
2 October 1980, World Title Fight, Las Vegas

Muhammad Ali in 1980 was the most recognisable, and possibly the most loved, 
man on earth. His accomplishments in the ring were the stuff of legend. Two 
fights with Sonny Liston, where he proclaimed himself 'The Greatest' and proved 
he was; three epic wars with Joe Frazier; the stunning victory over George 
Foreman in 1974's 'Rumble in the Jungle'; dethroning Leon Spinks in 1978 to 
become heavyweight champion for an unprecedented third time.

But there was far more to Ali than what took place in a boxing ring. His early 
embrace of the Nation of Islam and his insistence on being called Muhammad Ali 
instead of his 'slave name' (Cassius Clay) heralded a new era in black pride. 
His refusal to be drafted into the United States army at the height of the 
conflict in Vietnam highlighted the growing anti-war movement of the 1960s. His 
willingness to fight in such far-flung locales as Zaire, Manila, and Malaysia 
signalled a shift away from superpower dominance towards a growing awareness of 
the importance of the developing world.

None of that mattered on 2 October 1980. On that night, in a temporary arena 
constructed in a parking lot at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Ali stepped out of 
retirement and into the ring to face Larry Holmes, a former sparring partner.

Holmes had become a great champion in his own right. And, unlike Ali, he was 
in his prime. 'Ali is 38 years old,' Holmes said. 'His mind is making a date 
that his body can't keep.'

Realistically, Ali had no chance of winning. But there was that kernel of 
doubt. Would beating Holmes be any more extraordinary than knocking out Sonny 
Liston and George Foreman? Ali himself fanned the flames. 'I'm so happy going 
into this fight,' he said. 'I'm dedicating this fight to all the people who've 
been told, "you can't do it". People who drop out of school because they're 
told they're dumb. People who go to crime because they don't think they can 
find jobs. I'm dedicating this fight to all of you people who have a Larry 
Holmes in your life. I'm gonna whup my Holmes, and I want you to whup your 
Holmes.'

It was a horrible night. Ali was a shell of his former self. He had no 
reflexes, no legs, no punch. Nothing, except his pride and the crowd chanting, 
'Ali! Ali!'.

Holmes, who was eight years younger than his opponent, dominated every minute 
of every round. It wasn't an athletic contest; just a brutal beating that went 
on and on. Later, some observers claimed that Holmes lay back because of his 
fondness for Ali. But Holmes was being cautious, not compassionate. 'I love the 
man,' he acknowledged afterwards. 'But when the bell rung, I didn't even know 
his name.'

In round nine, Holmes stunned Ali with an uppercut that draped the challenger 
against the ropes. Turning away involuntarily, Ali covered his face with his 
gloves and Holmes followed with a right hand to the kidney that caused Ali to 
cringe and double over in pain.

'Holmes hit him with that punch to the body, and Ali screamed,' Lloyd Wells, a 
member of Ali's entourage who was at ringside later recalled. 'I never will 
forget that as long as I live. Ali screamed.'

Round 10 was more of the same. 'Like watching an autopsy on a man who's still 
alive,' Sylvester Stallone said later.

Finally, after 10 rounds, Angelo Dundee, Ali's trainer, stopped the carnage. 
An era in boxing - and an entire historical era - was over.

Â· Thomas Hauser is the lead writer for boxing website SecondsOut.com 
<http://secondsout.com/home/home.cfm?CFID=12172493&CFTOKEN=54393914> and is a 
contributing editor of this magazine
 