
A new campaign from the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) is calling 
for emergency contraception, commonly known as the morning-after pill, to be 
sold directly from pharmacy shelves without a mandatory consultation. The 
campaign highlights the fact that the pillcan cost British women up to £30 
<http://www.justsaynon.org.uk/about/>, as much as five times higher than in 
other European countries, meaning that it could even be cheaper to fly to 
France and buy it there than to visit a local pharmacy.

A 2003 report published in the Pharmaceutical Journal 
<http://www.pharmaceutical-journal.com/pj-online-news-pharmacists-believe-ehc-is-too-costly/20009356.article>
 revealed that the high price –described by BPAS chief executive Ann Furedi as 
a “sexist surcharge” – was a deliberate attempt to prevent women from taking it 
too often. As a spokesperson for Levonelle, a manufacturer of the pill, said: 
“The price has been set, in part, to ensure that EHC [emergency hormonal 
contraception] is not used as a regular method of contraception.”

BPAS also argues that the mandatory consultation women must go through with a 
pharmacist may be part of the reason it is so costly in the UK, compared with 
other countries where such consultations are not required. Given that the 
medication is considered very safe, even compared with other medications sold 
off-the-shelf, and that theNHS says it has no serious side effects 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/contraception-guide/pages/emergency-contraception.aspx>
, it seems likely that this is a means of influencing women’s sexual and 
reproductive decisions, rather than a requirement for safety reasons.

The comments of one spokesman from the Family Education Trust exemplified this 
 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/29/calls-slash-price-morning-after-pill-sell-shelf-like-aspirin/>
rationale: “With no questions asked about previous medical history or previous 
use of the drug, there is a very real danger that it could be misused or 
overused.” The same could be said of countless other off-the-shelf products, 
but the extra barriers only seem to come into play when a product is associated 
with female sexuality. And considering the lack of medical dangers associated 
with the morning-after pill, the “misuse” or “overuse” seems likely to be a 
moral, rather than medical, judgment.

So the major arguments both for the sky-high cost and the mandatory 
consultation seem closely tied to the idea that women cannot be trusted to make 
their own decisions about their bodies and sex lives. Not to mention the 
terrifying risk that, should the situation change, immoral, promiscuous women 
might run amok, foregoing other forms of contraception, indulging in countless 
one-night stands and choosing to pop morning-after pills instead of taking any 
other precautions.

Talk of 'misuse' or 'overuse' ​being referred to here​ seems likely to be a 
moral, rather than medical, judg​​ment

Of course it makes sense for a consultation to be available for those who 
choose it, as with any other product purchased in a pharmacy. Some people might 
want to ask about the efficacy of the medication within a given timeframe, or 
seek further information about issues such as sexually transmitted diseases. 
But this is a decision an individual is capable of making herself – not every 
person taking emergency contraception needs to be subjected to these 
interactions,often described as “embarrassing” and “shaming” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/16/barrier-morning-after-pill-shaming-ellaone-under-16>
.

The moralistic overtones of this debate are the same ones that emerge during 
any discussion relating to women’s reproductive health – as if male lawmakers 
and commentators feel the need to wrestle women’s autonomy from them because 
“we know best”.

As a healthcare option for those who wish to avoid unwanted pregnancy, it is 
hugely important that women should be able to access the morning-after pill as 
easily and cheaply as possible. But a2014 study found that 
<http://www.ec-ec.org/custom-content/uploads/2014/02/Nappi-et-al.-Use-and-attitudes-towards-EC-survey-in-5-European-countries.pdf>
 women in the UK were nearly twice as unlikely to use emergency contraception 
because they were “embarrassed to ask for it” than women in other European 
countries. Nearly a third of all the women surveyed who used emergency 
contraception said they felt uncomfortable or judged when obtaining it.

That women have to jump through hoops because they aren’t trusted to use it 
responsibly is reminiscent of the ongoingVictorian-era legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/abortion-campaign-scrap-victorian-law-womens-equality-party>
 that means abortion is still technically illegal in mainland Britain. Rather 
than overturning the 1861 Offences Against the Person Act, the 1967 Abortion 
Act essentially created a loophole allowing the procedure only after two 
doctors have agreed that a woman’s mental or physical health would be harmed by 
continuing with the pregnancy. The law hasn’t been changed since.

Like the idea that a woman’s decision isn’t valid until two doctors have 
agreed to “let her off” prosecution, the notion that we need a consultation 
before being allowed to take emergency contraception is outdated and 
patronising. It’s 2016. Isn’t it time we moved away from the Victorian notion 
that women can’t be trusted to make their own choices about their health, 
bodies and sex lives?




 