
Some issues are totemic and symbolise the challenges that remain in terms of 
achieving gender equality. The gender pay gap is one of them.

The average British woman earns around 80p for every £1 earned by a man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/12/how-to-end-uk-gender-pay-gap>
. This discrepancy exists for several reasons: because women are concentrated 
in low-paid jobs and take on the lion’s share of unpaid work – particularly the 
care of children. But it is also because of pay discrimination, women being 
paid less than their male counterparts for the same work or work of equal value.

We don’t always hear this part of the story, but some recent cases have been 
reminders that it still exists. First, theBBC agreed to pay some of its female 
staff more, under threat of an equal-pay challenge 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/bbc-forced-to-pay-female-presenters-same-as-men-after-legal-threat-6q57kpbtg>
.Essex University 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/essex-university-gives-female-staff-one-off-pay-rises-to-close-gender-pay-gap-a7063446.html>
 also decided to pay its female academics more to redress the balance in pay. 
Brainlabs gave every woman in the organisation a pay rise – the “pay gap tax”. 
There is a pattern here. Once employers compared their male and female 
salaries, they found an imbalance that they couldn’t explain away.

Research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/graduate-gender-pay-gap-university-subject>
 shows that this also happens at graduate entry level. Male graduates continue 
to earn more (£24–£27k) than female graduates (£21–£24k), even when compared 
with women who did the same subject, went to a similar university and went into 
the same industry.

The fact that some organisations have addressed this discrimination is a step 
in the right direction. But how many equal-pay claims do we really see? Very 
few. The lack of pay transparency in the workplace means it’s almost impossible 
to make pay comparisons with co-workers. Without that, you have no case. 
Employment tribunal fees are prohibitively expensive, the process can be 
extremely stressful and can take years to resolve. Moreover, claims that are 
brought are almost always settled before they get to tribunal, meaning the 
general public is less likely to hear about them.

New gender pay gap reporting regulations 
<http://www.equalpayportal.co.uk/a-new-act/>, due in October, will mean that 
employers with 250 staff or more (there are around 8,000 of them in the UK) 
will have to publish their gender pay gap figures for both basic salary and 
bonus payments. They will also be required to identify the number of male and 
female employees according to quartile pay bands throughout their 
organisations. This won’t give individuals the transparency they need to bring 
a claim, but it will force employers to think systematically about the gender 
pay gap and the inequities that may lie within their own organisations.

We at the Fawcett Society 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/policy-research/the-gender-pay-gap/> welcome 
the regulations, but we want to go further. We need a step change in 
assumptions, to start in a different place and break the male model of work. 
Every job should be advertised on aflexible working basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/apr/28/flexible-working-secret-women-success-pay-gap>
, unless there is a good business case not to. We need to end themotherhood 
penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/mar/15/mums-are-formidable-in-the-workplace-we-need-to-hire-more>
 and move to a presumption of equality for leave entitlements, including paying 
enhanced rates for dads so that they can afford to take them. We need to extend 
the new requirements to smaller organisations, too (Fawcett recommends those 
with 50 employees or more).

With these changes, the gender pay gap may finally become something that 
motivates employers to act, because they want to be seen as an employer of 
choice for women in an increasingly competitive labour market. And that might 
just drive change.

Sam Smethers will be taking part in a discussion entitled Who earns more? The 
pay gap at home and abroad 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/who-earns-more-97315> on Sunday 26 
June at the Royal Festival Hall, as part of the Southbank Centre’s Power of 
Power festival.
 