
The heinous terror attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/turkey-nightclub-shooting-reina-nightclub-istanbul-victims-search-continues>
 in the heart of Istanbul, targeting more than 500 guests celebrating New 
Year’s Eve in a popular nightclub on the Bosphorus, marked the peak of a series 
of massacres that has shaken Turkey to its core over the past year. These have 
partly been attacks against security forces claimed by offshoots of the 
Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK); and partly attacks by jihadi groups, imported 
from Syria.

The Reina atrocity shows how deeply Islamic fanaticism has taken hold in 
Turkey | Elif Shafak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/reina-islamic-fanaticism-turkey-new-years-eve-massacre>
The bloodbath has now been claimed by Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>. But – and it is a big but – there was 
a particular significance to the target. Jihadi terror has previously targeted 
Kurds, Alevis and leftists in Turkey, leaving hundreds dead. But, for the first 
time, a venue representing the secular lifestyle of the urban upper-middle 
classes was chosen. And the attack came at a critical time when Turkey’s ruling 
AKP party had made the basic secular tenet of republican Turkey vulnerable.

Weeks before New Year’s Eve, banners were hung by pro-government Islamist 
organisations in Turkey’s cities, telling people that “Muslims don’t celebrate 
Christmas”, followed by photos depicting groups of young men in local dress, 
chasing Santa Claus with guns and knives.

The icing on the cake was the sermon 
<https://news.sol.org.tr/new-year-celebrations-announced-illicit-diyanet-171312>
 by Turkey’s powerful directorate of religious affairs (Diyanet) – which 
represents the pious Sunni majority (roughly 70% of Turkey’s population), 
though it is financed by all taxpayers.

The statement told Turks not to waste money on new year celebrations 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2015/12/turkey-new-year-celebrations-perennial-problem.html>
. Secular Turks saw it as an undue intrusion on their lifestyles. But the 
sermon had already encouraged widespread hate speech on social media in the 
final days of 2016, including death threats towards those planning to celebrate 
New Year’s Eve. (For this reason, Mehmet Sönmez, the head of Diyanet, is now 
being asked to resign by the pro-Kurdish HDP party for “incitement to hatred”, 
probably to no avail.)

Remarkably, no minister or bureaucrat has resigned; nor were any removed from 
their posts, despite the fact that the death toll of the seemingly endless
series of terror attacks since July 2015 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/interactive/2016/06/timeline-attacks-turkey-160628223800183.html>
 – when the Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan terminated peace talks with 
the PKK Kurdish militant group in reaction to PKK-linked violence – has risen 
to nearly 1,800, out of which more than 600 are civilians. The government’s 
arrogant disregard of calls for resignations raises suspicions that the AKP 
will never leave power peacefully, adding to the tension felt by many Turkish 
people.

While Turkey has seen several mass killings over the past 18 months, it was 
during the second half of 2016 that the acts of terror somehow became routine: 
whilethe PKK <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-20971100> targeted 
security forces en masse, jihadi terror crept into major urban areas. The 
pattern clearly shows that the state’s intelligence network is now at its 
weakest.

Once seen as a 'regime changer' in Syria, Turkey has long been far too 
supportive of murky elements of radical Islamism

Observers claim there is a correlation with a massive purge of the security 
apparatus that Erdoğan launched before thefailed coup of July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt>. The ruling AKP blamed 
that exclusively on military officers affiliated withFethullah Gülen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-who-is-the-man-blamed-by-turkeys-president-for-coup-attempt>
, a reclusive cleric based in Pennsylvania, although outside experts largely 
question this official narrative. This “institutional cleansing” of otherwise 
highly qualified officers who were indiscriminately labelled as Gülenists led 
to hasty replacements. The suspicions are that their posts were filled by 
recruits sympathetic to jihadi movements, or, at best, people unqualified for 
the job. The Turkish state’s security deficit leaves the country vulnerable to 
further acts of destruction.

The terror in Istanbul left few in doubt over the connection with Syria. Less 
than 24 hours after the massacre, it was Numan Kurtulmuş, the deputy prime 
minister and spokesman of the AKP government, who said: “It is a message 
against Turkish cross-border operations. The operations inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> obviously stirred unease among terror 
organisations. We will take measures at home and across the border.”

The deadly equation is apparent. Once seen as a “regime changer” in Syria, 
Turkey has long been far too supportive of murky elements of radical Islamism, 
partly in an attempt to realise a neo-Ottoman dream of turning Syria into a 
Sunni-dominated hinterland and partly to use them in a combat to prevent Syrian 
Kurds to establish autonomy on the Turkey-Syrian border. And now, Turkey has 
fully reversed its Syria policy, ceasing its logistical support for the Syrian 
opposition to Bashar al-Assad, as a result of shrewd Russian moves and the
assassination of the Russian ambassador in Ankara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
.

Turkey will inevitably come into greater conflict with Isis and al-Qaida 
elements from now on. Murder in Ankara and the bloodbath in Istanbul may only 
be overtures that tear apart Turkey’s already explosive social faultlines. The
battle of al-Bab 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-syria-turkey-clashes-idUSKBN14A0QY>
, and theimminent siege of Idlib 
<http://www.middleeasteye.net/columns/welcome-idlib-next-aleppo-829826634>, 
both very close to the Turkish border, promise more trouble ahead.

Remarkably, no minister or bureaucrat has resigned, despite the seemingly 
endless series of terror attacks
 