
By turns almost unremittingly poignant, caustically honest and very, very 
funny, The Art of Being Normal, is, as you might expect, the antithesis of what 
it says on the tin. I have often heard it said that a book made someone “laugh 
out loud” and thought this only existed in book reviews, but Lisa Williamson’s 
intelligent, thought-stoking novel genuinely had me softly chuckling on more 
than one occasion.

Two outsiders – David, a transgender teenager on the cusp of puberty - and 
Leo, isolated from his classmates at the prestigious Eden Park secondary school 
by class and a reputation for violence, find their stories mesh in unexpected 
and transformative ways.

Voguishly, the entire novel is written in the present tense. Often, this 
technique is used to create a sense of pace and urgency, but given how much of 
the novel is about pauses – hesitancy in romantic or sexual relationships; 
David’s dilemma in coming out to his parents; the frequent stalls and misjudged 
attempts at friendliness between Leo and David themselves – this method seemed 
oddly inappropriate to me. There is a dream-like, almost hallucinogenic passage 
late in the novel, when David and Leo are splashing about in a freezing sea at 
night, in which identities blur, when using the present tense seemed perfect. 
It would perhaps have stood out even more if the rest of the novel had not been 
written in this way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-art-of-being-normal-lisa-williamson-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56d13dfde0e244cea18c4b03513c3488db576d46%2F0_0_1673_2527%2F1673.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Art%20of%20Being%20Normal%20by%20Lisa%20Williamson%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-art-of-being-normal-lisa-williamson-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Art%20of%20Being%20Normal%20by%20Lisa%20Williamson%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fthe-art-of-being-normal-lisa-williamson-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56d13dfde0e244cea18c4b03513c3488db576d46%2F0_0_1673_2527%2F1673.jpg>
The Art of Being Normal is chock-a-block full of plot twists which motor the 
novel along, keeping the pages turning. One in particular is not entirely 
unexpected if you have read any coming-of- age YA novel, but then again it 
relates to what is in all likelihood a universal human experience: losing faith 
in adults you have mythologised. However, the use of the first-person 
unreliable narrator also allows Lisa Williamson to conceal some major 
surprises. 

Some of the humour is crafted by tickling conventions – at times it almost 
feels David in particular is aware he is a character in a novel: 

Ever since we made the decision to come here, I’ve been envisioning a 
cinematic adventure full of self-discovery, bonding and life-defining moments, 
but so far Leo is failing to cooperate.

In so many ways Lisa Williamson brings to life the humdrum existence of 
post-millennials, from casual references to Leo’s sister Amber’s dysfunctional 
relationship with food to the Eden Park pupils’ jokes about “pervy” adults, to 
David’s self-conscious relationship with his parents. 

In so many ways this is a refreshing book to read. David is a blunt, frank 
narrator: “I’m not gay. I’m just a straight girl stuck in a boy’s body”. The 
ease with which, ironically, Lisa Williamson writes about characters struggling 
with their sexuality is remarkable. I was also taken aback, though, by the 
matter-of-fact inclusion of class as another seeming-impervious barrier in 
teenage relationships. Somehow as readers we are used to the idea of racism, 
sexism and homophobia being explored through novels and literature, while Leo’s 
uneasy limbo, coming from a working-class background but going to a ‘posh 
school’, was not only poignant but startlingly new in my reading experience. 

Lisa Williamson: 'I have met so many young transgender people living happy, 
hopeful lives'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/22/lisa-williamson-art-of-being-normal-transgender-protagonist>
As in real life, there are ambiguities and will-they/won’t-they moments which 
Lisa Williamson does not neatly resolve. The reader leaves David and Leo not at 
the end of their stories, but the end of their beginnings. I thoroughly enjoyed 
sharing the slice Lisa Williamson has conjured into being.

 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/art-of-being-normal-360862.html>  