
Hubert the anarchist is showing me around Centrum Reanimacji Kultury 
<https://www.facebook.com/crk.wro?fref=ts> (CRK 
<https://www.facebook.com/crk.wro?fref=ts>), a non-profit, post-punk commune 
epitomising the spirit of resistance in Wrocław (pronounced “Vrots-wav”), 
Poland’s fourth largest city. CRK’s courtyard is covered in street art, 
including early work byMariusz Waras <http://www.m-city.org/m-city/index2.html> 
(aka M-City), and from rehearsal rooms I can hear violins and vocals that 
remind me ofWarsaw Village Band <http://www.warsawvillageband.net/>.

Inspired by London’s Reclaim the Streets  <http://rts.gn.apc.org/>collective, 
Hubert set about developing this “DIY social/cultural centre” in Nadodrze, a 
downbeat former industrial area. Nowadays, he focuses on his band,Kurws 
<http://kurws.com/>, and, as a cultural activist, on protecting the right to 
drink alcohol outdoors on the city-centre island between two arms of the Oder 
river – home to summer gigs and screenings. Until recently, it was the only 
place in Poland where it was legal to drink in the open.

Next year, Wrocław becomes European Capital of Culture 
<http://wroclaw2016.pl/en/> and World Book Capital City 
<https://en.unesco.org/world-book-capital-city>, and Hubert wants to see some 
of the official money find its way to Nadodrze: “Wrocław 2016 must leave a 
legacy for areas such as this, too – and not blow all the money on fireworks.’’

Under communist rule, Wrocław was the “fortress of Solidarity”, the centre of 
resistance when Poland’s epoch-making trade union was made illegal under 
martial law in the early 1980s, and that spirit remains in these post-punk 
venues, in former breweries and in big Germanhofs (courtyards), an 
architectural legacy of Wrocław’s time as German Breslau. It’s also there in 
the city’s alternative theatres, from the radicalSong of the Goat Theatre 
<http://culture.pl/en/artist/song-of-the-goat-theatre> to the acclaimed Teatr 
Polski and theCapitol <http://www.teatr-capitol.pl/en/> musical theatre. Here 
are a few other places that keep that spirit alive.

Neon Side Gallery and Club

Through a courtyard a short walk from the main square, this bar offers beer, 
buzz and a great collection of discarded neon. External walls glow with huge 
signs, such as Wrocław Głowny (from the railway station), while inside Apteka 
(pharmacy) and Kino (cinema) signs carry photographs showing their original 
locations. At weekends, DJs play ambient tunes. (Those who favour Berlin-style 
drum’n’bass should head over the railway toDas Lokal <http://daslokal.pl/> on 
Solidarity Square.)
• facebook.com/neonside <https://www.facebook.com/NEONSIDE?_rdr>, Sun-Thurs 
3pm-midnight, Fri-Sat 3pm-about 4am

Browar Mieszczanski

This red-brick former brewery in a post-industrial zone 15 minutes from the 
centre has a village-like vibe. There are concerts, exhibitions, and artists’ 
and film studios within atmospheric halls of abandoned vats, peeling paint and 
rust. On Sundays, add a food market, bands, handicrafts, and Polish nibbles and 
craft beers.
• rowar.wroc.pl <http://www.browar.wroc.pl/>, 
facebook.com/pages/browar-mieszcza 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Browar-Mieszcza%C5%84ski-Wroc%C5%82aw/137334856330119>

Konspira: Restaurant and Historical Education Centre
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fwroclaw-poland-post-punk-arts-gallery-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427220489693%2F3f4b17a4-1276-467d-873a-1725618ce070-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20Poland%20on%20show%20in%20Wroc%C5%82aw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fwroclaw-poland-post-punk-arts-gallery-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20Poland%20on%20show%20in%20Wroc%C5%82aw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fwroclaw-poland-post-punk-arts-gallery-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427220489693%2F3f4b17a4-1276-467d-873a-1725618ce070-2060x1373.jpeg>
Just off Solny Square, this restaurant recreates the Wrocław of the Solidarity 
era, its candlelit brickwork lined with riot shields, political cartoons and 
newspaper cuttings bearing witness to the martial law of the early 1980s. Menus 
present information about Solidarity, as well as dishes such as “anti-communist
pierogi’’ and ‘‘Workman’s Dinner’’ – chicken or pork with roast potatoes and 
salad (from £3.85), and a fine selection of bottled Mirosław beers (£1.40). 
Profits go to local social projects.
• konspira.org <http://konspira.org/>, Sun-Weds midday-10pm, Thurs-Sat 
midday-11pm

Art Café Kalambur
 Photograph: Alamy 
With its stained-glass, art-deco mirrors, dark panelling, booths and half a 
spiral staircase, Kalumbur is a vision of bohemian late-night society. Weekend 
DJs play everything from 1930s swing to bossa nova to indie, so expect dancing 
until the small hours for a student and arty crowd. Be aware that it’s one of 
two places in the centre where smoking is allowed; the other isKawiarnia 
Literatka <http://www.kawiarnialiteratka.pl/> cafe in the main square. 
• facebook.com/kalamburem 
<https://www.facebook.com/Pod.Kalamburem?fref=ts&_rdr>, Sun-Thurs midday-2am, 
Fri-Sat midday-4am

BWA Gallery

In a neo-classical building designed by Carl Gotthard Langhans (architect of 
Berlin’s Brandenburg Gate), BWA is Poland’s first institute of street art.Cedar 
Lewisohn’s 2010 Tate exhibition and book, Abstract Graffiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/aug/06/olympic-legacy-street-art-graffiti-fury>
, has a chapter on Wrocław, and you can pick up a map of the best examples. 
Wrocław is also famous for glass and ceramics, and both feature at BWA. Other 
galleries to check out include the long-establishedSurvival Street Art 
<http://www.survival.art.pl/> project, and the small independent Entropia 
<http://entropia.art.pl/>, just off the main square, And don’t miss a 10-minute 
tram ride to contemporary art museumMWW 
<http://muzeumwspolczesne.pl/mww/?lang=en>, in a former air-raid tower – the 
building alone is fascinating.
• bwa.wroc.pl <http://bwa.wroc.pl/index.php?b=0&w=&l=en>, open Tues-Sun 
11am-6pm

Polish Posters

Poland has long led the way in poster design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2015/jan/30/polish-film-posters-bfi-special-collection-in-pictures>
, thanks to artists who do not so much promote a film or play as interpret them 
with strong, hand-crafted images. This independent gallery has a huge selection 
of classic film and theatre posters from the 1940s onwards, from as little as 
£5.25 to over £500, or postcard versions at a snip.
• polishposter.com <http://www.polishposter.com/>, Tues-Fri midday-6pm, Sat 
midday-4pm

Złe Mieso (Bad Meat)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fwroclaw-poland-post-punk-arts-gallery-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427220667340%2F63ef8989-5840-4981-86bb-789d3dce16f2-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20Poland%20on%20show%20in%20Wroc%C5%82aw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fwroclaw-poland-post-punk-arts-gallery-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20Poland%20on%20show%20in%20Wroc%C5%82aw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Fwroclaw-poland-post-punk-arts-gallery-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427220667340%2F63ef8989-5840-4981-86bb-789d3dce16f2-2060x1371.jpeg>
If the belly-busting Polish meat or pierogi dishes are not your thing, try 
this new veggie haunt in a central courtyard. Cream of carrot soup with a hint 
of peanut butter costs £1.25, pizzas andoscypek (salted sheep’s cheese) salads 
from £3.85, or falafels and other mains from £4.20. Plastic crates for 
light-shades, wall doodles, huge portions, friendly service (some of the staff 
are commune-dwellers), and plenty of flyers about local indie goings-on make 
this the perfect place for a counter-cultural veggie curry.
• facebook.com/klubojadalniazlemieso 
<https://www.facebook.com/klubojadalniazlemieso>, Mon-Sat midday-9pm

Kino Nowe Horizonty

Poland’s largest art-house cinema is a stylish affair with nine screens, a 
cafe-bar and shop, anda summer film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/01/new-horizons-international-film-festival-poland-festival-radar>
. Behind the cinema,Shopiq  <http://www.shopiq.com.pl/>sells vinyl and prints 
from local photographers. Up the road,KRVN  <http://krvn.pl/>is an elegant cafe 
with murals and locally sourced food.
• kinonh.pl <http://www.kinonh.pl/>, Sun-Thurs food until 10pm, Fri-Sat until 
11pm, bar carries on until “last guest”

Where to stay
 Leoapart flat 
Leoapart <http://en.leoapart.com/> has well-equipped, comfortable flats, most 
within walking distance of the main square, from £33 a night for two. The 
recently openedPuro Hotel <http://purohotel.pl/wroclaw> in the Jewish district 
backs on to the city moat. Its smart modern rooms have lots of glass and Wi-Fi 
enabled TVs and the buffet-breakfast is enormous.

How to get there

Ryanair <http://ryanair.com> flies to Wrocław from East Midlands, Glasgow, 
Liverpool and Stansted from £18 one-way.

James Hopkin’s novel, Winter Under Water (Picador, £9.99), is set in Wrocław, 
Krakow and Berlin
 