
Channel 4’s winter sports reality show The Jump has escaped censure from the 
broadcasting regulator despite a string of complaints about serious injuries 
suffered by stars including Olympians Beth Tweddle andRebecca Adlington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rebeccaadlington>, and Holby City actor Tina 
Hobley.

Ofcom has been assessing 17 complaints by viewers about the level of danger to 
which contestants are subjected, afterseven of an initial lineup of 12 
celebrities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/channel-4-launches-safety-review-jump-celebrity-casualties>
were forced to pull out through injury.

The most serious injury was to Tweddle, a gymnast who won a bronze medal at 
the 2012 Olympics and had“potentially life-changing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/jump-beth-tweddle-operation-to-repair-neck-injury-after-accident>
 surgery to fuse fractured vertebrae following a crash on the ski jump.


Breaking bones is not entertainment. Reality TV has gone too far | Anna Nolan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/10/breaking-bones-not-entertainment-reality-tv-the-jump>
Adlington, the Olympic gold-winning swimmer, dislocated her shoulder and 
Hobley fractured her arm in two places, in an incident caused by crew not 
clearing the area on which she was landing.

The string of incidents resulted in Channel 4 launching a safety review of The 
Jump, which came to be dubbed“the most dangerous show on television” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/08/channel-4-launches-safety-review-jump-celebrity-casualties>
, and sparked social media calls for the series to be cancelled.

Despite the furore, Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> dismissed 
viewers’ complaints, saying there were no grounds to launch a full 
investigation under the UK broadcasting code.

There is no rule requiring broadcasters to ensure the physical welfare of 
adults, as there is for children who appear on shows.

“We received a number of complaints about the welfare of the participants in 
this programme themed around winter sports, but won’t be taking them forward 
for investigation,” said Ofcom. “We noted that all the participants in The Jump 
were consenting adults and were aware of the potential risk of injury when they 
decided to take part.”

It has been speculated in the media the third series of The Jump will be its 
last, with Channel 4 considering whether to axe the show.

The final episode of the latest series, which aired on Sunday night, drew an 
average of 1.8 million viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/07/bbc-night-manager-beats-itv-doctor-thorne-ratings>
.

 