
Looking out over Lyme Bay in 1867, a telescopist might have noticed a well 
dressed couple walking along the Cobb and correctly inferred they were were a 
well-to-do couple from out of town who were shortly to be wed. But he would 
have been at all at sea with the motionless woman standing at the end of the 
mole clad all in black.

"I hope you haven't been talking about the silly ideas of Mr Darwin again," 
Ernestina chided. "Papa so hates the idea of being descended from an ape."

Indeed Charles had been talking of just that, for what self-respecting 
free-thinking man would have talked of anything else. Just as today such a man 
might talk of DNA, the Cold war and the right to self-determination.

Yet the reality is that Charles has no right to self-determination, as he is 
but the construct of my imagination, so let us now make him catch sight of the 
woman at the end of the Cobb.

"Who, pray, is that?" he asks.

"They call her the French Lieutenant's Woman," Ernestina replies. "She fell in 
love with a shipwrecked captain who abandoned her. She is quite disgraced and 
is now a servant to Mrs Poulteney."

"I wish you hadn't told me such a horrible story, but we must escort her back 
to Lyme for she is not safe here."

Charles made to counsel the woman's but her eyes warned him off, eyes that 
betrayed a sorrow as deep as the sea.

But as this is my book, let's leave this introductory scene and make some wry 
observations about both the characters and their Victorian values. Charles 
Smithson, we may conclude, is a man of moderate virtue. Freed by a private 
income from the necessity of work, he is a lost soul of 32 years, passing his 
time before claiming the greater inheritance from his uncle by hunting for 
fossils, and tortured by memories of his liaisons with prostitutes.

His fianc√©e, Miss Ernestina Freeman, is what we would now in the 1960s call 
petit-bourgeois. In short her father is in trade. But what trade! If you will 
excuse the overuse of exclamation marks! He owns department stores in London 
and is a man of considerable self-made wealth and his only daughter a worthy 
catch for a man, such as Charles, of greater class but fewer means. Ernestina's 
only drawback is that she is, as we now say in 2010, a bit of an airhead.

Miss Sarah Woodruff, or the French Lieutenant's Hoo-er as some Lyme Regis folk 
described her, we will come to shortly; the other minor characters need not 
detain us greatly. There is Mrs Poulteney, a widow who has taken in Miss 
Woodruff to offset her bigotry and increase her chances of entering the kingdom 
of heaven.

And then there's Sam and Mary. How sweet the lower orders are in love! And how 
little they appear to dissemble compared to the romantic contortions of their 
masters! For Mary is the maid to Ernestina's aunt and Sam is Charles's man. 
Such a useful contrast for the novelist! Yet do not underestimate the Crafty 
Cockney's ability to put one over on his master!

We could also spend many pages discussing Victorian society from a modern 
perspective, with recourse to such imagery as computers, but first I would like 
to talk again of me. It's tough being a novelist in the 60s, unsure if your 
characters exist and wanting to pretend you aren't really controlling their 
story. Yawn.

Enough of this. Now to the Undercliff, that secret prehistoric world of 
vaginal fecundity where Miss Woodruff walks alone. And where Charles is 
searching for a fossil.

"Miss Woodruff," he says.

"Mr Smithson," she replies.

Dark passions begin to simmer.

"I worry for your health."

"My health means nothing," she declares. "I know the French Lieutenant will 
never return, but the shame I bear defines me."

Had he been born 100 years later, Charles might have recognised this as an 
expression of Sartrean existential angst. Instead, he felt a disconcerting 
swelling in his trousers and kissed her on the eyelid.

Miss Woodruff looked back, her long red curls swept from her alabaster 
forehead by the wind machine situated behind the director. "If we are seen 
together I shall be expelled from Mrs Poulteney's service."

I could make more of this rather slender, contrived courtship. I could 
discourse longer on Victorian science and religious hypocrisy. I could begin a 
sub-plot where Charles is left rudderless by his uncle's marriage to a fortune 
hunter, a union that diminishes his prospects yet leaves him with the 
opportunity to terminate his betrothal to Ernestina with a patina of probity. I 
could arrange further portentous encounters between Charles and Sarah one of 
which could end by Sarah deliberately allowing herself to be observed and thus 
fulfil her Freudian need to be expelled from Mrs Poulteney's home.

Yet in this process of digestion I prefer to cut to the chase, so let's take 
ourselves to Exeter where Sarah is staying at Endicott's hotel. Here I have a 
dilemma, for I must maintain the artifice that my characters have their own 
lives and I don't know how the story ends. Daringly, then, I leave you two.

First we have Charles denying himself the fulfilment of a night with Sarah and 
returning to Ernestina, with whom he will live happily ever after for the next 
173 years. But I don't want to do that. So let's also find Charles collapsing 
on Sarah's naked body after 17 seconds of intense copulation.

"My God, but you were a virgin," Charles cries. "So the French Lieutenant did 
not... "

"Indeed not, but I needed the world to imagine I had for me to explore my 
shame and loneliness and prepare myself for you."

Had Charles read any modern psychology books he would have realised Sarah was 
a nutter in need of therapy. But as this was 1867 he merely says, "I adore you."

Oh dear. The complications increase. See how Sam fails to deliver Charles's 
letter to Sarah and their romance is snuffed out before it barely began. See 
how Charles is ostracised for ending his engagement and forced to wander the 
world like the Flying Dutchman reading Tennyson, sleeping with prostitutes and 
mixing metaphors in his search for Sarah.

If only I'd known how messy it was going to get, how I was making myself write 
another 100 unnecessary pages, I might have stuck with the first ending. But I 
didn't. So now I must leave you another two as Charles finishes a love poem. I 
weep and weep, I'm very deep / I yearn to sleep with Meryl Streep.

He finds her two years later, living as Rosetti's muse. "I cannot marry you. I 
still want to be alone. But we have a daughter," Sarah says.

Or.

"I will marry you, but it's only Platonic."

You'll probably choose the second. Readers always think the last more real. In 
truth they are the same. Either way, Charles and Sarah have ended up in a 
post-modern cul-de-sac.
 