
There can be no more urgent matter than putting an end to the terrible human 
tragedy and the lethal regional destabilisation produced bythe Syrian conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. This is a war in which 300,000 
people have died, which has internally displaced half the country’s population 
and which has caused more than 4 million to flee the country altogether. Syria 
has become the worst humanitarian catastrophe of our time. The plight of its 
people is also dangerously destabilising Europe and exposing weaknesses in its 
institutions. If the humanitarian crisis were not enough on its own, then the 
need to resolve Europe’s refugee crisis at its source would be reason enough to 
pay close attention to the peace talksthat are scheduled 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-syria-idUSKCN0V61M4> to begin 
on Friday in Geneva. Yet evengetting everyone round the table  
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-syria-opposition-idUSKCN0V51CZ>
is looking fraught.

In the current climate, the stated aim of the talks appears breathtakingly 
ambitious. Mandated by a UN resolution passed in December, their purpose is to 
organise a gathering of representatives of both the Assad regime and opposition 
groups, in the hope that it could eventually lead to the formation of a new 
government, and later, elections. At this stage of a devastating war, it is 
tempting to see the very possibility of talks as an achievement in itself. Yet 
for several reasons there is a danger that they amount to nothing more than 
fake diplomacy.

First, the question of protecting Syrian civilians has all but fallen off the 
agenda. There can be no progress without attention to their plight. Second, 
western powers seem to have made key political concessions toRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and Iran, the main enablers of the 
Assad regime. As as result, the Syrian dictator will feel even more empowered 
to pursue the mass targeting of his own countrymen and to continue a war of 
attrition in the belief that he will ultimately come out the winner.

Diplomacy is invariably a slow process. There will always be setbacks, doubts 
and negative headlines. TheIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> 
nuclear deal took years of patient effort; so did Barack Obama’s breakthrough 
with Cuba. But diplomacy is not just a talking shop, nor can it be reduced 
simply to putting people in a room, or scheduling summits. Ultimately, it 
hinges on substance, and there is a sneaking feeling now that the Obama 
administration may be elevating process over and above substance – in effect, 
marking time, as it enters its final year, rather than addressing the core 
reasons why the war has raged on for so long.

UN resolutions calling for the end of barrel bombing, to the sieges that left 
the people of Madaya and other towns at risk of starvation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/residents-besieged-syrian-town-madaya-starved-to-death>
, and to the other mass atrocities that Syrians have been subjected to mainly 
by Assad’s army, have been all but swept under the carpet as the prospect of 
talks grew closer. Opposition groups have objected to holding talks if those 
demands are not met: that hardly counts as maximalist obstructiveness. Yet the 
US administration has reportedly tried to pressure them by threatening to cut 
off assistance. That is not a good backdrop to building trust, let alone to 
forging a sustainable agreement.

Meanwhile, Russia and Iran are demanding that the opposition’s delegation to 
Geneva is modified to include elementsapproved by the Assad regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/09/syrian-government-will-attend-geneva-peace-talks-if-terrorists-banned>
 and favourable to their own interests. If the US and its allies do not reject 
this demand, it will in effect kill the legitimacy of the delegationin the eyes 
of Syrians themselves 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/01/syrian-activists-dontgotogeneva-campaign-160127174013151.html>
, and thwart any hope of a genuine negotiation. What’s more, theUS secretary of 
state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/23/john-kerry-reassures-gulf-states-over-us-relationship-with-iran>
, has spoken of a “national unity” government for Syria, not a “transitional” 
one. That vocabulary not only mimics Russia’s but runs counter to the very 
document on which the talks are meant to build: the 2012 Geneva communique 
calling for a political transition by mutual consent. Washington has even 
stopped saying Bashar al-Assad should not be allowed to run in elections.

If there is to be any hope for peace in Syria, talks must have a solid basis. 
After the setbacks it has recently endured, it must seem easy to pressure the 
opposition. But the proper place for pressure is on Mr Assad’s backers in 
Moscow and Tehran. Washington seems to believe that Russia will ultimately back 
a settlement inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> that would 
sideline Mr Assad and that its cooperation must be sought under any 
circumstance. Yet Russia has so far appeared to be more intent on undermining 
talks than on enabling them. Worse still, letting Mr Assad get the upper hand 
will only fuel the Isis myth that it alone can defend Sunni Muslims. Talks for 
the sake of talks may give an illusion of progress but they come at a high 
price for Syrians, and western security too. Fake diplomacy is no diplomacy.
 