
Heaving on a huge, scorched metal door and covered in engine oil, Sgt Hussein 
Mahmoud was deep into a morning’s work. Twisted hulks of wrecked army vehicles 
sat incongruously in the coarse dust that was kicked up by still-moving trucks 
as they crept around Mosul’s urban fringe.

Two other soldiers with industrial wrenches joined in, trying in vain to 
dislodge the door from its hinges. “We need it for humvees that still work,” 
said one of them. “We’re under pressure to provide them with parts.”


Impromptu salvage yards have appeared all around the Gogali neighbourhood in 
Mosul’s outer east, the immediate hinterland of the war withIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> and the most visible reminder of how 
destructive, difficult – and long – this fight is likely to be.

The startling progress of the first few weeks of the campaign to take Iraq’s 
second city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/kurds-lead-advance-on-mosul-in-decisive-battle-for-iraqs-second-city>
, the terror group’s last urban stronghold in Iraq, has given way to a numbing 
reality: Isis will not surrender Mosul, and Iraq’s battered military will 
struggle to take it.

Since Iraqi forces entered Gogali, a light industrial neighbourhood, in 
mid-November, the advance has slowed. “When we started, we were talking weeks,” 
said Hussein. “Now, we hope it will be by early in the new year. But these guys 
are not cowards. They kill as easy as they breathe.”

Forces deployed beyond nominal frontlines, marked by heaped piles of dirt, are 
around five miles from the Nour mosque, where theIsis leader, Abu Bakr 
al-Baghdadi, proclaimed himself the leader of a caliphate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/06/mosul-video-purports-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-islamic-state>
 nearly 30 months ago. But every street and sector towards the mosque – a 
highly symbolic target of the fight – is claiming an increasing toll in blood 
and treasure.


Car bombs – of the type that ravaged the dozens of humvees in the makeshift 
wrecking yards – continue to take a withering toll on the US-supplied vehicles, 
which form the staple of the Iraqi military’s armour.

The toll they are taking on morale is more difficult to gauge. Iraqi troops 
stationed in Gogali and the roads leading to it insist they will win the war, 
no matter how long it takes. Some however concede that they could still be 
fighting in Mosul’s tunnels and alleyways as late as next summer.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbattle-for-mosul-stalls-islamic-state-stronghold-iraq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9f6f4377e890ea4086b985c40c40c799b354dde%2F0_108_5878_3528%2F5878.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20battle%20for%20Mosul%20stalls%3A%20'we%20are%20fighting%20the%20devil%20himself'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbattle-for-mosul-stalls-islamic-state-stronghold-iraq%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20battle%20for%20Mosul%20stalls%3A%20%27we%20are%20fighting%20the%20devil%20himself%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbattle-for-mosul-stalls-islamic-state-stronghold-iraq%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9f6f4377e890ea4086b985c40c40c799b354dde%2F0_108_5878_3528%2F5878.jpg>
 People shopping at a street market in the Gogali neighbourhood of eastern 
Mosul. Photograph: Cengiz Yar 
“We’ve heard they have dug tunnels and sent boys in suicide vests,” said Cpl 
Mohammed Tawfiq. “Stopping them is not what we have trained for.”


A slow, grinding fight is not the outcome that Iraq’s political leaders were 
hoping for at such a critical juncture in the country’s modern history. “They 
were expecting this to be over in weeks,” said Major Saeed Ali, manning a 
checkpoint further south of the city, not far from where a lethal clash with up 
to 50 members of Isis took place in an empty village a week earlier. “Well, 
they are welcome to come here and try.”


The battle for Mosul in maps: how the offensive has slowed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/battle-for-mosul-maps-visual-guide-fighting-iraq-isis>
Iraq has billed the fight for Mosul <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul> 
as a nation-building step after more than 13 years of instability: first an 
invasion that ousted the Sunni-led ruling class, then a sectarian war that 
pitched the two rival sects of Islam against each other for more than three 
years, the rise of the earlier incarnations of Isis and the mobilisation of 
large numbers of primarily Shia militias, who rival the national military as a 
power base and who this week were legitimised as a state body by the Iraqi 
parliament.


The Shia militias are not directly involved in the fight to recapture Mosul, 
their role being confined to taking up blocking positions to the west of the 
city. Shia iconography is on ready display in the city though, flying from the 
back of Iraqi trucks and on top of their outposts. The flags jar among some 
members of the city’s Sunni population, who believe they frame the war in 
sectarian, not nationalistic terms.


“We expected it,” said Subhi Jabour, a Mosul local waiting for an aid delivery 
in Gogali last week. “But to be honest, they have not been as bad as we thought 
they would be. As long as they free us, then leave us alone, we will be happy.”

Mosul map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/mosul-nov28-zip/giv-15726puh9sWkAgnJ8/>
Smoke from airstrikes billowed from the city in the distance. The east bank of 
the Tigris river, which splits the city, is the only area in which Iraqi forces 
are operating and was predicted to be the easier of the two halves to take. As 
Iraqi forces eventually near the river, there is a growing likelihood that Isis 
will blow the last of the five bridges flanking it – US airstrikes have 
disabled the other four – making a push to the west highly difficult and 
raising the spectre of the Shias on the western outskirts playing more of a 
direct role after all.


“Look at their trucks,” said Mohammed Ahmed Mohammed, a community elder, as he 
sat by the main road leading into the city. “They were all given to them by the 
Americans, and not one of them hasn’t been hit by a rocket. All of their 
windows have been hit by snipers. They look like they have been fighting for 
five years. It is closer to two months.”


Across from him, a mechanic tinkered under the bonnet of a humvee that had 
pulled into a newly reopened workshop. Someone else tended to a flat tyre. 
Further out of the city, nine black and obliterated vehicles were on display 
outside a truck stop. An army technician wandered through them looking for 
things to salvage. “There’s not much,” he said. “Two people died in this one, 
and we had three martyrs in that,” he added, pointing to almost unrecognisable 
wreckage.


Two senior officers stood nearby, in immaculately pressed uniforms. “Don’t 
take too many pictures of the damage,” one of them asked. “We would prefer 
people didn’t see that.”


Iraqi officials have refused to provide numbers of combat casualties and are 
uncomfortable with anything that could be seen to give Isis a boost, or to show 
the military’s losses. “We will get there eventually, in our own way,” said Maj 
Rafid Ismael, an Iraqi infantry officer in the nearby city of Irbil. “Don’t 
forget, we are fighting the devil himself.”


Additional reporting by Salem Rizk
 