
A sprawling, anonymous convention centre in the heart of a fast-developing US 
city is probably the ideal place for Leon Krier to rail against the ravages of 
modern architecture. He once saw disaster all around him, from featureless 
shopping malls to tower blocks and the continuing trend - in urban Britain, 
particularly - for high-rise living. "Completely infantile and idiotic ideas," 
he storms in one of the centre's lecture theatres in Providence, Rhode Island. 
"Disaster projects. Something quite vile."

Now, belatedly, he sees a few towns and cities, architects, planners and 
developers acknowledging the error of their ways and changing direction, 
rejecting modernism and embracing classicism. But, overall, there appears 
little cause for celebration. Pointing to a wilting gherkin on the big screen 
behind, he parodies high-rise architecture as little more than a virility 
symbol inspired by frustrated designers anxious to leave their mark somewhere. 
Soon, he says, it becomes a "priapism" - laughter all round - and later, in an 
interview with Society Guardian, he calls it a "sexual aberration". Really? 
"Yes," he insists. "It's generally people who need to show their power and they 
don't know why, but it's stronger than them because, intellectually, you cannot 
argue for high-rise cities. The more you densify a city, the more congestion 
will increase, however technology changes ... cities so packed that they will 
no longer function ... vertical sprawl."

Krier, a native of Luxembourg, was the scourge of the English architectural 
establishment in the 1980s and early 90s when he lived in London. He was 
befriended by the Prince of Wales, whose views on modernism were becoming well 
known. HRH had found a soulmate. Krier was appointed in 1988 to plan a big 
urban extension on the western edge of Dorchester, on 400 acres of Duchy of 
Cornwall land. The rest is history. Poundbury was born, with its winding 
streets, traditional "classical" houses built from local stone and timber, 
village square, pub and shop.

Now a third of the way through development, with 2,400 homes planned, it has 
become a cause celebre for a movement called "new urbanism". Founded in the US 
in the early 1990s, it is dedicated to the rebirth of small, mixed-use 
neighbourhoods - a reaction against sprawl and the strict zoning that separated 
housing from commerce and business - with design coding to ensure a uniform 
style.

Krier, who now lives mainly in the south of France, is the inspiration for 
many new urbanists, and has been described as the "intellectual godfather" of 
their movement, the Congress for the New Urbanism (CNU). He was a keynote 
speaker at their recent annual convention in Rhode Island, and CNU is 
attracting a growing number of British converts, alarmed by continuing urban 
sprawl and the abysmal design of many housing estates, marooned miles from 
anywhere. The US planner Hank Dittmar, chief executive of the Prince's 
Foundation for the Built Environment, chairs the CNU board.

New urbanism

Like many student architects, Krier was originally a disciple of the 
modernists, from Le Corbusier to Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, pioneer of much of 
high-rise America. "I grew up in a small town that was absolutely a perfect 
embodiment of new urbanism," he says. "[Then] my brother studied architecture 
before me and we got into modernism, as everybody else did. We were great 
enthusiasts. I followed him eight years later to Stuttgart [technical 
university] and I realised that everything I grew up with and appreciated was 
utter nonsense - not just modernism, but the conception of life. It was sordid. 
There was shock. I found that my teachers were impossible to talk to and 
complete fanatics of a world that was unbearable."

Tall and elegantly dressed, with a thick mop of grey hair, Krier - who once 
wrote a book on Albert Speer, Hitler's architect - has no hint of fanaticism. 
Multilingual, articulate, he speaks quietly, sentences perfectly formed. Once 
he noted that "modernist architecture and town planning is inimical to human 
beings ... based on the Darwinian concept that evolution is open ended, that 
there must always be something new and better."

His conversion to classicism inevitably led to him falling out with his 
teachers at Stuttgart. He came to work for the late Sir James Stirling in 
London, and began a long association with Britain. Of Stirling, he says: "He 
was interested in traditional architecture, but would never dare to call it 
such. It took about 10 years to understand what was going on and why modernism 
was so shallowly based. Others were coming round to this view."

The reality of his native Luxembourg, post-war, was clearly a key influence. 
"The northern part had been destroyed by the Battle of the Bulge and it was 
being rebuilt in a traditional way, by old-fashioned, organised crafts people, 
building as before and sometimes better. Actually, some of what is thought to 
be historic was built in the 1950s, a bit like old Warsaw. As I started to do 
projects within these contexts, I suddenly found that all my Le Corbusier was 
material that was really not adequate to operate on those scales."

I remind him of the tower blocks in Glasgow, and the surrounding urban 
motorways in the Scottish city and elsewhere in Britain, which appear to be the 
embodiment of his detested modernism. "Yes, the problem was Le Corbusier was a 
genius and an enormous artist, but he tried to resolve problems to which there 
is no solution. So the idea to demolish the centre of Paris in order to adapt 
it to the car - he drew it! - is something not even the most bloody dictators 
conceived."

Krier is clearly not impressed with the continuing development of London, his 
former home. "There is a phenomenon more to do with impulse than reflection, an 
over-concentration of business, and residents, around London. It is 
catastrophic. People try to retrofit a city, but it is too late. There are so 
many impediments to the structures you would need to make it work. These 
metropolises like London, New York and other big concentrations are really like 
big imperial power centres based on [using] too much fossil fuel. But we are 
not brought up as imperial people."

Is he aware that parts of modernist Britain are being officially listed for 
their historical value? "Yes, that is a double irony when the people who were 
responsible for cutting us from history are now historicising their own version 
of the world. Unfortunately, they are going to conserve buildings that are 
going to destroy the very idea of conservation. You preserve something of 
value, not something that is of poor technical or stylistic quality."

And so to Poundbury. The growing community, which blends private with some 
social housing, may have its critics but for Krier its development is an 
ongoing process. "It has lasted now for 15 years and is adapting to many 
changing situations," he says. "It's not like there was a plan done 20 years 
ago. It is being shaped every day."

He recalls earlier encounters with Prince Charles, with whom he still has 
regular contact. "One day we were sitting outside in Highgrove [the Prince's 
country estate] and he said: 'What do I have to do to build Krier city?' I 
said: 'Excuse me, what do you mean?' And he pointed at me. So everybody there 
said it is all very well, he has an interesting theory, but you should not go 
that way because it will be retrograde. He had tried many people before but I 
got closest to what he wanted. He just said: 'Do what you think is right.'"

So Krier did. But he concedes: "It is not a site I would have chosen. It was a 
very exposed piece of land. The Duchy originally were terribly against it and 
it took something like five years to get going. They had surveyors saying they 
would lose money, but how can you lose money by selling land? There is 
absolutely no risk. I was right and, of all the people involved in it 
initially, I am the only survivor, apart from Prince Charles. Many people think 
it was easy because Prince Charles did it. For me, it was my most difficult 
project because Prince Charles was involved. There was such a reaction against 
it that I have difficulty publishing [books and academic papers], whereas 
before I published much more than I wanted."

Krier is still hoping that Poundbury will have one tall, spire-like structure. 
A contradiction? Absolutely not. He insists that high rise - think Venice and 
other great cities - can only be justified if it has a "very symbolic value".

Curriculum vitae

Age 60.

Lives Luxembourg and Provence.

Education Lyc√©e classique in monastery, Luxembourg; Technical University of 
Stuttgart.

Career 2004-present: master planner, Newquay growth area for Prince of 
Wales;1988-present: master planner of Poundbury; 1990-91 and 2002: professor of 
architecture, Yale; 1982: professor of architecture, University of Virginia; 
1977: professor of architecture, Princeton University; 1973-76: lecturer, 
Architectural Association School, Royal College of Art, London; 1974: private 
practice in London; 1968-70 and 1973-74: assistant to James Stirling; 1971-72: 
project partner with JP Kleihues, Berlin.

Interests Piano.
 