
The carnage in Iraq continues. Yet another terrorist attack took place today 
in Baghdad <http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/iraq-bomb-attack-baghdad-1.3922161>, 
the latest in aseries of such atrocities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/baghdad-sadr-city-car-bomb-attack-leaves-many-dead-iraq>
 that have hit the capital and other parts of the country over the past week. 
Isis is undergoing a losing battle in Mosul, its last remaining stronghold in 
Iraq, and it is expected to lose control of the city in the coming months. 
However, it still has a deadly capacity to carry out terrorist acts. Even 
without its so-called caliphate, Isis will continue to undermine stability in 
the country.

Baghdad car bomb leaves at least 24 dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/baghdad-sadr-city-car-bomb-attack-leaves-many-dead-iraq>
The bombings over the past week have barely registered in the international 
media and the conscience of the international community. The problem is in part 
a result of war becoming the new normal inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, which has been embroiled in terrorism 
for more than a decade; but also largely because conflict continues to be 
framed as political by the international community and media, which attribute 
the emergence of Isis, suicide attacks and conflict more generally to the lack 
of good governance and a series of disastrous policies adopted both during and 
after the US occupation.

This simplification and reduction of terrorist attacks in Iraq to a matter of 
politics, however, has not been without its consequences. Iraq fell off the 
radar because of western fatigue and reluctance to continue engaging with, and 
investing in, Iraq’s dysfunctional political process. Sectarian divisions and 
endemic corruption have also forced governments to shift their resources and 
energy away from Iraq’s institutions, which in the longer run will widen the 
space in which militant groups thrive. The incoming Trump administration, for 
example, has already indicated that it willno longer commit US resources 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-we-will-stop-racing-to-topple-foreign-regimes>
 to the rebuilding of the Iraqi state and others in the region.

Yet there is a failure to realise that Iraq is suffering from more than just 
political violence and instability. This is a campaign against the country’s 
array of religious and ethnic groups. Terrorist attacks in Iraq constitute a 
sustained attack against groups that reject Isis’s warped ideology and 
interpretation ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>.

Jihadi groups such as Isis view Kurds, Yazidis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/un-condemns-isis-genocide-against-yazidis-in-iraq-and-syria>
, Christians and other minorities as heretics, but it is their attacks on 
Iraq’s Shias (who represent Iraq’s majority) that would amount to what the 
United Nations and other international institutions have described as the 
factors that collectively constitute a genocide: namely, “the deliberate and 
systematicdestruction, in whole or in part, of an ethnic, racial, religious or 
national group 
<http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/genocide_prevention.shtml>”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fisis-iraq-shia-muslims-jihadis-atrocities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecc51f8f70557f9b756e525a249627e4ebecfac%2F0_2_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Isis%20campaign%20against%20Iraq%E2%80%99s%20Shia%20Muslims%20is%20not%20politics.%20It%E2%80%99s%20genocide%20%7C%20Ranj%20Alaaldin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fisis-iraq-shia-muslims-jihadis-atrocities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Isis%20campaign%20against%20Iraq%E2%80%99s%20Shia%20Muslims%20is%20not%20politics.%20It%E2%80%99s%20genocide%20%7C%20Ranj%20Alaaldin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fisis-iraq-shia-muslims-jihadis-atrocities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecc51f8f70557f9b756e525a249627e4ebecfac%2F0_2_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A suspected mass grave of Yazidis killed by Isis, found after the jihadi group 
was driven out of Sinjar. Photograph: Sam Tarling for the Guardian 
The targets, scale and frequency of the bombings directed at Iraq’s 
predominantly Shia neighbourhoods, and the intent behind them, readily fall 
within these parameters. Humanitarian organisations often highlight thedeath 
toll in Iraq <https://www.iraqbodycount.org/>, which almost always numbers 
hundreds of fatalities a month and the wounding of many more. Yet these 
statistics largely reflect attacks on Shia neighbourhoods, shrines, holy cities 
and pilgrimages.

In addition to weekly strikes on Shia communities, there have been even more 
deadly coordinated strikes. InJuly 2016 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Karrada_bombing> Isis hit a Shia district 
of Baghdad andkilled more than 300 people 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2016_Karrada_bombing>. When Isis took control of 
northern Iraq in 2014, Shias were the victims of its deadliest attack in recent 
years: more than a thousand Shia army recruits and air cadets were separated 
from their colleagues, tortured and killed in cold blood in what has since 
become known as theCamp Speicher massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/up-to-15000-bodies-may-be-buried-in-mass-graves-in-syria-and-iraq-survey>
.

Isis’s effectiveness also lies in its ability to frame its genocidal campaign 
against the Shias as a medium through which other grievances can be addressed 
by broader sections of the Arab Sunni population, who may have issues that go 
beyond religion – be they political, economic or otherwise.

Donald Trump: 'We will stop racing to topple foreign regimes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-we-will-stop-racing-to-topple-foreign-regimes>
Generally, the problem for policymakers and politicians is that once the term 
genocide is deployed, it increases the pressure for action. For example, Iraq’s 
Yazidis have been targeted incessantly over the past decade. In a single 
coordinated attack in 2007, al-Qaida in Iraq – the forerunner to Isis –killed 
more than 700 Yazidis 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2014/08/08/world/meast/iraq-ethnic-groups-under-threat-isis/index.html>
. Yet it was only afterIsis seized control of Sinjar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/07/who-yazidi-isis-iraq-religion-ethnicity-mountains>
, in northern Iraq, in June 2014 and the US-led campaign to defeat the jihadis 
was launched that crimes against the Yazidi community were recognised as 
genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/19/un-islamic-state-genocide-yazidis-iraq-human-rights-war-crimes>
 by a number of governments and international institutions.

The campaign against Isis will only ever be half completed if international 
resources end with the military effort. Acknowledging the continuing attacks on 
Iraq’s Shias as a genocide is not just a moral imperative: it will also help 
enable the legal and political mechanisms through which such atrocities are 
better confronted. Only then can popular opinion be mobilised in favour of the 
good governance and stabilisation efforts in the country that will ultimately 
remedy humanitarian crises in the region – and prevent groups like Isis from 
re-emerging in the future.
 