
Prince’s legendary backing band the Revolution are to reunite for two shows in 
memory of their former leader. The band will play at the Minneapolis club First 
Avenue – as featured in the concert sequences of Purple Rain – on 2 and 3 
September.

The group went through 15 members during its initial lifespan of 1979-1986, 
but the reunited lineup will feature guitarist Wendy Melvoin, keyboard player 
Lisa Coleman, bassist BrownMark, keyboard player Doctor Fink and drummer Bobby 
Z. All those members were withPrince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> 
in 1984, at the time of Purple Rain. Guitarist Dez Dickerson and bassist André 
Cymone will make guest appearances.

Prince: his 10 greatest songs from Head to Cream (and Purple Rain in between)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/21/prince-10-best-purple-rain-1999-when-doves-cry>
“With profound loss and apocalyptic grief, we, along with the world, mourned 
Prince upon the news of his passing,” the band said. “After seeing the response 
outside of First Avenue and around the rest of the world’s monuments, we, as 
the Revolution – Wendy, Lisa, BrownMark, Dr Fink, and Bobby Z – have decided to 
pay tribute to Prince at home in the city of Minneapolis.”

The band had said in April, following Prince’s death, that they intended to 
play shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/27/prince-band-the-revolution-announce-reunion>
, but it has taken until now to schedule them.

Though the band backed Prince from 1979, they did not officially become the 
Revolution until the release of Purple Rain. With or without the name, the 
Revolution played on the classic 80s run of Prince albums – 1999, Purple Rain, 
Around the World in a Day and Parade.

Prince: ‘Transcendence. That’s what you want. When that happens – Oh, boy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/prince-interview-paisley-park-studios-minneapolis>
The Revolution broke up in 1986, following the Parade tour. Wendy Melvoin had 
been unhappy about Prince hiring her twin sister, Susannah Melvoin. Wendy 
Melvoin and Lisa Coleman were fired in October 1986. Prince replaced Bobby Z 
with Sheila E. BrownMark left the band, though he was asked to say. Dr Fink 
played with Prince until 1991.

Meanwhile, John Blackwell, Prince’s drummer for 12 years from 2000, is 
undergoing hospital treatment in Japan. Blackwell was on tour in the country 
when he lost function in his left arm and leg. He posted on Facebook: “As many 
of you may be aware, I am in the process of getting tested for what the doctors 
think may be tumours in my brain. They are doing more testing and I have not 
been diagnosed with brain cancer as some may have been lead to believe. I do 
not want family and friends to be frightened by any rumours, but I will not be 
able to talk with everyone, nor will I be able to communicate daily through 
social media … I thank all of you for your love, support and prayers and will 
be up and funking in the very near future!”
 