
The first ascent of the Matterhorn was made by Edward Whymper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/15/blue-plaque-edward-whymper-matterhorn>
 and six companions on 14 July 1865. The Manchester Guardian reported the 
success - and tragedy - a week later on 21 July.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatterhorn-first-ascent-whymper-1865%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883553811%2F3b6f8cab-8e7e-4b1b-a6e5-623e544fc7f6-1324x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20first%20ascent%20of%20the%20Matterhorn%2C%2014%20July%201865&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatterhorn-first-ascent-whymper-1865%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20first%20ascent%20of%20the%20Matterhorn%2C%2014%20July%201865&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmatterhorn-first-ascent-whymper-1865%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883553811%2F3b6f8cab-8e7e-4b1b-a6e5-623e544fc7f6-1324x2040.jpeg>
 A climber falling on the 1865 Edward Whymper Matterhorn expedition. 
Photograph: Mansell/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
The fatal accident on the Matterhorn
(By Telegraph.)
Berne, Thursday

Further particulars have been received here of the fatal accident which 
occurred on Mont Cervin, upon the 14th inst. Lord Francis Douglas, aged 19; Mr. 
Whymper, Mr. Charles Hudson, and Mr. Haddo, all met at Zermatt, and being 
desirous of accomplishing the ascent of Mont Cervin, or Matterhorn, which had 
hitherto proved inaccessible, resolved to make the attempt in a party. Mr. 
Hudson had brought some wire rope to facilitate the ascent, but, finding that 
Mr. Whymper was ready to proceed at once, he left his apparatus at his hotel 
and started from Zermatt with the gentlemen above-named, accompanied by the 
guides, Michael Croz of Chamounix, and Tangevald, with the two sons of the 
latter. None of the party expected to reach the summit on this occasion, 
wishing only to discover some way to the desired point; one of Tangevald’s sons 
even returned to the village.

The party passed the night at the foot of Mont Cervin. On the following day, 
finding the ascent would be easier than was anticipated, they pushed on and 
arrived at the summit at two p.m. At three o’clock they were descending the 
mountain, Croz leading the way, followed by Lord Francis Douglas, Messrs, 
Haddo, Hudson; and Whymper, and the two Tangevalds, the whole party being 
connected by the same rope. Lord Francis Douglas happening to slip caused Croz 
and Messrs. Haddo and Hudson to fall, also Tangevald, the father. The last of 
the party was able to pass the rope round a rocky projection, but it broke 
between the rock and the four first, namely, Croz, the guide, Lord F. Douglas, 
and Messrs. Heddo and Hudson. They rolled down the mountain, and were 
precipitated from rock to rock to a depth of 4,000 feet. The survivors arrived 
at Zermatt on the morning of the 15th.

The bodies of the victims of the catastrophe were recovered the same day. The 
Rev. Mr. Dawson, the English chaplain at Geneva, has left that city for Zermatt.

A more detailed report from the Journal de Genève appeared the following day. 
 The Manchester Guardian, 22 July 1865. 
A piece later appeared defending Whymper’s role in the accident 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/7/14/1436882413134/28-July-1865-001.jpg>
 on 21 July 1865. Geoffrey Moorhouse reported the 1965centenary celebrations of 
the Matterhorn’s first ascent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/17/matterhorn-centenary-edward-whymper-switzerland-1965-archive>
.
 