
If you went by music press column inches and volume of tweets, you might be 
forgiven for thinking that there’s only one R&B artist who matters in 2016. The 
performative desperation for Frank Ocean to release a follow-up to 2012’s 
Channel Orange was an odd phenomenon, given firstly that four years is hardly 
an unusually long hiatus, and secondly that there has been no shortage of 
brilliant R&B albums this year. As the disappointment with the double dose of
hookless morass that Ocean finally heaved on to the world this weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/21/frank-ocean-releases-long-awaited-album-blond>
 surely begins to set in, they’re more needed than ever.

KING
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUbpSV3gBRfk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUbpSV3gBRfk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUbpSV3gBRfk&media=>
Ocean is far from unique in taking his time on his craft. Between 2011 and 
2016, LA trio KING – sisters Paris and Amber Strother, together with friend 
Anita Bias – released music at the rate of roughly one song per year. Each of 
those was gorgeous, psychedelic and intricately layered, and won them fans from
Erykah Badu <https://www.theguardian.com/music/erykahbadu> to Prince, who took 
on a role as the trio’s mentor. An album was promised in 2014, but didn’t come 
(the group admitted to taking months to refine a single song). Patience paid 
off though. Their full-length debut We Are King (King Creative) finally emerged 
in February, and its sumptuous textures – swells of harmonies from Amber and 
Anita, visionary analogue arrangements by Paris – demonstrated how worthwhile 
taking time over perfection is. King make everything sound transcendent – 
including, on Muhammad Ali tribute The Greatest – one of the only sports-themed 
songs that captures the heart and soul, shorn of macho bluster, of watching 
supreme athletic accomplishment.

Corinne Bailey Rae
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbest-randb-blond-king-abra-frank-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbfc5e1fd391e32d1c974bc08a874e52c745c16b%2F0_55_2699_1619%2F2699.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20R%26B%20of%202016%20has%20nothing%20to%20do%20with%20Frank%20Ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbest-randb-blond-king-abra-frank-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20R%26B%20of%202016%20has%20nothing%20to%20do%20with%20Frank%20Ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbest-randb-blond-king-abra-frank-ocean%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbfc5e1fd391e32d1c974bc08a874e52c745c16b%2F0_55_2699_1619%2F2699.jpg>
 Rae of Light: Corinne Bailey Rae. Photograph: PR Company Handout 
KING also found the time to work with Corinne Bailey Rae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/corinne-bailey-rae> on parts of her third 
album,The Heart Speaks In Whispers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/15/corinne-bailey-rae-heart-speaks-in-whispers-review>
 (Virgin EMI). If Bailey Rae’s 2010 second album, The Sea revealed her as an 
artist of greater depth than her Radio 2-geared debut had suggested, The Heart 
Speaks In Whispers found her pushing even further outwards. Time and again, 
songs morph in unexpected directions; on In The Dark, delicate acoustic 
balladry explode into distortion before drawing back carefully, while Green 
Aphrodisiac (which graced the night-time half of Barack Obama’ssummer mixtape 
this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/11/barack-obama-summer-playlist-proud-affirmation-blackness>
) winds up in a dreamy fugue state. Bailey Rae’s natural sense of restraint, 
particularly vocally, makes for a compelling sense of tension when paired with 
the cosmic scope of her lyrics: skies break and waves part before Bailey Rae 
puts out a call to “fellow astronauts”, but all the while she sings as though 
whispering in your ear.

Tweet
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8pN17ZnBX1c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8pN17ZnBX1c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8pN17ZnBX1c&media=>
It’s been a good year for the quiet women of soul. Tweet wasn’t always known 
as such, of course: her breakthrough hit, and still her best-known, was 2002’s 
sultry and sparse Oops (Oh My), a Timbaland-produced, Missy Elliott-featuring 
ode to self-love released during a golden age of electronic experimentation in 
R&B. Fourteen years later (and 11 since her last album, a longer wait than King 
and Ocean put together) Timbaland and Missy show up again, but this time it’s 
for the gently swinging retro soul of Somebody Else Will. And even that’s 
Tweet’s only real nod to pop: pensive, diaristic emotional vignettes over 
fluttering, lovingly crafted live arrangements comprise the rest of the 
eponymous Charlene (eOne Music). Tweet’s voice is as magnetic as ever, and her 
hooks are the sort to get under your skin without you realising.

K Michelle
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-JbEG5SS1bI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-JbEG5SS1bI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-JbEG5SS1bI&media=>
No appreciation of R&B is well-rounded if it doesn’t take into account its 
louder, brasher characters as well as its quieter ones. K Michelle is rarely 
bestowed with hashtag honours like #BlackGirlMagic, but beneath the reality TV 
background and hot mess public persona is simply a formidable talent who’s not 
ashamed to rip open her emotional wounds in her art. On her third album, the 
brilliantly titled More Issues Than Vogue, the verbal slaps she administers in 
rap, the gossip-baiting Idris Elba mention by name or the vibrator talk on 
Nightstand might be (highly enjoyable) aural clickbait - but cartoon façades 
have a habit of disguising realness, and there are few singers as capable of 
communicating raw pain as K Michelle. Heartbreakers such as If It Ain’t Love 
and Sleep Like A Baby, as well as nods towards K Michelle’s country roots, 
demonstrate that relegating her to Twitter meme and punchline is doing her 
artistry an immense disservice.

Fantasia
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di623xz8D5HI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di623xz8D5HI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di623xz8D5HI&media=>
Between K Michelle, Beyoncé’s gun-toting Daddy Lessons and Miguel’s 
collaboration with country star Kacey Musgraves on the strangely xx-likeWaves 
(Remix) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XtS3SyevpvI>, mixing R&B and country 
has officially been a trend in 2016. All of those examples were terrific, but 
the song that captured the emotional blood and guts at the core of both genres 
was Fantasia’s Ugly. In just over three minutes, the first American Idol winner 
takes in body image, class division, an unhappy marriage and alcoholism. A 
pivot into gospel midway through is unexpected but hard-won, Fantasia bellowing 
out “Give me good food that sticks to my bones” in that unmistakeable rasp that 
feels possessed by every word she sings. Ugly is the only outright country 
moment on Fantasia’s fifth album, The Definition Of… (19 Recordings) but the 
pleasant surprise is how varied her craft is becoming with each album; as well 
as the latter-day Tina Turner rock-soul style she’s suited to, cuts such as 
Stay Up show what Fantasia can do with space and stateliness as well as busier 
tempos.

Jamila Woods
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DasVhafDASjo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DasVhafDASjo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DasVhafDASjo&media=>
What’s been especially notable about the healthy state of R&B in 2016 is the 
range of styles it encompasses, both sonic and lyrical: there’s no such thing 
as an R&B archetype any more. It’s inextricable from questions of black 
American identity, and if each of these touches on racial themes in their work, 
Chicago’s Jamila Woods put those questions front and centre on her debut album 
Heavn (Closed Sessions). Woods – hitherto best known as an affiliate ofChance 
the Rapper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/13/chance-the-rapper-chicago-music-coloring-book-hip-hop>
 – dissects slogans and archetypes and situates them in the tension of black 
American life in 2016. It’s like the aural accompaniment to the photo of Ieshia 
Evansfacing down three armoured police officers in Baton Rouge in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/22/i-wasnt-afraid-i-took-a-stand-in-baton-rouge-because-enough-is-enough>
: just as Evans seemed to be repelling the officers with her upright 
fearlessness, so Woods radiates her own power.

Gallant: Ology review – a vision of the future of R&B
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/gallant-ology-review-mind-of-a-genius>
Paris Jones
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxgkxYwQRYK0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxgkxYwQRYK0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxgkxYwQRYK0&media=>
Also occupied with questions of identity have been young artists such as North 
Carolina’s PJ, whose debut set Rare (Atlantic) is an endearing journey of 
self-discovery amid a world of stereotypes. Paris Jones captures the anxiety of 
embarking on both personal and professional adulthood, with her dreams and 
money keeping her awake at night, but Rare is also threaded through with an 
unshakeable, quiet optimism. Rather bleaker was Maryland singerGallant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/gallant-ology-review-mind-of-a-genius>
’s debut, Ology (Mind Of A Genius). Haunted by solitude, religious agony and 
narcotics, Gallant nonetheless avoids the mopey cliches of so much alt-R&B 
thanks to the richness of his metaphysical poetry, layered arrangements full of 
crystalline details and a gorgeous falsetto that brought to mind a younger 
incarnation of Maxwell.

Maxwell
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbest-randb-blond-king-abra-frank-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc63c3a4ca5ec08b07dc33d21f04e6aff7e6b792d%2F0_9_1628_977%2F1628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20R%26B%20of%202016%20has%20nothing%20to%20do%20with%20Frank%20Ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbest-randb-blond-king-abra-frank-ocean%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20R%26B%20of%202016%20has%20nothing%20to%20do%20with%20Frank%20Ocean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fbest-randb-blond-king-abra-frank-ocean%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc63c3a4ca5ec08b07dc33d21f04e6aff7e6b792d%2F0_9_1628_977%2F1628.jpg>
 Maxwell … worth waiting for. Photograph: PR 
Maxwell returns: my working style is ‘Would Sade or Marvin do this?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/07/maxwell-returns-my-working-style-is-would-sade-or-marvin-do-this>
Talking of Maxwell, his own long-awaited blackSUMMERS’night (Columbia) – the 
second part of a trilogy that will clearly be decades in the making – lived up 
to every expectation. Aqueous and involving, Maxwell makes masterful mood music 
but also knows that feeling is so much more than mere vibe. If the first half 
of blackSUMMERS’night sets the scene carefully, its second half explodes into 
sweeping drama with the impossibly beautiful heights of 1990x’s undulating 
melody and the ominous doom of Lost. Maxwell and Gallant both makeFrank Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-ocean> seem flat and one-dimensional, 
and maybe provide a lesson that artists simply shouldn’t be hurried if you want 
quality results.

Best of the rest
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCI1g4dnDtao&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCI1g4dnDtao>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCI1g4dnDtao&media=>
Part of R&B’s story in 2016 has been an increased willingness on the part of 
artists such as King, Tweet, Woods,Abra and Dawn Richard to go down the route 
of small indie labels or self-releasing material. Abra’s Princess EP marked her 
out as one of the most distinctive singers and producers in any genre today. 
Richard, whose final instalment of her own trilogy is due this year, has been a 
whirlwind of imaginative boundary-pushing activity in advance of it, from 
collaborations withMachinedrum to 3D virtual reality 
<http://www.wired.com/2016/06/dawn-richard-vr-music-video/> videos. But it’s 
crucial to remember the lack of institutional support that R&B artists on major 
labels continue to have, and the limbo many still find themselves stuck in.
Tinashe’s follow-up to her acclaimed 2014 debut Aquarius was reportedly 
scrapped and restarted from scratch.Sevyn Streeter has been releasing 
impeccable singles for three years (the latest is the distorted party haze of 
Prolly) but Atlantic have yet to allow a full-length album to be released. And
Kehlani’s self-released 2015 debut You Should Be Here won her a deserved Grammy 
nomination, but despite the quality of singles such as 24/7, simultaneously 
heartbreaking and comforting in light of the singer’s own suicide attempt in 
March, people treated her less as an artist to fight for, à la Ocean, and more 
like a gossip blog punchline. It’s curious that a hysterical fever pitch was 
reached in the service of harassing an artist to speed up a creative process he 
was free to indulge in for as long as he wanted, but not to actually support 
artists who might need it.
 