
Last night I watched Ralph Fiennes star in a new production of Ibsen’s play 
The Master Builder. Towards the end of the play, Fiennes’ character Solness 
reveals that, like him, his wife, Aline, also had a vocation for building. 
Unlike him, however, her vocation was not for building houses, but for 
“building up the souls of little children.”

So far, so stereotypical. Of course, Ibsen was writing in the late 19th 
century. We’ve moved on a bit since then. Or have we?

Anti-bullying charity Ditch the Label asked over 1000 young people aged 13-25 
for their opinions on gender. Their responses did not on the whole make 
encouraging reading for feminists.


The word “gentle” was associated with femininity by 78% of respondents, while 
only 23% associated it with masculinity. Conversely, “strong” was associated 
with masculinity by 71% of respondents, but with femininity by only 23% of 
respondents. There was a similar disparity for “friendly” (74% associated it 
with femininity and 39% with masculinity) and “dominant” (48% associated it 
with masculinity and 5% with femininity).

The report also found that 51% of respondents believed that women are more 
emotional than men, that 42% think men are better at legal and political jobs 
(only 4% think women are) and 40% think men are better at managing businesses, 
with again only 4% thinking women are better.


This doesn’t sound promising for ambitious young women, but consider a recent 
report released by UCAS, which found that women now outnumber men in 112 of 180 
degree subjects. Mary Curnock Cook, chief executive of UCASsounded the alarm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/gender-gap-uk-degree-subjects-doubles-eight-years-ucas-study>
 for boys: “Girls are doing better throughout primary, secondary and higher 
education than boys; poor, white boys are the most disadvantaged group in entry 
to higher education and the gap is getting bigger. But despite the clear 
evidence and the press coverage, there is a deafening policy silence on the 
issue. Has the women’s movement now become so normalised that we cannot 
conceive of needing to take positive action to secure equal education outcomes 
for boys?”


Now women are routinely more likely to take degrees than men (admittedly men 
still outnumber women in degrees that tend to lead to better compensated 
careers, such as computer science, mechanical engineering, sports science, 
electrical engineering and economics), surely the opinions of the young people 
interviewed by Ditch the Label will soon start to look like relics of a past 
age?


Don’t be so sure. For example, in the US, by 1986 
<http://www.aauw.org/files/2013/02/Why-So-Few-Women-in-Science-Technology-Engineering-and-Mathematics.pdf>
 women earned 46.5% of undergraduate degrees in Maths, butby 2013 
<http://www.ngcproject.org/statistics>, they still made up only 25% of the STEM 
workforce. Something beyond education must going on. That something is sexism.


Consider this randomised double-blind study 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/109/41/16474.abstract> from 2012. Science faculty 
from research-intensive universities were asked to rate the application 
materials of a student — who was randomly assigned either a male or female name 
— for a laboratory manager position. Both male and female faculty members rated 
the male applicant “as significantly more competent and hireable than the 
(identical) female applicant”. They also selected a higher starting salary and 
offered more career mentoring to the male applicant.


A similar study <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2063742%20>
 from 2014 sent 6458 fictional letters of inquiry from a potential doctoral 
candidate asking to discuss research opportunities with a professor. The 
letters were identical in every way except for the writer’s name. The study 
found that faculty were more likely to simply not reply to requests from women. 
Where they did reply, they were more likely to tell women they didn’t have time 
to meet.Another 
<http://https://publichealthwatch.wordpress.com/2014/06/24/new-research-proves-gender-bias-discrimination-extraordinarily-prevalent-in-many-science-math-fields/?utm_content=buffer1591a&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
 also from 2014 found that managers were twice as likely to hire a man as a 
woman in the sciences even when they had no information beyond a candidate’s 
gender. In fact, even when they had information that proved the woman would be 
the best candidate, they were still more likely to hire the man.


The reality is, perception matters when it comes to career success. By all 
means, we should consider what it is about the way we are bringing up our young 
men that leaves them lagging in some if not all subjects. But let’s not pretend 
that UCAS’s finding marks the beginning of the matriarchy. The reality is, for 
men, your greatest asset is not your degree. It’s your penis.
 