
"My life and times?" says Thelma Holt. "I love talking, but" – her voice drops 
– "I'dmuch rather talk about other people." She smiles. In the previous 15 
minutes, Holt has related one story about a fellow theatre producer 
(unprintable), two stories about a theatre owner (possibly libellous), a yarn 
about an encounter with the crown prince of Japan (probable diplomatic 
incident) and a saga that swerves from the crisis in Gaza to David Cameron's 
taste in suits. It might be better to stick with the life and times, I say. She 
rolls her eyes theatrically, and her voice plunges to Lady Bracknell-like 
depths. "Well, darling. If you must."

She may be a little unsteady on her feet these days, the flame-coloured hair a 
little thinner than it was, but Holt, now 82, has lost none of her ability to 
command attention. She learned the skill early, as a young Rada graduate in the 
1950s. And it has proved useful when she left acting to become an impresario 
and producer,one of the most influential in the business 
<http://www.thelmaholt.co.uk>. Theatre is hardly known for its shrinking 
violets, but few people can boast both of having played Lady Macbeth in a 
transparent nightie (and afterwards debating iton TV with Mary Whitehouse 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/theatre/who-dares-wins-7284232.html>) then 
been awarded the Order of the Rising Sun for contributions to Japanese drama. 
And that's not to mention the epic rows with Robert Maxwell, treasurer when 
Holt ranLondon's Roundhouse in the late 1970s 
<http://www.camdenguide.co.uk/news/rhhistory.html>. "I've been so very lucky, 
you know," Holt says: "If you want it badly enough you'll get it."

Her beginnings in theatre have been written about before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/mar/10/books.guardianreview6>, but bear 
repeating for the insight they shed into Holt's way with a yarn (a fellow 
producer once said that "there is genius, which she has in abundance. But there 
is also more than a touch of Looney Tunes."). Brought up Catholic – the faith 
remains important to her – she was taken to mass at the age of four. "I saw the 
priest came on last, went off first, had the most lines and a beautiful dress. 
And I thought, I want to be a priest." She pats my wrist. "Clearly I was ahead 
of my time, dear. Seventy years."

Realising that a career in the priesthood was beyond even her, Holt switched 
her sights to theatre, "the other place where you get the best frock and all 
the words". She joined Rada in 1950, the same year as Joe Orton ("as wicked as 
can be").

She did well enough, but had an inkling that her true talents lay in 
other directions. "I was understudying Vanessa Redgrave on a show in Bath, 
it must have been the early 60s, and there were still posters up from the 
actors who'd been playing the week before. Vanessa turned to me and said, 'If 
you'd been doing it, that wouldn't have happened.' So I thought, 'I'll make it 
possible for them to do what they do.'" Her voice drops. "Also, I'll be honest, 
I thought: I'm never going to be as good as Vanessa."

She was spotted in a fringe show in 1965 by a young American director, Charles 
Marowitz <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/09/charles-marowitz>, who 
had collaborated with Peter Brook at the Royal Shakespeare Company and 
was looking to set up his own group. Overawed by Holt, he invited her to join; 
she proved that she was as valuable as an organiser and fundraiser as she was 
on stage.

"One day," she recalls, "Charles sent me a telegram saying, 'I've found a 
space.' This was 1967, in Tottenham Court Road, a basement. It cost £3,700 to 
convert. I've forgotten many things, but I remember that." The theatre was 
called theOpen Space, a "theatrical laboratory" 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/vastatic/theatre/archives/thm-271f.html> in which 
Marowitz and a group of young actors could conduct experiments on scripts old 
and new – and often on the audience. Some plays were rapid reactions to the 
news (1970'sThe Chicago Conspiracy made headlines for starring the author 
William Burroughs 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/02/13/specials/burroughs-conspiracy.html>), 
but others were Shakespeare collages compiled byMarowitz 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Marowitz-Shakespeare-Merchant-Adaptations/dp/0714526517>
, who tore up texts and spliced them into provocative new composites: a dadaist
Hamlet (1965) that recast the hero as a "slob" who deserved what was coming to 
him, an unyielding Taming of the Shew (1973) that resulted in Holt's Katherine 
being anally raped onstage by Petruchio.

Though the Open Space lasted only 11 years – it collapsed in fittingly 
eccentric form after a fight about whetherMarowitz had claimed a new bathroom 
on the production budget 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/charles-marowitz-iconoclastic-director-who-founded-the-open-space-theatre-and-kickstarted-the-careers-of-many-fine-actors-and-writers-9372494.html>
 – it brought an explosive sense of danger to British theatre. "I loved it," 
Holt recalls. "I was 40 going on 12. I like risk."

Not just professionally, one might add: having married a fellow actor, Patrick 
Graucob, who later became a bookseller, she fell for the American actor 
Lawrence Pressman, whom she later married (despite her Catholicism) in a Jewish 
ceremony in New York. The marriage lasted just six weeks (she quietly remarried 
Graucob in 2011); reflecting about it onDesert Island Discs years later 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/features/desert-island-discs/castaway/faf44a0a>, 
Holt briskly opined: "It is an English tradition to hang on to things longer 
than you should." Why did they marry in the first place? She smiles, a little 
pityingly. "It was a fantastic party. We stamped on a glass. Would anyone say 
no to that?" She sighs happily. "Anyway, he had wonderful legs."

And was there another marriage somewhere in the middle? An Italian? "Oh yes, 
he was a passing fancy, very attractive, but he died young." She stops. "Do you 
want a list? I'll ask Malcolm [her assistant]. He's much better at this than 
me."

Somewhat more constant than her love life has been Holt's passion for 
international drama, another thing she discovered during the Open Space days. 
While rehearsing Gertrude in Marowitz'sHamlet, she was astonished one day to be 
asked to perform alongside the titanicRussian actor Innokenti Smoktunovsky 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-innokenti-smoktunovsky-1381520.html>
, who had starred in Grigori Kosintsev's film ofHamlet and had come to London 
to perform. "He and his wife acted in French; we did it in English. When we met 
later, he was convinced I could speak beautiful Russian. He can't have been 
listening."

After the Open Space went under, Holt was persuaded to take her producing 
talents tothe Roundhouse in Camden 
<http://www.roundhouse.org.uk/about-us/history-of-the-roundhouse/>, which had 
been reborn as an arts venue but by the late 1970s was slipping into an ocean 
of debt. Alongside punk gigs that paid the bills and canny transfers from 
regional theatre, Holt imported a mix of non-English and defiantly 
non-traditional drama: Australia'sCircus Oz, the radical director Antoine Vitez 
from France, and most famously Georgia's Robert Sturua, whoseHieronymus 
Bosch-inspiredRichard III <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bKBcFg9ndsM>, which 
arrived in 1980 just after the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, brought British 
audiences into bloody proximity with theatre behind the iron curtain.

A decade later, having been courted by Peter Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/peter-hall> to perform the same trick at 
the National, she invited Ingmar Bergman and Peter Stein, and arranged visits 
from Chicago'sSteppenwolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/may/27/steppenwolf-tempest> 
and the Moscow Art theatre.

"I grew up in an island race," she explains. "When I went to Rada I was 
stuffed like a chicken with Shakespeare, when I left I was stuffed with more 
Shakespeare. I had never seen Chekhov done in his mother tongue, I had seen no 
Ibsen in Norwegian. I just wanted to experience some of that."

One of the relationships she forged was with the Japanese director Yukio 
Ninagawa <http://www.ninagawastudio.net/English/E-yukioninagawa.html>, whom she 
brought to the NT in 1986, and again the following year, astonishing audiences 
with a "cherry-blossom"Macbeth and an epic, stylised all-male Medea 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UQXkmRYag94> that blended kabuki, bunraku 
puppetry and musical-style production values. Since then Holt has brought over 
15 more Ninagawa productions to the UK (most recently 2012'sCymbeline) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/may/30/cymbeline-review-barbican-ninagawa>
, championing the cause of Asian drama in the west and forging a form of 
theatre that feels decisively modern. "I went barmy when I first I saw Yukio's 
productions. I was absolutely passionate about them. I suddenly realised that 
theatre is a way to learn not just about our own country but the world."

Holt's courage makes her stand out: her bloody-minded determination that the 
project should happen, come what may – whether it's bringing the sprawling
Théâtre du Soleil ensemble to Bradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/aug/10/ariane-mnouchkine-life-in-theatre>
or casting Janet McTeer oppositeMark Rylance in Much Ado About Nothing 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre--something-out-of-nothing-paul-taylor-applauds-mark-rylance-and-company-in-much-ado-about-nothing-at-the-queens-1483561.html>
 ("Mark phoned me and said, 'Thelma, you think I'm Benedick? Have you actually 
read the script?' Of course he agreed to do it eventually.").

In a West End reliant on film rehashes, 30-year-old musicals and shows that 
have been roadtested in the subsidised sector, Holt is that rarest of 
creatures: a veteran producer who has lost none of her appetite for the new.

"I believe in people," she says. "That's what keeps me going. Someone comes to 
me with an idea – Ninagawa comes, orGreg Doran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/22/gregory-doran-rsc-artistic-director>
 from theRSC <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>, anyone. It's all about 
making the idea happen."

She's as active as ever: a transfer of the Menier's production of Forbidden 
Broadway has just been announced 
<http://www.officiallondontheatre.co.uk/news/latest-news/article/item234343/forbidden-broadway-hits-west-end/>
, and a new adaptation of Frank McGuinness is being lined up for early next 
year. Two days after we speak she's flying to Tokyo withthe Oxford University 
Drama Society <http://www.ouds.org/thelma-holt-international-tour.html>, which 
she has supported since a stint as theCameron Mackintosh professor of 
contemporary theatre <http://www.ouds.org/thelma-holt-international-tour.html>. 
Next year's big event – a celebration of Ninagawa's 80th birthday at the 
Barbican – is just being finalised. Her 2016 diary is already filling with 
a new collaboration with the RSC.

What would she like her legacy to be? She draws breath for what seems like the 
first time. "For my failed productions as much as my successful ones. The 
nicest thing that anyone's ever said to me is if you're in a production of 
Thelma's that fails you actually don't know. There are just as many balloons, 
and just as much alcohol at the party as if it were a success." She sets her 
jaw. "Failure is not a bad thing, you get better at it. If I have a failure, 
we'll do the fucking thing again. We can't die and not get it right."

Death is on her mind, you sense. Graucob died last January at the age of 84, 
followed in May by Marowitz. Ever-pragmatic, she has made an advance booking 
for herself at Kensal Green cemetery in north London, in the same plot as her 
husband. "I'm on top. That seems to make sense."

But she's adamant she can't imagine retiring. "Where am I going to live, in 
Denville Hall <http://www.denvillehall.org.uk> with all the other old actors?" 
She cackles. "Actually that's quite fun, you'd go downstairs and you'd bitch. 
I'd like that."

We get talking about a time she was at the Roundhouse and the cast decided 
they'd do a group parachute jump. Holt insisted she'd join them, despite having 
no previous experience. "The doctor had seen me as Lady Macbeth. He said, 'Have 
you done this before?' I said no. Everyone else was petrified, but I wasn't, 
quite honestly."

I believe her, I say. "You just leap, darling. As easy as that."

• Forbidden Broadway will be at the Vaudeville theatre, London WC2, from 9 
September to 22 November,menierchocolatefactory.com 
<http://www.menierchocolatefactory.com>.
 