
We are on the brink of seeing three of the world’s richest democracies be led 
by women. This is a moment to take stock, to measure how attitudes have changed 
to women in power, and what that means for the licence that they now have to 
define themselves.

It is always harder on the way to power: Clinton’s battles with how to present 
herself as a woman aspiring to be commander in chief 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/2016/09/08/clinton-criticized-for-not-smiling-enough-during-commander-in-chief-forum/>
 – strong or compliant, outspoken or measured – have threaded through the 
presidential campaign. In office, it would be what she does that counts. Long 
ago,Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> became the 
most powerful politician in Europe, a standing that made a virtue out of 
ordinariness. It isTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>
 who seems most interesting, and interested, in how she can use her personal 
brand to sell a political message.

May has an acute sense of how to manage her public image. Track her trajectory 
to the top and you track what is acceptable to mainstream opinion, or sometimes 
what is only just acceptable – one of her skills is her judgment of where 
people are, and how far it is possible to shift them in her direction, or at 
least enough of them for her to win the argument. She often does it in policy 
development: she has been ahead of Conservative opinion on matters ranging from 
the pressingneed to recruit more female MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/theresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies>
,domestic violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/27/police-failures-domestic-violence-damning-report>
 andfemale genital mutilation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/22/fgm-unit-theresa-may-forced-marriage-girl-summit>
 to the conduct of the police and the need for afull investigation into the 
Hillsborough disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/27/hillsborough-disaster-those-responsible-could-face-charges-theresa-may>
.
 May in red at this year’s budget. Photograph: Jessica Taylor/UK Parliament/PA 
May is hardly a slave to fashion. But as a Tory MP and now leader and prime 
minister,she embodies it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/18/theresa-may-does-it-matter-what-the-new-prime-minister-wears>
. What she wears embodies what she wants the party to be. Her wardrobe is an 
object lesson in brand management.

May was first elected as an MP in 1997, the year of the Labour landslide, the 
year when there were101 Labour female MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/apr/22/women.labour1>. That year, 
precisely13 Conservative women were elected 
<http://conservativewomen.uk/content/women-parliament>. And, in an 1998 
interview after she became one of the first new MPs to be given a frontbench 
job, she was confident that gender was irrelevant. How she has changed.

Back then, the Tories were in shock and in decline after 18 years in power. 
Recovery seemed distant. Yet, for Conservatives, office is always the principle 
ambition, and that means it often makes a very unconservative accommodation 
with social trends. After the 1997 defeat, powerful figures in the party 
grasped that appearing more female-friendly would be at the heart of 
modernisation. Soon, May was speaking on women’s issues. In 2002, after the 
second election defeat, she became the first woman to chair the party. That was 
the year shedescribed the Tories as the “nasty party” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/oct/08/uk.conservatives2002>. It was 
the yearshe wore kitten heels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/oct/09/gender.fashion>.
 May dons a colour-block coat on her first day as prime minister. Photograph: 
Gareth Fuller/PA 
The kitten heels gave May an identity that was separate from her politics. In 
popular imagination, they were so ... well, unTory. They were a little quirky. 
They were almost cheeky. They were animal print, for heaven’s sake! It was as 
if every other woman in the party was still in shiny leather brogues. What May 
said about herself with those shoes, she came also to say about the party. The 
shoes helped to identify where the change in public perception had to come; 
they began to lay the ground for a party leader who really was modernising. 
Only it was David Cameron who capitalised on it, not May.

Fashion writers applaud May as a woman who treats the frontbench in the 
Commons like the front row at a fashion show. It’s much more than that – since 
that day at the 2002 party conference, May has never stopped using how she 
looks to indicate what she is thinking.

She dresses strikingly when she intends to make a striking intervention; as 
emphasis, not distraction. Last autumn, at the first party conference after the 
2015 election victory, May made a deeply controversial speech aboutimmigration 
in a zip-backed black Roland Mouret dress 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/politics/theresa-may-boutique/>. A few years 
earlier, she had been equally provocative about the Human Rights Act in another 
party conference speech, in awaisted navy jacket and a dress with an asymmetric 
hemline 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2045156/Theresa-May-Ken-Clarke-clash-catgate-Human-Rights-Act.html>
. During what turned out to be George Osborne’s last budget in March, shesat 
beside the chancellor in a scarlet dress 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3495666/Put-yer-baps-away-darling-Theresa-steals-budget-dress-divides-Twitter.html>
. Soon afterwards, she had a dramatic haircut, following Clinton,Nicola Sturgeon
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> and Merkel with the 
power bob (AKA the Pob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/26/pob-power-haircut-women-theresa-may-political-bob>
). At that point, it occurred to me she thought the Brexit vote might not go 
the government’s way and that, if so, it would be her chance for the top. She 
was not going to lose out to the Camerons again. Picture the tortoise sturdily 
marching past the snoozing hare. Then remember last July’s 
steps-of-Downing-Street colour-blocked coat and skirt by Amanda Wakeley, and
read the wardrobe of triumph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/theresa-may-wears-amanda-wakeley-coat-to-enter-downing-street/>
.

May can do this because wearing interesting clothes is at last a legitimate – 
maybe even a desirable – attribute for women in power, and she can take some of 
the credit for that. When she began her career in Westminster 20 years ago, an 
interest in fashion was taken as an indication of a woman who can read nothing 
more challenging than the captions to magazine fashion shoots. Labour women who 
took part in photo shoots soon after the election in 1997 were told they had 
destroyed their political credibility. When Sturgeon did the same thing in 
September last year,even the Daily Mail let it pass 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3225121/Sturgeon-attacks-hideous-cruel-focus-appearance-posing-glamorous-Vogue-photoshoot.html>
.
 At the 2015 Conservative party conference. Photograph: Ray Tang/REX 
Shutterstock 
May has played a part in making style a legitimate part of a political 
personality. She uses what she wears to underline her wider message: every 
public appearance announces that she is in touch with a reality outside 
Westminster (even if it is limited to prosperous southern England), and that 
she shares ordinary people’s – or at least well-off people’s – interests in the 
quotidian concerns of life. But her appearance says something else about her, 
too. From statement haircut to shiny toe cap, her appearance represents her 
freedom from anxiety about what other people think – a quality that, May’s 
friends say, is one of her defining characteristics.

May pushes boundaries with clothes as well as policies. Female MPs who reveal 
that, in fact, they – along with other women – do have breasts still get 
trolled on Twitter (whenAlison McGovern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alison-mcgovern> wore a low-cut dress on 
Channel 4 News last year, she wasaccused of deliberately trying to distract 
male viewers from the interview 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/mp-accused-flashing-cleavage-channel-6315978>
). When May wore that red dress behind Osborne, I’m not sure she thought she 
was reclaiming breasts from sexploitation. But she was saying that she will 
wear exactly what she likes.

Contrast this with the Thatcher era. Margaret Thatcher made a Thatcher-shaped 
hole in the glass ceiling. Apart from the significant fact of being there,she 
did nothing to make it different for women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/09/margaret-thatcher-no-feminist>
. Her lack of interest in feminist revolution was exemplified by many things 
she did, and also by her outfits.
 May’s 2011 waisted jacket and dress. Photograph: Toby Melville/REUTERS 
Thatcher wore clothes to make her look less threatening than she was: her 
attitude to gender was far more fully described by her wardrobe than anything 
that she said (a speech to the 1969 party conference archly quoting Socrates 
<http://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/101687> – “when woman is made equal 
to man she becomes his superior, and I would not dissent from anyone as wise as 
Socrates” – may be the best indication of her fey approach). In Thatcher’s 
view, women could share power only if they let men think that they were still 
making the tea.

One of the more odd developments in feminist politics is the motherhood 
divide. In last year’s Labour leadership contest,Helen Goodman suggested Yvette 
Cooper’s experience as a mother made her the best candidate 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/07/does-it-matter-liz-kendalls-not-mother-row-reveals-more-you-think>
. It is a terrifying thought that if Andrea Leadsom, a mother, had not tried 
the same line against the childless May, Leadsom might now be prime minister.

But it has become much more likely that men will face similar random tests of 
their familiarity with voters’ experiences. Women are no longer obliged to 
pretend to be domestic goddesses. It’s hard to imagine May bothering to 
perpetuate the myth that she cooks for Philip every night the wayThatcher 
apparently cooked for Denis 
<http://voices.nationalgeographic.com/2013/04/08/5-surprising-things-you-didnt-know-about-margaret-thatcher/>
. Mr May has already been objectified as Maidenhead man, andhis choice of 
outfits is almost as scrutinised as hers 
<http://www.marieclaire.co.uk/news/fashion-news/theresa-may-s-husband-peter-may-the-style-file-3581>
.

May says her heroine is Elizabeth I 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1686925/theresa-may-reveals-she-hates-her-nose-and-compares-herself-to-elizabeth-i-in-an-astonishingly-candid-interview/>
: head of a buccaneering nation; queen of Galleon Britain. And a woman with a 
fine appreciation for the power of a good frock.
 