
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is preparing to 
promote a string of female Conservative colleagues, including into key cabinet 
positions, after she is invited by the Queen to form a new government on 
Wednesday.

Allies including Amber Rudd, currently the energy secretary, and Justine 
Greening, the international development secretary, are among those expected to 
be in line for prominent positions as thesecond female prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/07/theresa-may-andrea-leadsom-tory-leader-prime-minister>
 shakes up the team running the government.

Theresa May: unpredictable, moralistic, and heading to No 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-the-vicars-daughter-poised-to-pull-the-tories-and-the-country-from-the-abyss>
The incoming prime minister will announce the reshuffle on Wednesday after she 
moves into Downing Street with her husband, Philip. May will take up residence 
at No 10 after an audience at Buckingham Palace where the Queen will confirm 
her new role.

Cameron will face the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, in the House of Commons 
for one final prime minister’s questions before making his outgoing remarks on 
Downing Street. Sometime thereafter he will head to the palace to formally 
resign. May will make the opposite journey, meeting the Queen for the tradition 
of “kissing hands”, which usually involves a handshake. She will make her first 
speech as Britain’s 54th prime minister as she makes her way into Downing 
Street [see footnote].

The appointments are intended to create a more gender-balanced cabinet, which 
has been called for by campaigners as a way to improve policymaking. Some of 
the most senior roles in the cabinet will be occupied by women. “It was Theresa 
who set up the campaign to elect more female MPs to parliament, and she has 
always believed that there should be more women in prominent government 
positions,” said a spokeswoman for May.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64eb2d0efbf0136ad4fd52ba570a5d83bfb040da%2F0_82_3440_2065%2F3440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20set%20to%20appoint%20female%20allies%20to%20key%20cabinet%20positions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20set%20to%20appoint%20female%20allies%20to%20key%20cabinet%20positions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64eb2d0efbf0136ad4fd52ba570a5d83bfb040da%2F0_82_3440_2065%2F3440.jpg>
 Amber Rudd, the current energy secretary, who is expected to be promoted to a 
top cabinet position. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
Speculation in Westminster suggested that a woman could be under consideration 
for the role of chancellor for the first time, although the frontrunners so far 
include the foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, and Chris Grayling, leader of 
the House of Commons.


Cameron had made some progress with the gender balance during previous 
reshuffles, with his final senior team having seven women serving as full 
members, almost a third of the total. But May intends to go further: other 
women tipped for ministerial promotions include Harriett Baldwin, Margot James 
and Karen Bradley, who worked with May at the Home Office as head of the modern 
slavery bill.

On Monday, May delivered a speech about social justice that included an attack 
on the government’s industrial strategy, widely interpreted as a swipe at 
George Osborne. Some were suggesting that he could be moved from the Treasury 
to the Foreign Office.

Officials within the Home Office suggested Grayling could become home 
secretary, although Rudd is considered a contender to succeed May in taking 
responsibility for immigration policy.

It was unclear whether May would keep Michael Gove in his job as justice 
secretaryfollowing a number of clashes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/theresa-may-v-michael-gove-personality-clash-with-long-history>
under Cameron’s premiership. However, she is likely to try to unify a party 
divided by the EU referendum campaign and appoint some senior Brexit 
campaigners such as Boris Johnson, Liam Fox, Andrea Leadsom and Priti Patel 
alongside Grayling.

Cameron will bow out and make a speech in which he will hope to cement a 
legacy beyond the EU referendum, and will urge May not to drop the commitment 
to spending 0.7% of GDP on international aid.

Who will be in Theresa May's cabinet?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/who-will-be-in-theresa-mays-cabinet-government>
May’s spokeswoman said work was already under way to set up a new department 
dedicated to negotiating Britain’s exit from the EU. “Civil servants have 
already been charged with finding a building to house the Brexit department – 
an indication of Theresa’s commitment to get on with delivering the verdict of 
the EU referendum.Brexit means Brexit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/theresa-may-launches-tory-leadership-bid-with-pledge-to-unite-country>
and we’re going to make a success of it,” she has said.

The prime minister in waiting spent her final day as home secretary planning 
her entry into Downing Street and also addressing staff at the Home Office. She 
highlighted areas of policy reform including measures against terrorism and the 
investigatory powers bill, also known as the snooper’s charter.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240ed87580ceb784ef357fb89dcca20b7315aad6%2F0_104_4787_2872%2F4787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20set%20to%20appoint%20female%20allies%20to%20key%20cabinet%20positions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20set%20to%20appoint%20female%20allies%20to%20key%20cabinet%20positions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Ftheresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F240ed87580ceb784ef357fb89dcca20b7315aad6%2F0_104_4787_2872%2F4787.jpg>
 Justine Greening, the international development secretary. Photograph: Carl 
Court/Getty Images 
 May then told civil servants she believed the “social justice agenda” had 
been at the heart of her tenure, naminginquiries into the Hillsborough tragedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquest-timeline-the-long-wait-for-justice>
, undercover policing and child sex abuse as proud achievements. Telling 
officials that “there will always be a little bit of the Home Office inside 
me”, May said her department had focused on the most vulnerable in society.

 May is expected to make the life chances strategy – a cross-government policy 
that Cameron hoped would be his flagship reform had he carried on as prime 
minister – a priority for the new government. The strategy is being led by the 
Department for Work and Pensions and includes reforms that affect a child’s 
earliest years, including access to high-quality childcare, a focus on 
schooling, university, rehabilitation for offenders and work opportunities.

Lauding the policy in cabinet, May then told Cameron that he had the “warmth 
and respect” of colleagues, and that he had led the country through a difficult 
time, with particularly tough economic circumstances.

Theresa May, gender politics, equality and the EU | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/theresa-may-gender-politics-equality-and-the-eu>
Later, the incoming prime minister went to Conservative headquarters and told 
staff that it was “an honour and a privilege to be the new leader of this great 
party”. She thanked staff for their work and set out her priorities. “Now, more 
than ever, we need to work together, to deliver on Brexit, to build a country 
that works for everyone, and to truly unite our party and our country,” she 
said, attacking Labour as a party that had brought the country to bankruptcy.

In combative language, May claimed it did not matter whether Tony Blair, 
Gordon Brown or Jeremy Corbyn led the Labour party, because “when Labour 
prospers the country suffers”.

During her time as home secretary and as part of the coalition, May clashed 
with the then deputy prime minister and Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg, 
particularly over the controversial snooper’s charter and other anti-terrorism 
legislation.

Alex Dziedzan, who worked for Clegg as an adviser, said: “There were lots of 
disagreements between Theresa May and the Liberal Democrats on asylum, 
immigration and issues involving human rights.

“But she is the toughest negotiator I have ever seen and she was the most 
formidable person we ever came across in government without a shadow of a 
doubt. I expect her to be much more forceful in delivering her policies than 
Cameron ever has been.”

James Cleverly, the Tory MP for Braintree, said he suspected it would be a 
“balanced cabinet”, arguing there were able people who satisfied a number of 
demographics. “Then you can stop thinking about tick-box exercises,” he said.

• This footnote was added on 13 July 2016 to clarify that Theresa May will be 
the 54th person to be a British prime minister. If the number of times the 
prime ministership has changed hands is counted, she will be the 76th. Some 
prime ministers have served more than one term non-consecutively.
 