
London, Thursday.
Between 9,000 and 10,000 Jews have been arrested in Berlin alone. According to 
careful estimates, between 35,000 and 40,000 have been arrested in allGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, exclusive of Austria and the 
Sudetenland. Nearly all the Jews arrested in Berlin have been sent to the 
concentration camp of Sachsenhausen, near Oranienburg, where Niemöller is 
confined. Many thousands of Jews have been sent to the concentration camps at 
Buchenwald, near Weimar, and Dachau.

The reports of executions at Buchenwald are confirmed. It is learned from a 
sure source that 70 Jews were executed in that camp on the night of November 
8–9, that is to say, before the death of Vom Rath. Further executions followed, 
and according to the latest information available they now total 200 in 
Buchenwald alone. The executions were carried out by firing-squads.

In some regions of Germany all male Jews aged from 16 to 60, in others 18 to 
80, were arrested – or, rather, all who could be traced. At the present moment 
innumerable Jews are wandering about the forests of Germany. Wealthier Jews are 
trying to elude arrest by spending all their time, night and day, in trains 
travelling from place to place. In all frontier regions, especially in the 
west, thousands of Jewish women and children whose husbands and fathers have 
been arrested trying to escape from Germany. They camp near the frontier or 
wander to and fro, seeking to cross openly or surreptitiously as best they can.

Excess planned well in advance
It grows more and more evident that the excesses were planned well in advance. 
In Berlin alone 3000 Jewish shops and stores were systematically destroyed by 
organised gangs in a very short space of time. In many towns the gangs, mostly 
S.A. (Storm Troop) men in mufti, were ready for action before the death of Vom 
Rath. In Hessen the outrages began in the night from Tuesday to Wednesday, and 
Vom Rath died on the Wednesday afternoon. In the course of the day Hessian Jews 
fled to Frankfort and arrived there bruised and bleeding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjews-germany-nazism-pogrom-1938%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782865c34e561b189948bc1d259bf33758ce174a%2F0_0_950_570%2F950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20of%20Jews%20arrested%20in%20Germany%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2018%20November%201938&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjews-germany-nazism-pogrom-1938%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20of%20Jews%20arrested%20in%20Germany%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2018%20November%201938&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjews-germany-nazism-pogrom-1938%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782865c34e561b189948bc1d259bf33758ce174a%2F0_0_950_570%2F950.jpg>
 Hitler Youth supervise Jews as they are forced to scrub the streets of the 
Austrian capital in 1938. Photograph: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 
In Hanover the furniture and household property of the Jews was taken to a 
square and burnt in the presence of a cheering crowd. In Kassel nearly all the 
homes of the Jews have been destroyed. There the arrested Jews were paraded in 
the open, the fire brigade was called out, and the hose-pipes were turned on 
them, so that they were all completely drenched before being sent to the 
concentration camp at Buchenwald. At Göttingen the fire brigade observed that a 
char-woman was inside a burning synagogue. The firemen rescued her, although 
the crowd tried to prevent them from doing so. At Zwickau all homes of German 
and Stateless Jews were demolished by hooligans armed with hatchets while the 
police looked on. The three synagogues in Bremen have been burnt down and all 
adult male Jews have been arrested. All adult male Jews in Erfurt have been 
arrested.

Homes for aged and sick destroyed
All Jewish homes and institutes for the poor and aged and ailing have been 
destroyed. The great Jewish children’s home at Caputh, near Berlin, had to be 
evacuated at short notice before being demolished inside by an organised gang. 
At Nuremberg all the inmates of the Jewish hospital, including the sick, had to 
parade in the courtyard while the inside of the building was demolished.

The Jewish home for aged people at Ems had to be evacuated during the night, 
and the personal property of the inmates was destroyed with the furniture and 
fittings. One of the inmates, who had stayed in bed because he could not move, 
was injured by splinters of furniture that was being smashed with hatchet 
blows. He was found the next day, bleeding from several wounds, by a second 
gang which had arrived to complete the work of destruction.

The patients in the home for consumptives at Soden were driven out during the 
night and the home was demolished. The home for Jewish infants at Isenburg was 
also destroyed. Homes and institutes for children have been destroyed at 
Lehnitz and Ellguth.
 