
At school and university, female students consistently achieve higher GCSE and 
A-level results 
<http://www.cambridgeassessment.org.uk/Images/gender-differences-at-gcse-report.pdf>
 and take upmore undergraduate places 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-36266753> than their male peers – yet this 
achievement does not translate to career success.

Almost 50% of women believe they would be further in their career if they had 
more self-belief

Currently, just 16% of director seats are women – and MSCI reports it will take
until 2027 for women to hold 
<https://www.msci.com/www/blog-posts/women-%20on-boards-%20global-trends/0263383649>
just 30% of global board seats 
<https://www.msci.com/www/blog-posts/women-%20on-boards-%20global-trends/0263383649>
. So if women are achieving academically, what is holding them back in their 
careers?

It starts in the teen years. Research from Girlguiding 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-36869186> shows that most girls’ career 
confidence plummets during adolescence. And these insecurities continue into 
working life: a survey showed that almost 50% of women believe they would be 
further in their career if they had more self-belief – with half of women 
saying they have beenburdened by these insecurities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/lack-of-confidence-holding-back-womens-careers>
 since school (only one in 10 said it started in the workplace). This lack of 
self-confidence could be preventing young women from excelling in their careers 
and securing the same high-level positions as men.

Some women also experience a drop in confidence mid-career. For example, 
returning to work after maternity leave can leave many feeling concerned that 
they have missed too much – withone in three women 
<http://www.stylist.co.uk/stylist-network/maternity-%20leave-mumsnet> returning 
to find their job “unrecognisable” to the one they left. So, what should women 
do to boost confidence and get ahead at work? Here’s three tips women can use 
in the workplace:

Focus on what you’re good at

 “Follow your passion” is a cliche, but for women it might be better to choose 
a career that uses their best skills – instead of their passion. Success can 
come from refining the skills that you already possess, rather than worrying if 
your job is right for you. Focusing on your best skills and drawing confidence 
from knowing that you are good at your job can help you thrive at work.

 We know we can’t be good at everything, so it is still a good idea to 
practise doing things you lack confidence in. But when it comes to putting 
yourself forward for an opportunity, whether you are negotiating a promotion, 
training or more responsibility – lead with your best skills and then talk 
about the skills you are developing. You will naturally have more confidence in 
discussing the areas that you know you are good at, and those you have 
repeatedly practised.

Recognise the value of your soft skills

Research shows 
<http://gulfnews.com/news/europe/uk/women-are-better-listeners-study-says-1.1290574>
 that women are likely to be better listeners and collaborators – so you should 
make the most of these skills in the workplace. Being welcoming and sociable is 
essential to sustain strong business relationships, so focus on building a 
social network at work to highlight these skills.

Likewise, when it comes to interviews and appraisals, focus on emphasising 
your soft skills such as being a strong communicator, or a good team player – 
and make sure you are able to explain why they are valuable to the business.


Life skills count for a lot and an employer will not necessarily just be 
looking for someone who can get the job done, but will also fit in with their 
culture and gel with work colleagues. So draw confidence from emphasising 
social skills to show you are a well-rounded individual.

What does success look like for women today?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/oct/28/what-does-success-look-like-for-you>
Put yourself forward

 In the workplace, women are less likely to put themselves forward for 
opportunities, as they doubt their capability more so than men. When it comes 
to appraisals, this can mean that they are overlooked for progression.

To counter this, it’s a good idea to consciously put yourself forward for 
opportunities – whether it is leading on a new project, attending an event or 
organising the office party. Doing this means you are more likely to be 
noticed, and it will give you tangible examples to draw on during job 
interviews and appraisals, meaning you’re more likely to stand out and succeed.

We know the world needs more female managers, leaders and chief executives. 
However, we also know thatnot everyone wants a top job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/05/women-ambition-top-jobs-men-saatchi>
. The point is, regardless of what people’s aspirations are, we need to help 
women of all ages reach their goals, and I believe the key to that is by 
building career confidence.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 