
As Gibraltar continues to flex its economic muscle, local infrastructure has 
been stretched to breaking point. The need for investment has never been more 
clear, both to keep pace with the quality and size of the companies it 
attracts, and accommodate their future growth. With full employment, new 
companies mean more imported workers, and turning its compact size to business 
advantage requires fresh efficiency and new facilities if Gibraltar is to 
maximise the benefits from its highly-concentrated economy. From 
state-of-the-art office space to superyacht marinas and vital road overhauls, 
the government is already tackling the question marks that have begun to appear 
as the Rock’s services industry and workforce matured, evolved and expanded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiny-gibraltars-outsized-infrastructure-projects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe02bcd67f5ef6b1170c351205dc56667a32898c%2F0_0_2559_1536%2F2559.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tiny%20Gibraltar%E2%80%99s%20outsized%20infrastructure%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiny-gibraltars-outsized-infrastructure-projects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tiny%20Gibraltar%E2%80%99s%20outsized%20infrastructure%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiny-gibraltars-outsized-infrastructure-projects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe02bcd67f5ef6b1170c351205dc56667a32898c%2F0_0_2559_1536%2F2559.jpg>
 The Europort business complex. Photograph: Europort 
In the 1990s, Gibraltar’s revolutionary Europort business complex became the 
hub of the Rock’s burgeoning service industry. Offering high-spec, 
self-sustaining offices and apartments with rapid and robust internet at the 
heart of their communications, it transformed the waterfront both physically 
and economically, paving the way for today’s economic virility. At that time, 
online gaming was in its infancy and just a dozen insurance companies operated 
on the peninsula. Today, that number is well in excess of 50, and flourishing 
sectors such as these have contributed to a 35-percent rise in GDP over the 
last five years.

Now it is the turn of the newly-erected World Trade Center Gibraltar to 
provide an ultra-modern Europort equivalent on the eastern flank of this small 
territory and relieve the pressure on Gibraltar’s shrinking office stock. 
Mooted since 2010, the £45 million development is now approaching readiness, 
with 85-percent occupancy already guaranteed, highlighting the huge demand for 
space.

“Every building has to be built on solid foundations,” says Pete Burgess, head 
of sales and marketing for the project, “and every successful economy has to be 
built on solid infrastructure. I think the World Trade Center will become the 
hub of Gibraltarian business.”

The impact of Europort is clear. In 1982, Gibraltar was home to 29,350 people 
and 11,650 jobs. By 2011 the population had crept up to 29,750 people with a 
total of 22,250 jobs. That continued rise has inevitably placed proportional 
strains on every aspect of the Rock’s core elements, from housing and traffic 
to office space and internet provision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiny-gibraltars-outsized-infrastructure-projects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd40461f09cf069c618297abda1b9d404a3ff49ca%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tiny%20Gibraltar%E2%80%99s%20outsized%20infrastructure%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiny-gibraltars-outsized-infrastructure-projects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tiny%20Gibraltar%E2%80%99s%20outsized%20infrastructure%20projects&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Ftiny-gibraltars-outsized-infrastructure-projects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd40461f09cf069c618297abda1b9d404a3ff49ca%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Every time a plane departs or arrives at Gibraltar International Airport, 
pedestrians and cars have to stop at barriers on either side of the runway, 
which intersects the busy four-lane Winston Churchill Avenue. It’s a canny use 
of the little space available, but also results in delays. Photograph: Tony 
Evans 
With the jobs also came more cars, and a huge increase in use over the last 10 
years has brought suffocating congestion to Gibraltar’s roads during peak 
times. Central to the peninsula’s future fluidity will be the relief of the 
traffic problems caused by shutting Winston Churchill Avenue – the sole link 
between Spain and Gibraltar – for each landing and takeoff at Gibraltar’s 
recently modernised airport. Disruption currently amounts to up to two hours of 
road closures a day, and with the number of inbound and outbound flights set to 
rise, the issue is now being addressed. Earlier this year, the government 
introduced its 10-year sustainable traffic and parking plan that included the 
construction of a tunnel under the runway.

As important as keeping the city moving, however, is keeping its tourists, 
professionals and locals accommodated evenly. The competition for space and 
changing demographics has contributed to a leap in average house prices from 
£350,000 in 2008 to over £600,000 in 2014, prompting the government to make the 
provision of affordable housing central to what is a crucial and multi-layered 
approach to infrastructure policy over the next five years.
 