
Welcome to this week’s blog, and our roundup  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/sep/19/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
of your comments and photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/dec/12/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/21/tips-links-and-suggestions-what-are-you-reading-this-week>
from last week. We’d love to hear what you’re planning to read over the 
holidays. We’ll be back in the New Year (and comments will stay open until 
then.) Hope you have a fine time - and manage to find some space for reading.

In case you are overwhelmed, here’s a useful discovery from Applecake 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4503247>. One that might make your 
Christmas chores go a little easier:

I’ve just discovered that I can download an audio book from my local library 
to my phone to listen to while wrapping presents, cooking or walking the dog - 
all activities where you can’t read at the same time but made hugely better by 
a good book. I’m listening to The Clock Winder by Anne Tyler and hearing the 
book, one I know quite well, rather than reading it, has given me a different 
perspective on it. It’s made me pay attention to the smaller details more than 
usual. I think I skip a lot when I’m reading, to be honest. I don’t mean to, 
but I’m just enthusiastic about getting through a book. So, audio books, who’d 
have thought...

This enthusiasm was shared by simplicitydrifter 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14661230>:

Audio books from the library are also brilliant for anyone recovering from an 
operation, or otherwise unwell and out of circulation. Hurrah for our public 
libraries - we’re basically clubbing together to provide shared access to books 
and community aren’t we, at modest cost per person?

Another fine discovery came courtesy of MsCarey 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11071608>:

In my teens I read a bit of the Russians (Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky) and was, 
predictably, wowed by the experience. And I’m pretty sure that, as best I 
could, I gave some thought to the majesty of the writing at the time. I could 
not be more surprised, therefore, that here I am some decades later reading 
Turgenev for the first time (Fathers and Sons) and my only critical response 
is: wow, it’s soRussian. Thinking back, this was pretty much my reaction to 
reading Chekhov for the first time a couple of years ago. So there you go. 
Russian writers; they’re terrific. SoRussian.

Here’s a fine review of James Salter’s Light Years from julian6 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2791828>: 

Finished reading James Salter’s beautiful novel - Light Years. An exploration 
of a marriage whose apparent perfection is a mirage. The book exhibits Salter’s 
celebration of love, culture and landscape - his glory in the sensual - an 
aestheticism that seems to bring language into the regions of fine art. If this 
seems rarefied - removed from the concerns of the struggle for existence, which 
in many respects it is, then it should also be noted he can fathom the anguish 
of the human heart in wonderful little cameos - such as the fear of Lia’s 
servant near the end of the book. Contemplation of the fierce despair of death, 
disease and the capacity to endure are never less than central to his vision. 
This vision is also notably non-judgmental - there is a richness of response - 
that is akin to Whitman - a celebration of the living world for its own sake - 
beyond moral dictums.

Enjoy an unusual seasonal association from frustratedartist 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2934261>:


Over the last few years I’ve read quite a few Zola’s Rougon-Macquart novels in 
December- and so I associate him with Christmas. A couple of years ago it was 
Germinal, but this year it’s one of the more low key ones, Une Page D’amour’. 
As always, a great joy to read.

As in all of his novels which I’ve read, each chapter is largely confined to a 
specific, vividly evoked, location. These chapter-long set pieces, with their 
contrasting moods and limited time scale, are the literary equivalent of the 
movements in a symphony or an act in a play. Or maybe they’re like long takes 
in a film- many of them have a ‘real-time’ feel to them, covering the events of 
about the amount of time it takes to read them. I imagine Zola writing each 
chapter at a single sitting. I’m sure he didn’t, but it feels that way.

The Sheltering Sky by Paul Bowles – a cautionary tale for tourists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/aug/28/the-sheltering-sky-by-paul-bowles-a-cautionary-tale-for-tourists>
And finally, everythingsperfect 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4688473> recommends a book which 
probably couldn’t contain less of the seasonal spirit - but is nonetheless 
wonderful:

Last night I finished The Sheltering Sky, bumped up to the top of my tbr pile 
thanks to recommendations here. So thank you to whoever recommended it. 
Beautiful and disturbing read, wonderful at evoking the Sahara landscapes and 
the dissolution of the mind. Quite something.

Happy Christmas! Thank you all for your contributions so far this year. TLS 
has been a fount of wisdom, fun and intelligence. It’s been a reassuring gleam 
of light in dark times, as well as a source of excellent book recommendations. 
It’s been a great pleasure. Here’s to more of the same in the New Year – 
comments here will stay open until 2 January, when we return for a fresh TLS.

Interesting links about books and reading

 * In case you haven’t read it yet, here’s The Spectator putting the ouch 
<http://life.spectator.co.uk/2016/12/wh-smith-become-national-embarrassment/> 
into WH Smith: ‘a national embarrassment’. 
 * The always reliable Dangerous Minds have put up a fascinating gallery 
<http://dangerousminds.net/comments/science_fiction_in_its_infancy_fantastic_illustrations_for_the_war_of_the_w>
 of early War Of The Worlds illustrations. 
 * The Goldsmiths Prize have launched an app 
<http://www.gold.ac.uk/goldsmiths-press/the-goldsmiths-prize-app/> featuring 
first drafts of winning novels, a look at the fresco behind Ali Smith’s 
wonderful How To Be Both and more. 
 * An alternative list  
<https://www.influxpress.com/blog/2016/12/15/twelve-literary-heroes-of-2016-according-to-influx-press>
of 2016’s literary heroes from Influx Press. 
If you would like to share a photo of the book you are reading, or film your 
own book review, please do. Click the blue button on this page to share your 
video or image. I’ll include some of your posts in next week’s blog.

If you’re on Instagram and a book lover, chances are you’re already sharing 
beautiful pictures of booksyou are reading 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/nowreading/>, “shelfies” 
<https://instagram.com/explore/tags/bookshelf/> or all kinds of still lifes 
with books as protagonists <https://instagram.com/p/5foOfkLDFI/>. Now, you can 
share your reads with us on the mobile photography platform – simply tag your 
pictures there with #GuardianBooks, and we’ll include a selection here. Happy 
reading!
 