
Noam Chomsky, Sir Richard Dalton and  Clare Short are among the heavyweights 
who have called forTony Blair to be dismissed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/24/appeal-to-quartet-on-middle-east-sack-tony-blair>
 as the Middle East envoy for the Quartet (UN, EU, Russia and America), tasked 
with facilitating peace between Palestine and Israel.

Their open letter was published to coincide with the seventh anniversary of 
Blair’s appointment as the Quartet’s peace envoy. An accompanyingonline 
petition called Sack Blair 
<http://www.change.org/en-GB/petitions/ban-ki-moon-sack-tony-blair-as-the-middle-east-peace-envoy>
, which describes the former British prime minister's role as peace envoy as an 
“insult”, has so far garnered over 20,000 signatures.

Blair’s office has responded to the open letter by branding its authors as far 
right and staunch left “people viscerally opposed toTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> with absolutely no credibility 
in relation to him whatsoever”.

All this represents the latest round of trenchant public backlash over Blair’s 
perceived responsibility for the current instability inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, because his 2003 military invasion is 
seen as the root cause of ongoing upheaval there, and his lack of tangible 
results after seven years as the Quartet’s peace envoy.

Blair appears to have few supporters left, as a steady stream of critics old 
and new emerges from the political closet to point out the negative legacies of 
his interventionist policies.

Last year former South Africa president Thabo Mbeki even alleged that Blair 
had sought hisassistance in staging a military intervention in Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/27/tony-blair-military-intervention-zimbabwe-claim>
 to remove the country’s president, Robert Mugabe, from power.

Britain had even identified people in the Zimbabwean military who they were 
going to put in place to succeed Mugabe

Mbeki repeated this allegation in an article published this wee 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/03057070.2014.933646#.U7EXok0U-JA>
k. According to Mbeki: “Tony put maximum pressure on me from 2000 to agree to a 
military invasion of Zimbabwe, and he was going to base his troops here (in 
South Africa), and we said no. It is not going to happen. If the Zimbabweans do 
not like Bob Mugabe they will remove him, not you. Britain had even identified 
people in the Zimbabwean military who they were going to put in place to 
succeed Mugabe. In the end they gave up because of our resistance.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftony-blair-military-intervention-iraq-rwanda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F2%2F1404325252847%2F85da9ccd-134e-4d1b-96cd-47a6e548d955-2060x1378.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%20deserves%20criticism%20but%20military%20intervention%20isn't%20always%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftony-blair-military-intervention-iraq-rwanda%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Blair%20deserves%20criticism%20but%20military%20intervention%20isn%27t%20always%20wrong&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftony-blair-military-intervention-iraq-rwanda%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F2%2F1404325252847%2F85da9ccd-134e-4d1b-96cd-47a6e548d955-2060x1378.jpeg>
 A memorial to some of the people who died in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. 
Photograph: Radu Sigheti/Reuters 
Invading Zimbabwe would have had disastrous consequences for the UK’s military 
and diplomatic standing. Field Marshal Charles Guthrie, then chief of the 
defence staff, warned officials in Downing St and the Foreign Office: “Zimbabwe 
is landlocked. It would be hard to supply and resupply, and some of the kind of 
people we would have to protect (persecuted white farmers) were spread 
throughoutZimbabwe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe>. So if you 
protect one lot here the other lot there will probably be killed.

"And the other thing was, there was not a single African country that would 
approve of what we were doing. They would say, here goes Britain again. 
Neo-colonialists all over again. We would have made things much worse by going 
in there.”

Blair, who was steeped in interventionist ideals about fighting global “evil”, 
certainly overreached his authority. But while he deserves to be reproached for 
his failures in Iraq and Zimbabwe, we should not overlook some of the very real 
foreign policy successes he scored.

Moreover, in light of events in Iraq particularly, there is a growing 
unhelpful tendency in current public debates to see military intervention as 
inherently bad. But there are times when military intervention is necessary and 
viable - for instance, Blair’smilitary intervention in Sierra Leone in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/may/26/tonyblair.foreignpolicy> helped 
to resolve the country’s crisis.

Above all, we must not forget the necessity of intervention in cases of 
genocide. The world did not intervene militarily inRwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> in 1994 to stop the genocide – at a 
cost of 800 000 dead.

Intervening militarily in Kuwait <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kuwait> in 
the 1990s was also the right thing to do because you cannot have leaders 
marching into other countries to take them over. It was also correct for the UK 
military to go into Afghanistan to destroy al-Qaida camps – although it would 
have been possible to destroy these camps and leave; there was no need for 
troops to remain.

So amid all the (richly deserved) Blair bashing let's not wholly discredit 
military intervention, which can be the best course of action. What is more, 
when does the debate move from simple criticising to accountability? Will Blair 
ever be held to account for how he (mis)led the UK into war against Iraq, as 
well as for the negative outcomes of some – yes, only some – of his military 
interventions?
 