
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> is to step back 
from his role as a peace envoy for the Middle East, according to a report.


The Financial Times said the former prime minister is preparing to change his 
role 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/8104fbbe-cb31-11e4-bac3-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk#axzz3UTrKqFMo>
as envoy for the Quartet of Middle East peace negotiators in a move that could 
be announced this week. The quartet consists of the UN, the EU, Russia and the 
US.

Sources told the newspaper that he is embarking on negotiations to “recast” 
his role while remaining involved in the peace process.

He is said to have met John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, US secretary of state, and 
Federica Mogherini, the EU’s foreign policy chief, to discuss a possible job 
change.

A US-led push to revive the Middle East peace process collapsed last year. 
Kerry has expressed a wish that whatever government is brought to power in the 
Israeli elections this week will “meet the hope for peace”.


There have long been concerns about a potential for a conflict between Blair’s 
role in peace negotiations in the Middle East and his business interests, since 
he advises a number of foreign governments.

Last year, a group of former British ambassadors joined a campaign calling for 
Blair to beremoved from his role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/23/tony-blair-middle-east-envoy-quartet-sacked>
 as Middle East envoy, raising objections to the possible clash with his 
business interests and a attempts to “absolve himself” of responsibility for 
the crisis in Iraq.

The letter, written last July to mark the seventh anniversary of Blair’s 
appointment as the representative of the quartet , said the former prime 
minister’s achievements as Middle East envoy have been negligible and he was 
guilty of seeking to please the Israelis.

At the time, a spokesman for Blair said: “These are all people viscerally 
opposed to Tony Blair with absolutely no credibility in relation to him 
whatsoever. Their attack is neither surprising nor newsworthy.

“They include the alliance of hard-right and hard-left views which he has 
fought against all his political life. Of course he completely disagrees with 
them over the Middle East. He believes passionately in the two-state solution 
but also believes that can only be achieved by a negotiation withIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.”

Blair’s office has not yet replied to a request from the Guardian for comment.
 