
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> wants 
Australia to suspend aid to the Palestinian Authority because “it keeps paying 
pensions to terrorists and their families”.

The former prime minister made the call in an opinion piece 
<http://spectator.com.au/2016/12/jerusalem-diary/> published in the Spectator 
Magazine on Monday.

Australia gives more than $40m a year in aid to Palestine, provided through 
United Nations agencies and some charitable organisations.

The money goes towards projects to provide Palestinian refugees with basic 
services such as health, education, water and sanitation.

Last year, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade suspended aid to World 
Vision’s work in the Palestinian territories in the wake ofallegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/israel-world-visions-gaza-director-diverting-cash-hamas-mohammed-el-halabi>
 the charity’s head in Gaza funnelled millions of dollars to militant group 
Hamas.

Julie Bishop: Australia would not have backed UN resolution on Israel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/julie-bishop-australia-un-resolution-israel>
The organisation has denied the claims, which are subject to court proceedings 
inIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

Abbott also said Australia could demonstrate “unswerving support for Israel” 
by joining any move by the incoming Trump administration to move its embassy 
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Most governments have kept their embassy out of 
Jerusalem because they do not recognise Israel’s occupation of east Jerusalem 
since 1967.

Noting that Israel’s GDP per person was about $40,000 a year, compared with 
Palestine’s of about $2,000, Abbott blamed the economic problems of the 
territories on “a focus on politics over economics and the all-pervading sense 
of grievance” among Palestinians.

Last week the foreign minister, Julie Bishop, strongly indicated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/julie-bishop-australia-un-resolution-israel>
 that Australia would not have supported a UN resolution – co-sponsored by New 
Zealand – criticising Israel’s settlements policy in the West Bank and east 
Jerusalem. The Israeli governmentreacted furiously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/israel-un-resolution-settlements-obama-trump>
 when the US abstained on the resolution.

The acting opposition leader, Chris Bowen, said Australian assistance to Gaza 
and the West Bank was vital to counter extremism and promote peace in the 
Middle East.

“Mr Abbott is clearly using this as yet another issue to undermine Malcolm 
Turnbull and continue his campaign to regain the leadership by appealing to the 
hardliners in the Liberal party,” Bowen said.

Australia’s aid program must be transparent and accountable and must reach 
those it was intended to benefit, he said.

Abbott recently returned from a trip to the Middle East, including Israel. He 
attended the Australia-Israel-UK Dialogue in Jerusalem with opposition leader 
Bill Shorten and other federal MPs.

In his article Abbott also noted that at the dialogue Professor Nir Shaviv of 
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem “methodically debunked the climate change 
theories peddled by the UN Panel”.

If he was right, Abbott wrote, “countries like ours have been inflicting 
pointless economic pain upon themselves’.
 