
Excuse me in advance for mixing food and book metaphors, but, hey, bear with 
me! The thing is, there’re times when I go out with friends and just can’t face 
a stodgy big main meal, no matter how delicious it sounds. So I’ll grab myself 
a snack-ish starter and sweet little pudding instead.


Same goes for books – if you’re not in the mindset for something chunky and 
meaty, aim for a slim and satisfying speedy read…

1. Brace Mouth, False Teeth 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brace-mouth-false-teeth.html> by Sita 
Brahmachari

Sita Brahmachari: the importance of diverse names in children's books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/15/sita-brahmachari-diverse-characters-diverse-names>
Zeni’s work experience placement sucks – she’s sent to help out an old 
people’s nursing home. But she quickly comes to notice Alice, who lives in her 
own little wonderland of lost memories. This story of a girl on the brink of 
being an adult, and a woman on the brink of losing herself through dementia is 
very touching, but the emotion is wrapped around with brightness and warmth.

2. M is For Autism 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337827/> by the 
students of Limpsfield Grange School and Vicky Martin

I have autism and the lack of authentic autistic voices in books angers me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/03/autism-voices-books-awareness-week>
Meet M, a teenage girl on a mission to find out what normal’s all about, from 
the viewpoint of being on the autistic spectrum. Gorgeous, thoughtful writing, 
with truly striking illustrations and layout.

3. Smile <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/smile.html> by Raina Telgemeier




Totally fun graphic novel of the trials of being a teenager – a teenager 
dealing with friends, boys, braces and earthquakes!

4. May B by Caroline Starr Rose

Noodling through social media one day, I happened by chance upon this little 
book that’s become one of my all-time favourites… A novel in verse, it tells 
the story of May B, a pioneer girl stranded alone in the Kansas prairies. Think 
‘Little House on the Prairie’ meets ‘The Weight of Water’ and you’ll get a 
flavour of this only-published-in-the-US gem.

5. Electrigirl 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368760/> by Jo 
Cotterill, illustrated by Cathy Brett

Cathy Brett: Why can't teen fiction have pictures?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/jun/11/booksforchildrenandteenagers-teen-books>
Holly is an average schoolgirl, who falls out with her friend one minute, and 
is struck by lightening and turns into a superhero the next! Part book, part 
comic, this book is fast and furious fun.

6. Life on the Refrigerator Door 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-on-the-refrigerator-door.html> by Alice 
Kuipers

Illness in YA fiction – do authors go too far, or not far enough?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/16/illness-in-ya-fiction-do-authors-go-too-far-or-not-far-enough>
Claire and her mum are like ships in the night, forever passing and missing 
each other, and only communicating with notes they leave each other on the 
fridge door. When we first dip into their lives, those notes – in which the 
whole story is told – are silly, fond and full of everyday chit-chat… till life 
happens to take an unexpected and frightening turn.

7. Mr Gum and the Biscuit Billionaire 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mr-gum-and-the-biscuit-billionaire.html> by 
Andy Stanton

Andy Stanton's 'cult humour for kids'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2011/jul/05/andy-stanton-mr-gum>
Mr Gum books are officially 96% bonkers and 100% wondrous, for all ages. How 
can I pick a favourite out of this dazzling bundle of stupidly good fun? Well, 
because this second in the series stars a living, breathing billionaire 
gingerbread man called Alan Taylor. And why not.

8. Ways to Live Forever 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ways-to-live-forever.html> by Sally Nicholls

Sally Nicholls: Most of my books are quite dark – I have a habit of killing 
off half of Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/20/sally-nicholls-interview-ibw-childrens-fiction-awards>
Sam is ill, really ill. Through short but affecting chapters – interspersed 
with notes and lists – you’re really there with him, wondering, hoping, crying 
and laughing. This book is simply stunning.

9. The Weight of Water <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/weight-of-water.html> 
by Sarah Crossan

What are the best books on immigration and adapting to life in the UK?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/13/black-history-month-best-books-immigration-refugees>
Kasienka and her mother arrive in the UK with a suitcase and laundry bag 
stuffed with clothes, as well as hope and fear in equal measure. Kasienka’s 
window on life as an immigrant is told in a fresh, poetic and rivetting way. 
Unputdownable.

10. A Dark Trade  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/366157/>by Mary Hooper

I love Mary’s light touch with weighty historical tales (full-length novel ‘By 
The Sign of The Sugared Plum’ is a huge favourite of mine), so I was more than 
happy to stumble across this story of a Victorian maid who disguises herself as 
a boy to escape danger – and walks straight into a situation much more 
dangerous…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftop-10-speedy-reads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f7c8c474be0dc938b61bbf77cdd4aa7a392b89b%2F0_0_1532_2339%2F1532.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20speedy%20reads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftop-10-speedy-reads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20speedy%20reads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftop-10-speedy-reads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f7c8c474be0dc938b61bbf77cdd4aa7a392b89b%2F0_0_1532_2339%2F1532.jpg>
Karen McCombie has had more than 80 novels published. The OMG Blog is her 
sixth (speedy read!) for inclusive publishers Barrington Stoke. Buy it at the
Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387710/>
 