
 As a teen, I remember summers stretching ahead, weeks and weeks of glittering 
possibility. All that wonderful time of not being in school. It felt as though 
everything could change over the course of a summer, and sometimes it did. I 
recall parties. Swimming at the river. Travelling. Festivals. Meeting new 
people who changed how I thought…


In my novel Eden Summer <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eden-summer.html>, 
Jess turns up at school to learn that her best friend Eden has gone missing. 
Although the action happens on that first Friday of the new term, there are 
flashbacks across the long hot summer, slowly revealing what went on. Jess and 
Eden’s boyfriend Liam join forces to search for her, revisiting the events of 
the summer to work out what has happened to Eden.

Summer stories are often coming-of-age stories, where the main character ends 
the story - and the summer - a different person. So here are some of my 
favourite summers in YA literature: some sunny, others stormy, all highly 
recommended:

1. The Tricksters 
<https://www.harpercollins.co.uk/9780007121731/the-tricksters> by Margaret Mahy

This is one of my favourite books of all time. The story is set in New Zealand 
at Christmas – a summer Christmas was a new and exotic idea to me when I first 
read this. The main character Harry is the overlooked middle daughter in the 
large, eccentric Hamilton family. The usual Christmas celebrations at their 
beach house are given a darker twist by the arrival of three sinister brothers, 
possible descendants of the original inhabitants of the house.

I love Harry because she’s the introverted writer who refuses to be shamed 
when her secret scribblings are exposed, along with shocking family secrets. I 
love the descriptions of family dynamics here, and how Harry grows in power and 
confidence, transformed by falling in love. I also love that the house and 
summer landscape act almost as characters themselves. Mahy’s writing has a 
clarity and lyricism that looks effortless, and is so hard to pull off!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Ftop-10-teen-ya-books-about-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2364e140b2ab290efbbb23922ee87b0d7687245%2F0_789_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20teen%20books%20for%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Ftop-10-teen-ya-books-about-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20teen%20books%20for%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Ftop-10-teen-ya-books-about-summer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2364e140b2ab290efbbb23922ee87b0d7687245%2F0_789_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Liz Flanagan: I remember summers stretching ahead, weeks and weeks of 
glittering possibility. Photograph: Sarah Mason 
2. The Greengage Summer 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/greengage-summer.html> by Rumer Godden

This is another classic coming-of-age summer story that I first read as a teen 
and have never forgotten. Thirteen-year-old Cecil – Cecilia – and her siblings 
Joss, Hester, Willmouse and Vicky, find themselves living in a French hotel one 
August, while their mother is ill in a nearby hospital. While the daily rhythms 
of the busy hotel ebb and flow around them, Cecil listens and watches: one foot 
in childhood, the other in adulthood. She observes the relationship between the 
hotel’s owner Mademoiselle Zizi and her English lover Eliot. With her naïve 
outsider’s perspective, Cecil sees how this little closed world is shattered by 
Eliot’s reaction to her own sister Joss – leading to a terrible event as the 
story speeds to its conclusion.

Although first published in 1958, there’s something very modern in the quirky 
characterisation, and the way the hot, sultry, languid summer by the river 
turns shocking and dark at its close.

Astrid Lindgren prize winner Meg Rosoff's greatest ever quotes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/apr/05/meg-rosoff-greatest-ever-quotes-astrid-lindgren-prize-winner-2016>
3. How I Live Now  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-i-live-now-4.html>by 
Meg Rosoff

This is definitely one of my desert-island books. Everything changes the 
summer that Daisy is sent from New York City to stay with her English cousins. 
Daisy’s distinctive, damaged voice is the best thing about this novel. Her 
descriptions of the lush English countryside – “like Walt Disney on E” - and 
her cousins’ free-range existence are superb and memorable, made all the more 
powerful because that peaceful idyll is soon destroyed by the outbreak of war.

4. Black Rabbit Summer 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-rabbit-summer.html> by Kevin Brooks

Pete Boland is facing a long hot lazy summer, when everything changes and he 
is drawn back into a complicated friendship group one last time before everyone 
drifts in different directions. Pete is instantly likeable because of his 
loyalty to his odd mate Raymond, though all the characters here feel real, 
flawed and familiar. In an edgy atmosphere of shifting loyalties, Pete and his 
mates get drunk and high, then head to the funfair where the worst night of 
their lives starts to unfold.

Brooks is excellent on the undercurrents of genuine danger that lie just below 
surface dynamics. I also applaud his light handling of magical thinking. The 
supernatural element is convincing here – spiked drinks only go so far as an 
explanation - because it’s done so deftly and confidently, in keeping with the 
characters and style.

Jandy Nelson: I felt like every work I’ve ever fallen in love with spoke to me 
all at once
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/may/01/jandy-nelson-ill-give-you-the-sun-interview>
5. The Sky Is Everywhere  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sky-is-everywhere-255759.html>by Jandy Nelson

When Lennie’s beloved sister Bailey dies, she’s heartbroken. She struggles 
with the enormity of her feelings and the fact that she’s suddenly obsessed 
with sex and finding herself drawn to her sister’s fiancé Toby. Lennie’s grief 
actually makes her more alive than ever, and she battles it, feeling disloyal 
to Bailey. The arrival of beautiful new boy Joseph is a welcome distraction. 
Preoccupied with her loss, yet Lennie manages to let him in and they fall in 
love over the hot Californian summer – till Joseph sees her kissing Toby and 
recoils in bitterness.

Nelson’s prose is lush and poetic. Before her sudden death, Bailey was reading 
Like Water For Chocolate, and something of the rich magical realism of that 
book is transposed to this contemporary high-school heroine’s journey.

David Almond wins Guardian children's fiction prize
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/19/david-almond-wins-guardian-childrens-fiction-prize>
6. A Song for Ella Grey 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/a-song-for-ella-grey.html> by David Almond

David Almond’s reworking of the Orpheus myth is set in the beautiful 
Northumberland landscape. It starts at the beginning of an ordinary summer, 
with a group of friends facing the exam season, and restlessly searching for 
more. They escape the city and camp on the beach, drinking, talking, singing 
and falling in love. But two of them fall in love more deeply and more 
dangerously than the others: Ella Grey and the mysterious newcomer Orpheus.

Told from the point of view of Ella’s best friend Claire, who’s also in love 
with her, the story is made fresh and new again through Almond’s stunning 
prose. One to read and re-read all summer long.

E Lockhart: "I rewrote We Were Liars about 15 times!"
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/aug/19/quickfire-e-lockhart-we-were-liars-childrens-fiction-prize>
7. We Were Liars <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-were-liars.html> by E 
Lockhart

Stylish, compelling and heartbreaking, this is one of my favourite books of 
recent years. I have to be careful how I describe it, as the plot twist is so 
breathtakingly successful that I had to start from the beginning the moment I 
finished reading it.

Cadence Sinclair Eastman – Cady – is the eldest grandchild in a wealthy 
family, the future heiress to the island on which she spends her summers with 
her cousins, mother, grandparents and aunts, as well as with Gat: the boy she 
adores.

However, something has happened to Cady. Something so horrific and traumatic 
that she has blocked it out and experiences violent migraines when she tries to 
remember. This is a fantastic novelistic technique. The whole story is a kind 
of whodunit that Cady has to unravel from her own suppressed memories. I’m in 
awe of E. Lockhart’s control and characterisation here.

8. Bone Jack  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bone-jack.html>by Sara Crowe

This summer, Ash Tyler has won the right to be the stag boy in the local Stag 
Chase, like his father twenty years earlier. Ash wants his father, Stephen, to 
witness his race, but he has returned from war altered by trauma. There’s also 
a new distance between Ash and his best friend Mark Cullen, grieving for his 
own father who killed himself after the foot-and-mouth outbreak destroyed their 
farm. While out running, Ash encounters ghostly apparitions of a previous Stag 
Chase, as well as the mysterious figure of Bone Jack. By the end of the novel, 
Ash is running for his survival, forced to make life-or-death decisions.

Brilliantly written, this is a gripping thriller that succeeds on so many 
levels, dramatising serious contemporary issues while never letting up the 
pace. I particularly admire the descriptions of landscape and the blending of 
personal, political and supernatural elements.

9. Blue <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/blue-5.html> by Lisa Glass

Blue – together with its sequels Air and Ride - is about as summery a novel as 
anyone could wish for. Set in a surfing town, we follow Iris as she falls in 
love with the gorgeous but enigmatic Zeke, a hero with a past. Iris is a 
refreshingly confident and capable heroine, with depths of emotional 
vulnerability. However, for me, the real draw is the satisfying surfing detail. 
Glass knows her stuff and brings alive this (for me, unfamiliar) world in 
extended action sequences, including a pacy double-peak finish. I defy anyone 
to put this down…

The Square Root of Summer by Harriet Reuter Hapgood - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/10/the-square-root-of-summer-harriet-reuter-hapgood-review>
10. The Square Root of Summer  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/square-root-of-summer.html>by Harriet Reuter 
Hapgood

Gottie is dealing with lots of stuff: the death of her beloved grandfather, 
the cooling of her first love with Jason, the return of her former 
best-friend-next-door Thomas, oh, and some weird worm-holes when time and 
memory do not behave according to the rules.

There’s so much to adore in this story: the eccentric, non-nuclear but very 
loving family that Gottie is part of; the beautifully described English 
countryside in summer; and a memorable and charming cast of characters, 
including Gottie herself who slowly emerges from her grief and starts to find 
herself again.

The text is dotted with notes and doodled equations as Gottie tries to 
theorise the wobbles in spacetime she is experiencing – certainly the most 
interesting approach to physics I’ve ever encountered!

Liz Flanagan’s debut YA novel,Eden Summer 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eden-summer.html>, is published by David 
Fickling Books on 7th July.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Ftop-10-teen-ya-books-about-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc306810e38e25d1d0445c34c4af228613c969f8c%2F0_0_1621_2527%2F1621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20teen%20books%20for%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Ftop-10-teen-ya-books-about-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20teen%20books%20for%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Ftop-10-teen-ya-books-about-summer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc306810e38e25d1d0445c34c4af228613c969f8c%2F0_0_1621_2527%2F1621.jpg> 