
A dozen of the most respected female figures in the arts and creative 
industries, including Bonnie Greer, the former culture secretary Tessa Jowell, 
Valerie Amos and Gail Rebuck, the chair of the book publisher Penguin Random 
House UK, have called on the government to explain its decision toblock the 
appointment of Althea Efunshile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/29/bme-woman-blocked-from-channel-4-board-as-four-white-men-join>
 to the board of Channel 4.

The group – which also includes the former Arts Council England chairwomen Liz 
Forgan and Sue Woodford-Hollick, as well as the broadcaster and former BFI 
chair Joan Bakewell – have signed a letter to the culture secretary, Karen 
Bradley, demanding to know the circumstances behind the decision to reject 
Efunshile.

The Guardian view on Channel 4: it needs a diverse board | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/the-guardian-view-on-channel-4-it-needs-a-diverse-board>
“We are united in our belief that Althea was an outstanding candidate and 
would have been a tremendous addition to theChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> board,” the letter says. “We are 
writing to you to express our dismay at your unprecedented decision to block 
the appointment … and call on you to explain the reasoning behind this decision 
as a matter of urgency.”


Bradley approved four new Channel 4 board members put forward by Ofcom, all of 
whom were white men, but vetoed Efunshile.


The decision to block an appointment is highly unusual. The candidate 
selections made by Ofcom, which is responsible for finding, vetting and 
appointing Channel 4 board members, have historically received rubber-stamp 
approval.


The letter’s other signatories include the former senior BBC executive Jenny 
Abramsky and Lola Young, the former head of culture at the Greater London 
Authority. Lady Amos is a former UN under-secretary general for humanitarian 
affairs and former leader of the House of Lords.


“We call on you to explain why the four successful candidates appointed to the 
board met the criteria set out by Ofcom, and why Althea fell short of meeting 
the criteria. What process did the department follow to reach this decision?” 
the letter asks.


Bradley announced the appointment of the four men to Channel 4’s board on the 
same day that the government published its green paper on corporate governance, 
which highlighted the importance of “improving the diversity of boardrooms so 
that their composition better reflects the demographics of employees”.


“We strongly feel that the decision to block Althea Efunshile’s appointment to 
the Channel 4 board undermines the government’s warm words on boardroom 
diversity,” the signatories say.

“It represents a significant step in the wrong direction that will do real and 
lasting damage to efforts to boost diversity in leadership positions across 
business, the professions and public life. We simply cannot understand a 
process that excludes a highly competent and qualified woman, in total 
contradiction to the government’s stated objectives.”


The letter marks the latest ratcheting up of pressure on the Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport after David Lammy, a former culture minister, put the 
issue in the spotlight,asking Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/30/theresa-may-defends-process-four-white-men-join-channel-4-board>
 about the Channel 4 appointments during prime minister’s questions.


This was followed by a cross-party group of 56 MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/mps-write-letter-channel-4-culture-secretary-karen-bradley-board>
 calling on Bradley for an explanation.


It has emerged that the culture department quietly put forward David Elstein, 
the former chief executive of Channel 5, to Ofcom late in the recruitment 
process.


Elstein, who was unaware that his name had been floated to Ofcom, has been a 
critic of Channel 4 and is in favour of some form of privatisation of the 
broadcaster.


Matthew Hancock, the secretary of state for digital and culture, said the 
Channel 4 board members had been chosen on the basis of skills and experience.

“Non-executive members of the Channel 4 board are appointed by Ofcom with the 
approval of the secretary of state,” he said,responding to a parliamentary 
question on Thursday 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/Commons/2016-12-05/56196/>
.

“Ofcom advertised for four vacancies for candidates with specific sector 
skills and experience. The secretary of state approved the four candidates on 
the basis that they met the skills and experience set out in the advertised job 
descriptions.”
 