
The Tory chairman of the Commons foreign affairs committee has questioned the 
prime minister’s criticism of John Kerry’s recent comments onIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

Kerry, the outgoing US secretary of state, delivered a robust speech  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/kerry-defends-us-decision-to-not-veto-un-condemnation-of-israeli-settlements>
this week that criticised Benjamin Netanyahu’s government as the “most 
rightwing coalition in Israeli history” and said the rapid expansion of 
settlements in the occupied territories meant that “the status quo is leading 
toward one state and perpetual occupation”.


Theresa May's criticism of John Kerry Israel speech sparks blunt US reply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
Crispin Blunt said Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> was focusing on a “narrow 
point” and expressed concerns that she was doubting Kerry’s analysis, which he 
described as “completely on the money”.

The prime minister’s spokesman said on Thursday that May did not think it was 
appropriate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
 to make such strongly worded attacks on the makeup of a government or to focus 
solely on the issue of settlements.

Blunt said it appeared she had chosen to position herself closer to the US 
president-elect, Donald Trump, who is pro-Israel. “I have absolutely no idea 
what was behind No 10 briefing in the way that they did,” the MP told BBC Radio 
4’s World At One.

“My only concern is it would seem to indicate that there might be something 
wrong with John Kerry’s analysis in their view. In my judgment there isn’t, it 
was an extremely fine speech. It was obvious in that sense it’s his probably 
last serious speech on this issue in office.

“And no one can complain about the enormous efforts that John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry> went to to try to find a way 
forward on this conflict, which is at the root of so much of the issues in the 
Middle East.”

Theresa May’s attack on John Kerry over Israel is extraordinary. What’s behind 
it? | Azriel Bermant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/theresa-may-israel-john-kerry-attack-extraordinary>
A US state department spokesman said of May’s comments: “We are surprised by 
the UK prime minister’s office statement given that Secretary Kerry’s remarks – 
which covered the full range of threats to a two-state solution, including 
terrorism, violence, incitement and settlements – were in line with the UK’s 
own longstanding policy and its vote at the United Nations last week.

“We are grateful for the strongly supportive statements in response to 
Secretary Kerry’s speech from across the world, including Germany, France, 
Canada, Jordan, Egypt, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates 
and others.”

The UK backed the UN resolution passed last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/uks-key-role-in-brokering-un-resolution-on-israeli-settlements-confirmed>
 that condemned the continued expansion of settlements, but May’s spokesman 
said she was concerned about the language Kerry had used.

“We continue to believe that the construction of settlements in the occupied 
Palestinian territories is illegal, which is why we supported UN security 
council resolution 2334 last week,” he said.

“But we are also clear that the settlements are far from the only problem in 
this conflict. In particular, the people ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> deserve to live free from the threat 
of terrorism, with which they have had to cope for too long.”
 