
Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, host to many unique cultural 
treasures largely unseen by western eyes, is expecting a significant rise in 
the number of tourists visiting the country in the wake of this week’s historic 
nuclear deal.


Discovering Iran: from Caspian Sea to Persian Gulf
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/21/discovering-iran-tour-caspian-sea-persian-gulf>
President Hassan Rouhani’s government is taking fresh measures to ease or 
abolish visa requirements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/18/iran-opens-doors-to-tourists> 
for most foreign visitors and build as many as 200 new hotels, as existing 
accommodation is insufficient to cater for the spike in tourism that has 
occurred since his election in 2013.

Iran’s vice-president for tourism, Masoud Soltanifar, said that “bright days” 
lie ahead for the country’s tourism industry followingthe nuclear agreement 
struck in Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/joy-in-tehran-at-end-to-isolation-but-hardliner-reaction-to-nuclear-deal-feared>
.

“No other industry in Iran will see a bigger boost than tourism as the result 
of this deal,” he said. “The news about the nuclear agreement and lifting of 
economic sanctions has delighted our tourism industry.” Soltanifar announced 
earlier in July that Iran was increasing the length of tourist visas from 15 
days to one month, and from as early as next year tourist visas could be issued 
electronically.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftourism-to-iran-rise-sharply-nuclear-deal-vienna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437062124381%2F0c12bb07-fd9b-4f2b-b187-04513e48a880-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tourism%20to%20Iran%20set%20to%20rise%20sharply%20after%20nuclear%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftourism-to-iran-rise-sharply-nuclear-deal-vienna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tourism%20to%20Iran%20set%20to%20rise%20sharply%20after%20nuclear%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftourism-to-iran-rise-sharply-nuclear-deal-vienna%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437062124381%2F0c12bb07-fd9b-4f2b-b187-04513e48a880-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tourists at the Tachara Palace in Persepolis. Photograph: Behrouz 
Mehri/AFP/Getty Images 
Earlier this month, Unesco added two more ancient sites – Susa archaeological 
mounds and the stunning Meymand village – the 18th and 19th sites on Iran’s 
world heritage list. The country was a popular destination for visitors until 
the 1979 Islamic revolution, and hosted world luminaries such as Andy Warhol, 
violinist Yehudi Menuhin and choreographer Maurice Béjart.

Iran, which was a Zoroastrian country before Islam arrived, is home to some of 
the world’s most magnificent historical and archaeological sites with ancient 
ruins, glittering mosques and spectacular landscapes. Relics of a proud ancient 
civilisation include: Persepolis, the capital of the largest empire that the 
world has ever seen; the city of Isfahan; Shiraz, the city of love and poetry; 
and Hamadan, where Avicenna, the father of early modern medicine, is buried. 
The capital Tehran is famous for having ski resorts on its doorstep.

Instagram shapshots: Annette Widitz in Iran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2015/apr/15/instagram-shapshots-annette-widitz-in-iran>
Michael Pullman, marketing manager of UK-based tour operator Wild Frontiers 
<https://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/en_GB/>, which has been taking western 
tourists to Iran for the past 10 years, said demands for Iran tours have soared 
since the nuclear deal was reached earlier this week. He also said that since 
2013 demand to visit Iran has increased significantly, and last year the tour 
operator, which specialises in small, tailor-made group tours, took 150 people. 
He expects that number to increase by 30% this year.


“When relations started to thaw between Iran and the west, suddenly people 
felt safe to go,” said Pullman. “It had been branded as part of the ‘axis of 
evil’ by George Bush, which didn’t help things, and it’s taken time for Iran to 
rid itself of the label.”

The reactions from westerners visiting Iran is remarkable, he added: “They all 
come back unanimously saying it’s their ‘new’ country. The sites are one thing 
– there’s just stunning Islamic architecture and ancient sites, such as 
Persopolis – but everyone seems to agree that it’s the people that are the 
biggest surprise.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftourism-to-iran-rise-sharply-nuclear-deal-vienna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437062519169%2Fd343b870-90be-475b-b04e-afe40da8da0d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tourism%20to%20Iran%20set%20to%20rise%20sharply%20after%20nuclear%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftourism-to-iran-rise-sharply-nuclear-deal-vienna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tourism%20to%20Iran%20set%20to%20rise%20sharply%20after%20nuclear%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F17%2Ftourism-to-iran-rise-sharply-nuclear-deal-vienna%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437062519169%2Fd343b870-90be-475b-b04e-afe40da8da0d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Milad Tower, Tehran. Photograph: Gallo Images/Getty Images 
David McGuinness from Travel The Unknown, echoed Pullman: “When Rouhani got 
elected, it made a sea-change difference in terms of bookings. Immediately we 
saw a rise in bookings for Iran, it suddenly became one of our most popular 
destinations.” His company, which took 100 people to Iran last year, has 
already planned several other tours – two classic and archeology tours in 
September and four more in October, including off-the-beaten-track tours.


But is Iran safe to visit? McGuinness said: “The country is very safe, I have 
travelled there myself five or six times over the last two years and we have 
never had any problems with anybody. Iran is probably the most friendly, most 
welcoming country I’ve ever been in.”

Pullman agreed: “I felt very safe. With what’s going on at the moment with 
Isis, if you look at the countries surrounding Iran, such as Syria and Iraq, 
they are unsafe but Iran is quite a strictly-controlled country, it’s 90% Shia 
and there’s no kind of Sunni-Shia friction. You feel safe walking in the 
streets, I felt safer there than I do in most places in London.”

One big disappointment is that the British foreign office (FCO) still advises 
against all but essential travel to Iran 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/iran>. “FCO still advises against 
travelling to Iran but we feel it’s perfectly safe and that seems to be more of 
an issue with the fact that there’s no British embassy in Tehran, rather than 
any particular threat,” said Pullman. Wild Frontiers works with an insurer who 
provides cover for its clients as standard insurance policies are not valid 
while FCO advice against travel is in place.

The FCO announced on 15 July that it was planning to reopen its embassy in 
Tehran by the end of this year. “When that happens and the FCO lifts its 
advice, the demand will increase further, in fact it will go to the roof,” said 
Pullman.

Pullman visited Iran last year and noted that: “Iran has an incredibly young 
population, I think over 60% is under 35; it has a history of being a cultured 
nation, and very well-educated. It also has one of the highest female 
university rates anywhere in the world.”


The UAE-based Rotana hotels is planning to open a number of hotels in Iran, 
and France’s leading hotelier, Accor, is involved in at least two four-star 
hotels in the country. Iranian officials, looking at neighbouring Turkey with 
envy, have expressed hope that the country could attract as many as 20 million 
visitors a year by 2025.
 