
Take me there: the Matterhorn


Why go?
On 14 July 1865, British climber Edward Whymper 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Whymper> made the first successful ascent 
of the Matterhorn. At the foot of the mountain, the village ofZermatt will be 
celebrating the 150th anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/17/matterhorn-centenary-edward-whymper-switzerland-1965-archive>
 with a summer-long programme of events, from fireworks displays to theatrical 
mountain-top re-enactments of the climb(zermatt.ch 
<http://www.zermatt.ch/en/150>). But the highlight of the celebrations will 
undoubtedly be the reopening of the Hörnlihütte, the iconic mountain refuge 
beloved of climbers, after a two-year renovation.

What to do
Ringed by some of Europe’s highest peaks, Zermatt is a magnet for serious 
climbers, but there are dozens of less challenging hikes and climbs for 
amateurs wanting to immerse themselves in the magnificent Alpine scenery. The 
Zermatt Alpin Center (alpincenter-zermatt.ch 
<http://alpincenter-zermatt.ch/willkommen.html>) can provide advice, maps and 
guides for anything from glacier treks through the Gorner gorge and easy climbs 
on the Riffelhorn to a Matterhorn ascent. And if that sounds a bit too much 
like hard work, you can take the little cog railway which operates between the 
village and the summit of the Gornergrat for jaw-dropping views of the 
Matterhorn and the Monte-Rosa massif (gornergratbahn.ch 
<http://www.gornergratbahn.ch/en/Pages/default.aspx>).

Where to stay
Next month a state-of-the art refuge with 25 rooms will replace the original 
Hörnlihütte (hoernlihuette.ch <http://www.hoernlihuette.ch/home.html>) which 
has been used as a base camp for the Matterhorn since 1880. The hut can be 
reached on foot from the Schwarzsee cable car (from £105pp per night).

Where to eat
Ried Restaurant is a welcoming mountainside chalet serving Valais specialities 
with inspiring vistas (restaurantried.ch <http://restaurantried.ch/home.html>).

Insider tip
Nick Parks, director of climbing and trekking company Mountain Tracks (
mountaintracks.co.uk <http://mountaintracks.co.uk/>), recommends tackling the 
fixed-rope adventure in the Gorner gorge: “You travel through the gorge on 
ladders, rope walkways and zipwires. It’s great fun for all the family.”

Give me a break

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ftravel-tips-swiss-alps-matterhorn-wales-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433943971429%2F867554ee-b9c3-4906-a60a-800f8af2eecc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20the%20Swiss%20Alps%2C%20and%20deals%20of%20the%20week%20%7C%20Joanne%20O%E2%80%99Connor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ftravel-tips-swiss-alps-matterhorn-wales-sweden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20the%20Swiss%20Alps%2C%20and%20deals%20of%20the%20week%20%7C%20Joanne%20O%E2%80%99Connor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F14%2Ftravel-tips-swiss-alps-matterhorn-wales-sweden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433943971429%2F867554ee-b9c3-4906-a60a-800f8af2eecc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Snout’s honour: a pig ark camping pod at Cwmcrwth Farm Holiday Cottages. 
Home: making a pig of yourself in Wales A working farm in Carmarthernshire is 
offering guests the chance to spend a night in a glamped-up pig sty. Cwmcrwth 
Farm Cottages in Llandeilo has converted a ‘pig ark’ into cosy accommodation 
for two in its orchard. Guests can help out with collecting eggs, feeding the 
farm animals or even take part in a pork-curing course. £45 per night, 
including a picnic breakfast (cwmcrwthfarmcottages.co.uk 
<http://cwmcrwthfarmcottages.co.uk>).
 Hidden hideaway: one of Simply Sweden’s wooden cabins. 
Away: Scandinavian secret A night on a secret island is one of a handful of 
new holidays from Simply Sweden. The trip includes a stay in Stockholm and a 
taste of the Swedish wilderness in the rural district of Ockelbo, where there’s 
a night at a stylish country B&B followed by a night in a wooden cabin on a 
secluded private isle with lake swimming. From £930pp, including flights and 
four nights’ accommodation (simplysweden.co.uk <http://simplysweden.co.uk>).
 