
Escapism

Tour operator Inside Japan, which offers unusual, expertly organised trips, 
has a new sister brand for Vietnam. Inside Vietnam's holidays, escorted or 
tailor-made, include aHighlights 
<http://www.insidevietnamtours.com/vietnam-small-group-tours/i-hvg0001/highlights-of-vietnam>
 tour from £1,290pp, orWild Vietnam 
<http://www.insidevietnamtours.com/vietnam-small-group-tours/i-wv/wild-vietnam>
, taking in Ba Be Lakes, Phong Nha-Ke Bang caves, Nuoc Mooc springs and Hue, 
Hoi An and Ho Chi Minh City, from £2,150pp (0117-244 3370,insidevietnamtours.com
 <http://www.insidevietnamtours.com/>).

Cheap date

A weekend in spectacular Palazzo Victoria <http://palazzovictoria.com/> in 
Verona with Bailey Robinson, costs £375pp for three nights B&B, including 
flights from Heathrow, for travel from 14 June- 8 Sept (book by 27 April). Or 
stay in its luxurious sister property,Il Salviatino <http://salviatino.com/>, 
in the Fiesole hills near Florence, for £575pp for the same period (book by 25 
March).
• 01488 689 700, baileyrobinson.com 
<http://www.baileyrobinson.com/latest-offers/offeraccomdetails/_1268>

Snow watch

The French and Catalan Pyrenees are having an epic winter, with a huge amount 
of snow over the past week. In Spain's Baqueira-Beret there's 450cm of snow in 
the deepest spots; and in the Hautes Pyrénées, Cauterets has had seven metres 
in three weeks – it's still almost six metres deep at the top!
• skiclub.co.uk 
<http://www.skiclub.co.uk/skiclub/snowreports/snowconditions.aspx#.URzV7Bx7Tdw>

Glampwatch
 SHEPHERD'S HUT 
Two stylish grey shepherd's huts have been added to the Deepdale Backpackers 
and Camping site in north Norfolk, each sleeping four people from £50 a night. 
The purpose-built huts have curved tin roofs, woodburning stoves and simple 
pale interiors.
• 01485 210036, deepdalebackpackers.co.uk/shepherdshuts 
<http://www.deepdalebackpackers.co.uk/shepherdshuts/>

What's new?

Lakes festivals 
Two festivals come to the Lake District in March. Words by the Water (
wayswithwords.co.uk 
<https://www.wayswithwords.co.uk/festivals/words-by-the-water--the-lake-district-23>
, 1-10 March) in Keswick, is a literary festival with speakers including Carol 
Ann Duffy, Tracy Chevalier, Pat Barker and James Naughtie, at the Theatre by 
the Lake on Derwentwater (pictured below); while the Cockermouth Weekender (
golakes.co.uk 
<http://www.golakes.co.uk/do/arts-and-culture/cumbria-contemporary.aspx>, 8-10 
March), has Stuart Maconie at the helm, hosting beer, and 
food-pairing-with-beer, tasting, a secret ramble through the Western Lake 
District town's galleries, shops and historic houses, and a talk on the people 
and events that shaped the region, plus folk music.

Film tour 
Following the release of the film Hitchcock last weekend, cinema fans can find 
out more about the director on a themed walk through London locations of some 
of his flicks. Sandra Shevey, who runs similar tours in New York, leads walking 
tours to locations from Frenzy, The Man Who Knew Too Much, and The Paradine 
Case, while playing audio excerpts from an interview she did with Hitchcock 
(above) on the subject of London locations.
• sandrashevey.tripod.com/hitchcock.walks 
<http://sandrashevey.tripod.com/hitchcock.walks/>

Self catering 
Rare Hideaways <http://rarehideaways.co.uk>, a collection of unusual 
self-catering accommodation in Wales, has been launched byWelsh Rarebits 
<http://www.rarebits.co.uk/home>. It includes converted miners' cottages, 
watermills, barns and grand country houses. You can search for holidays with 
pets, holidays with pools and hot tubs, and places suitable for children.
 