
Why go
Arriving in Saxon Switzerland is like stumbling across a little corner of 
Conan Doyle's Lost World (minus the dinosaurs). Its teetering rock pinnacles, 
table-top mountains gouged by steep ravines and tumbling waterfalls earned it 
the "Swiss" label in the 19th century though it actually sits in south-east 
Germany. It is easily reached on a day trip from nearbyDresden, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/dresden> but you'll need a couple of days 
to savour this timeless landscape.

What to do
The most famous landmark is the Bastei, an extraordinary rock formation 
towering above the Elbe River. Similarly mind-blowing views can be had from the 
hilltop fortress of Königstein. Both spots can get busy: escape the crowds by 
striking out on one of the many hiking and biking trails which criss-cross the 
Sächsische-Schweiz national park: the Malerweg (painters' way) is a 112km route 
taking in landscapes that inspired many 19th-century artists. Climbers come 
from all over to tackle the sandstone rock towers: for guiding and tuition see 
the national park website (saechsische-schweiz.de 
<http://www.saechsische-schweiz.de/en/saxon-switzerland.html>).

Where to stay
The spa town of Bad Schandau is a great base for exploring the region. On the 
outskirts, the Ziegelscheune is a lovely guesthouse on the banks of the River 
Elbe. It's been run by the same family for 100 years. There are just four 
light, pretty rooms and a cosy dining room with riverside terrace (from €60,
ziegelscheune-krippen.de <http://ziegelscheune-krippen.de/>).

Where to eat
The Lindenhof in Bad Schandau is a good place to try out regional 
specialities, such as wild garlic soup, pork cooked with mustard and beer, and 
rainbow trout stuffed with herbs (lindenhof-bad-schandau.de 
<http://lindenhof-bad-schandau.de/>).

Insider tip
Hans Peter Mayr of the national park recommends the Kirnitzschtalbahn, a  tram 
which has been carrying tourists for more than 100 years: "It starts in Bad 
Schandau and runs 8km through the beautiful Kirnitzsch Valley to the Kuhstall, 
a natural rock arch with panoramic views."

Give me a break
 Under glass: Centerparcs Woburn Forest. 
Home: Center Parcs arrives in Bedfordshire
The new Center Parcs at Woburn Forest opens on 20 June. It will boast 
redesigned lodges, the biggest pool complex of the five UK villages, including 
three water rides, and new family activities. There will also be a restaurant, 
the Shearing House, serving classic British food. A three-night break in a 
two-bedroom Woodland Lodge costs from £899 (centerparcs.co.uk/woburn 
<http://centerparcs.co.uk/woburn>)
 Going Turkish: Bunk Beyoglu. 
Away: Budget Bunk in Istanbul 
The Bunk hostel raised the bar for budget accommodation when it opened in 
Istanbul's arty Beyoglu district two years ago (bunkhostels.com 
<http://bunkhostels.com>). Now a sister hostel near Taksim Square has opened 
with simple but stylish dorms, doubles and twin rooms, rooftop terrace, 
pizzeria and DJ booth. Dorm beds start at €15. Atlasjet launches flights from 
Luton to Istanbul on 2 May with returns from £148 (atlasjet.com 
<http://atlasjet.com>)

• This article was amended on 14 April – the new Center Parcs opens on 20 
June, not the last week of May.
 