
Anyone flirting with the idea of turning their backs on the daily grind and 
seeking a new life in the mountains should head for Morzine to see how it can 
be done. The picturesque town that knocks spots off the likes of Val d’Isère, 
for this skier’s money, is home to dozens of interesting chalets set up by 
Brits who’ve run for the hills.

The Portes du Soleil is an obvious place for them to head: handy for Geneva, 
part of a huge ski network, with a near perfect resort base boasting two 
cinemas that show English-language films, skating and hockey ice rinks, decent 
shops, restaurants and cafes around quaint squares, plus laid-back après ski.

I was there to check out two new Sawday’s properties. Like many accommodation 
sites, it has launched special ski collections, recognising a growing demand in 
the market for unusual, independent chalets, rather than the package-operator 
pads of the past. Five-bedroomChalet de Soie 
<http://www.canopyandstars.co.uk/france/rhone-valley-alps/haute-savoie/chalet-de-soie>
, owned by Darren and Katya, just outside the town, is a fantastic find. 
Beautiful and spacious inside, it has a large deck that looks over the 
mountains beyond.
 Chalet de Soie 
On my first night, the state-of-the-art kitchen-diner, connecting to an 
open-plan lounge with woodburner, went to waste, and I ordered in a meal of 
pork kebabs, couscous, olives, lentil dip, lemon tart and an impressive 
cheeseboard, provided by caterer Sue Molony: essentially, a posh and delicious 
takeaway.

Local hire company Gravier <http://gravierski.com/> had delivered our ski 
equipment before we’d arrived, so we wasted no time hitting the slopes, and 
there was a bus stop nearby, so we skipped the 15-minute stroll to the centre. 
These were little added bonuses that made a difference.

The second chalet, Twenty26 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/france/rhone-valley-alps/haute-savoie/chalet-twenty262>
, had more of a boutique-hotel feel. It is slightly out of town but we had a 
driver to take us into town, or to the nearest lift, and what we lost from 
being a little further from the slopes we gained in good service and 
jaw-dropping views. There was a hot tub and a sauna outside – and pre-dinner 
cocktails – to help battered bodies forget their bruises. Chef Al’s cooking was 
inspired: salmon ceviche, a brilliant duck breast with rillettes and potato 
dauphinoise. The afternoon cakes and tea, home cinema and fire that welcomed us 
back from the slopes raised the chalet above the norm.
 Twenty26 
Owners Chris and Sarah were great hosts and very knowledgeable. They’d given 
up their jobs in London to follow their dream and said they had looked at 
several resorts before deciding on Morzine. They’d liked its relaxed 
atmosphere, and the fact it was a proper town that didn’t cease to exist when 
the slopes shut in April. And who can blame them?
• Chalet de Soie sleeps 10 from £2,480 a week self-catering and can be booked 
viacanopyandstars.co.uk/peaks 
<http://www.canopyandstars.co.uk/france/rhone-valley-alps/haute-savoie/chalet-de-soie>
. A fully catered week at Chalet Twenty26 (sleeps 12) costs from £6,950. Book 
via Sawday’s new Go Snow Collection (sawdays.co.uk/gosnow 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/hand-picked/go-snow>). Individual rooms can be booked 
during off-peak weeks from £695pp based on two people sharing
 