
The University of California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, 
Berkeley has reinstated a controversial course examining Palestine “through the 
lens of settler colonialism” after facing intense backlash that it was stifling 
academic freedom.

A coalition of Jewish organizations had launched a campaign against the 
course, claiming it was “antisemitic” and “anti-Israel”, and last week the 
elite school suspended the class, saying it “did not receive a sufficient 
degree of scrutiny”.

But on Monday, UC Berkeley announced that a review had determined “the course 
does not cross the line between teaching and political advocacy and organizing”.

Suspension of controversial Palestine class at UC Berkeley sparks debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/15/uc-berkeley-israel-palestine-class-suspended-decal>
“I’m hoping that this will make the administration think twice before they 
respond to outside political pressure,” said undergraduate Paul Hadweh, who 
created the course, which is part of a UC Berkeley program that allows students 
to teach classes to their peers.

The dispute comes at a time of increasingly tense debate surrounding free 
speech on college campuses and student activism on the Israel-Palestine 
conflict. Pro-Palestine groups argue that universities have suppressed their 
right to free speech and protest and that student activists are up against
well-funded initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/05/sheldon-adelson-looks-to-stamp-out-growing-us-movement-to-boycott-israel>
 aimed at discrediting and harassingindividual protesters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/22/sheldon-adelson-palestine-jew-haters-colleges-campuses>
.

But Pro-Israel and Jewish organizations claim that the growing Students for 
Justice in Palestine (SJP) movement – along with the boycott, divestment and 
sanctions (BDS) efforts targeting the Israeli government – are antisemitic and 
shouldn’t be allowed on campuses.

Hadweh’s class, called Palestine: A Settler Colonial Inquiry, aims to explore 
the region in the context of “settler colonialism” and study how 
“decolonization” could “open the possibility for justice and equality for all 
peoples in the region”. A coalition of opposing groupsargued 
<http://www.amchainitiative.org/43-advocacy-groups-to-uc-berkeley> that the 
syllabus implied that the class “intended to indoctrinate students to hate the 
Jewish state and take action to eliminate it”.

The university threw me under the bus and publicly accused me of failing to 
meet policies and procedures
Paul Hadweh, course creator 
The university, considered the top public college in the US, claimed that it 
was suspending the course due to procedural concerns, thoughprofessors 
<http://org.salsalabs.com/o/301/p/dia/action3/common/public/?action_KEY=20362> 
andstudents 
<https://medium.com/@ethnicstudies198/an-open-letter-to-the-uc-berkeley-administration-regarding-academic-freedom-1bf60c9a040e#.o4rr7tce6>
 said that administrators were responding to negative press and criticisms from 
Israel advocacy groups.

On Sunday, Shari Huhndorf, chair of the department of ethnic studies, said in 
a letter to administrators that she had determined that the “course is 
structured by open inquiry rather than a specific agenda”.

“We are impressed by how thoughtfully the student facilitator has constructed 
the course,” she wrote, adding: “The histories and dynamics of settler 
colonialism, structural inequality, and social marginalization are central to 
our teaching and research.”

Hadweh said he has agreed to make minor adjustments to the language of the 
syllabus, but that the fundamentals of the course are intact.

Tammi Rossman-Benjamin, director of the AMCHA Initiative, a Jewish group that 
led the charge against the class, said on Monday that she had not yet reviewed 
the new syllabus but was upset the school would allow a course that uses the 
“colonialism” framework and promotes “decolonization”.

“It sounds like the revisions were not adequate,” she said. “It’s deeply 
disappointing and suggests that they really are not considering … what 
‘indoctrination’ really is.”

Supporters of the course, along with SJP and BDS activists, have argued that 
they are not targeting the Jewish faith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/07/to-support-the-boycott-divestment-and-sanctions-movement-is-not-anti-semitic>
 but are speaking up against the Israeli government and against human rights 
abuses associated with the occupation of Palestinian territories.

Liz Jackson, staff attorney with Palestine Legal, who is representing Hadweh, 
praised the reinstatement.

“It’s a victory for everyone across the US who is facing this documented and 
coordinated attack on the right to study and speak freely onIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and Palestine.”

Jackson, who noted that she is a Jewish alumnus of UC Berkeley, said the 
suspension could still have a chilling effect on free speech. “For Paul and 
every other student and scholar on campus who wants to think about … this 
international problem from the perspective of Palestinian history, the message 
that they got from the university is: ‘We’re going to pay extra attention to 
you. And you are guilty until you prove yourself innocent to us.’”

Hadweh, a 21-year-old senior, who was born in the US and grew up in Palestine, 
said the ordeal had taken a toll on him.

“The university threw me under the bus and publicly accused me of failing to 
meet policies and procedures,” he said, adding, “This was not the first time 
something like this happened and unfortunately it probably won’t be the last.”

Hadweh said that, on the bright side, it seems the controversy has inspired 
his class to be particularly enthusiastic. “I never imagined students would be 
so eager to do reading.”
 