
Britain’s top companies should ensure that more women make it on to executive 
committees as well as into boardrooms, a government-backed review has 
recommended.


Companies listed on the FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 
should have at least a third of their executive pipeline positions filled by 
women by 2020, the independent review led by Sir Philip Hampton, chairman of 
GlaxoSmithKline, and Dame Helen Alexander, chair of UBM, concluded. The 33% 
target is voluntary.

The aim is to ensure that there is a broader focus so that more women are 
employed in other senior roles below board level. At present, a quarter of 
people either sitting on FTSE 100 executive committees or reporting directly to 
them are women.

Tackling gender inequality 'could add £10tn to world economy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/tackling-gender-inequality-could-add-10tn-to-world-economy>
Hampton and Alexander were appointed in February  
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-chair-and-deputy-chair-of-women-on-boards-review-will-champion-female-executives>
to look at the issue of developing senior female talent by then business 
secretary, Sajid Javid. It followed the work of Lord Davies,who recommended in 
2011 that FTSE 100 companies should double the proportion of women in 
boardrooms – including non-executive roles – to 25% by 2015. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/feb/24/double-number-of-women-directors-davies-tells-firms>

The target was exceeded, with women accounting for 26.1% of FTSE 100 boards 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/29/a-third-of-boardroom-positions-should-be-held-by-women-uk-firms-told>
. In July, Hampton and Alexander said they supported the Davies review’s 
subsequent recommendation that FTSE 350 boards should be a third female by the 
end of 2020.

Sir Philip Hampton and Dame Helen Alexander said in a joint statement: “We are 
launching the next stage in the journey where FSTE 100 companies will aim for a 
third of their all-important leadership roles to be occupied by women by the 
end of 2020.

“We don’t underestimate the challenge the new voluntary target presents for 
many FTSE companies. However, we are encouraged by the breadth of experienced 
women ready and willing to step up, the significant efforts under way in many 
companies on this agenda, and the ability of British business to work together 
to bring about change when it is needed.”

Lady Barbara Judge, the chair of the Institute of Directors and member of the 
advisory panel for the review, said: “We have long argued that focusing just on 
boards fails to build a sustainable pipeline of women leaders. Having a third 
of executive committees made up by women by 2020 is a very stretching target, 
and there will have to be sustained political and public pressure for this to 
be achieved.”

Justine Greening, the minister for women and equalities, said bridging the UK 
gender gap in work could add £150bn to the UK’s annual GDP in 2025.

Melanie Richards, the vice-chair and a partner in KPMG, said that although UK 
companies had made progress in promoting more women into boardrooms, there had 
been little improvement at the executive level. “If we are to continue to make 
progress towards achieving greater gender balance, it is critical that all 
levels of the pipeline are addressed,” she said.
 