
“Why write for a violin when there is the cello?” asked Rachmaninov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sergei-rachmaninov>. There is something 
peculiarly lovable about the cello, with its tenor radiance, narrow waist, 
gleaming shoulders and back of flaming maple: to play it you must embrace it, 
and its resonating chamber rests upon your heart. Rostropovich captured that 
warm physical connection when he recalled that as a tired boy he would lie the 
cello on its side and “squeeze my backside into the carved dip near the 
f-holes”.Dvořák <https://www.theguardian.com/music/antonin-dvorak> said that 
its upper register “squeaks and the lower growls”, but for Ernest Bloch it was 
a voice “vaster and deeper than any spoken language”.

For Anthony Trollope <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope> it 
was “the saddest of instruments”; indeed, it has acquired the role of chief 
mourner, a long way from its beginnings as a dance-band bass. It was a cellist 
who performed at the memorial for the Paris terrorist attacks in 2015, and 
another, Yo-Yo Ma, whocommemorated the 10th anniversary of 9/11 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZoJHd6VxE-4>, with solo Bach. Think of Elgar’s 
famous concerto, or Fauré’s funereal Élégie: the instrument is nowsynonymous 
with sorrowful eloquence 
<http://www.classicfm.com/music-news/latest-news/rip-alan-rickman-truly-madly-deeply/#VRPlmEiQqZUeG0lA.97>
.

So when did this Cinderella step into the spotlight? The first cellos date 
from the mid-16th century, peasant rival to the sophisticatedviola da gamba 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vosK-NKq9FQ>. Contrary to appearances, they 
are not related: while the fretted viol derives from the guitar, a 
“violoncello” (simply, a diminutive bass violon) is a large medieval fiddle, a 
crude, loud, outdoors instrument. You can still see a plugged hole on the back 
of many 18th-century cellos where a strap was fixed, so it could be lugged 
through the streets in marches, parades and for dances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fstory-of-the-cello-rostropovich-du-pre-yo-yo-ma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa46d685330b76d93d9350bb8c6625a70d2e709f9%2F0_0_5178_3452%2F5178.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vast%2C%20deep%20and%20awash%20with%20feeling%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20cello&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fstory-of-the-cello-rostropovich-du-pre-yo-yo-ma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vast%2C%20deep%20and%20awash%20with%20feeling%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20cello&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fstory-of-the-cello-rostropovich-du-pre-yo-yo-ma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa46d685330b76d93d9350bb8c6625a70d2e709f9%2F0_0_5178_3452%2F5178.jpg>
 Cellist Steven Isserlis performs at Wigmore Hall, London, in February 2016. 
Photograph: Amy T Zielinski/Redferns 
One can date the change in the cello’s fortunes in the UK to the Restoration: 
while Charles I was a viol connoisseur, dedicatee of the sublime consorts of
William Lawes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rKvFnn_tW04>, Charles II 
favoured the more robust cello, and by 1714 English amateur musician Roger 
North was recalling how the cello – “a coarse instrument, as it was then” – had 
begun to be played while viols fell into disuse, and Italian emigres Cervetto, 
Cirri and Lanzetti made the cello all the rage in 18th-century London.

This is a time of Peak Cello: as instrument maker Stradivarius enters his 
golden period (63 of his sought-after cellos remain in circulation), Vivaldi 
turns out a clutch of glittering concertos and sonatas. Meanwhile, in Germany, 
JS Bach composes the six extraordinary solo suites, so technically challenging 
that their intendedinstrument is still in dispute 
<http://www.pauldwyer.net/blog/so-what-instrument-were-these-cello-suites-written-for>
.

The cello vaults across the later 18th and early 19th century as a fully 
fledged prima donna: Luigi Boccherini showcases his own virtuosic brilliance 
and dreams upsubtle string quintets 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2AZOknKotVc>, model for Schubert’s masterpiece 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S3tmFhrOgNk>, his final chamber work, the C 
major quintet; Haydn pens twojoyous concerti 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eU5KdY_04kU>, both unearthed in the mid-20th 
century, whileBeethoven’s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GFfGHUiuous> five, 
indelible career-spanning sonatas open the gates to the instrument’s Romantic 
period.Schumann pens a beautiful concerto 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bVFn7Hvxxos> he never lived to hear, followed 
by the soulful works of Chopin, Brahms, Dvořák, Grieg, Strauss and Rachmaninov. 
Enter the cello as heldentenor, orator, an idea that reached its apotheosis in 
the young Jacqueline du Pré’s incandescent performances of Elgar’s concerto, 
the elegiac work for ever identified with her own tragedy and early death.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPhkZW_jwc0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPhkZW_jwc0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOPhkZW_jwc0&media=>
Du Pré was one of a parade of inspirational figures who saw the instrument’s 
popularity soar in the 20th century.Pablo Casals 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KX1YtvFZOj0> will be remembered as keenly for 
his lifelong stand against fascism as for his exhumation ofBach’s suites 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KX1YtvFZOj0>. After the Spanish civil war he 
lived out the rest of his life in exile, shaming western governments by his 
refusal to perform in any country that recognised Franco’s government.
Rostropovich <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/apr/27/russia.world>’s 
explosive interactions with the Soviet authorities made him a natural heir: he 
not only sheltered Solzhenitsyn before defecting, but wrote an open letter to 
Pravda attacking cultural oppression that even now startles with its fierce 
honesty. More courageous still wasVedran Smailovic 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1992/06/08/world/death-city-elegy-for-sarajevo-special-report-people-under-artillery-fire-manage.html?pagewanted=all>
, the “cellist of Sarajevo”, who risked sniper fire to play in the burnt-out 
ruins of his besieged city. Recently, Iraqi cellistKarim Wasfi 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/04/interview-played-cello-baghdad-bombsite-150429191916834.html>
 has also performed, without protection, at bomb sites in Baghdad, in a bid to 
slow time and make space in a broken community.

Still, Rostropovich’s chief legacy was musical: he was the catalyst for more 
than 200 new works for the instrument, from Shostakovich to Britten, Prokofiev, 
Lutosławski, Gubaidulina, Pärt, Piazzolla and Dutilleux, to name but a handful. 
From Prokofiev’s operatic sonata to Piazzolla’s feline Grand Tango, Britten’s 
pungent Sonata and third suite – a devastatingvalediction to his friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/16/benjamin-britten-mstislav-rostropovich>
 – here is a body of music that still vibrates with “Slava’s” high-octane 
artistry.

Another pioneer, Yo-Yo Ma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/facing-the-music-yo-yo-ma-cellist>
, set out in 1998 on an intrepid “Silk Road project” to former Soviet states, a 
bold act of cultural reconciliation documented in his recentfilm The Music of 
Strangers <http://themusicofstrangers.film/>. Ma relinquished his star status 
to relearn the cello in radically different, improvised contexts. In the UK,
Matthew Barley <http://www.matthewbarley.com/> has travelled a similar road, 
finding a cellistic way into Arab, Persian, west African and Indian music, 
mixing his own techniques with the textures of oud, kora, sarod and mandolin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fstory-of-the-cello-rostropovich-du-pre-yo-yo-ma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0365527d1916cf3a4a1c29d66dfe1a1c4a155d79%2F0_221_4906_3388%2F4906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vast%2C%20deep%20and%20awash%20with%20feeling%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20cello&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fstory-of-the-cello-rostropovich-du-pre-yo-yo-ma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vast%2C%20deep%20and%20awash%20with%20feeling%3A%20the%20story%20of%20the%20cello&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fstory-of-the-cello-rostropovich-du-pre-yo-yo-ma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0365527d1916cf3a4a1c29d66dfe1a1c4a155d79%2F0_221_4906_3388%2F4906.jpg>
 Unique body of songs … Ayanna Witter-Johnson. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the 
Observer 
There’s plenty more to the instrument’s alternative story. Disco producer and 
composer Arthur Russell (1951-92) was also a radical downtown amplified cellist 
who, according to his colleague trombonist Peter Zummo, “sang and played 
effortlessly standing up”. Fast-forward to the present and Silicon Valley’s Zoë 
Keating, a cellist and programmer, has unlocked a secret world in her 
thoughtful, layered soundscapes, “the breathy half-sounds of bow-hair touching 
steel string, a fingernail scraping the side of the bridge, all the noises of 
sound production the audience may never be aware of”. Meanwhile there’s Dutch 
composer-cellist Ernst Reijseger, who uses electronics to create kaleidoscopic 
transformations of cello sound, or young Londoner Ayanna Witter-Johnson, who 
started singing with cello in a Caribbean restaurant and has created a unique 
body of songs, giving the instrument a new home in the sassier realm of soul. 
“It’s spacious and intimate all at the same time,” she observes, reminding us 
she’s part of a much older cello story – one that goes back to the instrument’s 
roots as a ground bass and operatic continuo, the fundament of orchestral 
harmony, friend and support to singers.

 * The Cello Unwrapped <http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/cello-unwrapped> series 
runs at Kings Place, London, from 7 January.
 