
Information is being created and disseminated faster than any of us can absorb 
it. Google estimates that humans have created more information in the past five 
years than in all of human history - 300 exabytes of information 
(300,000,000,000,000,000,000) to be precise. If all that information were 
written on 3x5 index cards, your personal share of it would wrap around the 
earth twice. The pile of cards would reach to the moon three times.


Social media, emails, texts, WhatsApp messsages and phone calls take up an 
increasing amount of time. Our to-do lists are so full that we can’t hope to 
complete every item on them. So what do we do? We multitask, juggling several 
things at once, trying to keep up by keeping busy.  
<http://www.inc.com/larry-kim/why-multi-tasking-is-killing-your-brain.html>

Research 
<http://www.inc.com/larry-kim/why-multi-tasking-is-killing-your-brain.html> by 
Earl Miller of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and others however 
shows that multitasking doesn’t work - simply because the brain doesn’t work 
that way. If you’re studying from a book and trying to listen in on a 
conversation at the same time, those are two separate projects, each started 
and maintained by distinct circuits in the brain. Pay more attention to one for 
a moment and you’re automatically paying less attention to the other.


To make matters worse, learning information while multitasking causes the new 
information to go to the wrong part of the brain,as shown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/18/modern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload>
 by Russ Poldrack of Stanford. If students study and watch TV at the same time, 
for example, the information from their course work goes into the striatum, a 
region specialised for storing new procedures and skills, not facts and ideas. 
Without the distraction of TV, the information goes into the hippocampus, where 
it is organised and categorised, making it easier to retrieve it.


“People can’t do [multitasking] very well, and when they say they can, they’re 
deluding themselves,” says Miller. And it turns out the brain is very good at 
this deluding business.


Related: What happens in your brain when you make a memory? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/16/what-happens-in-your-brain-when-you-make-a-memory>

As if that weren’t enough to stop you from multitasking, switching back and 
forth between tasks uses up glucose, which neurons need to function optimally. 
So, after a morning of switching between Netflix, your lecture notes, and cute 
cat videos, if you feel as though you can’t settle your mind down to focus and 
really get something done, it’s because you’ve depleted the neural resources 
you need to stay engaged and focused.

Students who uni-task, immersing themselves in one thing at a time, remember 
their work better 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/16/opinion/sunday/the-power-of-concentration.html>
, get more done, and their work is usually more creative and ofhigher quality 
<http://www.webmd.com/mental-health/features/why-multitasking-isnt-efficient>. 
Fortunately there are a few pieces of advice to help stop modern life getting 
the better of you.


Make time to let your mind wander

Healthy breaks can hit the reset button in your brain, restoring some of the 
glucose and other metabolic nutrients used up with deep thought. A healthy 
break is one in which you allow your brain to rest, to loosen its grip on your 
thoughts.

Activities that promote mind-wandering, such as reading literature, going for 
a walk, exercising, or listening to music, are hugely restorative. Many 
students find that a work-break cycle of 25 minutes work followed by five 
minutes rest, or even two hours of work followed by 15 minutes of rest promotes 
efficiency to the extent that they get back the time they spent resting, and 
then some. A 15 minute nap is even better.


Create a ‘no fly zone’

The pull of social media and the internet is today one of the biggest barriers 
to effective revision or learning. This is because the brain has a tendency to 
seek new stimulation, and to try to find the path of least effort. Have you 
ever sat at your computer, focusing on writing an essay and then found your 
attention start to flag? You might remember that you had wanted to see a movie, 
so you go to the internet to look up show times. Then you find there are three 
movies playing in your area that you’re interested in, so you go to Rotten 
Tomatoes to look at the reviews, and after that to Facebook to see what your 
friends thought about it. Before you know it, two hours have gone by and you 
haven’t gotten any work done. And your brain is worn out from all that 
stimulation.


Increasingly, students, scientists, and corporate CEOs are enforcing a “no fly 
zone” period of time when they shut off the internet, a time to focus, to 
concentrate, to engage deeply in what’s in front of them. This can be as simple 
as shutting down the browser or turning off your wireless connection. Chrome 
now hasan extension 
<https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/stayfocusd/laankejkbhbdhmipfmgcngdelahlfoji?hl=en>
 that allows you to limit the amount of time you spend on certain sites, and
many other app 
<http://mashable.com/2012/01/03/block-internet-distractions-apps/#s0lZO65ZBiqC>
s are available to help enforce the no fly zone.


Related: How much can you really learn while you're asleep? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/06/how-much-can-you-really-learn-while-youre-asleep>

Slowly take back the power

The addiction to multitasking and social media is real, there is a 
dopamine-addiction-feedback loop 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/russell-poldrack/multitasking-the-brain-se_b_334674.html>
 behind it . The human brain seeks novelty — more pronounced in some of us than 
others — and dopamine is the brain’s reward for finding it. Dopamine can be 
thought of as the “give me more” neurochemical. We encounter something new 
every few seconds through multitasking, we release dopamine, which makes us 
want to encounter something new, which releases dopamine, and so on, until 
we’re exhausted.

Many of us allow texts and social media to interrupt us, giving it the power 
to decide how we’ll spend our time and what we’ll think about. Just small 
changes in the way we approach the internet, small increases in self-discipline 
can make all the difference between managing the internet versus letting it 
manage you. We can’t slow down the flow of information. But we can slow down 
how much of it we let intrude on our plans, our study time, our social lives, 
and the daydreaming time that is a necessary part of being productive and 
creative.

Daniel J Levitin is a neuroscientist and author of The Organized Mind. He 
tweets at@danlevitin <https://twitter.com/danlevitin>

Get involved with the Use your head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/use-your-head> series by joining 
the discussion on #useyourhead or pitching your ideas to
natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com <mailto:natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com>

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 