
We are trying to teach the children something about tolerance and unity at a 
time when they are inevitably picking up on the differences that are said to 
exist and the racist incidents that are taking place. Can you recommend books 
that might help?

Children’s books have a long and proud tradition of encouraging children to be 
open-minded and tolerant.

Books to breed tolerance: what children can read after the terrorist attacks 
in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/12/books-breed-tolerance-children-read-errorist-attacks-paris>
Again and again, sometimes openly and sometimes covertly, authors and 
illustrators have influenced children’s thinking about both conflict and 
difference; through their stories and illustrations they have offered children 
to chance to question the conversations of adults and challenge the attitudes 
which are so prevalent in the media.

In terms of conflict, Munro Leaf’s The Story of Ferdinand 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Story_of_Ferdinand>, published almost 100 
years ago, the story of a bull who preferred to stay in the field and smell the 
flowers than engage in a bull fight, showed very young children thatnot 
fighting was a clever and brave decision to take. More recently David Mckee’s
The Conquerors <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/conquerors.html> showed how 
pointless war is while Raymond Brigg’sThe Tin-Pot Foreign General and the Old 
Iron Woma 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/tin-pot-foreign-general-and-the-old-iron-woman.html>
n was a vehement visually critique of the Falklands War. All three titles, in 
their different way, extol the value of working together rather than against 
those around you.

We are all born free – our human rights in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/jan/30/human-rights-in-pictures-we-are-all-born-free-amnesty>
In terms of encouraging tolerance and understanding in children who read 
pictures better than words, Amnesty’sWe Are All Born Free: The Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights in Pictures 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-are-all-born-free.html> , a stunning 
picture book illustrated by many artists including Axel Scheffler, Debi Gliori 
and Chris Riddell, is an invaluable starting point for all as it brings into 
focus and celebrates each of the rights which should underpin every society.

In terms of fiction, David Almond’s Klaus Vogel and the Bad Lads 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/klaus-vogel-and-the-bad-lads.html>, a 
post-World War two story about the way a gang of boys treat a German refugee, 
shows that an individual can challenge the popular view and make a difference. 
More depressingly, it shows that provides a timely reminder that enmity towards 
outsiders is not anything new.

Why fiction can help us understand the Syrian refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/sep/08/fiction-refugee-crisis-gillian-cross>
For a story that will make all readers think about attitudes to outsiders, 
Gillian Cross’s After Tomorrow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/after-tomorrow.html> takes an English family 
across the channel to escape conflict at home. Suddenly the family finds that 
they are refugees; along with many others they live in camps and suffer the 
deprivations that go with the circumstances. By turning the situation on its 
head, Gillian Cross causes readers to question their prejudices against those 
whose lives are different.

Robin Talley: 'it’s important for fiction to show the breadth of the world we 
live in'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/02/robin-talley-interview-lies-we-tell-ourselves>
Robin Talley’s Lies We Tell Ourselves 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lies-we-tell-ourselves.html> was shortlisted 
for the prestigiousCILIP Carnegie medal 2016 and won the Amnesty CILIP 2016 
honour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/20/sarah-crossan-carnegie-medal-2016-one>
. Set in Jefferson High School in 1959, Sarah arrives at the school as the 
first black student in a school which has previously been all-white. The 
hostility Sarah must face from all sides of the school community will shock 
readers – and rightly so. Linda, whose father is a segregationist, is among the 
most overtly hostile. But, as an intense friendship develops between the two 
girls, Linda and Sarah develop a bond that empowers them to stand up for what 
they think really matters. Confident in each other and in their beliefs the two 
girls fight together and, in doing so, influence those around them. In Lies We 
Tell Ourselves Robin Talley shows the unthinking nature of prejudice against 
‘others’ and that when people can and do overcome differences much better 
things happen.

Stories have the power to create a more hopeful world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/27/stories-power-hopeful-world-sita-brahmachari-brexit>
See our recommendations for books to breed tolerance curated by Sita 
Brahmachari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jan/12/books-breed-tolerance-children-read-errorist-attacks-paris>
 andstories have the power to create a more hopeful world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jun/27/stories-power-hopeful-world-sita-brahmachari-brexit>
. If you have more recommendations share on Twitter@GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>. 
 