
Ever since the Forrest family pet unexpectedly entered the food chain in Fatal 
Attraction, and Frank the mercury-faced leporid walked into Donnie Darko’s 
waking dreams, rabbits have been officially nibbling around the edges of the 
horror genre. Right now, they’re at 46th place in the freakiness rankings, 
sandwiched between abandoned rocking chairs and wind-up music boxes (well below 
the likes of staring twins and evil clowns). But if there was a moment when the 
placid little critters first extended their range beyond merely cute, I like to 
think I was there, and wailing in raw, unfiltered, primal terror.

That reaction was probably wasn’t what Richard Adams had in mind when he wrote 
Watership Down in 1972, his homily to the timeless rhythms of rural England. I 
doubt Martin Rosen and John Hubley, directors of the 1978 film version, wanted 
to scare the bejesus out of their young audience either. But one small section 
– the apocalyptic vision that leads skittish rabbit seer Fiver to encourage his 
warren mates to abandon their burrows – was far too vivid. Fiver sniffs around, 
a whisper of terror in the air: a fencepost rears up like a gallows; a 
cigarette singes the lush green. Then he sees it: blood blotting a vast field, 
threatening to engulf them all. Skeletal tree outlines crack like veins through 
the insanguinated sods. Their branches twist and undulate with queasy malice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fwatership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414666486199%2F31c36eb8-20c1-4b16-bb32-5b76d5651a12-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watership%20Down%3A%20the%20film%20that%20frightened%20me%20the%20most&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fwatership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watership%20Down%3A%20the%20film%20that%20frightened%20me%20the%20most&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fwatership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414666486199%2F31c36eb8-20c1-4b16-bb32-5b76d5651a12-2060x1236.jpeg>
 That’s more like it … Watership Down. Photograph: c.Everett Collection/Rex 
The horror, the horror! I was a kindergarten Kurtz; the toddler who had seen 
too much. It was like reality was melting. I have dim memories of fleeing from 
a dark cavern of a Newcastle cinema, desperate for bright air and parental 
comfort. I hadn’t been that scared since a few months previously, when the 
Wicked Witch’s whiz-bang explosive entrances in an open-air pantomime of The 
Wizard of Oz had caused me to beg my dad to get me the fuck out of there. I 
hope having a child of Petit Prince-like sensitivity went some way to 
compensating for their wasted entertainment overheads during those years.

Strangely, neither of my parents remember the Watership Down walkout, but I’ve 
been convinced for quite a few years that it happened. Fiver’s vision happens 
less than 10 minutes into the film, and I recall nothing else of it. Just the 
weird Mesoamerican-style creation myth that is the prologue, perfectly 
synchronised with my own primitive brainwaves to lull me into the story as it 
delivered its kick. I’m guessing I was about three when I watched it, so it was 
probably one of the first times I had seen a film on the big screen, if not the 
very first.

I can’t claim that watching Watership Down was some kind of formative trauma, 
and watching the offending extracts on YouTube (many now spliced to Clint 
Mansell’sRequiem for a Dream <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n3mDmpCBdzI> 
theme) has definitely put any residual demons to bed. There have been plenty of 
other times when, as a grown adult, it’s felt more legitimate to brick it in 
the face of cinematic terrors: the mechanistic fight-flight prodding of most 
slasher films usually does the job; or the spiritual degradation of something 
more realistic like Snowtown; or the time I was watchingRing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/21/ring-ringu-the-film-that-frightened-me-most-halloween>
 home alone when the power supply failed just as Sadako was crawling out of her 
cathode-ray abyss.

But the fact so little sticks about Watership Down other a vague reminiscence 
of an unstoppable flood of rabbit-geddon into my inner self – the field of 
blood that was my blood – makes me sure I must have seen it then, when the 
fontanelles were still hardening and reality was not fully formed. The perfect 
point to be most affected by the subtlest of all horror sensations: the child’s 
belief that whatever you see is real. Adults hold that feeling at bay with laws 
that mark off the boundaries between fiction and reality, most porous when it 
comes to filmed images; those demarcations are what allow us to lap up a Game 
of Thrones decapitation, but recoil when an Isis atrocity appears in our 
Twitter feed. On some level, is there a difference? It can be kind of fun to 
blur the categories, a frisson plenty of horror films have exploited with 
suggestions that –Blair Witch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/23/blair-witch-project-film-frightened-me-most-steve-rose>
 or Paranormal Activity-style – their secret footage might be real.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fwatership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414666533437%2F0614c852-0087-454d-b2e5-313124af62ed-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watership%20Down%3A%20the%20film%20that%20frightened%20me%20the%20most&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fwatership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watership%20Down%3A%20the%20film%20that%20frightened%20me%20the%20most&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F30%2Fwatership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414666533437%2F0614c852-0087-454d-b2e5-313124af62ed-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Watership Down. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Nepenthe Films 
The child doesn’t make those distinctions, of course. And we’re children again 
when we watch, not so much suspending disbelief as resuming belief. Watch the 
right (or the wrong) things, and it will change you for ever. It was a vision 
of fear that first hooked me on the power of cinema, but then you don’t always 
have a rabbit’s foot around your neck.
 