
Lionel Shriver knew she was going to annoy people. “Inviting a renowned 
iconoclast to speak about ‘community and belonging’ is like expecting a great 
white shark to balance a beach ball on its nose,” she said. She then usedher 
keynote speech at the Brisbane writers’ festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/lionel-shrivers-full-speech-i-hope-the-concept-of-cultural-appropriation-is-a-passing-fad>
 to tear into the argument that writers – most particularly white writers – are 
guilty of “cultural appropriation” by writing from the point of view of 
characters from other cultural backgrounds.


Referring to incidents in which two members of student government at an 
American universityfaced impeachment 
<http://www.pressherald.com/2016/03/04/bowdoin-student-government-to-hold-impeachment-hearings-agaist-two-members/>
 after attended a “tequila party” wearing sombreros, and reports of a ban on a 
Mexican restaurant from giving out sombreros, the author of We Need to Talk 
About Kevin said: “The moral of the sombrero scandals is clear:you’re not 
supposed to try on other people’s hats. Yet that’s what we’re paid to do, isn’t 
it? Step into other people’s shoes, and try on their hats.”

The response was instant. Sudanese-born Australian social activist Yassmin 
Abdel-Magied, who was attending the event, walked out and then quickly penned a 
comment piece which argued that Shriver’s speech was “a celebration of the 
unfettered exploitation of the experiences of others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/as-lionel-shriver-made-light-of-identity-i-had-no-choice-but-to-walk-out-on-her>
, under the guise of fiction”.

Lionel Shriver's full speech: 'I hope the concept of cultural appropriation is 
a passing fad'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/lionel-shrivers-full-speech-i-hope-the-concept-of-cultural-appropriation-is-a-passing-fad>
The argument is one of the most pointed yet in a debate that has a long 
history across literature, music, art and performance. While fiction might be 
the catalyst for this discussion, in the eyes of Abdel-Magied and others the 
issues are deeply rooted in real-world politics and a long history.

The image of the blackface minstrel artist of 1830s America – the white 
performer painted up to look like a caricature of an African-American person 
and performing comic skits – is perhaps the most oft-invoked example of 
cultural appropriation from history.The racial dynamic of minstrelsy was complex
 <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/foster/sfeature/sf_minstrelsy.html#> – it was 
performed by African-American and Anglo actors alike – but while 
African-American performers often sought to gain financial security from the 
practice and in some cases use their platform tocounter negative public 
stereotypes of themselves 
<http://exhibits.lib.usf.edu/exhibits/show/minstrelsy/jimcrow-to-jolson/african-american-performers>
, white performers reinforced those stereotypes. This occurred within a society 
which still had not abolished slavery, and in which the political power dynamic 
was very much racialized. As the civil rights movement grew, so did criticism 
of white people attempting to exploit the images and experiences of people of 
colour for social and financial gain.

This pattern is repeated around the world, particularly in places that 
experienced colonisation and slavery, such as India, Australia and South 
Africa. As scholars, artists, activists and writers of colour fought to gain 
access to predominantly white institutions and public spaces, and gained 
visibility in the cultural sphere, they began to criticise the inaccurate 
representations of themselves they saw created by and for the profit of others.

The issue has been heavily explored within the academies but has gathered 
momentum in popular culture over the past decade. It underpins criticism of, 
among other things, Iggy Azalea’s “sonic blackness 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/07/15/iggy_azaleas_post_racial_mess_americas_oldest_race_tale_remixed/>
”, Coldplay’s “myopic construction of India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/01/coldplay-beyonce-hymn-for-the-weekend-cultural-appropriation-india>
” in their music videos, andMiley Cyrus’s dance moves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/27/miley-cyrus-twerking-cultural-appropriation>
. Director Cameron Crowe recently apologised for casting Anglo-American actor 
Emma Stone asa “part-Asian” character 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/03/cameron-crowe-apologises-for-casting-emma-stone-as-part-asian-in-aloha>
 in the 2015 film Aloha – not the first time a white actor has been cast toplay 
a character from a different racial background 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/speakeasy/2014/04/08/the-mickey-rooney-role-nobody-wants-to-talk-about/>
 in mainstream cinema. The argument has been assisted particularly by the
feminist community’s focus on “intersectionality” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/23/in-defence-of-intersectionality>
 – crudely the idea that discrimination takes on different forms depending on 
the race, class and/or gender of the person discriminated against.

The charge of “cultural appropriation” is not confined to fiction, but at the 
moment that’s perhaps the most hotly contested terrain. In March, Harry Potter 
author JK Rowling was accused of appropriating the “living tradition of a 
marginalised people” after a story published to herPottermore 
<https://www.pottermore.com/> website drew upon Navajo narratives about 
skinwalkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/09/jk-rowling-under-fire-for-appropriating-navajo-tradition-history-of-magic-in-north-america-pottermore>
. Shriver herself mentioned the case of white British author Chris Cleave, 
whose novel The Other Hand is partly narrated by the character of a teenage 
Nigerian girl. “In principle, I admire his courage,” Shriver said. She then 
went on to detailreviewer Margot Kaminski’s concerns 
<http://www.sfgate.com/books/article/Little-Bee-by-Chris-Cleave-3168139.php> 
that Cleave was “exploiting” the character, that he ought to be “taking special 
care” with representing an experience that was not his own.

Shriver took aim at the suggestion that an author should not “use” a character 
they created for the service of a plot they imagined. “Of course he’s using 
them for his plot!” she said. “How could he not? They are his characters, to be 
manipulated at his whim, to fulfil whatever purpose he cares to put them to.

As Lionel Shriver made light of identity, I had no choice but to walk out on 
her | Yassmin Abdel-Magied
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/as-lionel-shriver-made-light-of-identity-i-had-no-choice-but-to-walk-out-on-her>
“What boundaries around our own lives are we mandated to remain within?” asked 
Shriver. “I would argue that any story you canmake yours is yours to tell, and 
trying to push the boundaries of the author’s personal experience is part of a 
fiction writer’s job.”

While it seems obvious that writers of fiction will endeavour to write from 
perspectives that are not their own, many writers of colour argue there is a 
direct relationship between the difficulties they face trying to make headway 
in the literary industry and the success of white writers who depict people of 
colour in their fiction and who go on to build a successful literary career off 
that. The difference between cultural representation and cultural 
appropriation, by this logic, lies in the white writer telling stories (and 
therefore taking publishing opportunities) that would be better suited to a 
writer of colour.

Some writers argue that it works in reverse, too. In an event for the Guardian 
in November last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/30/marlon-james-writers-of-colour-pander-white-woman-man-booker-event-brief-history-seven-killings>
, Booker Prize-winning author Marlon James said publishers too often “pander to 
the white woman” (the majority of the book-buying public), causing writers of 
colour to do the same. In a Facebook post responding to novelist Claire Vaye 
Watkins’widely circulated essay On Pandering 
<http://www.tinhouse.com/blog/41314/on-pandering.html>, James said that the 
kind of story favoured by publishers and awards committees – “bored suburban 
white woman in the middle of ennui experiences keenly observed epiphany” – 
pushed writers of colour into literary conformity for fear of losing out on a 
book deal.

Speaking to Guardian Australia, Indigenous Australian author and Miles 
Franklin winner Kim Scott says it’s crucial to listen to the voices of 
marginalised people who may not be given enough space to tell their own 
stories. “Stories are offerings; they’re about opening up interior worlds in 
the interests of expanding the shared world and the shared sense of community. 
So if there’s many voices saying we need more of ‘us’ speaking ‘our’ stories, 
from wherever they’re saying that, then that needs to be listened to.”

If there’s many voices saying we need more of ‘us’ speaking ‘our’ stories, 
then that needs to be listened to
Kim Scott, author 
Omar Musa, the Malaysian-Australian poet, rapper and novelist, told Guardian 
Australia: “There is a history of stereotypes being perpetuated by white 
writers and very, very reductive narratives. People are just generally a lot 
more wary of that.”


Musa says white writers should read, support and promote the work of writers 
of colour before attempting to encroach on that space themselves, if that is 
something they want to do. But he admits he finds the issue difficult; the 
suggestion that writers shouldn’t move outside the boundaries of their own 
experiences comes into direct conflict with what he sees as the purpose of 
fiction: to empathise with and understand other people’s lives.

If you’re going to write from someone else’s perspective, Musa says, it’s 
important to avoid stereotypes, especially “if you want to make the characters 
rich and flawed as a good character should be”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-cultural-appropriation-why-lionel-shrivers-speech-touched-a-nerve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff18fe39b0ecb8571512e1f677e73cf8980833a2a%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20cultural%20appropriation%3A%20why%20Lionel%20Shriver's%20speech%20touched%20a%20nerve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-cultural-appropriation-why-lionel-shrivers-speech-touched-a-nerve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20cultural%20appropriation%3A%20why%20Lionel%20Shriver%27s%20speech%20touched%20a%20nerve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-cultural-appropriation-why-lionel-shrivers-speech-touched-a-nerve%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff18fe39b0ecb8571512e1f677e73cf8980833a2a%2F0_0_4928_3264%2F4928.jpg>
 Australian author Maxine Beneba Clarke. ‘There are two schools of thought 
about [cultural appropriation] … I don’t know what the answer is but I can 
understand both perspectives.’ Photograph: Nicholas Walton-Healey 
Musa has his own experience of writing across the cultural divide. His first 
novel, Here Come The Dogs, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jul/23/here-come-the-dogs-by-omar-musa-review-street-poetry-committed-to-the-page>
was told from the perspective of a character with a Samoan background. Musa 
says accepting criticism is a crucial part of this process: “There will be 
people who will tell you that maybe you didn’t quite get this right, and you 
just have to cop that flack.”

Maxine Beneba Clarke is an Australian-based writer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/27/melbourne-writers-festival-maxine-beneba-clarke-says-non-white-children-rendered-invisible>
 of African-Caribbean descent. Her memoir The Hate Race was prompted by a 
torrent of racial abuse; her collection of short stories, Foreign Soil, was 
published to great acclaim after she won the Victorian Premier’s Literary award 
for an unpublished manuscript in 2013. “I think there are two circumstances in 
which I’ve written outside of the African diaspora,” she says. “In both cases 
they were pieces of short fiction and the process of writing them took several 
years, just because of that consultation.”

Beneba Clarke believes consultation is crucial, but so is examining your own 
impulse to write from the perspective of another. “What does it mean to be a 
writer who is not a minority writer and wanting to diversify your literature? 
How do you do that? I think that was the opportunity for conversation that was 
missed [in Shriver’s speech] ... How do we feel about writing each other’s 
stories and how do we go about it? What’s the respectful way to go about it?

There will be people who will tell you that maybe you didn’t quite get this 
right, and you just have to cop that flack
Omar Musa, poet, rapper and novelist 
“In some ways it comes down to personal ethics,” she says. “Whether you feel 
you are doing no harm; whether you feel you are doing it sensitively; and, I 
suppose, whether the publisher or the reader agrees that you have done it 
sensitively.”

Helen Young from the University of Sydney English department says fiction can 
have a very real impact on marginalised people. “Individual books have an 
impact on individual lives, but representation overall creates a space and an 
environment in which people can feel like it’s OK to be who they are.”


The politics of representation is a huge issue in the science fiction and 
fantasy worlds too, says Young. This was exemplified by the recent campaigns 
againsta perceived leftwing bias in the Hugo awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/21/hugo-awards-winners-nk-jemisin-sad-rabid-puppies>
, in which disgruntled rightwing science fiction and fantasy writers argued the 
awards were being diminished by what they saw as the tendency of voters to 
prefer works “merely about racial prejudice and exploitation” and the like over 
traditional swashbuckling adventures.

Referring to the JK Rowling <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> 
incident, Young says just because fantasy is often thought of as escapist, 
doesn’t mean those stories don’t matter, or that authors should not treat the 
source of their inspiration with respect. “They’re still the lived, sacred 
stories of living cultures,” she says. “They’re the beliefs of real people. So 
if from a western perspective you go, ‘oh well, it’s just mythology, I can do 
whatever I like with it’, that’s a problem.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-cultural-appropriation-why-lionel-shrivers-speech-touched-a-nerve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaeea9bb72dd68b1b3087f2ac95147ea992fb122%2F0_656_2933_3662%2F2933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20cultural%20appropriation%3A%20why%20Lionel%20Shriver's%20speech%20touched%20a%20nerve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-cultural-appropriation-why-lionel-shrivers-speech-touched-a-nerve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20cultural%20appropriation%3A%20why%20Lionel%20Shriver%27s%20speech%20touched%20a%20nerve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwe-need-to-talk-about-cultural-appropriation-why-lionel-shrivers-speech-touched-a-nerve%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaeea9bb72dd68b1b3087f2ac95147ea992fb122%2F0_656_2933_3662%2F2933.jpg>
 Kate Grenville said she felt writing Indigenous characters was ‘beyond’ her 
when she wrote The Secret River. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
In some respects, the ground seems to be shifting. When Kate Grenville wrote 
her highly acclaimed historical novel about colonial Australia, The Secret 
River, in 2005, she avoided writing from the perspective of Indigenous 
characters because she felt it was “beyond” her.Speaking to Ramona Koval on ABC 
radio 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/booksandwriting/kate-grenville/3629894>
, she said: “What I didn’t want to do was step into the heads of any of the 
Aboriginal characters. I think that kind of appropriation ... there’s been too 
much of that in our writing.” In her novel The Lieutenant, the sequel to The 
Secret River, however, Grenville did venture into depicting more rounded 
Indigenous characters, but only afterdeep and careful engagement with the 
historical records <http://kategrenville.com/node/47> upon which her characters 
were based.


Identity politics doesn’t deserve Lionel Shriver’s contempt, but it can be 
limiting | Nesrine Malik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/identity-politics-lionel-shriver-author-cultural-appropriation>
All the writers who spoke to Guardian Australia say they believe that 
discussing the issue of cultural appropriation is crucial, but the tenor of 
that discussion matters. They say that making a mockery of marginalised 
people’s concerns about representation and appropriation does not constitute a 
constructive discussion.


Scott, who has previously suggested a moratorium on white authors writing 
about Indigenous Australia, says white writers could use fiction itself to 
explore the tension about representation. “Even the desire to inhabit the 
consciousness of the other, that can be explored in story.”


For Musa, the shift needs to go beyond books: “You probably can’t have a 
change in literary culture without a change in the whole culture of the 
country,” he says.


On the question of progress, in Australia at least, Beneba Clarke says: “There 
are two schools of thought about this: that Australian literature is not 
diverse enough for Anglo-Australian writers to be even considering writing from 
other cultures, and the other school of thought is, well, how do we diversify 
literature then, given that most of our writers are Anglo-Australian? Are we 
locking ourselves into an inevitably whitewashed world of literature?

“And I don’t really subscribe to either view; I don’t know what the answer is 
but I can understand both perspectives. But I think what I absolutely can’t 
understand is disregard for any kind of consultation and an inability to 
understand when people of colour are outraged.”

• This article has been amended to clarify that the Hugo awards are voted on 
by the public.
 