
Makeup tutorials have been big business for years. And with so many of them 
now out there, there’s a pressure to make them ever bolder. Recent Youtube 
videos show women usingfood  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F69Y-oOaPgI>(such 
as hummus and jam) as makeup <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F69Y-oOaPgI>, 
others show women attempting to put on full faces ofmakeup while high 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o6dmu3mS8z8> – and some show beauty vloggers 
recording themselves attempting to applymakeup without using mirror 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJG7CQdd5_k>s. It was all fun and games until 
last week, when makeup artist Lilia Mouline, a host on Moroccan public channel 
2M’s show Sabahiyat, conducted a tutorial on how to cover bruises from domestic 
violence.

“Good morning!” Mouline begins. “Today, we’re going to move to a topic that is 
saddening, but on the occasion of theInternational Day for the Elimination of 
Violence Against Women <http://www.un.org/en/events/endviolenceday/>, I’m going 
to show you the makeup that can cover bruises from the hits a woman may 
experience. It’s a topic we shouldn’t even have to discuss, but unfortunately, 
this is what it is.”

Moroccan state TV shows women how to hide domestic violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/27/moroccan-state-tv-shows-women-how-to-hide-domestic-violence>
Beside her sits a model with a faint smile and “cinematic bruises”. Mouline 
takes out a multi-corrector concealer pallet: “We use the green corrector for 
the redder parts of the bruise,” she says. “We are then going to take this 
orange corrector, and apply to the bluer parts,” she continues. The tutorial 
goes on for more than seven minutes and concludes with Mouline wishing the 
victims of domestic violence abuse “better days”.

Two days after the episode aired, screenshots of the makeup tutorial began 
circulating on social media inMorocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco>. Within minutes, users had watched 
the full segment and, before 2M could take the video down, had copied it and 
started circulating it.

The reaction was swift and strong. On Twitter, Aida Alami w 
<https://twitter.com/AidaAlami/status/802177069639761920>rote: “Next week, a 
segment on the benefits of going to the spa after rape?”Another user tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/GhizlaneRadi/status/802162623227760644>: “2M teaches you 
how to be a battered, but sexy woman.” And “God is great, beat your women under 
the patronage of the Moroccan regime,”tweeted another <http://God is great, 
beat your women under the patronage of the Moroccan regime>, alongside several 
crying laughing emojis. 2M published a statement in French and Arabic on its 
Facebook page <https://t.co/hRo2t6crmZ>, which was later read on the evening 
news. In it, the channel apologised and acknowledged the segment was an “error 
of judgment”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fsamia.errazzouki%2Fvideos%2Fvb.100001324214826%2F1179683112085818%2F%3Ftype%3D2%26theater&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fsamia.errazzouki%2Fvideos%2Fvb.100001324214826%2F1179683112085818%2F%3Ftype%3D2%26theater>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fsamia.errazzouki%2Fvideos%2Fvb.100001324214826%2F1179683112085818%2F%3Ftype%3D2%26theater&media=>
But for many Moroccans, this apology was not enough and a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/haca-don-t-cover-domestic-violence-with-makeup?recruiter=21569190&utm_source=share_for_starters&utm_medium=copyLink>
 was created, which now has nearly 3,000 signatures, calling on Morocco’s High 
Authority of Audiovisual Communication (Haca) to “severely sanction” 2M and 
Sabahiyat. It adds that, instead of covering up domestic violence, it is time 
to “condemn the aggressor!” Should Haca decide to take action, it could span 
from a fine to the suspension of the show.

The question on everyone’s mind is: who actually thought this was a good idea? 
Sabahiyat is hosted almost entirely by Moroccan women and 2M’s editorial 
division is led by a French-Moroccan woman. The fact is that domestic violence 
is deeply normalised in the country, and backed up by a legal and justice 
system with endless loopholes.As Human Rights Watch pointed out earlier this 
year in a letter 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/02/15/letter-human-rights-watch-government-morocco-domestic-violence-law-reforms>
 addressed to the minister for solidarity, women, family and social development,
Bassima Hakkaoui 
<http://www.forbesmiddleeast.com/en/lists/people/pname/bassima-hakkaoui/pid/90363/>
, Morocco doesn’t even recognise domestic violence as a crime in its penal 
code. And Hakkaoui herself oncepublicly stated 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2013/03/201332719369713593.html> that 
if a rape victim married her rapist, it “would cause no real harm”.

Even as outrage poured forth in response to the domestic-violence makeup 
tutorial, in terms of the normalisation of violence against women, it was 
business as usual elsewhere. Last weekend, for instance, dozens of Moroccan 
women protested in front of the French consulate in Casablanca, demanding the 
release of pop star Saad Lamjarred 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/28/singer-who-fled-brooklyn-rape-case-busted-in-paris-sex-assault/>
, who has been imprisoned in France after being charged with “aggravated rape”. 
Videos circulated of women denouncing his arrest. “We’re with you, Saad 
Lmjarred. With our hearts, we can’t even sleep any more,” one woman said. Even 
one of the hosts on Sabahiyat, Leila Hadioui,published a petition 
<https://www.facebook.com/leila.hadioui/posts/10154849624298816?pnref=story> 
calling for his release. And, in an unexpected plot twist,King Mohammed VI of 
Morocco said 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/morocco-king-cover-legal-cost-saad-lamjarred-french-rape-case-a7392746.html>
 he will “cover the costs” of legal representation for Lamjarred.

Morocco may think of itself as a “pioneer” and “trailblazer” when it comes to 
women’s rights in the Middle East and North Africa, with observers pointing to 
Morocco’sreformed personal status code law 
<http://sas.rutgers.edu/news-events/research-news/1273-the-new-dynamics-of-islam-and-feminism-in-morocco>
, which defines the state’s role in familial affairs, such as marriage, divorce 
and inheritance, as a “regional model”, or how the king’s wife, Princess Lalla 
Salma dresses in modern three-piece Chanel suits. But this is a moment for a 
serious, and engaging national conversation among Moroccan women of all classes 
and backgrounds. It’s time to shed the baggage of normalisation. Moroccan women 
have succeeded in pushing the national conversation before, whether it was on 
personal status code law reforms ordemanding a change in archaic laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/feb/07/ngo-change-morocco-rape-law>
 – and they can do it again.
 