
We all have memories, as far as I can remember. But where do these memories 
come from and how do they get made?

People often compare the brain to a computer, but the brain doesn’t have USB 
slots that allow you to pick up new information by jamming a flash drive in 
your ear. That would be convenient, if a little painful.

So where do we get all this information sloshing around in our skulls? You 
might imagine human memory is a bit like a Santa’s sack filled with life 
events, song lyrics and the first half of jokes. But in truth, “memory” is not 
one single solid thing. It is a term covering lots of types of recollections 
that are surprisingly distinct, and used constantly in different combinations 
by a typical human.

Short-term memory – like writing your name with a sparkler 

We’ve all heard about short-term and long-term memory. While people tend to 
use the phrase “short-term memory” to refer to our recall of things that 
happened recently – in the last hour or day – technically speaking, it’s 
actually far more fleeting. Short-term memory typicallylasts between 15 and 30 
seconds <http://www.simplypsychology.org/short-term-memory.html>: it’s a bit 
like writing your name in the air with a sparkler. Any memory that can be 
recalled after that length of time is a long-term memory.

In computer terms, short-term memory is like the RAM 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random-access_memory> – it holds the information 
we’re currently working with or using for cognitive tasks (thinking). This can 
be new information delivered by our senses, for example, or old information 
retrieved from the long-term memory. Neuroscientists theorise that all this 
thinking is supported by patterns of neuron activity in theprefrontal cortex 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1692423/> (that bit at the front 
of your brain).

Long-term memory - information becomes a physical ‘thing’

Luckily, for memories we actually want to keep, there’s also long-term memory. 
If short-term memory is the RAM of a computer, long-term memory is the hard 
drive, which keeps everything from your failed screenplays to Minesweeper 
scores.

Unlike short-term memories, long-term memories have a physical presence in the 
brain, and aren’t dependant purely on specific patterns of activity. Neurons 
make new physical connections andsynapses 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synapse> with each other when a new long-term 
memory is formed. This connection endures whether it’s being used or not.

Long-term memory can be split into explicit and implicit memory 
<http://psychology.about.com/od/memory/a/implicit-and-explicit-memory.htm>. 
Implicit memories include habits and skills that we can do automatically, such 
as rolling a cigarette, driving a car, forging your boss’s signature on expense 
forms.

Explicit memories are things we’re consciously aware of and are intentionally 
trying to remember. There are two kinds of explicit memory:episodic and semantic
 <http://www.human-memory.net/types_episodic.html>. Episodic memory is memory 
for things and events that happened to you. Semantic memory is for more general 
knowledge. Knowing Paris is the capital of France is a semantic memory, 
remembering being sick on your trip to Paris is an episodic memory.

Encoding – a terrifyingly complex tapestry in real time

When we actually want to learn something, it is long-term memories we are 
interested in. So how are they formed? The first step is to encode a piece of 
information – otherwise it quickly disappears, like breath on a mirror.

Information is channelled to the hippocampus 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673669907181>, the brain 
region crucial for the formation of new memories and one of the only places in 
the brain where brand new neurons are regularly generated. The hippocampus 
links all of the relevant information together and encodes it into a new memory 
by forming new synapses. It’s basically like someone knitting a terrifyingly 
complex tapestry in real time.

But not all information is equal in the eyes of the hippocampus. “Important” 
things are encoded more readily and effectively than routine or 
incomprehensible things, like an uneventful daily commute, or the lyrics of a 
dance song in a language you don’t recognise. The hippocampus will prioritise 
those that have been rehearsed repeatedly in the short-term memory, or those 
with astrong emotional component 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotion_and_memory>. The hippocampus is 
selective because it is very busy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fwhat-happens-in-your-brain-when-you-make-a-memory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442323081080%2F72a0fc92-5f3e-42bd-9141-3e72d7dbbdc4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happens%20in%20your%20brain%20when%20you%20make%20a%20memory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fwhat-happens-in-your-brain-when-you-make-a-memory%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happens%20in%20your%20brain%20when%20you%20make%20a%20memory%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fwhat-happens-in-your-brain-when-you-make-a-memory%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442323081080%2F72a0fc92-5f3e-42bd-9141-3e72d7dbbdc4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Long-term memories have an actual physical presence in the brain. Neurons make 
new physical connections and synapses with each other when a new long-term 
memory is formed. Illustration: Lauren Humphrey 
Finding a home for your memories 

Coding a memory is all well and good, but it is useless if it has nowhere to 
go. Finding a storage place is the next step.

Newer memories, once consolidated 
<http://www.human-memory.net/processes_consolidation.html>, appear to reside in 
the hippocampus for a while. But as more memories are formed, the neurons that 
represent a specific memorymigrate further into the cortex 
<http://download.springer.com/static/pdf/296/art%253A10.1007%252Fs00441-007-0478-3.pdf?originUrl=http%3A%2F%2Flink.springer.com%2Farticle%2F10.1007%2Fs00441-007-0478-3&token2=exp=1441289161~acl=%2Fstatic%2Fpdf%2F296%2Fart%25253A10.1007%25252Fs00441-007-0478-3.pdf%3ForiginUrl%3Dhttp%253A%252F%252Flink.springer.com%252Farticle%252F10.1007%252Fs00441-007-0478-3*~hmac=0fbcf80a6d6d00e8fbebac4153fbedf1c1d3e3ecd3782c88295f4bddc2fa4e06>
. As a result, memories are stored throughout the brain. It’s a bit like the 
internet, which is made of information spread all across the planet and 
accessed via countless connections.

Similar memories tend to clump together – spoken memories near the language 
centres, visual memories near the visual cortex – and there’s a lot of 
redundancy too; you can have several memories for the same thing. Every time 
they are activated they are strengthened. Human memories aren’t stored like 
books in a library; they’re constantly being updated and tweaked.

Recalling memories you’ve forgotten you forgot 

So how do you go about getting the bits you need out of this weird, 
ever-shifting library of information? It might seem as though lots of the 
so-called long-term memories have actually turned to dust because there are 
plenty of things you’ve forgotten: old addresses, passwords, deadlines for 
articles about the memory system that you promised to write.

The problem here is not that it has disappeared, but rather that you can’t 
recall it. It’s a bit like losing a glove – you still own a glove, it’s in your 
home somewhere, but you can’t use it.

Recall is a very impressive but slightly mysterious process. When we want to 
access a memory from the dark recesses of our brain, signals from our frontal 
cortex link to that memory via uncertain means, and the memory is reconstructed 
from the information available. The more often you use the memory, the easier 
it is to find.

How to treat your brain during revision time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2012/nov/06/how-your-brain-likes-to-revise>
Revising and remembering is a crucial part of the learning process. And there 
are things you can do to make it easier – some stranger than others. Being in 
the presence ofsome of the elements from the original memory 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Context-dependent_memory> helps retrieval. For 
example, if you learned something while in a swimming pool, you’ll remember it 
better while in a swimming pool at a later date (they’ve actually shown this 
<http://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar_url?url=http://www.niu.edu/user/tj0dgw1/classes/411/GoddenBaddeley1975.pdf&hl=en&sa=X&scisig=AAGBfm3yEDUoSUxzU7kLqjh88hpQ01kiDg&nossl=1&oi=scholarr&ved=0CB8QgAMoADAAahUKEwihjMPnp-fHAhUmgdsKHYkqA4M>
).

Is there such a thing as too many memories? Maybe. Ever tried to learn a new 
phone number and then found it impossible to remember the old one, even though 
you had it for years? Constantly updating memories can supposedly “supplant” 
existing ones, so you end up remembering things differently. This is known as 
“interference” and can lead toforgetting 
<http://www.simplypsychology.org/forgetting.html>. As far as I can recall.

This blog is the first of a new series exploring the psychology and 
neuroscience of learning. Get involved with theUse your head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/use-your-head> series by joining 
the discussion on #useyourhead or pitching your ideas to
natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com <mailto:natalie.gil.casual@theguardian.com>

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 