
When Barack Obama was inaugurated in January 2009, he made it clear that 
gender equality was high on his agenda. The very first piece of legislation he 
signed was theLilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/30/obama-lilly-ledbetter-equal-pay>
, which allowed workers greater latitude to sue their employers for equal pay. 
Since then, his administration has made sexism and violence against women 
priorities; creating the White House Council on Women and Girls and launching 
theIt’s On Us campaign to tackle sexual assault on college campuses 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/09/19/president-obama-launches-its-us-campaign-end-sexual-assault-campus>
.

As his time in office draws to a close, Obama has underlined his commitment to 
gender equality by convening the first everWhite House summit on the United 
State of Women <http://www.theunitedstateofwomen.org/>, which was held in 
Washington DC this week. It was a chance to take stock of the current state of 
women’s rights in America, as well as further afield, and to plan for the 
future.

The Walter E Washington Convention Centre was buzzing with energy and purpose 
as attendees lined up, from as early as 6.30am, around several blocks to get 
in. Even the queue was inspiring – the woman behind me explained to her 
neighbour how her organisation uses mentor coaching to improve outcomes for 
at-risk young women. Inside, speakers fromGloria Steinem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gloria-steinem> to Amy Poehler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/dec/13/amy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy>
 mingled and shared their stories. There was an enormous sense of solidarity, 
with a rousing cheer when House Democratic leaderNancy Pelosi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/mar/26/nancy-pelosi-politician-speaker> 
described standing up to an early experience of sexism as a congresswoman in an 
overwhelmingly male-dominated government.

The summit saw leading political, cultural and campaigning figures come 
together to share their experiences, with a focus on action: sharing strategies 
and techniques that are already working in some areas in the hope that they may 
be successful further afield.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fwhite-house-summit-women-obamas-oprah%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ff52ec288e810ea21bf5675ac2332d1e98eaf6d%2F0_27_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20I%20learned%20from%20the%20White%20House's%20first%20summit%20on%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fwhite-house-summit-women-obamas-oprah%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20I%20learned%20from%20the%20White%20House%27s%20first%20summit%20on%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fwhite-house-summit-women-obamas-oprah%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ff52ec288e810ea21bf5675ac2332d1e98eaf6d%2F0_27_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Michelle Obama in conversation with Oprah Winfrey at the summit. Photograph: 
Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 
Vice-president Joe Biden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/joebiden> spoke 
passionately about the importance of shattering the myths and misconceptions 
surrounding rape. He recalled a college survivor he had met who, when told by 
her student adviser that what she had described sounded like rape, said it 
couldn’t have been, because “I knew him”. Changing the law, Biden said, is not 
enough – we have to change a national culture that condones and promotes 
violence against women.

There were sobering statistics that backed up Biden’s calls for a cultural 
shift. Despite the fact that just4% of US companies have female CEOs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/29/women-in-uk-boardrooms-executive-directors-ftse-100-companies>
, a recent poll found that many still blame women themselves for the problem. 
41% of Americans, we heard, believe that “women hold themselves back in the 
corporate world”. Laurie Fabiano, President of theTory Burch Foundation 
<http://www.toryburchfoundation.org/>, revealed that despite being drivers of 
the economy, women receive just one in every 23 dollars of business loans.

Obama sets tone at United State of Women and renews call for equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/obama-speech-united-state-women-summit-gender-equality>
Many attendees spoke with grief about the recent shooting in Orlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/orlando-terror-attack>, and the importance 
of an intersectional approach to gender inequality; tackling it alongside 
issues such as racism, homophobia, transphobia, classism, ageism and disablism. 
Joanne Smith, executive director of Girls for Gender Equity, spoke passionately 
about the need for domestic violence to inform gun control policy, because guns 
are the most common weapon used by men to kill their partners. Bamby Salcedo, 
president and CEO of theTransLatin@ Coalition 
<http://www.translatinacoalition.org/>, said that “systems within our 
governments, organisations and homes fail trans women of colour who are 
murdered simply for living their lives authentically”, and stressed that the 
visibility of trans women in the mainstream media, while positive, doesn’t 
automatically solve the wider problems of prejudice and violence.

There was talk of American women’s struggle for control of their reproductive 
health, withPlanned Parenthood <https://www.plannedparenthood.org/> President 
Cecile Richards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/08/cecile-richards-planned-parenthood-roe-v-wade-republicans>
 pointing out that women in America are now six times more likely to get a 
college degree than they were before birth control became legal. President 
Obama later touched on the same subject, saying: “A society that does not give 
women control over their own bodies is a society that will not work.”

Obama also spoke passionately about the importance of shattering gender 
stereotypes, citing the negative impact they have on both men and women.He said 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oxHAG60z9ZMnd>: 

We’re still boxed in by stereotypes about how men and women should behave… We 
need to keep changing the attitude that raises our girls to be demure and our 
boys to be assertive. That criticises our daughters for speaking out and our 
sons for shedding a tear. We need to change the attitude that punishes women 
for their sexuality but gives men a pat on the back for theirs. We need to 
change an internet where women are routinely harassed and threatened when they 
go online. We need to keep changing the attitude that congratulates men for 
changing a diaper, stigmatises full-time dads and penalises working moms … We 
need to keep changing a culture that shines a particularly unforgiving light on 
women and girls of colour. About how they look. About how they feel. About what 
they should or should not do.”

The most exciting aspect of the summit was the sharing of tried-and-tested 
strategies for change, from Reverend Traci Jackson Antoine’s description of 
working with faith leaders as part of a coordinated response to domestic 
violence; to Neil Irvin, executive director ofMen Can Stop Rape 
<http://www.mencanstoprape.org/>, who argued: “We need to teach social and 
emotional intelligence in an everyday, ongoing basis in the lives of adolescent 
boys”. Kim Wells, from theCorporate Alliance to End Partner Violence 
<http://www.caepv.org/>, shared innovative techniques for involving 
corporations in the battle, pointing out the powerful business case for solving 
a problem that costs billions of dollars in lost employee productivity.

For a room full of activists and frontline workers, First Lady Michelle 
Obama’s conversation with Oprah Winfrey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LCmwkjSzr2g> provided strength and solace, as 
she urged self-care and valuing your own time and worth. “If you don’t 
prioritise yourself,” she said, “you keep falling lower and lower on the list 
of priorities”. When it comes to experiencing abuse on social media, she said: 
“There are times when you just can’t be reading all that.” And speaking about 
the memory of waving her girls off to school for the first time with their 
secret service agents in the car, she remembered wondering how the experience 
would impact them, and realising: “If I was going to protect them, I needed to 
protect myself.”

She also spoke about the role men can play in achieving gender equality, 
saying:

Be better. Just be better. Be good fathers. Provide solid examples of what it 
means to be a good man in the world. Be better husbands. Be a part of your 
family’s life. Do the dishes. Don’t ‘babysit’ your own children…

Be a better employer. When you are sitting at a seat of power and you look 
around and just see men like you… be better.”

But perhaps the biggest cheer of the day came in response to President Obama, 
who said: “I may be a little greyer than I was eight years ago, but this is 
what a feminist looks like”.
 