
In the mood for adventure? Here’s a ready-made one waiting to be activated. 
Just add a flight to Reykjavik, some atrocious weather and Kommi Hermannsson, 
an Icelandic search and rescue veteran who had the bright idea of taking people 
out in the worst conditions imaginable. He calls it Storm Hike.

In the first 70 days of 2015, Iceland was buffeted by 53 storms – with winds 
in excess of 72km an hour. Many of the storms were accompanied by heavy 
snowfalls. The search and rescue teams were busy. And just last month,four 
British lads made headlines 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/iceland/12075457/British-trekkers-on-thin-ice-as-they-call-out-rescue-teams-three-times.html>
 when they had to be rescued three times. They had made a slick advance video 
announcing that they would be the first to cross Iceland on foot in winter. 
They were wrong on all counts.

When I arrive in Reykjavik, the sky is almost clear. Kommi is apologetic. 
January in Iceland is usually meteorologically horrific. “I had the idea of 
Storm Hike because travel businesses were cancelling trips and I felt storms 
could be fun.”

We drive out of the city into a world of black lava and white snow. Kommi 
assures me it is a mild day. “I choose the storms carefully – good whiteouts – 
and let people experience disorientation, anxiety and excitement. We walk for a 
few hours, dig a snow cave, then tell some stories over a hot chocolate.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb47d00b82b6eda494eccf9d3763710ca20e3a2c%2F0_89_3024_1986%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20good%20weather%20is%20bad%20news%3A%20a%20storm%20adventure%20in%20Iceland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20good%20weather%20is%20bad%20news%3A%20a%20storm%20adventure%20in%20Iceland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb47d00b82b6eda494eccf9d3763710ca20e3a2c%2F0_89_3024_1986%2F3024.jpg>
 Kommi, Kevin’s guide, at the entrance to the cave. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
But for now Kommi can’t give me that kind of adventure. In the few hours of 
daylight, we drive a short way to the Seltún geothermal field, south of 
Reykjavik. Its pools of boiling water, bubbling mud and hissing gas are sitting 
on a magma chamber that will one day split, sweeping away a large slice of the 
capital. Kommi knows this because a few years ago his brother Dofri, then a 
politician, had a visit from a clairvoyant who’d had terrible visions of lava 
rivers under Reykjavik. Dofri consulted a geologist. “It will happen,” they 
said. “We just don’t know when.”

Kommi chuckles. Icelanders live in a hostile landscape on top of a rift that 
will cause calamity at some unspecifiable point. That does something to your 
psyche – as well as your psychics. Such people might be expected to have 
interesting views on adventure. I tell Kommi that strolling around the lava 
fields, lovely as it is, does not fulfil my requirements. I want a blizzard. I 
want danger. He nods: “I once worked out a simple equation for an adventure. It 
is an event with two possible outcomes, only one of which is positive.”

He suggests we visit a nearby cave, a natural subterranean pipe left by 
fast-flowing lava. “There are around 600 that we know about.”

Called Leiðarendi, it is used by tour groups. “But,” he assures me, “they just 
explore the easier parts. We’ll do the whole thing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5348e354f01f1ac3329abfbce18d536e6e68f01c%2F0_604_4032_2420%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20good%20weather%20is%20bad%20news%3A%20a%20storm%20adventure%20in%20Iceland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20good%20weather%20is%20bad%20news%3A%20a%20storm%20adventure%20in%20Iceland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5348e354f01f1ac3329abfbce18d536e6e68f01c%2F0_604_4032_2420%2F4032.jpg>
 Kommi wriggles through a cave with a roof covered in three-inch lava nails. 
Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Can anything go wrong? Could there be a bad outcome? Kommi chuckles.

The entrance is a snow hole in a lava field. Kommi drops a rope to steady our 
descent. Almost immediately we’re in a low cavern that curls away into 
darkness. The roof is spiky with lava stalactites, the floor slick with ice. We 
go slowly, and soon hear a tour group coming the other way. “Let’s wait and let 
them pass,” says Kommi. “There’s something I want to show you.”

When the line of people has passed, Kommi leads me behind a pile of roof-fall 
rubble to a small, hidden black hole. “We go this way.”

We haul ourselves along in press-up position, to save our knees being ripped 
apart by jagged lava, and come to a fence of ice stalactites that we must 
wriggle through. Is this the possible bad outcome – being impaled on a giant 
ice spike? We stop to admire what is a magical hall of mirrors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ee1ff7052c2d3371f7ae685feef56d19993e41%2F0_395_3024_1817%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20good%20weather%20is%20bad%20news%3A%20a%20storm%20adventure%20in%20Iceland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20good%20weather%20is%20bad%20news%3A%20a%20storm%20adventure%20in%20Iceland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fbad-weather-storm-holiday-iceland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ee1ff7052c2d3371f7ae685feef56d19993e41%2F0_395_3024_1817%2F3024.jpg>
 Kommi and a shard of ice in the lava cave. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
I ask Kommi about those naive British lads. Hadn’t they endangered their 
rescuers? Kommi is surprisingly indulgent. “When I was young I did things like 
that. One of our Old Norse poems, the Hávamál, has the line, ‘He knows alone 
who has wandered wide.’ It basically says staying at home makes you stupid. 
Lots of our mythology is about adventure.”

He picks up a piece of icicle and the tip glows like a beacon in the 
torchlight. “Storm Hike is for people who don’t want to sit at home, whatever 
the weather.”

We set off again, through an even narrower gap. The cave roof is covered in 
three-inch lava nails: it looks like a Hollywood set in which the hero is about 
to become marmalade. I have to commando wriggle. My helmet smacks the roof. My 
headtorch dies. My foot slips and my cheek smacks the rough rock. For a moment 
I’m not in control. Then I reach up for the switch and the torch comes back to 
life.

Further on, where we rejoin the group tour route and can walk upright, I spot 
the dessicated remains of a sheep, a pale white shadow on the black rock. I 
think of that poor creature, probably seeking refuge from a storm, wandering 
in, happy to be out the 72km wind.

Our small adventure is almost over, but as we climb out of the snow hole we 
are already discussing further possibilities. That is something Kommi’s 
equation does not mention: when there’s a positive outcome, it leads, 
inevitably, to another adventure.

• The trip was organised by Wow Air <http://wowair.co.uk/>, which flies to 
Reykjavik from Gatwick from £78 return (and from Bristol from 13 May). Storm 
Hike day trips byIceland Expeditions <http://www.icelandexpeditions.is/> cost 
£79pp. Tours of Seltún and the lava cave cost £127. Accommodation in Reykjavik 
was provided by Alda Hotel (doubles from €138 room-only,aldahotel.is 
<http://aldahotel.is/>). Holiday Extras <http://www.holidayextras.co.uk/> 
provided a night at Gatwick Hilton and lounge access
 