
It is often said that women have been written out of history. We have all 
heard of Alexander Graham Bell and Thomas Edison, but few are familiar with 
their contemporary, Margaret E Knight, a prolific Amerian inventor who held 
over 20 patents and was decorated by Queen Victoria. Knight created her first 
device, a safety mechanism for textile machines, after witnessing a factory 
accident aged just 12. She later invented a machine that created the
flat-bottomed paper bags <http://www.paperhall.org/margareteknight/> still used 
in grocery stores today. When she died in 1914, an obituary described her as a 
“woman Edison”. Somewhat dispiritingly, she has also been described as “the 
most famous 19th-century woman inventor”. But how many of us know her name?

If you were to try and research Knight’s life and work, you might struggle. Her
Wikipedia profile <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margaret_E._Knight> is just 
under 500 words long;Edison’s <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Edison> is 
more than 8,500. Of course, Edison’s contribution to the development of the 
electric light warrants a significant write-up, and his legacy deserves a 
lengthy profile. But his Wikipedia page also contains minute detail about his 
early life, diets and views on religion. By contrast, information on Knight’s 
page is scant, though she too invented an item still widely used today. Her 
profile lacks many details (including any mention of her first invention), 
which are available elsewhere online, particularly onwebsites dedicated to 
commemorating the work of female inventors 
<http://www.women-inventors.com/Margaret-Knight.asp>. That such resources exist 
says a lot about the erasure of women such as Knight from more mainstream 
information sources.

This week, it was revealed that only around 17% of notable profiles 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/live/world-38243211> on Wikipedia are of women. 
While we bemoan the sexist bias that prevented many historic female figures 
from being rightly commemorated and celebrated, there is a risk that history 
may be repeating itself all over again.

Women, you can stop working now. Here's why
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2016/nov/10/women-you-can-stop-working-now-heres-why>
Perhaps the disparity is unsurprising given that only around 15% of 
Wikipedia’s volunteer editors are female 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gender_bias_on_Wikipedia>. Reasons  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gender_bias_on_Wikipedia>suggested for the 
gender gap have ranged from the elitist nature of the “hard-driving hacker 
crowd” to the overt harassment and misogyny faced by female editors on the 
site. When one editor suggested a women-only space on Wikipedia for female 
contributors to support one another and discuss online misogyny, other users
vowed to fight the proposal “to the death” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/10/how-wikipedia-is-hostile-to-women/411619/>
.

The trouble with Wikipedia having such a vast gender gap in its notable 
profiles is that it is one of the most commonly used information sources in the 
world. A 2011 studyfound that 53% of all American internet users 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2011/01/13/wikipedia-past-and-present/> look for 
information on Wikipedia, increasing to almost 70% of college-educated users.
According to web-traffic data company Alexa <http://www.alexa.com/topsites>, it 
is currently the fifth most visited website in the world. For such a popular 
source to present millions of students, researchers and journalists with a 
hugely gender-biased roster of articles could have a real impact on everything, 
from young people’s career aspirations to which high-profile figures are 
invited to speak at conferences and events.

There are ongoing efforts to solve the problem, such as this week’s BBC 100 
Women edit-a-thon <http://www.bbc.com/news/live/world-38243211>. Meanwhile, 
Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales has called for a more inclusive and diverse 
community of editors.Wales has pointed out 
<http://www.theverge.com/2012/7/15/3160926/jimmy-wales-wikipedia-gender-gap-kate-middleton-wedding-dress>
 that the process by which Wikipedia editors decide collectively whether a 
particular topic deserves its own article could lead to biased outcomes when 
those editors are overwhelmingly male. Various projects have been launched to 
try and address the problem, but progress seems slow.

Knight probably wouldn’t have been surprised by the disparity. In her own 
lifetime, she faced sexism and discrimination from men – in particular from 
Charles Annan, who spied on her paper-bag-production prototype and tried to 
steal the patent, even arguing in court that a woman could never have invented 
such an innovative machine. But she might have imagined that the gender gap 
would have improved rather more significantly by 2016.
 