How would most people describe you?  Peaceful and caring  Mischievous and 
adventurous  Determined and a hard worker  Entertaining and playful Where would 
you most like to live?  A cosy house  A busy farm  A secretive underground den  
An island You want to see your friends. What do you do with them?  Go out for a 
big fancy dinner  Have a lovely cup of tea and a chat  Host a big, entertaining 
party where you tell lots of riddles and stories  Go round to their house - you 
don't want to be the host! Your friendship group has a problem. How do you 
solve it?  Work with everyone to solve the issue, planning your actions 
thoroughly  Rebel against the source of the problem without thinking about the 
consequences  Look after everyone in a parental fashion  Don't listen to anyone 
else's advice and do what you think is best What would be your ideal job?  An 
entertainer  A teacher  An explorer  Running your own business What are you 
most likely to be found doing?  Experiencing mishaps but cleverly finding your 
way out of them  Working hard at the latest task you have set your mind to  
Looking after people and helping them with their problems  Dancing and singing 
Which animal would be your sworn enemy?  An owl  A cat  A fox  You don't have 
enemies, you get on with everybody! What is your best feature?  Your curiosity 
and sense of adventure  Your wisdom  Your ability to entertain everyone  Your 
very caring nature Which of these would you prefer to eat?  Vegetables  Nuts  
Cereal  Biscuits Who would you most like to be allies with?  A dog  A fox  
Humans  Your own animal family  You gotâ€¦  Challenge your friends Submit answers  