
One thing is certain: the Labour leader is a man and will still be a man after 
this mud-slingingbloodbath of an election contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/22/labour-mp-prepare-coexist-jeremy-corbyn-leadership-backbench>
 is over.

Harriet Harman: Theresa May 'is no sister' on women's rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/23/harriet-harman-theresa-may-is-no-sister-on-womens-rights>
By contrast, women occupy leading roles in almost every other significant 
political force in the UK. The leader of the Scottish Labour party, Kezia 
Dugdale, has recentlyagreed a set of significant reforms with Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/21/scottish-labour-calls-on-conference-to-back-bid-for-more-autonomy>
 to give her party further autonomy as she battles the ascendent Scottish 
National party in Scotland. Indeed, Dugdale is the third woman leader to be 
elected by the Scottish Labour party, and was voted in before Corbyn and on a 
mandate as sizeable as his.

The Conservatives have their second female leader and prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/17/theresa-may-prime-minister-prepared-to-risk-it-all>
 in Theresa May and the formidableRuth Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/21/ruth-davidson-never-been-caught-out-tells-you-something-interview-leader-scottish-conservatives>
 leads them in Scotland, where one of the most impressive politicians of the 
modern era, Nicola Sturgeon, is at the helm of the SNP. Plaid Cymru has Leanne 
Woodat its helm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/its-time-to-put-welsh-independence-on-agenda-leanne-wood>
 and Caroline Lucas has made a welcome return to the leadership of the Green 
party asone half of a job share 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/caroline-lucas-and-jonathan-bartley-voted-joint-leaders-of-green-party>
.

Even Ukip, renowned for the most appalling misogynistic public statements (
remember Godfrey Bloom’s “joke” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/20/ukip-godfrey-bloom-calls-women-sluts>
 that women who did not clean their kitchens properly were “sluts”?) now has a 
woman leaderin Diane James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/ukip-elects-diane-james-as-new-party-leader>
.Frances O’Grady <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/frances-o-grady> is the 
first woman leader of the Trades Union Congress, working hard to represent a 
modern trade union movement now populated by a majority (55.5%) of women.

So how can the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader 
(probably Jeremy Corbyn) correct the inequality within the party’s ranks, and 
do better still by delivering a feminist leadership team and social democratic 
agenda?

Labour’s women problem isn’t new. I saw it first hand | Sonia Sodha
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/14/labour-party-misogyny-former-woman-adviser-experience>
Corbyn is an instinctive feminist, although this cannot be said for everyone 
in his circle. But the composition and announcement of hisfirst shadow cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-statistical-breakdown>
 was a disaster. While it was 52% women, none of the traditional great offices 
of state (prime minister, chancellor, foreign and home offices) were shadowed 
by a woman.

Labour’s civil war of the past year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/14/labour-right-shambles-jeremy-corbyn-questions-answer>
 has produced a macho and misogynistic atmosphere. The 44 MPs whowrote to Corbyn
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/22/female-labour-mps-call-on-jeremy-corbyn-to-act-over-escalating-abuse>
 to complain that his supporters were disproportionately targeting women cannot 
be ignored. But this is not purely a “hard left” issue. Look at John McDonnell 
and Alistair Campbellnearly coming to blows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/alastair-campbell-john-mcdonnell-clash-on-question-time>
 on national television. Remember Owen Smith’ssideswipe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/17/angela-eagle-owen-smith-jeremy-corbyn-must-be-loving-it>
 at Angela Eagle. He was the “normal” candidate who spoke of “smashing” Theresa 
May back on her heels.

And yet there is hope. Corbyn’s most effective lieutenants have turned out to 
be women. The able advocacy of Diane Abbott andEmily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry> has proved invaluable 
to his leadership this summer.

So, if one assumes that the leader and chancellor remain the same after next 
week, imagine the following fantasy feminist shadow cabinet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Flabour-party-leader-women-shadow-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88473c0fbe3cd3735246509f079f86221895f7ec%2F0_100_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Whoever%20he%20is%2C%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20next%20leader%20must%20set%20right%20the%20party%E2%80%99s%20women%20problem%20%7C%20Rachel%20Holmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Flabour-party-leader-women-shadow-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Whoever%20he%20is%2C%20Labour%E2%80%99s%20next%20leader%20must%20set%20right%20the%20party%E2%80%99s%20women%20problem%20%7C%20Rachel%20Holmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Flabour-party-leader-women-shadow-cabinet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88473c0fbe3cd3735246509f079f86221895f7ec%2F0_100_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Diane Abbott would be the first black Briton – of either party – to hold the 
pivotal home affairs brief.’ Photograph: Ben Pruchnie/Getty Images 
Emily Thornberry remains shadow foreign secretary. With appropriate junior 
shadow ministerial support, her legal background and strong internationalist 
human rights values make her the perfect foil to The Three Brexiteers of 
Johnson, Davis and Fox.

Diane Abbott becomes shadow home secretary. With decades of experience in the 
chamber and incredible public recognition, who betterto take on Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/19/amber-rudd-aims-reduce-uk-immigration-sustainable-levels>
? She would be the first black Briton – of either party – to hold the pivotal 
home affairs brief. This would mean that of the top four posts in Corbyn’s 
team, two would be held by women.

The energy Tom Watson has previously directed against Corbyn would be better 
directed against that other Jeremy – Hunt, and hisdismantling of the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/19/jeremy-hunt-acted-illegally-junior-doctors-contract-court-hears>
. So Watson stands aside for a female deputy leader. For this role,Lisa Nandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/labours-lisa-nandy-urges-party-to-ditch-tribalism>
 andKate Green <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kategreen> would both be 
excellent candidates. They serve northern constituencies and each supported 
Smith’s leadership bid. Both could play a vital role in building a united party 
and –to quote Green 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/feminism/2016/09/kate-green-mp-jeremy-corbyn-still-doesnt-get-our-concerns-about-sexist>
 – finding ways to “address the root causes of gender inequality”.

May has never won an election as prime minister. We must ensure she never does 
| Iain McNicol
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/theresa-may-never-won-election-prime-minister-labour-never-does>
Luciana Berger and Shabana Mahmood are extremely able parliamentarians and 
would both be assets to Corbyn’s top team if the former could be persuaded to 
return and the latter to join.

Once the shadow cabinet is announced, the national executive unites to 
recommend a constitutional amendment for 2017 that ensures that future 
leadership and deputy leadership elections are staggered to ensure a deputy of 
a different gender to the Labour leader.

Last but by no means least, Corbyn makes it clear that when the time comes for 
him to hand on the leadership, his aspiration is for his successor to be a 
woman.

 * This article was amended on 24 September 2016. An earlier version omitted 
the fact that the Scottish Labour party has a female leader. This has been 
corrected.
 