
The Olympic swimmer Fu Yuanhui made waves last week with her candid comment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/chinese-swimmer-fu-yuanhui-praised-for-breaking-periods-taboo>
 in a post-race interview that she was on her period. She was lauded in the 
western press for breaking taboos on periods and pushing the feminist agenda, 
andMelinda Gates even tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/melindagates/status/765597240039772164> her thanks to Fu 
for “using your voice to challenge taboos about menstruation”.

In China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, however, the episode 
didn’t turn as many heads. While people praised Fu for talking about periods 
openly, they failed to see any feminist angle (feminism is not a concept 
familiar to most people in China). In fact, the Chinese media were so bemused 
by the feminist reaction that it actually reported on “western media’s 
reporting” as news in itself.

Chinese internet users instead focused on the fact that Fu was swimming during 
her period at all. The question rang everywhere: “You can swim on your period?” 
Many around me (including myself) had believed that elite female athletes 
simply adjusted the timing of their period so as to not have to deal with it 
during major events. Let’s face it, even if it doesn’t affect performance, you 
hardly want to be “on” when trying to be at your best. Some users of Weibo 
(China’s equivalent to Twitter) were genuinely asking how come Fu wasn’t making 
the pool red.

There’s one big reason for this: tampons are incredibly rare in China– only 2% 
of Chinese women use them 
<http://www.cottoninc.com/corporate/Market-Data/SupplyChainInsights/China-Baby-Care-Feminine-Hygiene-Market/China's%20Baby%20Care%20&%20Feminine%20Hygiene%20Market.pdf>
; in Europe, the figure is as high as 70%. Of my female friends who have lived 
abroad, many aren’t endeared towards these white cotton sticks, either. Not a 
single person I know uses them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fwhy-chinese-women-dont-use-tampons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46afb931d29a06f286b5937b4d96ab26709eeda3%2F66_95_776_466%2F776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Chinese%20women%20don't%20use%20tampons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fwhy-chinese-women-dont-use-tampons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Chinese%20women%20don%27t%20use%20tampons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fwhy-chinese-women-dont-use-tampons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46afb931d29a06f286b5937b4d96ab26709eeda3%2F66_95_776_466%2F776.jpg>
 Chinese tampons: many supermarkets and pharmacies don’t stock them. 
In Beijing, although tampons have been on sale since the early 90s, there are 
still only two brands on offer. Perhaps because usage never picked up, many 
supermarkets and pharmacies still don’t even stock them.

Tampons are incredibly rare in China. Not a single person I know uses them

There is a general belief that tampons are not good for women’s health. For 
younger women, there has traditionally been a fear that tampons will break the 
hymen. But now, with more than 70% of Chinese women having sex before marriage, 
virginity is no longer a huge consideration. Remaining qualms come down to lack 
of “tampon culture”, as well as any education on how to use them properly.

Chinese medicine is also hugely influential, too, if only subconsciously, and 
its basis in non-invasive treatment creates unease around putting a foreign 
object into the body, for hours at a time. It is also seen as potentially 
harmful for girls who are still “growing”.

It doesn’t help that one of the only brands available in the country – it 
calls itself the “first domestic tampon maker” – creates tampons that look like 
lollipops.Danbishuang <https://cswsyp.1688.com/> sells a number of 
terrifying-looking contraptions (alongside more familiar-looking products).

Perhaps Fu’s comments didn’t generate the waves in China that they did 
elsewhere because periods here are already much more openly discussed, among 
women at least. While in Britain, there is often the feeling that talking about 
your period is oversharing, not to mention unpleasant, there’s a much more 
accommodating culture around them in China. Chinese women will discuss periods 
from a practical standpoint: what helps with tiredness during menstruation, 
what to eat to replenish iron and more intimate topics such as how often you 
should change your pad.

While Chinese women could stand to be better informed about tampons, perhaps 
in turn British women could be more open to talking about periods.
 