
Last week I wrote a column for the London Evening Standard about the problems 
faced by women making their way in the media 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/media/roy-greenslade-sexism-in-the-press--glass-ceiling-broken-then-mended-again-8482934.html>
 in the bad old days.

In giving various examples, I overlooked one extraordinary episode that 
illustrated the way in which women journalists suffered from prejudice. And I 
was pleased to put that right by referring to it at the end of my column today,
Page 3 demeans women and it should be binned 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/markets/roy-greenslade-page-3-demeans-women-and-it-should-be-binned-8493071.html>
.*

But the story of Felicity Green's life and career deserves more space than I 
was able to give it in the paper and it also merits a readership beyond the 
capital.

Felicity is 86 and grew up above a bike shop in Dagenham, an area of east 
London/Essex that could never be described as fashionable. Yet she began her 
life-long passion for fashion during her childhood through studying the 
Hollywood movie stars of the 1930s and 40s.

She has confessed to skipping off school every Thursday afternoon 
<http://thatsnotmyage.blogspot.co.uk/2012/01/style-icon-felicity-green.html> to 
accompany her father to one of the local cinemas.

Her enthusiasm for fashion led her to her first job, as a secretary, at a 
magazine entitled Woman & Beauty. It was far from glamorous. She once said: 
"Having struggled up on the District line I had to make the fires and walk the 
dog even before I made the coffee."

Promoted from secretary to fashion editor

Within a couple of years she impressed the editor-in-chief enough to be 
promoted to fashion editor. She likes to tell of the time the editor invited 
her to dinner and she looked forward to meeting one of the Labour party's 
increasingly influential figures – and later prime minister – Harold Wilson. 
But there was a twist,as she explained to the Jewish Chronicle: 
<http://www.thejc.com/news/people/20945/felicity-green-returns-fashion-journalism-age-83>

"I had given myself one of the first Toni perms, and the editor wanted me to 
give one to Mary Wilson, who was coming with Harold, then president of the 
board of trade. While the great and the good had drinks, I did the perm in the 
bathroom and got a thank you poem from Mary."

Perhaps it's not surprising that she moved on, first to become fashion editor 
of Housewife, and then to an advertising agency. It was while she was there, in 
1955, that the great tabloid titan of the period, Hugh Cudlipp, called to ask 
her what she thought of a paper he had launched called the Woman'sSunday Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaymirror>.

She wrote a fierce critique and what followed, according to Felicity, 
<http://www.thembsgroup.co.uk/inspiration/felicity_green_on_women_and_media> 
was "an odd meeting" in which Cudlipp "assumed I would be joining." He even 
asked her what her title should be and she replied: "Associate editor". He 
agreed.

So began a lengthy association with the Mirror group. The Woman's Sunday 
Mirror didn't last long, being absorbed into Woman magazine, but Felicity moved 
on to the Sunday Pictorial (later renamed the Sunday Mirror) and in 1961 she 
joined theDaily Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> in the 
role of associate editor.

It made her the highest female flyer in Fleet Street and she won admiration 
from most of her male colleagues, though some just couldn't come to terms with 
her being their boss.

How to handle men – leave their dignity intact

She once told me that after her first six months at the Mirror, during which 
she had proved herself more than capable of doing the job, a senior executive 
asked her if she was finding life better "now that the hatred has disappeared."

Felicity was baffled because she had been genuinely unaware of any hatred. 
That said, she did employ an interesting tactic to deflect antagonism from 
obstreperous men during what could have been difficult confrontations.

She explained that she had accepted excellent advice from the paper's editor 
Lee Howard. He had told her to "let men leave the room with their bollocks 
intact." So, she said, "that's what I always tried to do."

To know Felicity is to understand how subtly she would have carried it out. 
She has grace and charm and wit, but also a steely determination and an 
unshakeable sense of principle, as you will discover.

She achieved great things during her time at the Mirror, being in the vanguard 
of the 1960s fashion revolution, the era that saw the rise of youth culture 
that would lead to people having pride in wearing inexpensive clothes. She 
introduced Mary Quant, Biba and Twiggy to the paper's readers.

She persuaded photographers such as David Bailey and John French to shoot her 
fashion spreads. Or should I say stylish spreads. As Felicity has made 
abundantly clear,what she is really passionate about is style 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/2011/nov/13/style-felicity-green-audrey-hepburn>
 rather than fashion.

She oversaw Barbara Hulanicki's design of the pink gingham A-line dress that 
became a sales sensation after the Mirror promoted it on a centre spread.

Cecil King, the Mirror group's chairman, was outraged by Felicity championing 
Quant's mini-skirts. He asked her: "How long are you going to continue to put 
those ridiculous clothes in my newspaper?"

Felicity replied: "As long as they are news. And what will you do with me if I 
do continue to put them in the paper?" King said: "I will arrange for you to be 
fired." It was King who was later fired, however.

She followed a clear philosophy: "What I brought to the paper was something 
new in the way of presentation, in that I made fashion into features, I made it 
relate to your life, to your money, to your attitudes, to your prejudices, to 
your pleasures."

The reason for a sudden resignation

Felicity was eventually promoted to be executive women's editor across all 
three Mirror group titles and in 1973 was appointed publicity director, 
becoming the first woman to serve on a national newspaper company's main board. 
She had burst through the glass ceiling and was the real first lady of Fleet 
Street.

It says something about the period that the news was greeted in the trade 
magazine, Press Gazette's forerunner, with a report saying she would be the 
first director "to powder her nose before a board meeting."

She spent five years on the board before shocking her fellow directors by 
suddenly resigning. Why? Because she discovered that a newly appointed board 
member, a male journalist, was being paid £30,000 a year. Her salary was 
£14,000.

I think it's fair to say that her discovery of such discrimination, of being 
paid less by men she had respected and simply because she was a woman, still 
rankles today.

After the Mirror, Felicity ran the UK office of Vidal Sassoon before returning 
to journalism in a variety of capacities. She spent time on theDaily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, helped to launch Working 
Woman magazine, advised the Telegraph board and the publishers of M&S magazine.

For five years in the 1990s she was a senior lecturer on the St Martins School 
of Art fashion journalism course. And she remains active in fashion and 
journalism. She also told some excellent anecdotes about Cudlipp a couple of 
weeks ago before the latest memorial lecture in her old boss's name.

Felicity Green is, quite simply, a special person. She was a journalistic 
pioneer and she is a journalistic icon. And what style!

*On the Page 3 topic, see also Hadley Freeman's excellent piece 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/feb/12/murdoch-page-3-sexism-media>
 