
Hillary Clinton has a unique talent to make people viscerally angry. Just look 
at the footage from Trump rallies: supporters carry “Lyin Hillary” 
<https://lyinhillarydoll.com/> dolls hung from miniature nooses, cry “Lock her 
up” and “Hang her in the streets”, and wear Trump That Bitch T-shirts. You 
could chalk this up to Trump’s toxicity, but some of it also haunted the 
Democratic primaries, in the over-the-top depictions of Clinton as a 
cold-blooded murderer or criminal mastermind promulgated by the most fanatical
Bernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> supporters.

Hillary’s critics insist there is something wrong with her sexually

So why is it, exactly, that Clinton gets under our skin? We could blame it on 
sexism – personally, sexism is one of my favourite things to blame stuff on; I 
recommend it highly – and that would be correct. Still, that diagnosis is a 
little too blunt to really get at the problem.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> and men, left-wingers and 
right-wingers alike, all dissolve into spasms of rabid conspiracy theorising 
and ranting when Clinton’s name comes up.

I would argue that Clinton irritates people not just because of her gender, 
but because we simply can’t process her narrative. There are no stories that 
prepare us for her trajectory through life and, therefore, we react to her as 
if she’s a disruption in our reality, rather than a person. We love public 
women best when they are losers, when they’re humiliated, defeated, or (in some 
instances) just plain killed. Yet Clinton, despite the disapproval that rains 
down on her, continues to go out there and chalk up wins.

Aversion to successful or ambitious women is nothing new. It’s baked into our 
cultural DNA. Consider the myth ofAtalanta 
<http://www.theoi.com/Heroine/Atalanta.html>. She was the fastest runner in her 
kingdom, forced men to race her for her hand, and defeated every one of them. 
She would have gotten away with it, too, if some man hadn’t booby-trapped the 
course with apples to slow her down, which is presented as a happy ending. By 
taking away her ability to excel, he also takes away her loneliness.
 Pushed to the edge: (clockwise from top left) Diana Spencer; Britney Spears; 
Marilyn Monroe; and Amy Winehouse. Composite: Karen Robinson; Getty; Rex 
Then, there’s the story of Artemis and Orion 
<https://people.ucsc.edu/~rosewood/writing/tales/orion.htm>: He’s the most 
handsome hunter in all Greece, and she’s the Virgin Goddess of the Hunt, who’s 
ready to get rid of the “virgin” portion for him. Until, that is, her jealous 
brother Apollo tricks her into an archery contest – she’s so proud of her aim 
that she lets Apollo taunt her into shooting at a barely visible speck on the 
horizon and, therefore, winds up shooting her lover in the head.

The lesson is clear, and has been reiterated in countless hacky comedies about 
cold, loveless career women ever since. Success and love are incompatible for 
women. For a woman, taking pride in her own talents – especially talents seen 
as “masculine” – is a sin that will perpetually cut her off from human 
relationships and social acceptance. She can be good, or liked, not both. The 
only answer is to let a man beat her, thereby accepting her proper feminine 
role.

It’s no coincidence that the people who insist there’s “just something” off 
about Hillary Clinton as a politician are so eager to buy the idea there is 
something sexually wrong with her: frigidity (Hillary Sucks, But Not Like 
Monica, as per one popular T-shirt); or top-secret lesbianism (why is she so 
often photographed with political stafferHuma Abedin 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/10/07/a-rare-look-inside-huma-abedins-relationship-with-hillary-clinton/>
?); or simply an Artemis-esque tendency to slaughter her boyfriends, as with
deputy White House counsel Vince Foster 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vince_Foster>, who conspiracy theorists have 
long claimed she had an affair with, then had him killed to keep him from 
revealing her dark secrets.

Yet, though Clinton activates the darkest parts of her critics’ sexual 
imagination, our yearning for her downfall goes beyond even that. It’s not just 
that her success makes her unattractive or “unlikable”, it’s that, on some 
level, we cannot believe her success even exists.
 ‘We loathe and mock addicted women until the day they die’: Amy Winehouse. 
Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer 
You hear that disbelief in the frantic insistence of certain Sanders 
supporters that the primary was “rigged”, simply because Clinton won it. You 
hear it when Trump sputters that Clinton “should never have been allowed to 
run”, making her very presence in the race a violation of the accepted order. 
You can hear it when pundits such asJonathan Walczak 
<http://pavementpieces.com/author/jwalczak/> argue that even if Clinton is 
elected, she should voluntarily resign after one term “for her own good”. 
(Also, presumably, good for George Clooney, whom Walczak offers up as a 
plausible replacement.) Even when we imagine her winning, we can’t imagine her 
really winning. Unadulterated female success and power, on the level Clinton 
has experienced, is simply not in our shared playbook. So, even when a Clinton 
victory is right in front of our eyes, we react, not as if it’s undesirable, 
but as if it is simply not real. And the thing is, it might not be. Or at 
least, it might only be temporary: the rise before the big, spectacular, 
sexism-affirming fall.

When I wrote my book, Trainwreck, I was interested in how our culture treats 
failed women. The answer is that we rarely allow women to be anything else. 
From the moment a woman arrives in the public eye, we scrutinise her for signs 
of deviant sexuality, out-of-control emotions, or both. Not surprisingly, when 
put under constant surveillance and deprived of meaningful privacy, most people 
eventually reveal human flaws. Which we then broadcast and publicise – the nip 
slip, the up-skirt, the broken engagement, the drinking binge – until the flaws 
become more famous than the woman herself, until they come to define and 
contain her, and render her a trainwreck.

We don’t just want women to fail, we need it. Female failure is a live 
demonstration of all our stereotypes about female weakness, and a confirmation 
of all our old prejudices against women entering the public sphere. When I say 
old, I mean Paleolithic – injunctions against female self-expression or fame 
are everywhere in ancient history. The Christian New Testament “[suffers] not a 
woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man;” Pericles wrote that the 
greatest womanly virtue was “not to be talked of for good or evil among men”. 
In the colonial United States and Britain, women who talked too much and 
started fights were labelled “common scolds” – recommended punishments included 
making them wear gags or repeatedly dunking them in water to simulate drowning.

Nowadays, we can’t literally outlaw the act of women becoming visible, 
successful or famous. But we still punish the women who do – by turning their 
very visibility against them, and making their time in the public eye a 
reputation destroying misery. The more successful a woman is, the more pleasure 
we take in demolishing her and turning her into a two-dimensional villain. 
Hillary Clinton’s extraordinary success may only be tempting the God of 
Trainwrecks to make her our biggest and best catastrophe yet.
 Playing dirty: a pro-Trump supporter holds up a sign in Florida. Photograph: 
Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 
If elected, Clinton would not be the first or only female head of state in the 
world. As the existence of Germany’s Angela Merkel shows, it is possible for 
female leaders to get along — with a practiced dullness that prevents them from 
attracting too much of the limelight and, therefore, too much public rage. But 
Clinton’s presidency is not likely to follow those patterns. For a look at how 
her time in the Oval Office might go, and how it might go wrong, we’d do best 
to look at the fate of Australian Prime MinisterJulia Gillard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/julia-gillard>.

Gillard, too, was the first woman of her kind – at least as far as her home 
country was concerned. And Gillard, too, was greeted with a tremendous amount 
of resentment, even hatred, when she made it to the top. Most notoriously, 
conservatives held a fundraising dinner with “Julia Gillard Kentucky Fried Quail
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/12/menu-quail-julia-gillard-liberal>
” on the menu. It featured “Small breasts, huge thighs and a big red box.” (The 
same joke has been repurposed at Trump rallies: the “KFC Hillary Special” 
contains “Two fat thighs, two small breasts… left wing.” Look, no one ever said 
sexists were a laugh riot.)

Gillard’s response, initially, was to ignore all this, and attempt to rise 
above it: “My essential view was that it was because I’m the first woman, I’m 
unusual, and it will wash itself out of the system,” she said. This attempt at 
nobility was her fatal flaw. Without resistance, the sexism escalated to epic 
proportions. “Ditch the Witch” signs were distributed, pornographic cartoons of 
her circulated online, and her childless status became a national topic, with 
some commentators alleging she’d rendered herself “deliberately barren”. 
Meanwhile, her political rivals whipped up false charges of corruption – widely 
regarded now as sheer political calculation – and began calling her “Ju-Liar 
Gillard”. She responded to some of this in a speech about her experience with 
sexism that went viral, but it wasn’t enough – by that time, the trainwreck 
narrative had firmly taken hold and the speech only made things worse, with 
rivals declaring she had “demeaned every woman in [the] parliament” by “playing 
the gender card”. Within three years, her own party had ousted her from office, 
and Gillard not only resigned as prime minister, but left politics for good.

Gillard failed and provided us with the spectacular flameout we all wanted
 Gender gains: Australian opposition leader Tony Abbott campaigning against 
Julia Gillard. Photograph: Alan Porritt/AAP 
Gillard, in other words, provided us with the spectacular flameout we were 
looking for. She failed publicly and therefore affirmed that female success and 
ambition would always rebound on the woman in question, and ruin her life. Of 
course, these kinds of humiliation aren’t inevitable. They’re consciously 
inflicted by sexist people on female targets. But the illusion of inevitability 
comforts us. Witness: as soon as Gillard had been publicly demolished to the 
point she could not recover, people started liking her.

It’s this, the tendency to hate women when they’re up and love them when 
they’re down, which is the most perverse feature of trainwreck culture and our 
aversion to female success. Often, with the true centrepieces of trainwreck 
media – mentally ill or addicted women, likeAmy Winehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse> or Marilyn Monroe – we loathe 
and mock them until the very day they die, then transform them into beloved 
angels and martyrs after their deaths. Alive,Diana, Princess of Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/diana> was a tabloid fixture, a madwoman who 
featured in stories about throwing up all her food and driving through Paris in 
only her underpants. Dead, she was England’s Rose.

Clinton may not have to go quite that far to win us over. But she fits the 
pattern. Over and over, we embrace her once we think she’s down for the count. 
When Bill Clinton’s affair with Monica Lewinsky was revealed – making Hillary 
appear before the nation as the betrayed and humiliated “little woman” she’d 
infamously sworn never to be – her approval ratings soared, from 42 to 64%. 
When she ran against Barack Obama in the 2008 Democratic primary, people hated 
her even more feverishly than they do now, yet when he beat her, and she 
accepted a subordinate position in his administration, she became one of the 
US’s most popular politicians.
 ‘As soon as Julia Gillard had been publicly demolished to the point she could 
not recover, people started liking her.’ Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images 
So why does Hillary still get up and apply for the big jobs? Why, when she 
could so easily garner our love by accepting humiliation and a role in the 
background, does she persist in stepping forward and aiming for what she wants? 
All she has to do is let a man beat her – any man; her husband, a political 
opponent, anyone – and she can be loved again. Why does she insist on winning?

It’s a feverish gender-politics Catch-22. If Clinton gives up and lets herself 
be beaten, she’ll experience less sexism which will, in and of itself, be proof 
of sexism. If she continues being openly, visibly successful, she’ll experience 
more sexism, but the very fact of her success will demonstrate that sexism is 
less powerful than we thought.

Given the option, Clinton has apparently chosen the harder road – to keep 
warping the narrative, keep challenging the idea that disreputable women always 
end in ruin and wreck and flame. She still may, of course – there are many, 
many people rooting for her to fall. But there is something profoundly 
admirable to how she keeps plugging ahead, looking to provide the world with a 
new kind of story.

Trainwreck by Sady Doyle is published by Melville House at £18.99. To order it 
for £15.27, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trainwreck.html>
 