
My introduction to the wonder that is Maggie Stiefvater was… rough. She 
invited me to a writing retreat, but accidentally gave me the wrong dates. I 
arrived two days early, to a shut-down Midwestern American tourist town in the 
middle of February. I spent both days holed up, alone, in a hotel room with 
only a large pizza to sustain me.


Actually, in retrospect, that part was pretty nice.


Shiver by Maggie Stiefvater - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/31/shiver-maggie-stiefvater-review>
By the time the retreat started, I was ready to interact with people outside 
of the ones living in my head, though. So I was a little bummed when Maggie 
mostly kept to herself and her writing partners. Only one book into my career, 
I was not yet familiar with the weight that comes when people arrive with fully 
formed opinions about who you are and what you can and should be doing for 
them. Maggie, having hit it big with her Wolves of Mercy Falls series (Shiver 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shiver-3.html>, Linger 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/linger.html>, Forever 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/forever-5.html>), was in the thick of it.

I wrote the retreat off as a bizarre life experience. (The date mix up ended 
up being a blessing in disguise — while I was back in gorgeous California, the 
women who stayed got snowed in.After they had gotten rid of all the food.) So 
it was with only mild curiosity that I picked up her next book, the standalone 
novelThe Scorpio Races <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/scorpio-races.html>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmaggie-stiefvater-feminist-author-kiersten-white%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F217749fe7ccbcee33b97e2dea168cec39286f285%2F0_191_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20love%20feminist%20author%20Maggie%20Stiefvater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmaggie-stiefvater-feminist-author-kiersten-white%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20love%20feminist%20author%20Maggie%20Stiefvater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmaggie-stiefvater-feminist-author-kiersten-white%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F217749fe7ccbcee33b97e2dea168cec39286f285%2F0_191_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Kiersten White: I just wanted to lick her brain. (In the least creepy way 
possible.) Photograph: Kiersten Brazier 
And I was livid. Because here was this woman I had written off as not being 
nice enough, and her mind was a monstrously beautiful and astonishingly 
talented thing. Forget being friends, no need for niceness — I just wanted to 
lick her brain. (In the least creepy way possible.)

I started paying attention. Her online presence is both entertaining and 
unusual. Entertaining in that she is unapologetically absurd in answering 
straightforward questions from readers. Unusual in that the Maggie you see 
online is the same as the Maggie that exists in real life. There is no 
artifice, no performance factor. Maggie is Maggie is Maggie.

Maggie Stiefvater: I steal a real human heart for each of my characters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/07/maggie-stiefvater-interview-shiver-trilogy-sinner>
Both online and in real life, so many of us have learned to tip toe to avoid 
dredging up the hatred lurking beneath our feet. The mere act of existing as a 
woman in public makes us targets. We learn to be nice, to make it easy for 
others to like us. But Maggie doesn’t tip toe. She stomps with steel-toed 
boots. She doesn’t apologise for her existence, or her success. She never 
frames her accomplishments in slick, easily digestible self-deprecation. She 
owns it.

The Raven Boys by Maggie Stiefvater - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jun/16/review-the-raven-boys-maggie-stiefvater>
She also engages openly and honestly with her fans—even when her creative 
spaces online become hostile. I once saw the absurd declaration that “she 
doesn’t deserve her characters.” It says a lot that some people feel entitled 
to her writing, but want to cuther out of the equation. Maggie meets that 
sentiment, she addresses it, and—just as powerfully and even more bravely—she 
is open about the toll addressing online vitriol takes on her emotional and 
mental health.

The Scorpio Races by Maggie Stiefvater - review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2013/may/01/review-the-scorpio-races-maggie-stiefvater>
In the end, I think what makes her such a trailblazing feminist author is that 
she isn’t trying to blaze any trails. She’s not in people’s faces, or promoting 
any agenda. She’s simply herself. Her ruthlessly clever, delightfully odd, 
writing genius, wife and mother and friend, goat owning, road trip loving, 
car-obsessed self. In a world where women are constantly being told what and 
who we should be to makeother people happy, being oneself is both radical and 
refreshing.

And, for the record, she can give me the wrong dates for writing retreats any 
time she wants. As long as I have a book of hers to read while I wait.


Kiersten White’s And I Darken 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/and-i-darken.html> is available from the 
Guardian bookshop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmaggie-stiefvater-feminist-author-kiersten-white%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa084652286d99d92e26d48f924fc55ac84080abd%2F0_0_1527_2345%2F1527.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20love%20feminist%20author%20Maggie%20Stiefvater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmaggie-stiefvater-feminist-author-kiersten-white%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20love%20feminist%20author%20Maggie%20Stiefvater&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fmaggie-stiefvater-feminist-author-kiersten-white%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa084652286d99d92e26d48f924fc55ac84080abd%2F0_0_1527_2345%2F1527.jpg> 