
When I discovered the Bechdel test <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bechdel_test>
 – created by graphic novelistAlison Bechdel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/01/alison-bechdel-fun-home> in her 
1985 comic Dykes to Watch Out For – I found it a revelation. The Bechdel test 
is an irresistibly simple gauge of female representation and gender inequality 
in film. To pass, a film has to have two named female characters who talk to 
each other about something other than a man. The test has been applied to plays 
too – as with the Twitter campaign@BechdelTheatre 
<https://twitter.com/BechdelTheatre?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
.

But although the test is useful, I worry when it is the only thing used to 
measure the feminism of a film or a play (a use Bechdel never intended). The 
ridiculously retrogradeTwilight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/twilight>, 
for example, passes (doormat heroine, Bella, talks briefly to her mother about 
moving to a new town) whileGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>, which has a 
fierce, clever and interesting heroine, fails. Sometimes women’s conversations 
about menare feminist. Two women discussing being bullied at work by a man 
would make for a feminist drama – certainly preferable to a play in which two 
women briefly compared shoes but spent the rest of the time serving the 
narrative arcs of the men.

The Good Wife review: a legal drama that breezes the Bechdel test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/30/the-good-wife-review-legal-drama-breezes-bechdel-test>
I’d go further: conversations about fancying or loving or sleeping with men 
can be feminist too. I don’t believe it is un-feminist to ask how we can have 
relationships with men (because some of us do want to); to ask what makes a man 
a feminist and what we can expect from men; to ponder how we can achieve 
equality in our romantic lives. As I wrote my play How to Date a Feminist, I 
knew it would fail the Bechdel test because these questions are its major 
concerns.

So I wanted to think about other ways of challenging myself to make feminist 
theatre. The ongoing inequality (according to the latest research, women are 
only playing 39% of stage roles in the UK, writing 32% of the plays and 
directing 39% of them) inspired theSphinx test 
<http://www.sphinxtheatre.co.uk/blog.html>, a series of questions for 
playwrights to consider. Questions such as: is there a woman centre stage? Is 
she active rather than reactive? Is she compelling and complex?

I’ve asked myself other questions too. How many of the cast are women, and 
what percentage of the dialogue do they speak? Do the female characters have 
agency? Do they make choices? Do they drive their own stories (or, indeed, 
their cars)? Do they have a strong arc? Are they victims or do they have power 
or seize power? Do their stories empower them or punish them? Does the play 
address issues of concern to women, and to feminists? Does the play support the 
status quo or does it invite the audience to imagine, to think, to make change?

If the play is funny, do the women have any funny lines? One particular 
bugbear of mine is comic plays where the men monopolise the wit, and the women 
are earnest, heartfelt or (worst of all) long-suffering. I was determined not 
to reinforce the madly outdated idea that feminism can’t be funny, so I hope my 
play passes this test, at least.

The questions don’t stop once a play goes into production – in fact, a 
director can make a huge difference by reinterpreting a play through a feminist 
lens, or casting gender-blind. Other questions to ask might be: how many of the 
creative team are women? Are they respected in rehearsal? Are the actors asked 
to wear costumes that make them feel uncomfortable? (The Casting Call Woe blog 
<http://castingcallwoe.tumblr.com/>, now an Edinburgh show, is a roll-call of 
failures on this front.) And how is the play marketed? More than one producer 
asked if I could call my play something that didn’t involve the word feminist, 
which they felt was too in-your-face, too political, or too boring-sounding. In 
the end, keeping the title felt like a feminist statement I could make before 
the lights even went up on the first scene.

How to Date a Feminist previews at the Arcola theatre, London, from 6 September
 