
With women leading three of the parties in the Scottish parliament, and a 
femalefirst minister committed to legislating for gender balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2015/nov/12/scotland-is-at-a-tipping-point-in-terms-of-gender-equality>
, equality campaigners could be forgiven for taking their foot off the gas.

But Women 50:50, Scotland’s campaign for equal representation in parliament, 
councils and public boards, has proved herself admirably unwilling to rest on 
her laurels, and on Wednesday evening held a revealing and energetic debate 
titled Backroom Boys, looking a why so few women hold powerful positions behind 
the scenes in Scotland’s political life.

Ahead of the debate, Women 50:50 released a set of figures highlighting the 
scale of the problem:

 * 59 different people have been government special advisers since 1999; 13 
have been women

 * there were 6 women out of 31 special advisers during the Labour/Lib Dem 
coalitions (19%) 
 *  the SNP have had 7 female special advisors out of 28 (25%) 
 * first minister, Nicola Sturgeon has 33% female special advisers 
 * the first Holyrood parliamentary session under Donald Dewar had no female 
special advisers. 
Commenting on the figures, Talat Yaqoob <https://twitter.com/talatyaqoob>, 
chair and co-founder ofWomen 5050 <http://www.women5050.org/>, said: “Having 
women at every level of politics in Scotland is the only way we can ensure real 
representation and inclusiveness, but we need them beyond the chamber. The 
influencers behind the scenes are, in the main, men, we need women in these 
positions influencing policy and decision making”.

The evening was chaired by Scottish Labour leader Kezia Dugdale 
<https://twitter.com/kezdugdale> with a panel of speakers including writer, 
broadcaster and former newspaper editorLesley Riddoch 
<https://twitter.com/LesleyRiddoch>, Valerie Livingston 
<https://twitter.com/velivingston?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, former SNP Westminster press officer turned political consultant andNatalie 
Coupar <https://twitter.com/natalie_coupar>, former Scottish Liberal Democrat 
staffer, now comms manager.

Lesley Riddoch called on her experience of both print and broadcast journalism 
to ask what we want from spads, and why women are deemed not to measure up. 
Some - though not all - women remain unwilling to put their heads above the 
parapet when it comes to opinions, she suggested, perhaps because opinionated 
women tend to be treated differently to their male counterparts, not least in 
terms of online response.


But women are aware of the world outside the room, said Riddoch, and thus 
often attracted to activism rather than formal politics: so their experience is 
not valued, or else their areas of experience are not represented in formal 
politics.

Many of the women present nodded along when Riddoch also raised the obvious 
point that backroom jobs - be that political advisers or news editors - demand 
24-7 attendance: “No human being wants to do that for long, and women are more 
prone to being human.”

Valerie Livingston, who walked away from the Westminster bubble to start her 
own business, with all the flexibility and autonomy that brings, recalled how 
little sense of career progression she had: “Undoubtedly politics can be very 
macho but a bigger problem is failure to develop staff.”


This was echoed by Natalie Coupar who said that now she was working in the 
private sector, with appraisals and support structures and standard 
interviewing procedures to prevent bias, she’s amazed by how things were done 
in the world of politics, with no formalised processes for championing 
diversity and inclusion.


Coupar added that she often found herself to be the only woman in the room, 
and noted that when she joined the Scottish Lib Dems there was only one female 
print journalist in the Holyrood press corridor (this has since increased to 
roughly a quarter, something that the newly formedWomen in Journalism Scotland 
<http://womeninjournalism.co.uk/wij-scotland/> is also hoping to tackle).

Couper recalled “those moments when you’re in a meeting and you look up and go 
‘wow, this is history and its also all men!” But she also emphasised the need 
to be hopeful: “the most most dangerous message to go out from tonight is that 
its too difficult.”

Steering the conversation towards some practical conclusions, Dugdale first 
asked whether 50:50 in elected positions was still the right focus: “We need to 
get women behind the scenes too, is there too much focus on public-facing 
roles?”


Likewise, she and other women discussed the problem of “the pipeline”, ie how 
to make sure that women are ready to step up into those roles, and in 
particular how to make mentoring expansive enough to reach BME and working 
class women who are so appallingly represented at every level of politics.

Scottish Labour’s Lorna Finlayson asked whether women are pigeon-holed into 
organisational/diary roles rather than being promoted to strategic ones, whilst 
academic and bloggerMeryl Kenny <https://twitter.com/merylkenny> described how 
men’s informal networks can circumvent the formal equality work that women do, 
leading to calls for men to act as “allies not bystanders”.

The evening’s discussion, with a roomful of women including serving party 
staffer from across the Holyrood spectrum, drew out some fascinating threads 
and resulted - as is not often the case with such events - in an actual action 
plan.
 