
One of my “favorite” – ie just plain awful – recent stories to expose the 
staggering tone deafness around gender parity came courtesy of John Greenhouse, 
a Silicon Valley venture capitalist. He was sharing some supposedly helpful 
advice for women seeking equality in the business world.

In his Wall Street Journal op-ed, Greenhouse suggested that in order for women 
to rise above unconscious gender bias online 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/experts/2016/09/28/why-women-in-tech-might-consider-just-using-their-initials-online/>
, they ought to go by their initials and hide the fact that they’re women. 
Female readers weren’t so thrilled by the suggestion thatthey should be the 
ones responsible for fixing male bias against them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/29/wall-street-journal-article-silicon-valley-hide-gender>
.

For better advice, look to Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, where 48% of the incoming freshmen at the School of Computer 
Science are women, fargreater than the national average of 18% 
<https://ngcproject.org/statistics>. Rather than urging women to change their 
behavior, the school changed the culture by launching a faculty-run mentorship 
group for female computer science students, which “opens doors for women across 
campus through networking ”,according to the college newspaper. 
<http://thetartan.org/2016/10/3/scitech/enrollment> That has attracted 
increasingly more women to apply to the program.


 Carnegie’s advancements aside, a recent study from McKinsey & Company and 
LeanIn.org – the non profit founded by Facebook chief operating officer Sheryl 
Sandberg, maven of workplace gender equality – confirms that what we suspected 
about corporate America is still true. In looking at employee data from 132 
companies and their 4.6 million workers, researchersfound that women are less 
likely than men to be hired into senior positions, have access to top 
executives or receive challenging assignments 
<https://womenintheworkplace.com/#key-findings>.


Gender pay gap is widest during workers' 50s, analysis shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/14/gender-pay-gap-widest-during-50s-analysis>
But there were some glimmers of hope: the report found that women are now 
asking for promotions and salary increases just as much as men, which the 
authors say signals progress – even though women still aren’t getting those 
rewards as often as men.

What’s more, the percentage of women who are being promoted into middle and 
senior management is now higher than the percentage of women in those positions 
at the moment. “If this pattern holds over time, the representation of mid- and 
senior-level women will slowly increase,” the authors wrote.

Here’s what the research tells us, along with some theories that help to 
explain the findings.

“Negative personality” criticism: the real reason you’re not getting promoted

We knew, as the report confirmed, that women are less likely to receive 
promotions than men. But it plays out in a different way than we thought. We 
hear a lot about the dearth of women CEOs or corporate board members, but 
McKinsey and Lean In found that the biggest gender disparity in promotions 
comes early on, when entry-level workers make the jump to managerial roles. 
Researchers discovered that while women make up 46% of entry-level employees, 
they represent just 37% of managers. In other words, for every 100 women 
promoted to a manager position, 130 men get advanced up the chain. For women of 
color, the gap is even wider.

Men and women are leaving companies at about the same rate, so attrition isn’t 
what’s keeping women from advancing. What could be happening here? Well, it 
could have to do with animplicit bias against women who ask for promotions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/02/unconscious-bias-most-women-believe-sexism-still-exists-but-most-men-disagree>
. Even though the report says that women are now making these requests just as 
often as men, and are 54% likelier to get promotions than the ones who don’t 
ask, the researchers also found they were penalized for it. Women who negotiate 
for higher pay are 30% more likely than men to be accused of being 
“aggressive”, “bossy” and “intimidating”, a trope thatimplies women are held to 
a double standard 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/01/14/women-and-leadership/>.

In a 2014 Fortune article, Kieran Snyder, the Seattle-based CEO of the 
recruiting startup Textio, mused on the “abrasiveness gap” and recounted her 
surprise after she spoke to a friend who was considering promoting two of his 
high-achieving direct reports. Hedescribed the woman as “talented” but “too 
abrasive,” while the man was “an easy case” 
<http://fortune.com/2014/08/26/performance-review-gender-bias/> who “just 
needed to learn to be more patient”. Snyder, wondering how the perception of 
female “abrasiveness” might affect their advancement, collected work 
performance reviews from nearly 250 men and women working in technology. She 
was astonished to discover that a whopping 88% of the women’s reviews included 
critical feedback, versus just 59% of the men’s.


“Men are given constructive suggestions. Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are given constructive 
suggestions – and told to pipe down,” she wrote in Fortune. Snyder acknowledged 
that the reviews were shared with her voluntarily, so her study had 
limitations. But she was more floored by what she called “negative personality 
criticism”, which was a feature of 75% of the women’s reviews with critical 
feedback. In other words, they were scolded as “bossy”, “strident” and 
“abrasive”. Such personality criticisms only entered two of the men’s reviews 
with critical feedback.

Why are men skipping rungs on the corporate ladder?

Aside from what appears to be a cultural discomfort with women doing exactly 
what men have been doing all along 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/oct/03/when-will-we-stop-calling-successful-women-abrasive>
, another theory on why women aren’t getting the first promotion to manager is 
that it’s due to their difficult bosses, and that companies have a systemic 
bias when hiring. A 2010 study from the research firm Catalyst tracked more 
than 4,000 MBA students who graduated between 1996 and 2007, and found thatmale 
holders of MBA degrees routinely started out in more senior roles than their 
female counterparts 
<https://hbr.org/2010/03/women-in-management-delusions-of-progress>. Even when 
statistically accounting for experience, industry, whether the students had 
children or whether they aspired to be senior executives, the findings were the 
same.

In other words, it had nothing to do with lack of ambition or taking time off 
to have kids. In placing female hires, there were probably implicit biases and 
assumptions on the part of hiring managers that women weren’t gunning for the 
C-suite, or would soon leave to start a family. “Firms must consider how their 
talent management processes contribute to the problem,” the authors wrote. 
“This is especially critical regarding first jobs, since they set the stage for 
all the inequities that follow.”

Don't play by the rules: how to reignite women's fire in the workplace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/mar/17/women-in-leadership-workplace-confidence-power>
After starting higher up, the men were also able to rise faster. The exception 
was for the 10% of female MBA graduates who started out at as middle managers 
or higher – they advanced just as quickly as the men. After slicing and dicing 
the numbers, the researchers noticed that among the rest of the women, 25% said 
they’d left their first post-MBA jobs because of bad bosses, versus just 16% of 
the men. In other words, managers may have been treating their direct reports 
differently based on gender, allowing men to get a leg up.

This was something that showed up in the Lean In and McKinsey report, too. 
Those researchers separately polled 34,000 workers on their thoughts about 
gender and the workplace, and found that women felt subtly disadvantaged in 
some ways. For example, 67% of women reported being able to fully participate 
in meetings, versus 74% of men –manterruptions, anyone? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2015/jan/15/women-gender-survey-research-success>

And while 51% of women in senior management said they’d had a substantive 
interaction with a senior leader at least once a week, some 62% of men said 
they did. In fact, women were three times more likely to have personal networks 
mostly made up of women, which probably compounded their lack of exposure to 
the power players and decision makers at work – because those people are 
vastly, disproportionately male. A cycle, if you will.

So what do companies do to break out of it? McKinsey and Lean In say that 
businesses can achieve better gender parity in a number of easy-to-implement 
ways. Executives ought to talk more openly with employees about the gender 
issue and why it matters. When hiring, they should consider doing blind resume 
reviews, in which the name and gender of the potential employee is removed, an 
easy way to cut down bias that only 4% of companies report doing. Companies 
should also share any available gender data with their employees, which just 
one-third of companies do.
 