 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421409520920%2Faaeace76-cd7c-4ea3-b300-98fd6c11768b-2060x1488.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20modern%20world%20is%20bad%20for%20your%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20modern%20world%20is%20bad%20for%20your%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421409520920%2Faaeace76-cd7c-4ea3-b300-98fd6c11768b-2060x1488.jpeg>
 Daniel J Levitan: ‘When trying to concentrate on a task, an unread email in 
your inbox can reduce your effective IQ by 10 points.’ 
Our brains are busier than ever before. We’re assaulted with facts, pseudo 
facts, jibber-jabber, and rumour, all posing as information. Trying to figure 
out what you need to know and what you can ignore is exhausting. At the same 
time, we are all doing more. Thirty years ago, travel agents made our airline 
and rail reservations, salespeople helped us find what we were looking for in 
shops, and professional typists or secretaries helped busy people with their 
correspondence. Now we do most of those things ourselves. We are doing the jobs 
of 10 different people while still trying to keep up with our lives, our 
children and parents, our friends, our careers, our hobbies, and our favourite 
TV shows.

Our smartphones have become Swiss army knife–like appliances that include a 
dictionary, calculator, web browser, email, Game Boy, appointment calendar, 
voice recorder, guitar tuner, weather forecaster, GPS, texter, tweeter,Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> updater, and flashlight. 
They’re more powerful and do more things than the most advanced computer at IBM 
corporate headquarters 30 years ago. And we use them all the time, part of a 
21st-century mania for cramming everything we do into every single spare moment 
of downtime. We text while we’re walking across the street, catch up on email 
while standing in a queue – and while having lunch with friends, we 
surreptitiously check to see what our other friends are doing. At the kitchen 
counter, cosy and secure in our domicile, we write our shopping lists on 
smartphones while we are listening to that wonderfully informative podcast on 
urban beekeeping.

But there’s a fly in the ointment. Although we think we’re doing several 
things at once, multitasking, this is a powerful and diabolical illusion. Earl 
Miller, a neuroscientist at MIT and one of the world experts on divided 
attention, says that our brains are “not wired to multitask well… When people 
think they’re multitasking, they’re actually just switching from one task to 
another very rapidly. And every time they do, there’s a cognitive cost in doing 
so.” So we’re not actually keeping a lot of balls in the air like an expert 
juggler; we’re more like a bad amateur plate spinner, frantically switching 
from one task to another, ignoring the one that is not right in front of us but 
worried it will come crashing down any minute. Even though we think we’re 
getting a lot done, ironically, multitasking makes us demonstrably less 
efficient.

Multitasking has been found to increase the production of the stress hormone 
cortisol as well as the fight-or-flight hormone adrenaline, which can 
overstimulate your brain and cause mental fog or scrambled thinking. 
Multitasking creates a dopamine-addiction feedback loop, effectively rewarding 
the brain for losing focus and for constantly searching for external 
stimulation. To make matters worse, the prefrontal cortex has a novelty bias, 
meaning that its attention can be easily hijacked by something new – the 
proverbial shiny objects we use to entice infants, puppies, and kittens. The 
irony here for those of us who are trying to focus amid competing activities is 
clear: the very brain region we need to rely on for staying on task is easily 
distracted. We answer the phone, look up something on the internet, check our 
email, send an SMS, and each of these things tweaks the novelty- seeking, 
reward-seeking centres of the brain, causing a burst of endogenous opioids (no 
wonder it feels so good!), all to the detriment of our staying on task. It is 
the ultimate empty-caloried brain candy. Instead of reaping the big rewards 
that come from sustained, focused effort, we instead reap empty rewards from 
completing a thousand little sugar-coated tasks.

In the old days, if the phone rang and we were busy, we either didn’t answer 
or we turned the ringer off. When all phones were wired to a wall, there was no 
expectation of being able to reach us at all times – one might have gone out 
for a walk or been between places – and so if someone couldn’t reach you (or 
you didn’t feel like being reached), it was considered normal. Now more people 
have mobile phones than have toilets. This has created an implicit expectation 
that you should be able to reach someone when it is convenient for you, 
regardless of whether it is convenient for them. This expectation is so 
ingrained that people in meetings routinely answer their mobile phones to say, 
“I’m sorry, I can’t talk now, I’m in a meeting.” Just a decade or two ago, 
those same people would have let a landline on their desk go unanswered during 
a meeting, so different were the expectations for reachability.

Just having the opportunity to multitask is detrimental to cognitive 
performance. Glenn Wilson, former visiting professor of psychology at Gresham 
College, London, calls itinfo-mania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/oct/05/avoid-multitasking>. His 
research found that being in a situation where you are trying to concentrate on 
a task, and an email is sitting unread in your inbox, can reduce your effective 
IQ by 10 points. And although people ascribe many benefits to marijuana, 
including enhanced creativity and reduced pain and stress, it is well 
documented that its chief ingredient, cannabinol, activates dedicated 
cannabinol receptors in the brain and interferes profoundly with memory and 
with our ability to concentrate on several things at once. Wilson showed that 
the cognitive losses from multitasking are even greater than the cognitive 
losses from pot‑smoking.

Russ Poldrack, a neuroscientist at Stanford, found that learning information 
while multitasking causes the new information to go to the wrong part of the 
brain. If students study and watch TV at the same time, for example, the 
information from their schoolwork goes into the striatum, a region specialised 
for storing new procedures and skills, not facts and ideas. Without the 
distraction of TV, the information goes into the hippocampus, where it is 
organised and categorised in a variety of ways, making it easier to retrieve. 
MIT’s Earl Miller adds, “People can’t do [multitasking] very well, and when 
they say they can, they’re deluding themselves.” And it turns out the brain is 
very good at this deluding business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421423601293%2Fe09ac2f3-4bd0-46cd-bacc-4da100549717-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20modern%20world%20is%20bad%20for%20your%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20modern%20world%20is%20bad%20for%20your%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421423601293%2Fe09ac2f3-4bd0-46cd-bacc-4da100549717-2060x2060.jpeg>
 ‘Asking the brain to shift attention from one activity to another causes the 
prefrontal cortex and striatum to burn up oxygenated glucose, the same fuel 
they need to stay on task.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Then there are the metabolic costs that I wrote about earlier. Asking the 
brain to shift attention from one activity to another causes the prefrontal 
cortex and striatum to burn up oxygenated glucose, the same fuel they need to 
stay on task. And the kind of rapid, continual shifting we do with multitasking 
causes the brain to burn through fuel so quickly that we feel exhausted and 
disoriented after even a short time. We’ve literally depleted the nutrients in 
our brain. This leads to compromises in both cognitive and physical 
performance. Among other things, repeated task switching leads to anxiety, 
which raises levels of the stress hormone cortisol in the brain, which in turn 
can lead to aggressive and impulsive behaviour. By contrast, staying on task is 
controlled by the anterior cingulate and the striatum, and once we engage the 
central executive mode, staying in that state uses less energy than 
multitasking and actually reduces the brain’s need for glucose.

To make matters worse, lots of multitasking requires decision-making: Do I 
answer this text message or ignore it? How do I respond to this? How do I file 
this email? Do I continue what I’m working on now or take a break? It turns out 
that decision-making is also very hard on your neural resources and that little 
decisions appear to take up as much energy as big ones. One of the first things 
we lose is impulse control. This rapidly spirals into a depleted state in 
which, after making lots of insignificant decisions, we can end up making truly 
bad decisions about something important. Why would anyone want to add to their 
daily weight of information processing by trying to multitask?

In discussing information overload with Fortune 500 leaders, top scientists, 
writers, students, and small business owners, email comes up again and again as 
a problem. It’s not a philosophical objection to email itself, it’s the 
mind-numbing number of emails that come in. When the 10-year-old son of my 
neuroscience colleague Jeff Mogil (head of the Pain Genetics lab at McGill 
University) was asked what his father does for a living, he responded, “He 
answers emails.” Jeff admitted after some thought that it’s not so far from the 
truth. Workers in government, the arts, and industry report that the sheer 
volume of email they receive is overwhelming, taking a huge bite out of their 
day. We feel obliged to answer our emails, but it seems impossible to do so and 
get anything else done.

Before email, if you wanted to write to someone, you had to invest some effort 
in it. You’d sit down with pen and paper, or at a typewriter, and carefully 
compose a message. There wasn’t anything about the medium that lent itself to 
dashing off quick notes without giving them much thought, partly because of the 
ritual involved, and the time it took to write a note, find and address an 
envelope, add postage, and take the letter to a mailbox. Because the very act 
of writing a note or letter to someone took this many steps, and was spread out 
over time, we didn’t go to the trouble unless we had something important to 
say. Because of email’s immediacy, most of us give little thought to typing up 
any little thing that pops in our heads and hitting the send button. And email 
doesn’t cost anything.

Sure, there’s the money you paid for your computer and your internet 
connection, but there is no incremental cost to sending one more email. Compare 
this with paper letters. Each one incurred the price of the envelope and the 
postage stamp, and although this doesn’t represent a lot of money, these were 
in limited supply – if you ran out of them, you’d have to make a special trip 
to the stationery store and the post office to buy more, so you didn’t use them 
frivolously. The sheer ease of sending emails has led to a change in manners, a 
tendency to be less polite about what we ask of others. Many professionals tell 
a similar story. One said, “A large proportion of emails I receive are from 
people I barely know asking me to do something for them that is outside what 
would normally be considered the scope of my work or my relationship with them.
Email <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/email> somehow apparently makes 
it OK to ask for things they would never ask by phone, in person, or in snail 
mail.”

There are also important differences between snail mail and email on the 
receiving end. In the old days, the only mail we got came once a day, which 
effectively created a cordoned-off section of your day to collect it from the 
mailbox and sort it. Most importantly, because it took a few days to arrive, 
there was no expectation that you would act on it immediately. If you were 
engaged in another activity, you’d simply let the mail sit in the box outside 
or on your desk until you were ready to deal with it. Now email arrives 
continuously, and most emails demand some sort of action: Click on this link to 
see a video of a baby panda, or answer this query from a co-worker, or make 
plans for lunch with a friend, or delete this email as spam. All this activity 
gives us a sense that we’re getting things done – and in some cases we are. But 
we are sacrificing efficiency and deep concentration when we interrupt our 
priority activities with email.

Until recently, each of the many different modes of communication we used 
signalled its relevance, importance, and intent. If a loved one communicated 
with you via a poem or a song, even before the message was apparent, you had a 
reason to assume something about the nature of the content and its emotional 
value. If that same loved one communicated instead via a summons, delivered by 
an officer of the court, you would have expected a different message before 
even reading the document. Similarly, phone calls were typically used to 
transact different business from that of telegrams or business letters. The 
medium was a clue to the message. All of that has changed with email, and this 
is one of its overlooked disadvantages – because it is used for everything. In 
the old days, you might sort all of your postal mail into two piles, roughly 
corresponding to personal letters and bills. If you were a corporate manager 
with a busy schedule, you might similarly sort your telephone messages for 
callbacks. But emails are used for all of life’s messages. We compulsively 
check our email in part because we don’t know whether the next message will be 
for leisure/amusement, an overdue bill, a “to do”, a query… something you can 
do now, later, something life-changing, something irrelevant.

This uncertainty wreaks havoc with our rapid perceptual categorisation system, 
causes stress, and leads to decision overload. Every email requires a decision! 
Do I respond to it? If so, now or later? How important is it? What will be the 
social, economic, or job-related consequences if I don’t answer, or if I don’t 
answer right now?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421336895209%2F3c829983-d344-4eba-a99e-8f85cb7f574b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20modern%20world%20is%20bad%20for%20your%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20modern%20world%20is%20bad%20for%20your%20brain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fmodern-world-bad-for-brain-daniel-j-levitin-organized-mind-information-overload%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421336895209%2F3c829983-d344-4eba-a99e-8f85cb7f574b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Because it is limited in characters, texting discourages thoughtful 
discussion or any level of detail, and its addictive problems are compounded by 
its hyper-immediacy.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Now of course email is approaching obsolescence as a communicative medium. 
Most people under the age of 30 think of email as an outdated mode of 
communication used only by “old people”. In its place they text, and some still 
post to Facebook. They attach documents, photos, videos, and links to their 
text messages and Facebook posts the way people over 30 do with email. Many 
people under 20 now see Facebook as a medium for the older generation.

For them, texting has become the primary mode of communication. It offers 
privacy that you don’t get with phone calls, and immediacy you don’t get with 
email. Crisis hotlines have begun accepting calls from at-risk youth via 
texting and it allows them two big advantages: they can deal with more than one 
person at a time, and they can pass the conversation on to an expert, if 
needed, without interrupting the conversation.

But texting suffers from most of the problems of email and then some. Because 
it is limited in characters, it discourages thoughtful discussion or any level 
of detail. And the addictive problems are compounded by texting’s 
hyperimmediacy. Emails take some time to work their way through the internet 
and they require that you take the step of explicitly opening them. Text 
messages magically appear on the screen of your phone and demand immediate 
attention from you. Add to that the social expectation that an unanswered text 
feels insulting to the sender, and you’ve got a recipe for addiction: you 
receive a text, and that activates your novelty centres. You respond and feel 
rewarded for having completed a task (even though that task was entirely 
unknown to you 15 seconds earlier). Each of those delivers a shot of dopamine 
as your limbic system cries out “More! More! Give me more!”

In a famous experiment <http://neuroblog.stanford.edu/?p=3733>, my McGill 
colleagues Peter Milner and James Olds, both neuroscientists, placed a small 
electrode in the brains of rats, in a small structure of the limbic system 
called the nucleus accumbens. This structure regulates dopamine production and 
is the region that “lights up” when gamblers win a bet, drug addicts take 
cocaine, or people have orgasms – Olds and Milner called it the pleasure 
centre. A lever in the cage allowed the rats to send a small electrical signal 
directly to their nucleus accumbens. Do you think they liked it? Boy how they 
did! They liked it so much that they did nothing else. They forgot all about 
eating and sleeping. Long after they were hungry, they ignored tasty food if 
they had a chance to press that little chrome bar; they even ignored the 
opportunity for sex. The rats just pressed the lever over and over again, until 
they died of starvation and exhaustion. Does that remind you of anything? A 
30-year-old man died in Guangzhou (China)after playing video games continuously 
for three days 
<http://www.gamespot.com/articles/gamer-dies-after-diablo-iii-marathon/1100-6387472/>
. Another man died in Daegu (Korea) after playing video games almost 
continuously for 50 hours,stopped only by his going into cardiac arrest 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4137782.stm>.

Each time we dispatch an email in one way or another, we feel a sense of 
accomplishment, and our brain gets a dollop of reward hormones telling us we 
accomplished something. Each time we check aTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> feed or Facebook update, we 
encounter something novel and feel more connected socially (in a kind of weird, 
impersonal cyber way) and get another dollop of reward hormones. But remember, 
it is the dumb, novelty-seeking portion of the brain driving the limbic system 
that induces this feeling of pleasure, not the planning, scheduling, 
higher-level thought centres in the prefrontal cortex. Make no mistake: email-, 
Facebook- and Twitter-checking constitute a neural addiction.

© Daniel J. Levitin. Extracted from The Organized Mind: Thinking Straight in 
the Age of Information Overload, published by Viking (£20).Click here to buy it 
for £16. <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/organized-mind.html>
 