
In recent years Latin America has had more female presidents 
<http://www.diplomaticourier.com/latin-america-s-leading-ladies/> than any 
other part of the world. Yet none of these women during their triumphant 
electoral campaigns had to face as biased and derogatory propaganda, as close a 
scrutiny, as Hillary Clinton in her attempt to become the first woman to be 
president of the US.

Although public opinion has indeed changed and the latest polls suggest Clinton
is favoured to win, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/us/elections/polls.html> a decade ago 
just 60% of Americans thought the country wasready for a female president 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/271866-poll-most-americans-ready-for-female-president>
 – the same year that Chile elected Michele Bachelet as its first female head 
of state.

Argentina’s Isabel Peron was the first woman 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-11447598> to become president in 
the region in 1974, and between 1990 to 2014, a record number of women were 
elected as political leaders. After Violeta Chamorro in Nicaragua, Panama 
elected Mireya Moscoso in 1999; in Chile, Bachelet in 2006 and 2014; Argentina 
elected Cristina Fernández de Kirchner in 2007 and 2011; Brazil elected Dilma 
Rousseff in 2010 and, in the same year, Costa Rica elected Laura Chinchilla.

I believe that behind every macho man there’s an insecure boy in need of 
mothering



But how is it that in a region which is home to seven of the 10 countries with 
the highest rate of female murder victims 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/democraciaabierta/mimi-yagoub/why-does-latin-america-have-worlds-highest-female-murder-rates>
, a region that’s all too known for its reigning machismo, where only less than
half of the female population makes an income, 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/01/23/gender-inequality-latin-america_n_4653710.html)>
 women have access to a levelof political representation 
<http://www.idea.int/publications/wip/upload/Chapter1-Htun-feb03.pdf> second 
only to the Scandinavian countries?

And why is it that in a culture like the US women have had so much trouble 
rising in the ranks, while in countries where machismo is the norm, men have 
been so open minded by comparison?

I believe that behind every macho man there’s an insecure boy in need of 
mothering, so in Latin America men in all their virile glory have not disputed 
the suitability of women for the higher office.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fmacho-latin-america-elected-more-female-leaders-than-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30530da5c8fe984d0cbb32c8f18f76e7700c5cb3%2F186_40_1201_1501%2F1201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20has%20'macho'%20Latin%20America%20elected%20more%20female%20leaders%20than%20the%20US%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fmacho-latin-america-elected-more-female-leaders-than-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20has%20%27macho%27%20Latin%20America%20elected%20more%20female%20leaders%20than%20the%20US%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fmacho-latin-america-elected-more-female-leaders-than-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30530da5c8fe984d0cbb32c8f18f76e7700c5cb3%2F186_40_1201_1501%2F1201.jpg>
 Isabel Peron, the first woman to become president in Latin America.
 Photograph: Eduardo Di Baia/AP 
Machismo divides women into two categories: sexual beings to be conquered and 
possessed, and mothers as authority figures that embody everything that is 
virtuous, gracious and worthy of praise in female nature. And in Latin culture 
the mother archetype is very powerful. In the case of Cristina Fernández, she 
embodied the widow following the death of her husband, the former president 
Néstor Kirchner – a woman in pain that men are expected to defend and protect. 
While Laura Chinchilla, who sufferedthe most gender-specific attacks 
<http://www.eluniversal.com/internacional/130512/prejuicios-machistas-castigan-buena-gestion-de-chinchilla>
, being younger and attractive, was accepted as the chosen one because of the 
patronage of former president Oscar Arias.

My theory might be questionable and I have no way of proving it – it is based 
on my powers of observation as a writer and my feminine intuition. But having 
said that, there are two other objective factors: the extraordinary 
participation of women in the struggles of the 70s and 80s when dictatorial 
regimes in the region were confronted by popular uprisings, conspiracies and 
guerrilla groups.

In Nicaragua, for example, the first guerrilla force that managed to liberate 
a major city during the 1979 insurrection was composed entirely of women. We 
women joined revolts and became experienced in grassroots organising, political 
activism, diplomacy, and combat. When it came time to build democratic 
societies, we claimed a place in governments and power structures.

Nevertheless, the trend was still to have women resume their traditional 
roles. And because many refused to be relegated to status quo and go back to 
the kitchen or the practice of home economics, they focused their energy on 
organising powerful social movements, NGOs and feminist organisations. These 
strengths account for the quotas that have been adopted by 16 Latin American 
countries and allowed them to have one woman for every four legislators 
<http://www.worldpolicy.org/latin-women-take-helm>. Only the Nordic countries 
have higher ratios.

Violence against women harms us all: will measuring the pain help prevent it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/28/violence-against-women-harms-us-all-will-measuring-the-pain-help-prevent-it>
It is a big step to have women as presidents, but in the patriarchal structure 
of power we have all inherited, very often women are still forced to prove that 
they are as “tough” as the toughest of men. A woman president who would defy 
the masculine model of power and infuse it with the feminine ethic of caring 
and real equality is still in the making. Although women as Latin American 
leaders have many challenges ahead, they have managed to get to the right 
place, and now they have to be daring enough to seize or declare that it is the 
right time.

Gioconda Belli is a Nicaraguan poet, writer and political activist



Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Follow the conversation on the 
hashtag#LatAmNow <https://twitter.com/hashtag/LatAmNow?src=hash>.
 