
The Cascade Lakes highway runs southwest out of my hometown in Bend, Oregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/oregon>, for about 20 miles, climbing out 
of the high desert and into the mountains before it ends rather abruptly at a 
place where winter begins. The transformation is shocking. It can be a sunny, 
almost warm day in town and, 3,000ft and 30 minutes later, a raging blizzard. 
Ponderosa pines give way to hemlocks and spruce. The land buckles into great 
volcanic welts. The snow on the ground can swell from nothing to a cushion 12ft 
deep.

I hopped out of my truck at a small parking area at the end of that road. It 
was still dark out, a little before 6am, and the crisp air felt like needles in 
my nose. Soon the chairlifts would begin spinning atMount Bachelor 
<http://www.mtbachelor.com/site/index.html>, a ski resort just across the road, 
but we’d be far away by then. I put climbing skins on the bottom of my skis, 
clicked in and glided off into the woods.

My friend Ralph Tadday, like me, had moved to this corner of the Pacific 
Northwest largely to ski, and roads like these mean that if you’re willing to 
hike off them, there isn’t a month you can’t find snow here. We skied largely 
in silence, our worlds reduced to the cone of light cast from our headlamps. He 
was strong, fit from years of playing football in Germany, and pulled ahead of 
me, inch by inch. In my pack I carried a shovel and a probe while a locator 
beacon blipped under my jacket: rescue gear in case of an avalanche. Ahead lay 
our goal, the western flank of Broken Top, an ancient volcano that blotted out 
the stars on the horizon. If we hustled, we could ski it a few times and be 
back at the truck by dusk.

What a journey it had been already, just to be here now. I didn’t exactly hate 
backcountry skiing at first, but I didn’t love it either. I was living in New 
Mexico, where some friends would get up in the pre-dawn light to skin 1,700ft 
up the slopes of a local hill in the wind-scoured Sangre de Cristo mountains. 
My heart exploded on the climbs, which took hours for descents that were over 
in minutes. My gear was pitiful. It was exercise and a cheap way to ski.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwild-skiiing-oregon-america-norway-switzerland-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192729313%2F4e175e1e-3481-43af-bef5-e8ce10bdb914-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20skiing%3A%20from%20Oregon%20to%20Bosnia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwild-skiiing-oregon-america-norway-switzerland-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20skiing%3A%20from%20Oregon%20to%20Bosnia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwild-skiiing-oregon-america-norway-switzerland-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192729313%2F4e175e1e-3481-43af-bef5-e8ce10bdb914-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Open house: sorting gear at a small cabin in Kosovo. Photograph: Tim 
Neville/Observer 
Eventually I bought better skis, better skins, better bindings and better 
boots. My body adapted and my technique improved. I stepped away from the 
resorts and into the wilderness, learning how to watch out for avalanches and 
choose safer routes. I found my own rhythm and climbed at my own pace – a 
breathe-slide-slide song of call and response – that sent me gliding through 
the mountains with an efficiency that was right for me. It all became so 
personal. Instead of leering at a mountain anonymously from a chair, I could 
run my body over its shoulders, feel it tense up into ridges and relax into 
bowls. The soft rush of snowflakes settling on to hemlocks isn’t so soft when 
that is all there is to hear.

Finally there was a woman involved as well. I met Heidi in Montana, where we’d 
climb high into the backcountry of the Bridger mountains where no ski lifts 
ran, then bounce back to cold beers through snow that felt slightly thicker 
than air. She moved to Oregon for a job and I soon followed. Like Ralph, the 
winter kept us here.

To be sure, backcountry skiing is no lonely man’s sport. Out amid the cornices 
and the wind slabs is no place to dream, and venturing into the uncontrolled 
wilds with a friend can mean the difference between six weeks in a cast and 
someone finding your corpse come spring. An avalanche rescue beacon does no 
good if no one is around to track it. Besides, friends make the suffering of 
even a good day fun.

Soon I was travelling around the world looking for places to ski and the 
people who loved it as much as me. I skied among the blasted-out ruins of 
Bosnia. I toured with hippies as high as the peaks in Nelson, British Columbia, 
and laid tracks in Washington with a friend who would later officiate at my 
wedding. I jetted off to Japan, where I soaked in hot springs after a long tour 
and watched a fox that slept in the snow. I was halfway up a volcano there, a 
cone called Big Snow Mountain in Japanese, when Heidi called to say she was 
pregnant.

My family grew both at home and away. I skied with housewives in Switzerland. 
In Kosovo I met a family of Serbs who took me in, plied me with booze and led 
me deep into the folds of the Sharr mountains with their Albanian friends. I 
met formerKLA fighters <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kosovo_Liberation_Army> 
who’d fashioned their own skis out of trees and lashed them to their boots with 
leather. Together we found unlimited lines of untracked snow, high-fived at 
their bases and celebrated our bonds over our differences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwild-skiiing-oregon-america-norway-switzerland-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192888922%2Fd820f6df-b1cb-4bf0-9dd1-db19cd0ce186-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20skiing%3A%20from%20Oregon%20to%20Bosnia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwild-skiiing-oregon-america-norway-switzerland-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20skiing%3A%20from%20Oregon%20to%20Bosnia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fwild-skiiing-oregon-america-norway-switzerland-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415192888922%2Fd820f6df-b1cb-4bf0-9dd1-db19cd0ce186-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ralph Tadday slides off a cornice in the Three Sisters Wilderness in Oregon. 
Photograph: Tim Neville/Observer 
I have more responsibilities than I used to. I’m a father. I have bills. My 
time is more of a loan than an asset, and backcountry outings demand a lot. 
Sometimes I still just shell out the cash, ride the lifts and bang out the runs.

Not that day. Ralph and I carried on. The pale winter sun seeped into the sky 
and we gained a ridge that climbed steadily up the volcano. The Three Sisters – 
South, Middle and North: all volcanoes that I would climb and ski over the 
years – loomed around us. In the distance sat a small saddle where in a few 
years I’d spend days building a modest village of igloos close to my favourite 
backcountry runs. I’d call it Glooville, my very own private retreat. Antics 
like that will keep me young, even when I’m old.

Each year I tell myself I’ll spend more time in the woods, on skis, with 
people like Ralph, Heidi and the Serbs. We’ll slip through the glades like 
smelly elves and reminisce over the times the powder was so deep it’d well up 
around our chests. One day I’ll get my daughter out here and she’ll build the 
’gloos with me.

For now, there was only the moment at hand. Ralph and I reached the top around 
10.30am, tired but energised, too. Below us lay 2,000ft of the creamiest snow 
in the state. We stripped off our skins. We sorted our packs. And then we 
disappeared over the edge in a big poof of white.

Flat out: great places for cross-country skiing


Norway Three hours from Oslo, Skeikampen, alongside the Gudbrandsdalen Valley, 
is family-friendly and known for its cross-country offering. There are more 
than 600km of routes, including the Peer Gynt Trail. Ibsen claimed that his 
hero was inspired by a real man who lived in the area. The famous route is 
relatively flat and gives great views of the Jotunheimen and Rondane mountain 
ranges. Built in the 1930s, the Thon Hotel Skeikampen is clean and comfortable (
thonhotels.com <http://www.thonhotels.com/>).

Switzerland For a more civilised village-to-village approach than you might 
get in the roaming wilds of Scandinavia, head to the Alps. The routes are 
lower, the season is shorter, but there are hundreds of kilometres of linked 
routes, dotted with agreeable restaurants. If the weather turns there are also 
spas, and reliable trains. Try Pontresina, the little resort near where 
Nietzsche used to come to gather his thoughts. The will to powder? Stay at the 
Grand Hotel Kronenhof (kronenhof.com <http://www.kronenhof.com/>).

Canada The Laurentians, north of Montreal, contain more than 1,000km of 
country trails through vast forests and alongside sprawling lakes. There are 
several excellent resorts, but try Tremblant, which has everything you could 
want from a modern ski venue: good accommodation, a jaunty nightlife and plenty 
to do if you don’t fancy skiing. Strap on your skins, however, and you will 
quickly be in the Canadian wilderness. The Hôtel Quintessence, in Tremblant sur 
le Lac, is cosy and luxurious (hotelquintessence.com 
<http://www.hotelquintessence.com/en/>).
 