
Beijing has won the battle to host the 2022 Winter Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> after the Chinese 
president, Xi Jinping, made a last-minute vow to lay on a “fantastic, 
extraordinary and excellent” event. Beijing defeated its rival Almaty in 
Kazakhstan by 44 votes to 40, with one IOC member abstaining.

International Olympic Committee delegates handed the 2022 Olympic and 
Paralympic events to Beijing on Friday afternoon following a secret ballot in 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

“We are honoured and humbled by the International Olympic Committee’s decision 
to award Beijing the 2022 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games,” Beijing’s bid 
committee said in a statement. “It is with an incredible sense of excitement 
that we express our thanks to the IOC and the wider Olympic movement. Just as 
with the Beijing 2008 Summer Games, the Olympic family has put its faith in 
Beijing again to deliver the athlete-centred, sustainable and economical Games 
we have promised.

“This will be a memorable event at the foot of the Great Wall for the whole 
Olympic family, the athletes and the spectators that will further enhance the 
tremendous potential to grow winter sports in our country, in Asia and around 
the world. We would like to congratulate Almaty 2022 for their campaign. We 
wish to thank once again all the Chinese people and people around the world who 
have supported Beijing 2022 in this extraordinary bid journey.”

Earlier, the president Xi threw his weight behind China’s bid, promising the 
“strongest support” for the Beijing Games in a one-minute video address to the 
IOC delegates.

Winter Olympics 2022 decision: Beijing beats Almaty to host Games – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jul/31/winter-olympics-2022-decision-beijing-v-almaty-live>
A Beijing Olympics would “boost exchanges and mutual understanding between the 
Chinese and other civilisations of the world,”Xi said 
<http://video.sina.com.cn/p/news/w/v/2015-07-31/121765046185.html>. “The 
Chinese people are looking forward to this opportunity. Let me assure you that 
if you choose Beijing the Chinese people will present to the world a fantastic, 
extraordinary and excellent Olympic Winter Games in Beijing.”

Beijing’s mayor, Wang Anshun, vowed to deliver “Games that are joyful and 
harmonious, Games that are safe and reliable”.

The 2022 Beijing Winter Games will in fact be split between three Olympic 
sites: one in the city of Zhangjiakou, 125 miles from Beijing in the Hebei 
province, another in Yanqing, a mountainous region to Beijing’s north-west, and 
a third in China’s sprawling capital itself.

A key component of Beijing’s winning bid was its pledge to tackle the toxic 
air pollution <http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-07/28/c_134456417.htm> 
that often enshrouds the city. Beijing’s mayor told IOC delegates huge steps 
had been taken since his city hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics, with one million 
high-emissions vehicles forced from its roads. “All our efforts are moving 
Beijing towards a clean energy future,” Wang said.

Chinese officials have also dismissed concerns over a dearth of natural 
snowfall in the region around Beijing. Almaty’s campaign slogan – “Keeping it 
real” – was a not-so-subtle swipe at China’s promise to compensate with 
artificial snow. “Real snow, real winter ambience, real winter Games,”boasted a 
promotional video for Almaty 2022 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7pIPvk6xk5I&feature=youtu.be>.

But Liu Peng, the president of the Chinese Olympic Committee, batted away 
Kazakhstan’s provocations. “Ski resorts have been operating in Zhangjiakou for 
decades,” he said on Friday. “Beijing 2022 will build on its existing 
snow-making capability to supplement natural snow fall.”

Nor was the lack of a winter sports culture in China an issue. Chinese 
officials have said they hope the Beijing Winter Olympics will ignite “a winter 
sports passion” that will helpcreate a £535m industry in China by 2025 
<http://www.beijing-2022.cn/a/20150507/015863.htm>.

“Winter sports fever is sweeping our nation,” claimed Liu, adding that more 
than one million Chinese teenagers were now ice skating regularly. “Twenty 
years agoChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> had less than 10 ski 
resorts. We now have more than 500.”

In 2001, Beijing’s selection as the host city for the 2008 Summer Olympics 
sparked an international outcryamid criticism of China’s human rights record <>
. In the runup to Friday’s vote activists had again called on the IOC to reject 
Beijing’s bid in response toa “human rights crisis” they believe is under way 
in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/29/beijing-2022-winter-olympics-bid-human-rights-activists>
.

Amnesty International says at least 231 people have been detained or 
questioned in recent weeks as part of what campaigners, diplomats and observers 
describe as anunprecedented crackdown on human rights lawyers 
<https://www.amnesty.org/press-releases/2015/07/china-list-of-lawyers-and-activists-targeted>
.

But Jin Shan, a sports commentator, said the victory would give “a huge boost” 
to China’s attempts to build a 5 trillion yuan (£516bn) sports industry and 
would create millions of jobs. Beijing’s triumph would also prove a tonic for 
ambitious plans to create “Jing-jin-ji”, a 130 million-population megacity
around the Chinese capital 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/20/world/asia/in-china-a-supercity-rises-around-beijing.html>
, Jin added.

There was no risk Olympic facilities would be become “white elephants” after 
the event was over. “I live close to the Bird’s Nest stadium and the Water Cube 
and see many people visiting both venues every day,” he said. “We have a huge 
population and there will be great demand for these sports venues after the 
Games.”

Beijing’s mayor claimed 92% of the country supported the 2022 Olympic 
campaign. Yet many Chinese have reacted with indifference. “Don’t waste 
taxpayers’ money,” one user of Weibo, China’s Twitter, wrote on Friday. “Is the 
country’s reputation more important than improving people’s lives?”

Additional reporting by Luna Lin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbeijing-wins-right-host-winter-olympics-2022%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438338904327%2F27095b30-6834-4528-84dc-95d604eab2eb-2060x1370.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Winter%20Olympics%202022%3A%20Beijing%20chosen%20ahead%20of%20Almaty%20to%20host%20Games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbeijing-wins-right-host-winter-olympics-2022%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Winter%20Olympics%202022%3A%20Beijing%20chosen%20ahead%20of%20Almaty%20to%20host%20Games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fbeijing-wins-right-host-winter-olympics-2022%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438338904327%2F27095b30-6834-4528-84dc-95d604eab2eb-2060x1370.jpeg>
 The Beijing delegation celebrates. Photograph: Olivia Harris/AFP/Getty Images  