
Sophie Walker believes that British businesses are sitting on a lucrative 
untapped resource that could help to stop a decline in global financial markets 
and a slowdown in the world economy. That resource is women.

“We are in the crazy situation where economists are issuing really gloomy 
forecasts about growth, and on the other we have McKinsey [the consultancy] 
saying if we close the gender pay gap, we can add something like $28tn to the 
global economy,” she explains. “There is a huge opportunity there that is not 
being taken.”

Walker is at the forefront of trying to unlock this resource as the leader of 
the new Women’sEquality <https://www.theguardian.com/society/equality> party, 
and as its candidate for the London mayoral election in May.

After a whirlwind start, the Women’s Equality Party faces its first test – a 
call for quotas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/18/women-equality-party-politics-first-test-quotas>
The party was founded a year ago by the broadcaster Sandi Toksvig and the 
author Catherine Mayer. It opened for members from July and hasalready signed 
up 45,000 members and supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/22/womens-equality-party-problem-wep-ukip-eu-feminism>
 and raised more than £50,000.

Walker worked as a journalist for 20 years, latterly as a financial journalist 
at Reuters, and says shejoined the party because of a “lifetime of experiences”.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/24/womens-equality-party-make-it-happen>

“I think we have tapped into a really deep sense of frustration,” she says. 
“Yes, it has grown very fast but actually I am not that surprised because, at 
the last election, very many people in this country felt they were not being 
heard, seen and listened to. It was a conversation among people who had already 
decided what the parameters of that conversation were.

“When you look at where we are in terms of existing deep structural problems 
of inequality between women and men, it seems staggering to me for that we are 
still just talking about how to make the EqualPay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> Act work when it is 45 years old, and 
that we are still talking about how we parent equally. Lots and lots of young 
men are joining our party because they are deeply frustrated by the very 
traditional and unimaginative options that are being presented to them.”

Walker describes her party’s policy document as an “economic document” which 
is anchored in equal pay, equal opportunities and equal rights.

“At the moment I am talking to lots of business people as part of our 
manifesto for London,” she explains. “London is like a concentration of where 
everything has gone wrong. We see it as a place that is a brilliant place to 
live, but actually if you are woman living in London you are more likely to be 
unemployed and you are more likely to be living in poverty. Last year alone 
London’s women earned £50bn less than London’s men. The pay gap is bigger – the 
national average pay gap is about 15%, inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> it’s 23%.

“So I have been talking to lots of businesses in London about how we tackle 
this. What is really encouraging to me is actually I think the stars have 
aligned. Everybody is now in the same place where they understand that 
diversity in business is a really crucial profit driver. It is not a women’s 
issue any more, it’s a business issue.”

The party’s proposals include introducing quotas so that 50% of a company’s 
board and 50% of its executive committee are made up of women within the next 
10 years.

Boardroom gender quotas are a controversial topic among men and women, but 
Walker reckons the time has come for them to be introduced. The 
government-backed Davies review set a target of 25% of FTSE 100 directors being 
female by 2015, which was met, and at least a third by 2020. However, Walker
believes that companies can go much further. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/campaign-women-top-jobs-man-sir-philip-hampton-business-leaders>

“I think it is disappointing that we are still only looking at representing 
51% of the population with 30% targets,” she says.

“We have said from the get-go that we would want to see quotas. That was the 
result of talking to our members. The answer came back loud and clear from the 
membership – it’s time for quotas because the way we are approaching it now 
isn’t working.”

Ten facts you might not know about the gender pay gap | Laura Bates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/10/ten-things-you-should-know-about-the-gender-pay-gap>
Other policies include an overhaul of maternity and paternity policies so that 
there is shared parental leave of six weeks at 90% for both partners, and free 
childcare from nine months.

“We are in a situation where I think less than 10% of men in the UK take the 
two weeks paternity leave that you are offered,” Walker says. “There is a huge 
amount of work to do because many men actually want to take it and feel very 
frustrated that they can’t, because they are the chief breadwinner or the 
workplace culture says that they can’t.

“That is a really key part of our policy plank – to say that we can parent 
equally and we are free to make real choices about how we balance work, life 
and family.”

Walker also wants to encourage more girls and young women to take up careers 
linked to the Stem (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) subjects 
and, crucially, wants companies to be more transparent about the pay and 
opportunities that women are offered.

“There are two things here – there is equal pay and then the gender gap,” she 
says. “They are often jumbled up as one big very difficult problem that we 
can’t fix because its ‘Oh, it’s really hard’. But on equal pay I think it’s 
very simple. We should have full transparency of what is going on within 
Britain’s companies.


“There is an annual report that already goes out, lets add an extra page on 
what is going on inside – a full breakdown of pay – what men are earning, what 
women are earning, what levels they are at within the company, whether they are 
working full-time or part-time, what the stickiness levels are before and after 
parental leave, break it all down by ethnicity and disability. Then you get a 
proper look.”

Walker says it is disappointing that the government has not done more to 
promote transparency, particularly because the companies she is speaking to are 
increasingly willing to cooperate.

“I am not going to sit here and give you a list of all the really bad ones,” 
she explains. “We have spoken to lots of different companies. I think there is 
a huge amount of work we can do in tech. I think actually what is going to 
happen is that tech will lead the way because tech is a very young, diverse 
industry which is just not prepared to put up with old-fashioned ways of doing 
things any more.”

Gender pay gap: women effectively working for free until end of year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/09/gender-pay-gap-women-working-free-until-end-of-year>
It is vital that London changes from an economic perspective, Walker adds, 
because otherwise it will become less attractive as a place to work.

“If London wants to continue to attract the best talent it has to present 
itself as an imaginative and creative place to work and not a place with 
companies that have got 10 men on the board who all work very set hours. I 
think increasingly we are seeing women break out of unfulfilling, unimaginative 
workplaces. We have seen various stages of brain-drain from British industry 
when the conditions weren’t right and unless Britain’s businesses really get on 
top of this, the same thing is going to happen again.”

 At the moment, “there is a bit of fiddling at this and a bit of fiddling at 
that. But actually it’s not complicated. It’s complex, but not complicated.”
 