
The Guardian and Observer were two papers to start women’s pages that appealed 
to both sexes, but reading theTimes a few days ago showed, without any special 
section, just how far women have got. There was Miriam Margolyes joining Mark 
Rylance to save theGoodwin Sands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/19/dredging-proposed-kent-marine-conservation-zone-risk>
, Serena Williams cutting off an interviewer who suggested she shouldn’t be 
paid as much as men, and any number of novelists, artists and so on doing just 
about everything.

And politically, women are getting just about everywhere. Angela Merkel, 
Hillary Clinton, Christine Lagarde,Luciana Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/luciana-berger>, and now Britain gets its 
second female prime minister – Theresa May. Of course, theDail Mail felt 
obliged to headline an article before Andrea Leadsom pulled out: “Two 
contenders on parade, two different skirt lengths.”

One can’t help but feel, though, after men caused all the mess that we find 
ourselves in, that women are being sent in to mop up the mess. I always feel 
when I’m in hospital, as the invariably male doctors cut you up, the invariably 
female nurses clean up after them – after which point you might get home.

Even in business, while the huge corporations are still run predominantly by 
men, I am always amazed by how many of the smaller more dynamic companies are 
founded and run by women. The same is true of the charities.

There are, I suppose, jobs that will never be feminised, but I wonder if soon 
it won’t only be the pope. The endless discussion on whether it is better for 
everything to be unisex – should women play men at their own game or create 
their own parallel systems? – may never come to an end, but really I think, as 
ever, it’s mostly a matter of what we can get away with.

What do you think? Have your say below
 