
David Bowie’s latest album, released last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
 to coincide with his 69th birthday, has been described as his “parting gift” 
as collaborators and friends paid tribute to the iconic star after the 
unexpected announcement of his death.


Friends and collaborators recalled Bowie’s final interactions with them amid a 
re-examination of Blackstar, his final work. It includes a new single, Lazarus, 
whose video opens with theimage of a dead spaceman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kszLwBaC4Sw> and which begins: “Look up here, 
I’m in heaven.”

In a Facebook post, Tony Visconti 
<https://www.facebook.com/tony.visconti1/posts/10208522003550232?fref=nf>, who 
produced a series of Bowie’s albums, revealed the significance to Bowie of 
Blackstar, his 25th and final studio album, released to critical acclaim.

“He always did what he wanted to do,” wrote Visconti, who was a producer on 
Blackstar as well as Young Americans and his seminal Berlin trilogy: Low, 
Heroes and Lodger.

“And he wanted to do it his way and he wanted to do it the best way. His death 
was no different from his life – a work of art.”


Blackstar was the first Bowie release not to feature a picture of him on the 
cover: instead, a stylised black star heralded a darker work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Flazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lazarus%2C%20from%20David%20Bowie's%20last%20album%2C%20Blackstar%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Flazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lazarus%2C%20from%20David%20Bowie%27s%20last%20album%2C%20Blackstar%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Flazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video&media=>
Lazarus, from David Bowie’s last album, Blackstar – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/lazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video>
Visconti added: “He made Blackstar for us, his parting gift. I knew for a year 
this was the way it would be. I wasn’t, however, prepared for it. He was an 
extraordinary man, full of love and life. He will always be with us. For now, 
it is appropriate to cry.”

Bowie had kept news of his cancer diagnosis from all but a few close 
associates. His desire for privacy – and for his message to speak through his 
work – was achieved by a small inner circle including his manager, Coco Schwab;
archivist Jimmy King 
<http://www.davidbowie.com/news/exclusive-jimmy-king-bowie-birthday-photograph-48486>
; Bowie’s wife, Iman, and daughter, Lexi; and Visconti.

It was broadly known that Bowie’s onstage heart attack in 2004 had left him 
frail. But a sudden death was not foreseen, whatever the portents that can now 
be seen Blackstar.

“He considered [privacy] the greatest luxury,” said one friend familiar with 
the singer’s thinking, who did not wish to be named. “It was paramount to him 
in the way he lived his life over the last few years.”

The death of Bowie, who had a profound influence on music, fashion and 
sexuality in a career spanning more than half a century, was confirmed on in a 
Facebook post on his official page early on Monday. “David Bowie died 
peacefully today surrounded by his family after a courageous 18-month battle 
with cancer. While many of you will share in this loss, we ask that you respect 
the family’s privacy during their time of grief.”


Writing on Twitter <https://twitter.com/ManMadeMoon/status/686441083648212992>
, Bowie’s son, the film director Duncan Jones, 44, said: “Very sorry and sad to 
say it’s true.” Some were initially sceptical, but Bowie’s publicist, Steve 
Martin, told Reuters: “It’s not a hoax.”

'We thought he'd go on for ever': Bowie fans gather worldwide to pay tribute
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-fans-gather-worldwide-to-pay-tribute>
Belgian theatre director Ivo van Hove, who worked with Bowie on his last stage 
musical Lazarus in New York, said the singer had been suffering from liver 
cancer.

Hove, who attended the premiere of Lazarus with Bowie in December, told Dutch 
NPO radio: 
<http://nos.nl/artikel/2079806-bowie-voerde-een-ongelooflijke-strijd.html>“I 
have lived for a long time with the knowledge this was coming. I was with him 
on stage at the premiere of Lazarus a few weeks ago. I knew when he got into 
the car that it might be the last time.

“He had told me in confidence and I never broke that confidence. He told me 
about a year and three months ago, soon after he found out himself. Liver 
cancer.”

He said Bowie refused to postpone Lazarus. “He absolutely did not want to and 
I knew why. It reminded me of Dennis Potter, who kept on writing scenarios and 
scripts right up to his deathbed, in a fight against death and it was the same 
with [Bowie] too. He put up an incredible fight. He really didn’t want to die.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-fans-pay-tribute-with-mass-sing-along-in-brixton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20fans%20pay%20tribute%20with%20mass%20sing-along%20in%20Brixton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-fans-pay-tribute-with-mass-sing-along-in-brixton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20fans%20pay%20tribute%20with%20mass%20sing-along%20in%20Brixton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-fans-pay-tribute-with-mass-sing-along-in-brixton-video&media=>
David Bowie fans pay tribute with mass sing-along in Brixton. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-fans-pay-tribute-with-mass-sing-along-in-brixton-video>
He added: “It was incredibly painful to watch. He came to the rehearsals and 
walk-throughs as often as possible. And stayed, and I saw how much effort it 
was taking.

“At the premiere he seemed to be glowing with health, but afterwards he had to 
sit down right away. We chatted for 15 minutes. It has been very intense, 
working together but also keeping the secret.”

A long-time Bowie collaborator, the producer Brian Eno, told of how his death 
had come as a “complete surprise, as did nearly everything else about him” and 
revealed that he had received an email from him seven days ago.


“It was as funny as always, and as surreal, looping through word games and 
allusions and all the usual stuff we did. It ended with this sentence: ‘Thank 
you for our good times, brian. they will never rot’. And it was signed ‘Dawn’.

“I realise now he was saying goodbye.”

Eno, who knew Bowie for 40 years, said that they had started talking a year 
ago about revisiting Outside, the last album they worked on together, and 
“taking it somewhere new”.

Bowie’s 25 albums produced a string of hits including Changes, Life on Mars 
and Ashes to Ashes. He was known for experimenting across diverse musical 
genres, and for his alter egos – Ziggy Stardust, Aladdin Sane and the Thin 
White Duke. He also had a notable acting career.


Those joining in tributes included Mick Jagger, who collaborated with Bowie on 
the 1985 single Dancing in the Street, and said Bowie was always an inspiration 
to him and “a true original”.

“He was wonderfully shameless in his work,” Jagger said on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/MickJagger/status/686604420583428096>, where he described 
him as a friend he would never forget.
Mick Jagger (@MickJagger) 
We had so many good times together. He was my friend, I will never forget him. 
2/2pic.twitter.com/9xfPj88x8b <https://t.co/9xfPj88x8b>
 <https://twitter.com/MickJagger/status/686604493631418368> January 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MickJagger/status/686604493631418368> 
Another British rock legend, Pete Townshend of The Who, paid tribute on the 
band’s website <http://thewho.com/david-bowie/>.

“For those who were his fans he was a charismatic and exotic creature and 
still gloriously beautiful even as he approached 70. But face to face he was 
funny, clever, well-read, excited by the arts, and really good company.

“We have also lost a wonderful clown whose combined sense of mischief and 
creativity delightedly touched our hearts.David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> was my Salvador Dali.”

Describing him as a visionary artist, Bruce Springsteen said that Bowie had 
been an early supporter. “Over here on E Street, we’re feeling the great loss 
of David Bowie,” Springsteentold followers  
<https://twitter.com/springsteen/status/686618900335845376>on Twitter. “Always 
changing and ahead of the curve, he was an artist whose excellence you aspired 
to.”


An hour after the news of Bowie’s death broke on Monday, fans began to gather 
near his apartment on Lafayette Street in the Soho district of New York. The 
first, Kate Corman, left a candle and flowers. “First Lou Reed, now David 
Bowie. It’s so sad. Unbelievable. New York is really over now,” she said.


‎At Puckfair, a bar across the street from Bowie’s apartment and frequented by 
the singer, the barman played a string of his hits – Jean Genie, Let’s Dance 
and Heroes. “It’s hard to put into words what he gave us in his songs,” said 
customer Bill Marlborough. “If you don’t feel it, I can’t explain.”

Flowers and tributes were also laid at a mural on a wall in Brixton, south 
London, where the singer was born, and a candle was placed outside a property 
in Stansfield Road, thought to be his childhood home.


Bowie had been absent from public view for a decade. After a heart attack 
while touring in 2004 there were only a few low-key live appearances – his last 
at a charity show in New York in 2006 when he performed alongside Alicia Keys – 
and an acting role in the film The Prestige the same year.


He was said to sit quietly in his apartment, or at the house in upstate New 
York near Woodstock, which he bought with the supermodel Iman, whom he married 
in 1992 and with whom he had a daughter, Alexandria, 15.


Paul Trynka, his biographer, told the Press Association the decade between his 
23rd album, Reality, in 2003 and The Next Day in 2013 gave Bowie time to be “a 
family man”. “He walked Lexi [his daughter] to school every day – something he 
had missed with Duncan [his son], which was something he deeply regretted.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-death-worldwide-tributes-death-work-of-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e8a44b16bbee2ccf03fed4e2806a1a8cefc290%2F0_105_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Worldwide%20tributes%20to%20David%20Bowie%3A%20'His%20death%20was%20a%20work%20of%20art'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-death-worldwide-tributes-death-work-of-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Worldwide%20tributes%20to%20David%20Bowie%3A%20%27His%20death%20was%20a%20work%20of%20art%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-death-worldwide-tributes-death-work-of-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e8a44b16bbee2ccf03fed4e2806a1a8cefc290%2F0_105_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 Bowie in New York in December for the premiere of the musical Lazarus. 
Photograph: BR/ dana press/PA 
Ricky Gervais, the comedian and actor who convinced the famously private Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/exit-david-bowie-discreetly-friends-neighbors-did-not-know-cancer>
 to star as himself in an episode of the 2006 sitcom Extras, wrote: “I just 
lost a hero. RIP David Bowie 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/rickygervais/status/686444063869026304?p=p>.”


The rock guitarist Joel Madden, quoting Changes, wrote simply: “Turn and face 
the strange <https://twitter.com/JoelMadden/status/686445570873950209>.”


The rapper Kanye West said 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/686449257767776256>: “David Bowie was one 
of my most important inspirations, so fearless, so creative, he gave us magic 
for a lifetime.”


Glastonbury founder Michael Eavis recalled the singer’s first appearance at 
the Somerset festival in 1971. “He had lovely, long, flowing hair, a right 
hippie-looking lad. Fantastically beautiful he looked, actually,” Eavis told 
the BBC.

 “Nobody knew who he was, he played at four in the morning at sunrise, a song 
we’d never heard before.”

Bowie was born David Robert Jones on 8 January 1947 in Brixton, south London, 
to mother Margaret “Peggy”, a waitnress, and charity worker Haywood “John” 
Jones. His older brother’s record collection introduced him to rock music at an 
early age.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-television-interviews-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bowie%20in%20his%20own%20words%3A%20highlights%20from%20his%20TV%20interviews%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-television-interviews-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bowie%20in%20his%20own%20words%3A%20highlights%20from%20his%20TV%20interviews%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-television-interviews-video&media=>
Bowie in his own words: highlights from his TV interviews – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-television-interviews-video>
The family moved to south-east London and he graduated from Bromley technical 
high school at 16, when he was busy forming a number of bands and leading a 
group. He called himself Davy Jones, later changing his name to David Bowie to 
avoid confusion with Davy Jones of the Monkees. The name was reportedly 
inspired by a knife developed by the 19th-century American pioneer Jim Bowie.


He released three singles as a solo artist for Pye Records, and a debut album 
David Bowie, but did not achieve huge success and retreated to a Buddhist 
monastery in Scotland in 1967.


After returning to London he started the arts troupe Feathers in 1968, then 
helped organise the Free festival, a day-long free music event in Beckenham, 
south-east London, in 1969. That same year he released Space Oddity, which went 
on to be his first UK No 1. The release the following year of The Rise and Fall 
of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars made him an international star, and 
he conquered the US with his theatrical stage show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-death-worldwide-tributes-death-work-of-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9256d7b0c8dcb7aba7444794aef156054f960e%2F0_233_4712_2827%2F4712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Worldwide%20tributes%20to%20David%20Bowie%3A%20'His%20death%20was%20a%20work%20of%20art'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-death-worldwide-tributes-death-work-of-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Worldwide%20tributes%20to%20David%20Bowie%3A%20%27His%20death%20was%20a%20work%20of%20art%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-death-worldwide-tributes-death-work-of-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9256d7b0c8dcb7aba7444794aef156054f960e%2F0_233_4712_2827%2F4712.jpg>
 David Bowie performs at Earls Court Arena, May 1973, during the Ziggy Stardust 
tour. Photograph: Gijsbert Hanekroot/Redferns 
He produced albums for Lou Reed and Iggy Pop, as well as writing All the Young 
Dudes, which he gave to Mott the Hoople who had a massive hit with it. In the 
late 1970s he produced a three-album collaboration with Brian Eno, known as the 
Berlin trilogy.

Bowie’s acting career took off with his performance in Nicolas Roeg’s The Man 
Who Fell to Earth, followed by roles in Labyrinth, The Last Temptation of 
Christ and Absolute Beginners. More recently, he appeared as himself in the 
film Zoolander.

Bowie officially retired Ziggy Stardust in 1973, making the announcement 
during a London gig. But the hits kept coming, with albums including Aladdin 
Sane, Diamond Dogs and Pin Ups.


He changed direction with the soul-inspired Young Americans. His first US No 1 
was a collaboration with John Lennon on Fame, which topped the charts in 1975.

He continued to sell millions of albums and pack out stadiums with the rise of 
the New Romantic scene in 1980s Britain. He embraced pop, finding chart success 
with songs such as Let’s Dance and Under Pressure, a collaboration with Queen.


Iggy Pop described him on social media as “the light of my life”, while singer 
Madonna tweeted: “Talented. Unique. Genius. Game Changer.”


The Rolling Stones hailed him as “an extraordinary artist and a true 
original”. Queen tweeted a link to the Under Pressure, with the words: “This is 
our last dance ... ”


The British prime minister, David Cameron, speaking in north London, said: 
“Musically, creatively, artistically David Bowie was a genius.”

Bowie once said that he was bisexual but he later suggested that his sexual 
interactions with men should be seen in the context of his wider cultural 
experimentation. “I was always a closet heterosexual,” he told Rolling Stone 
magazine in 1993.


David Bowie: the man who thrilled the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation>
In 1970 he married Angie Bowie, and the couple had a son named Zowie Bowie, 
now known as Duncan Jones. They split in 1980. He settled in New York one year 
after marrying Iman.

Bowie continued to record and tour until 2003, when he released Reality, his 
23rd album, which many assumed to be his last.


“I am not a natural performer,” Bowie said in a rare interview in 2002. “I 
don’t enjoy performing terribly much. Never have. I can do it and, if my mind’s 
on the situation, do it quite well. But, five or six shows in, I’m dying to get 
off the road and go back to the studio.”

In the same interview, he said: “My entire career, I’ve only really worked 
with the same subject matter. The trousers may change, but the actual words and 
subjects I’ve always chosen to write with are things to do with isolation, 
abandonment, fear and anxiety, all of the high points of one’s life.”
 