
At least 10,000 people have been killed in the war in Yemen, according to the 
United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, which is 
urging both sides to come together to end nearly two years of conflict.

The UN’s humanitarian affairs office said the figure, which is a low estimate, 
was reached using data from health facilities that have kept track of the 
victims of the war, which has largely been ignored by the international 
community.

The figure does not include those recorded by hospitals and health centres as 
having died, which is likely to be most of the combatants on both sides of the 
conflict.

“This once more underscores the need to resolve the situation in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> without any further delay,” Farhan 
Haq, deputy spokesman for the UN general secretary, said in New York. “There’s 
been a huge humanitarian cost.”

Related: Medics in Yemen: as we fight to help the sick and injured, delays can 
cost lives | Giorgio Trombatore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/10/medics-in-yemen-as-we-fight-to-help-the-sick-and-injured-delays-can-cost-lives>

The war has devastated Yemen, which was already the Arab world’s poorest 
country. UN officials estimate that nearly 19 million people – 80% of the 
population – are in need of humanitarian aid, and more than 3 million have been 
displaced.

Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> launched the war 
in Yemen in March 2015 after the Houthis, rebels backed by Iran, took control 
of the Yemeni capital, Sana’a, and overthrew President Abd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi 
in a coup. The Saudi-backed president fled to the southern city of Aden and 
then to Riyadh. The Saudi campaign is backed by the US and the UK.

But the Saudis have not achieved their objectives and the war has dragged on, 
leading to a humanitarian catastrophe. Large numbers of child soldiers have 
been recruited, there have been outbreaks of cholera and many attacks on 
schools, hospitals and civilian areas.

The Saudi-led coalition has been blamed for most of the civilian casualties. 
The devastation hasalso drawn attention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/saudis-dropped-british-cluster-bombs-in-yemen-fallon-tells-commons>
 to the role of western powers who have continued to provide Riyadh with 
weapons, logistical support and intelligence. The Houthis have also been 
accused of human rights violations.

Yet the destruction of Yemen has garnered little international attention 
compared with other regional conflicts such as that in Syria, or the battle 
against Isis in Iraq.

The war has dragged on despite efforts by a UN mediator to broker a peace 
deal. While the Saudis are apparently eager to reach a settlement that would 
end an expensive war that has damaged its image worldwide, Hadi and his Houthi 
rivals have yet to agree to a deal.

Hadi is demanding that the Houthis give up their arms and control of Sana’a, 
while the Houthis wish to see a national unity government formed in which they 
are included.
 