
ICT is the archetypal young man in a hurry and recent advances have come 
perhaps not so much despite Malta being a small island but because of it. 
Establishing high-speed communications across the nation is swifter if the 
nation is both small and fortuitously located in the middle of an international 
communications highway.

As Edward Woods, chairman of the MCA, put it, “ICT features high on our 
national agenda as it is a key enabler for economic and social development.”

Large or small. Domestic or foreign. Few would be bold enough openly to speak 
of growing ICT-reliant business to the size of the tourism industry, which 
represents 29 percent of Malta’s GDP. Yet the industriousness present in ICT 
expansion gives a broad hint in that direction. What’s more, the potential 
unleashed by the hosting of i-gaming on Malta is both huge, and as far as these 
things can be, a sure-fire winner.

A European Commission report notes that “more and more Maltese SMEs sell 
online (16 percent) and the percentage of SMEs selling online to other EU 
member states (12 percent) is high”. However, it adds that there is room for 
improvement in e-commerce turnover (3.5 percent) and the use of e-invoices (8.8 
percent), where Malta is below the EU average. Its point that adopting digital 
technologies is an important driver of labour productivity is well understood 
by the MCA, which sees part of its role as instilling digital literacy and 
advancing business innovation in communications. “This activity broadens the 
investment perspective of SMEs which are strongly acknowledging the importance 
and benefits of investing in web technologies,” said Woods.

In 2014 the MCA and the University of Malta agreed to support initiatives that 
bridge the gap between research, innovation and entrepreneurship in ICT-related 
fields. This resulted in to a seed fund of up to €40,000 made available by the 
MCA to support two local start-ups to develop an innovative business idea with 
a view to eventual commercialisation, with €20,000 already being allocated.

Cloud computing is another area beset with possibilities. An EU study, 
Quantitative Estimates of the Demand for Cloud Computing in Europe, forecasts 
an increase of one percent in GDP and the creation of 2.5 million jobs by 2020 
if all EU states adopt the technology.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0885bf6174e20edf01743700f228ce345615bb84%2F0_163_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20tech%20in%20a%20hurry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20tech%20in%20a%20hurry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0885bf6174e20edf01743700f228ce345615bb84%2F0_163_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
 In 2015 GO announced a €50 million investment to bring fibre to the home. 
Photograph: GO 
The study also reports that a scenario driven by government policy was three 
times more effective in creating jobs and economic growth than one operating in 
isolation. The one item ICT advancement in Malta is not short of is government 
support.

Indeed, the government’s Digital Malta Strategy, articulated between the MCA 
and the Malta Information Technology Agency (MITA) envisages “a 
digitally-enabled country empowering its people, communities and entrepreneurs 
through the intelligent and universal use of ICT”. Set up in 2014 and running 
through to 2020, it puts forward a set of guiding principles and policy actions 
of how ICT can be used for socio-economic development. This is no 
pie-in-the-sky initiative. The strategy incorporates contributions from over 
240 people from all sectors of society, and includes more than 300 proposals 
and suggestions submitted during meetings, workshops and consultations.

It also strengthens the attractiveness of Malta for knowledge and 
innovation-based investment at a time when all eyes are on the country thanks 
to its hosting of the CHOGM in late 2015, its EU Presidency in 2017, and its 
capital city, Valletta, acting as the European Capital of Culture in 2018. “The 
Digital Malta Strategy launched in 2014 aspires to synergise the work of public 
authorities and other stakeholders to really drive ICT across all strata of 
society and business communities,” says Woods. “By the end of 2016, I am 
confident that Malta would have edged a step closer to fulfilling the 2020 
Digital Agenda vision and targets.” 2016 marks 15 years of operations for the 
MCA, a period of time which has seen huge changes in the ICT sector, but it is 
clear that the coming years will be truly transformative for Malta.

Malta tops the region in next-generation broadband coverage 

Internet connection speed is not the only thing soaring round Malta. According 
to the European Commission’s Digital Agenda Scoreboard, the island ranks first 
among 28 EU states in next generation broadband network coverage. Two of the 
four nationwide broadband networks serve the market through next generation 
access (NGA). Malta also climbed two places, ranking ninth overall, in 
connectivity, which measures the quality and deployment of broadband 
infrastructure.

Progress in ICT development is further illustrated by other scorecard 
findings. Fixed broadband access in Malta has 100 percent coverage compared 
with 97 percent for the EU as a whole. However, it is in NGA where Malta’s 
superiority stands out. An NGA has download speeds of 30 Mbps or more. Malta 
again scores 100 percent coverage, well in front of the 68 percent EU average 
shown in the scorecard.

Every household in Malta has access to high-speed broadband services with 
speeds reaching at least 100 Mbps, and subscriptions to these services are 
following the same upward trend.

The scorecard shows that in one year, the number of Maltese households 
subscribed to broadband speeds of 30 Mbps or more increased by 41 percentage 
points to reach 55 percent in 2014, up from 14 percent in 2013 and two percent 
in 2012.

Interview: Edward Woods, chairman of the Malta Communications Authority (MCA)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33cb3c143bf422f345a641066a4a24daf80d7aee%2F0_65_980_588%2F980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20tech%20in%20a%20hurry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20tech%20in%20a%20hurry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33cb3c143bf422f345a641066a4a24daf80d7aee%2F0_65_980_588%2F980.jpg>
 Dr. Edward Woods. Photograph: Andrew Gauci Attard/Imagine Photography 
Capitalising on the versatility and simplicity of its regulatory regime and 
Malta’s location at the heart of the Mediterranean Sea, the MCA, chaired by Dr 
Edward Woods since 2013, has created a major communication hub for the region, 
and has motivated the proliferation of innovative and experimental technologies 
available to Maltese consumers.
Information 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/labs/report-company/malta/boxouts/mca.html>
Why do companies use Malta as a testing ground for new services?
The MCA operates a test and trial regime geared especially for spectrum-based 
technologies and services that are still at the developmental stage. It does 
this by introducing an accelerated licensing procedure, as well as attractive 
licence conditions and fees for test and trial spectrum.

Our location offers local and international companies a unique opportunity to 
test innovative technologies and service implementations on a national scale 
and at minimal costs.

Test and trial licences have been issued to the local aviation, mobile 
communications and broadcasting sectors. The MCA is now keen to attract 
international equipment manufacturers and research organisations, not least to 
develop satellite technologies. Additionally, we want to support companies 
aspiring to serve the digital single market and beyond, through e-commerce, 
over-the-top (OTT) services, or other internet-based models.

What is the balance between new entrants and the investment needs of major 
operators?
The process for enabling new entrants to operate is based on straightforward 
notification. Radio spectrum is allotted efficiently and at fair prices. 
Obligations on existing operators are tailored to intervene only where 
required, while ensuring new operators can offer services that are 
interoperable with established providers.

Spectrum caps are in place to ensure a competitive market and to facilitate 
new entrants. Combining a light-touch approach and low barriers for 
authorisation, the MCA seeks to balance the impetus given to the market by new 
entrants without over-fragmenting it and potentially jeopardising investments.

How does the MCA coordinate the needs of the different stakeholders?
Technological advances have lowered geographic barriers to trade, while new 
unprecedented markets for digital goods have emerged. Europe’s efforts aimed at 
establishing a digital single market will continue to accelerate such shifts.

Yet, market consolidation and technology advancement have also opened the 
floodgates to disruption, with new players using technological advancement to 
disrupt sectors such as tourism, transport and retail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52e1c3c299a6d6c34018a6f0ca59e4ca78ef148b%2F0_347_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20tech%20in%20a%20hurry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20tech%20in%20a%20hurry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-report-company%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fyoung-tech-in-a-hurry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52e1c3c299a6d6c34018a6f0ca59e4ca78ef148b%2F0_347_5184_3109%2F5184.jpg>
 Vodafone Malta’s destination store in Birkirkara which includes a technical 
service centre and a business centre. Photograph: Vodafone Malta 
If we want to host innovation, we must first innovate from within and the 
MCA’s role is to provide robust and future-proof infrastructure and regulatory 
regimes.

However, we can also support other competent entities working on aspects of 
innovation. The MCA has helped public, educational and private stakeholders to 
develop policies in broadcasting and human capital, incentives and support 
programmes for start-ups, attracting FDI, education, incentives for ICT 
investment, and training.

What is your strategy for maintaining adequate investment? 
Through regulatory certainty, the MCA ensures long-term sustainability of the 
electronic communications markets, encouraging service providers to expand 
their infrastructure and invest in new technologies. Services take-up and 
usage, in most cases, is going from strength to strength. However, regulation 
in communications is still essential to nurture a competitive market which 
benefits consumers with innovative products at reasonable prices.

That the strategy has paid off is shown by the degree of infrastructure 
competition. Although fibre-to-the-home (FTTH) is in the initial roll-out 
stage, Malta already boasts broadband infrastructure that exceeds the targets 
of Europe’s Digital Agenda 2020.

The Digital Agenda scoreboard, published annually by the European Union, again 
ranks Malta first amongst the 28 EU member states in next-generation broadband 
network coverage. We also climbed two places, ranking ninth overall, in the 
connectivity segment, which assesses the deployment of broadband infrastructure 
and its quality.

What are your priorities for 2016?
In the wake of the ongoing technological advancements and changing consumer 
expectations, we remain committed to ensure that the right conditions for 
continued investment prevail and that industry players continue on the path of 
rolling out new and better service offerings. On 6th May 2015, the European 
Commission launched a strategy for a European Digital Single Market which 
covers the various aspects depicting the digital economy and with an ambitious 
work programme being set for 2015 and 2016. Some of these aspects directly or 
indirectly fall within the remit of the MCA.

The European Commission is also expected to start the highly-anticipated 
review of the electronic communications regulatory framework. This review is 
expected to elicit intense discussions about the scope of regulated services, 
the level of regulation and the level of Europe-wide harmonisation. We shall be 
working closely with all the relevant stakeholders at EU, national and provider 
levels in order to ensure that any future EU policy in these areas benefit the 
Maltese economy and society at large.
 