
Scuol, in eastern Switzerland, has been hosting health tourists since the 
1830s. Back then, people congregated in “drink halls” built on natural springs, 
sampling their mineral-rich bounty. Everyone had their own tankard, labelled to 
avoid the spread of disease. Some waters had such a laxative effect that 
toilets had to be built at regular intervals along the path back to town.

I found myself naked in mixed company, bubbling jets of mineral water wobbling 
our bare buttocks

Today, the main reason to go to Scuol (for the non-skier, at least) is to 
visit the town spa, Bogn Engiadina, with its steam rooms and saunas, indoor and 
outdoor pools, all pulsating with pure mineral water and accompanied by 
stunning views of the snowcapped Alps.

The town has 25 different mineral water springs, and Bogn Engiadina is 
supplied by four of them. It offers all the trappings of a luxury hotel spa 
complex but in a more democratic setting: local grannies sharing a bench with 
Zurich businessmen in their Speedos. For a little extra, entry can be had to 
the Roman-Irish spa, a series of rooms in an inner sanctum where swimsuits are 
verboten and I found myself naked in mixed company, bubbling jets of mineral 
water wobbling our bare buttocks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dcafb32211924028741ecebb500fdcf50365c45%2F0_27_2362_1417%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dcafb32211924028741ecebb500fdcf50365c45%2F0_27_2362_1417%2F2362.jpg>
 Raising a glass … a drinking hall in Scuol, built in 1875 for health tourists. 
Photograph: Debbie Lawson 
This part of the Alps, with its fresh air, pure water and magnificent views, 
has long been known as a wellness destination, where Hollywood stars, prime 
ministers and oligarchs go to relax. But touring the watering holes of Alpine 
Switzerland and Italy is not as expensive as you might think. As a day visitor 
you can luxuriate in one for the price of an evening in the pub. And, as I 
discovered, using the Engadine Valley as a conduit, you can even organise 
yourself a spa crawl.

I began in Zurich, an underrated tourist destination: because it is primarily 
a business hub, prices (including flights) drop dramatically at the weekend, 
bringing the cost of the financial capital’s impressive art galleries, shops 
and restaurants into line with those of other European cities. I stayed at the 
historic Hotel Adler, famed for its fondue and handy for the mainline station, 
then travelled east.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9571f683db5243437e0ed932e6cfb8365bfdfe73%2F192_415_3201_1920%2F3201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9571f683db5243437e0ed932e6cfb8365bfdfe73%2F192_415_3201_1920%2F3201.jpg>
 Making tracks: the Bernina Express, winding its way through the high Alps. 
Photograph: Luca/Getty Images/Moment RM 
The spectacular three-hour journey to Scuol took in Klosters and Davos, a 
first glimpse of mountains dotted with wooden farmhouses and passing alpine 
skiers, and fields of powder snow pockmarked by animal tracks.

Further up the valley, as the train climbed to 1,800m and the snow thickened, 
St Moritz beckoned, with its particular class of bling. This town, little more 
than 5,200 inhabitants scattered around a frozen lake, owns alpine tourism, 
having invented and honed it over 150 years. The season is organised around 
polo matches and gourmet festivals: it sounds expensive, and it is. But if you 
feel like a splurge, the Kempinski Grand Hotel des Bains is a bit of a treat: a 
fairytale hotel backed by pine trees, with a spa situated right on top of the 
Mauritius Spring – an iron-rich natural water source discovered in the Bronze 
Age.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e4ad4a8859899e8c3fe211ce2ce2e7a8862ce92%2F0_0_2362_1758%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e4ad4a8859899e8c3fe211ce2ce2e7a8862ce92%2F0_0_2362_1758%2F2362.jpg>
 Arriving in style … Debbie Lawson outside the Kempinski Grand Hotel des Bains, 
St Moritz. Photograph: Roddy Thomson 
The hotel was originally called a kurhaus because of its healing powers. I was 
warned that the spring water tasted like blood, but as it was “happy hour” in 
the spa – when an afternoon visit costs just £35 – it seemed rude not to try a 
glass. (For the record, it’s just like the liquid iron sachets you can buy in 
Boots.)

The best of Switzerland's city sights: readers’ tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/04/best-switzerland-city-sights-readers-travel-tips>
The pool area was full-on glamour, with snowy views and granite walls, where 
guests in white Kempinski robes and day visitors wandered in and out to swim a 
few lengths. Entering the sauna and steam room area poses another challenge for 
the reluctant naturist. But the towels were quite generous, even after memories 
of last night’s tagliolini with black truffle had made a more lasting 
impression around my midriff.

The railway line linking St Moritz and Tirano in Italy was declared a Unesco 
World Heritage site in 2008. It’s an incredible feat of engineering, reaching 
2,253m above sea level – the highest railway crossing in Europe. I set off for 
Tirano on the Bernina Express and the final spa of my trip through unparalleled 
scenery of glacier gardens, turquoise lakes and mountains topped with dollops 
of snow, all viewed through the curved windows of a panoramic carriage. At the 
end of the two-hour ride – great value at £21/38 (2nd/1st class) – I took a bus 
to the premier ski and spa resort of Bormio and checked into La Genzianella, a 
comfortably chic midpriced hotel with warm ambiance and a great restaurant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e842c10ca936781a5159fc536bf2d6f6ca43669%2F0_177_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Your%20good%20health%3A%20an%20Alpine%20spa%20crawl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Falpine-spa-crawl-switzerland-italy-spa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e842c10ca936781a5159fc536bf2d6f6ca43669%2F0_177_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘Full-on glamour.’ The luxurious pool at the Kempinski, St Moritz. 
Not far from here, QC Terme Bagni Nuovi, set on the edge of Stelvio national 
park near Bormio, is a grand hotel built as a palace in 1836 for the Queen of 
Austria. Its spa, open to budget-conscious day visitors as well as hotel 
guests, is a pink confection of Art Nouveau and endless rooms, each containing 
mineral pools pitched at varying degrees of nice warm bath. The scent of alpine 
herbs and attar of roses hung in the air. Some rooms looked like torture 
chambers, with raised slabs on which you’re pelted by downward torrents of warm 
rain.

Local farmers still have the right to bathe their livestock in the thermal 
waters that supply the spa

Outside there’s even more fun: a sauna and relaxation cabin with hanging 
chairs, jacuzzis fitted with frames you can lie down in, and a sheep dip 
converted into a pool with underwater music and an attached shepherd’s bothy 
heated by a log fire. Local farmers still have the right to bathe their 
livestock in the thermal waters that supply the spa.

Further up the mountain is the hotel’s older sister, Bagni Vecchi, reached by 
foot or via the spa shuttle. Here, you can bask waist-deep in the steamy waters 
of a 2,000-year-old cave that leads directly to the mouth of an ancient thermal 
mountain spring. These Roman baths were frequented by Pliny the Elder and, 
later, Leonardo da Vinci. If you’re looking for a recommendation, they don’t 
come much higher than that.

Essentials

Fly from London, Birmingham and Manchester to Zurich from £71 with SWISS (
swiss.com <https://www.swiss.com/us/en>); Milan Bergamo to London around £35, 
Ryanair (ryanair.com <https://www.ryanair.com/gb/en/>). 

Wellbeing retreats: readers’ travel tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/15/wellness-readers-tips-yoga-meditation-retreats>
Hotels (double room per night based on B&B for two sharing a room): Hotel 
Adler, Zurich, from £118 (hotel-adler.ch 
<http://www.hotel-adler.ch/index.php/en/>); Hotel Engiadina, Scuol, from £135 (
hotel-engiadina.ch <http://www.hotel-engiadina.ch/>); Grand Hotel Kempinski Des 
Bains, St Moritz, from £241 including spa access (kempinski.com 
<http://www.kempinski.com/>); Hotel La Genzianella, Bormio, from £100 (
genzianella.com <http://www.genzianella.com/>).

Spa entry: Bogn Engiadina, Scuol 
<http://www.engadin.com/wellness-gesundheit/baeder/engadin-bad-scuol/?R=1&S=2>: 
£17 for 3 hours; £37 for the day; Roman-­Irish spa £31. Kempinski The Spa, St 
Moritz: £35 for 3 hours during “happy hour”, or £52 for the day.QC Terme Bagni 
Nuovi and Bagni Vecchi <http://www.bagnidibormio.it/en/>, Bormio: £32 each for 
the day.

Swiss Travel Pass (free travel in Switzerland) from £147 for three days (
swisstravelsystem.com <http://www.swisstravelsystem.com/en/home.html>) or book 
individual super-saver tickets via the rail websitesbb.ch 
<http://www.sbb.ch/en/home.html>.

For more information on Switzerland, visit myswitzerland.com 
<http://www.myswitzerland.com/en-gb/home.html> or call international freephone 
00800 100 200 30.
 