
The architect Zaha Hadid cut short a tetchy BBC radio interview to mark her 
beingawarded the 2016 Riba Royal Gold Medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/23/zaha-hadid-from-baghdad-global-ubiquity-and-the-riba-gold-medal>
 after mounting an angry defence of her Qatar World Cup stadium and Tokyo 
Olympic stadium projects.

Zaha Hadid Radio 4 interview: how and why it went so wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2015/sep/24/zaha-hadid-radio-4-interview-sarah-montague-qatar>
The British-Iraqi architect claimed there had not been a “single problem in 
the stadium in Qatar” after Radio 4 Today programme presenterSarah Montague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sarah-montague> alleged there had been 
deaths of construction workers at the Al-Wakrah stadium for the 2022 football 
World Cup.

“It is absolutely untrue; there are no deaths on our site whatsoever. I sued 
someone in the press for it. You should check your facts.”

Hadid was challenged about her bid to build the main stadium for the 2020 
Tokyo Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games-2020>, and 
walked out of the interview after Montague said the programme was running out 
of time for her to explain why the project had been abandoned.

Last week it was reported that Hadid had decided not to continue with her bid 
to build the Tokyo stadium, afterher initial design was scrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/18/zaha-hadid-abandons-plans-2020-tokyo-olympics>
 amid ballooning costs and the fact that the architect could find no 
construction company to work with on a new design.

“I didn’t pull out of the Japanese project,” Hadid said, contradicting the 
premise of Montague’s question. “It’s a very serious story. It’s a scandal. We 
won this competition three years ago, it was an international competition 
entered by many Japanese architects and we won it ...”

Zaha Hadid: from Baghdad to global ubiquity (and the Riba Gold Medal)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/23/zaha-hadid-from-baghdad-global-ubiquity-and-the-riba-gold-medal>
Interrupted by the presenter, who asked Hadid to respond to the allegation 
that the Japanese prime minister pulled the plug on the stadium because of high 
costs, Hadid walked out of the interview. “Don’t ask me a question if you don’t 
want [me] to answer,” she said. “Let’s stop this conversation right now.”


The Qatari government says the figure used by Montague that 1,200 migrant 
workers have died in Qatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jun/03/qatar-outraged-by-washington-post-myth-about-world-cup-deaths>
 since it was awarded the World Cup in 2010 is categorically untrue. Human 
rights groups have used figures showing high numbers of construction workers’ 
deaths because they say much ofQatar’s current construction boom is motivated 
by the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/23/qatar-nepal-workers-world-cup-2022-death-toll-doha>
, and so they claim deaths on projects such as roads and hotels should be 
included when monitoring fatalities.

The number of deaths of construction workers who were directly building the 
Hadid-designed stadium is unknown, but Hadid repeatedthe Qatari authorities’ 
line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jun/03/qatar-outraged-by-washington-post-myth-about-world-cup-deaths>
 that since work began on the project in 2013, there had been no deaths on site 
nor any accidents causing lost time. Hundreds of migrants from Nepal, India and 
other countries working on other construction projects have been dying every 
year, including dozens from site accidents and cardiac arrests. But a spokesman 
for Hadid said “the authorities in Qatar managing the al-Wakrah site operate 
the highest levels of workers’ health, safety and welfare”.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> later apologised personally to 
Hadid saying the questions about Qatar were “less than ideal”. “We’re sorry if 
she feels the programme has treated her badly,” it said. “It’s something we 
regret.”

It also issued a public statement <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06c06nb> 
clarifying that the 1,200 construction deaths refers to the whole of Qatar. “We 
are sorry we didn’t make this clear in this morning’s interview with Dame Zaha 
Hadid,” a spokesperson said. “We are happy to accept there is no evidence of 
deaths at the main stadium site.”

Much of the online reaction to the interview came out in favour of Hadid.
Terminal4u (@Terminal4u) 
@BBCr4today <https://twitter.com/BBCr4today> poor interview with Zaha Hadid 
1st Q about sexism, turned off is she not good enough to discuss any 
achievements?
 <https://twitter.com/Terminal4u/status/646971921603645440> September 24, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Terminal4u/status/646971921603645440> James Wilkinson 
(@_JWilkinson_) 
Totally understand Zaha Hadid's reaction on @BBCr4today 
<https://twitter.com/BBCr4today>. It was supposed to positive story & 
@Sarah_Montague <https://twitter.com/Sarah_Montague> focused on negative 
questions.
 <https://twitter.com/_JWilkinson_/status/646971519902588928> September 24, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/_JWilkinson_/status/646971519902588928> Sue 
Pethybridge (@SuePethybridge) 
Well Today programme don't bring Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid> on say she's scary & then 
don't do your research properly!
 <https://twitter.com/SuePethybridge/status/646971567365320704> September 24, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/SuePethybridge/status/646971567365320704> 
Speaking after Hadid’s radio interview, Lord Rogers, the architect of the 
Pompidou Centre and Lloyds of London, told the Guardian: “It is imperative that 
architects should be ethical.”

He said his firm refuses to work in Saudi Arabia or do military work. “We went 
to Saudi Arabia and looked at it and thought, ‘If women can’t work there and it 
is a dictatorship situation and there is an immense supply of arms, we better 
not work there,’” he said. “If we believe in a sustainable world, then we have 
to make some sort of stand. If we want to be involved in society, then we have 
to take forward our sense of social responsibility.”

Cullinan Studio, the firm of Edward Cullinan, who won the 2008 Royal Gold 
Medal, said it has declined commissions that are “antisocial or environmentally 
harmful, including the nuclear industry.” It has an ethical statement of intent 
that states: “For many years, we declined to work in private health and 
education but the progressive blurring of the public / private boundary has 
made this impractical. Invitations from overseas are examined on a case by case 
basis and the human rights record of the particular country is evaluated 
against the UK record.”

But other firms believe architects do not have a duty to make such choices. 
“Trying to turn architects into moral policemen is an extreme piece of hubris,” 
said Robert Adam, a prominent classical architect who designs large country 
houses. “Almost any Russian client with any amount of money has probably 
something in their past that wouldn’t stand up to the British legal system. And 
it can be a problem working out nasty dictators. You have to look at them in 
context. It could be the social norms in their country are not our social 
norms.”


Earlier in the interview, Hadid seemed uneasy about answering questions on 
sexism in the architecture industry, as well as her 2016 Royal Gold Medal 
citation written by Prof Sir Peter Cook, which described her as a “scary” 
character.

“I don’t have any examples,” she said when asked to expand on earlier comments 
about prejudice in the industry. “I think it is a lot better. I was always 
considered on the margins, I was not part of the so-called establishment. I 
can’t go to men’s clubs or go golfing. But I don’t mind it, I think I have 
always been on the edge and I don’t mind being on the edge.”

Hadid had earlier been announced as the 2016 recipient of the Riba Royal Gold 
Medal, one of the highest accolades in the profession. The first woman to be 
awarded the prestigious gong in her own right, the 64-year-old earned a place 
as one of the most sought-after architects in the world, having bestowed her 
trademark blobs on cityscapes from Baku to Guangzhou

 * This article was amended on 25 September 2015. An earlier version referred 
incorrectly to “the late Edward Cullinan”.  