
So Zaha Hadid's Maxxi, a museum of 21st-century art in Rome has won the 2010 
Stirling prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/oct/03/architecture-stirling-prize-zaha-hadid>
, the Â£20,000 award made annually for the best building designed by a British 
architect completed in the course of the current year. The Maxxi wasin 
competition for the Stirling prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2010/jul/21/stirling-prize-shortlist-2010>
 with the restored Neues Museum, Berlin, by David Chipperfield, and the freshly 
extended Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, by Rick Mather. Other competitors, although 
these could in no way be compared in terms of building type, cost or ambition 
to this trio of major arts projects, were two thoughtful south-eastern schools, 
in Guildford and Clapham, and a block of flats in London EC2. The public vote 
was for the Ashmolean.


Without doubt, Hadid's win raises the award's profile. It needs the glister of 
genuinely imaginative architects. Whether or not Hadid needs the Stirling prize 
is another question, although you tend to think she still relishes recognition 
in a country that has not exactly done her a lot of professional favours. In 
1995, her scheme foran eye-opening opera house for Cardiff Bay 
<http://designmuseum.org/design/zaha-hadid> that might have set the tone for a 
very special development of this Welsh seascape, was turned down in favour of 
the banal sweep of buildings there today.

Not everyone agrees with the final decision. The online community, at least as 
represented by readers of Building Design magazine, hadalready begun to savage 
Hadid 
<http://www.bdonline.co.uk/news/uk/zaha-hadids-maxxi-wins-the-stirling/5006660.article>
 before Saturday night was over. It sends out the wrong messages to 
architectural students, commented one, at a time when they should be aspiring 
to design schools; another, responding to the story of Hadid's struggle to win 
recognition in Britain, snapped: "If she really had talent, it wouldn't have 
been a struggle." Ouch.

But my view is that Maxxi is a captivating building. Within its serpentine 
halls and unexpected galleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2009/nov/16/rome-zaha-hadid-museum-art>
, the visitor with an open mind can find unselfconscious references to the 
works of such baroque masters as Guarino Guarini, echoes of Rome's Spanish 
Steps and its Piazza del Popolo, as well as references to futurist paintings, 
sudden blasts from the Soviet constructivism of the early 1920s, as well as 
something of the dunescapes of southern Iraq thatso captured the imagination of 
the young Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/nov/16/zaha-hadid-maxxi-rome>. 
And it could never have been built in Britain, because it has been designed and 
built over a long haul, for functions that have yet to emerge, and for 
unembarrassed delight.

No, Maxxi isn't a model for new primary schools in London. What it offers 
instead is an adventure in and through architecture. Criticise it all you like, 
but what Hadid's latest venture in Rome does is raise the stakes for the 
Stirling.
 