
It is hard to believe that this piece is still necessary. We long for the day 
when we don’t have to single out authors – or anyone of any walk of life, for 
that matter – for their gender, but here we are again. Last weekend, author and 
New Journalism fatherGay Talese was asked to name women writers who had 
inspired him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/02/gay-talese-twitter-female-writers>
 at a Boston University event, to which he answered: “None.” He reportedly went 
on to say that “educated women don’t want to hang out with anti-social people,” 
according to what journalist Amy Littlefield, who was in the audience,told the 
Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/arts-and-entertainment/wp/2016/04/02/gay-talese-cant-name-a-single-woman-writer-who-inspired-him-thankfully-twitter-has-a-few-suggestions/?tid=sm_tw>
.

Undoubtedly, the hashtag #womengaytaleseshouldread 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23womengaytaleseshouldread&src=typd> started 
bubbling on Twitter, and plenty of suggestions were made – here is a tiny 
selectionfrom authors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/06/authors-respond-to-gay-talese-neil-gaiman-jodi-picoult>
:
Neil Gaiman (@neilhimself) 
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> writers who inspired 
me: Enid Blyton, Richmal Crompton, PL Travers, Margaret Storey, Ursula LeGuin, 
Baroness Orczy, Diana Wynne Jones
 <https://twitter.com/neilhimself/status/717156849842257920> April 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/neilhimself/status/717156849842257920> Neil Gaiman 
(@neilhimself) 
More women writers who inspired me: Wilmar Shiras, Shirley Jackson, Lisa 
Tuttle, Mary Shelley, Anne Rice, Scheherazade, Judith Merrill...
 <https://twitter.com/neilhimself/status/717157840717287425> April 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/neilhimself/status/717157840717287425> Neil Gaiman 
(@neilhimself) 
Even More Women Writers Who Inspired Me: Joanna Russ, Hope Mirrlees, Joy Chant,
Angela Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter>, Madeleine 
L’Engle, James Tiptree Jr, Kit Reed
 <https://twitter.com/neilhimself/status/717158853557805056> April 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/neilhimself/status/717158853557805056> John Scalzi 
(@scalzi) 
And Now, An Incomplete List of Women Writers Who Inspire Me: 
https://t.co/mxrYOFFE5r <https://t.co/mxrYOFFE5r> pic.twitter.com/7H8JaWgTgQ 
<https://t.co/7H8JaWgTgQ>
 <https://twitter.com/scalzi/status/717109354042933252> April 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/scalzi/status/717109354042933252> roxane gay (@rgay) 
I hope no one expected Talese, who doesn't wear jeans, to think well of women. 
IDGAF about his opinions.
 <https://twitter.com/rgay/status/716350120921464832> April 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/rgay/status/716350120921464832> 
We have celebrated female authors on the Books site before, but we contacted 
some of our readers and asked them to tell us which female writers shaped their 
lives. Here are 10 of the most mentioned authors, in no particular order, and 
what our readers had to say about them:

1. Doris Lessing (1919 - 2013)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbea4782ce299bada8f29e8eee464db4c043d0c0e%2F0_88_4682_3200%2F4682.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbea4782ce299bada8f29e8eee464db4c043d0c0e%2F0_88_4682_3200%2F4682.jpg>
 Doris Lessing working at a typewriter, circa 1950. Photograph: Paul 
Popper/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
In my twenties, I was a foreigner in London. Reading Lessing’s subtly 
brilliant short story Out of the Fountain, I had that Keatsian feeling of a new 
world coming into view. As I read my way into the books of this fellow exile, 
her range and depth emerged – from psychological portraits in granular detail, 
to vast explorations of cataclysm and survival. Class, sex, old age, childhood, 
the inner workings of politics, the wilder shores of the psyche – she embraced 
complexity and got under the skin of the human condition with piercing acuity. 
This was writing from the frontiers of experience and utterly mind-stretching.

The two landmarks, for me, are Shikasta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jul/22/summer-voyages-shikasta-doris-lessing>
, her monumental portrait of humanity, andThe Four-Gated City 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/328415.The_Four_Gated_City> (part of the 
Children of Violence series), Lessing’s visionary mapping of London and the 
no-man’s-land between psychosis and sanity – this book opened doors for me. Her 
understanding of resilience and transformation in the midst of upheaval is 
profound. In our obfuscating times, we continue to need that eye. –barbkay 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1759344>.

Start with: The Golden Notebook 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/golden-notebook.html> – “Hailed as one of the 
key texts of the women’s movement of the 1960s, this study of a divorced single 
mother’s search for personal and political identity remains a defiant, 
ambitious tour de force,”wrote Robert McCrum. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/06/100-best-novels-golden-notebook-doris-lessing>


Further reading:

 * “I was the cuckoo in the nest” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/07/jenny-diski-doris-lessing-cuckoo-in-nest>
 – WriterJenny Diski <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jenny-diski> tells the 
story of how she lived with Lessing as a teenager

 * My hero: Doris Lessing by Margaret Drabble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/23/hero-doris-lessing-margaret-drabble>
 – “Doris would invite herself to lunch with me in Hampstead, when the mood 
took her. I never dared to say no” 
 * Doris Lessing in her own words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2013/nov/18/doris-lessing-dies-obituary-audio-interviews-podcast>
 on the Guardian books podcast 
 * ‘She helped change the way women are perceived, and perceive themselves’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/17/dorislessing-fiction> – by 
Guardian Review editor Lisa Allardice 
2. Toni Morrison (born 1931)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa99cac4180fce6783de735796f375bfca0a446%2F0_98_2728_1825%2F2728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa99cac4180fce6783de735796f375bfca0a446%2F0_98_2728_1825%2F2728.jpg>
 Toni Morrison in a 1982 image. Photograph: Reg Innell/Toronto Public Library 
When we asked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/mar/06/international-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women>
 readers for their favourite books by women, many replied with “anything and 
everything written by Toni Morrison.” Here are but a few.

Toni Morrison’s Beloved is the best book I have ever read. A horror story in 
every sense. I re-read it as soon as I had finished it. Chilling, difficult, 
painful, but absolutely brilliant. –afiercebadrabbit 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10792685>

Beloved. It’s odd reading a book at which you are simultaneously repulsed at 
how you feel and yet you understand exactly why you feel that way. She’s a 
terrific writer. –getebi 
<https://moderation.discussion.gutools.co.uk/moderation/users/11701437/>

I love every word she’s written, with Beloved at the top of my list. I’m also 
sad to see few writers from non-Anglo Saxon cultures listed as there are so 
many superb writers from other traditions.The God of Small Things by Arundhati 
Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2012/mar/20/review-god-small-things-arundhati-roy>
 is my favourite book of all time, and I also adoreElif Shafak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/elif-shafak>, whose fiction and essays as 
well as her talks are outstandingly fresh and insightful. ReadThe Flea Palace 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/flea-palace-270825.html> and The Bastard of 
Istanbul <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jul/29/fiction.features1>. –
spraos <https://moderation.discussion.gutools.co.uk/moderation/users/10187485/>

Start with: Beloved <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/beloved.html> – “If 
Beloved represents the terrible pain and suffering of a people whose very 
mother-love is warped by torture into murder, she is no thin allegory or shrill 
tract. This is a huge, generous, humane and gripping novel,”wrote A S Byatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1987/oct/16/fiction.asbyatt>

Further reading: 

 * ‘I’m writing for black people … I don’t have to apologise’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/25/toni-morrison-books-interview-god-help-the-child>
 – interview by Hermione Hoby 
 * Tea with Toni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/27/the-day-i-had-tea-with-toni-morrison>
, by SL Bridglal 
 * Toni Morrison on her novels: ‘I think goodness is more interesting’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/04/toni-morrison-god-help-the-child-new-york>

 * Her 1993 Nobel lecture <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ticXzFEpN9o> 
3. Ursula K Le Guin (born 1929)

The Earthsea trilogy is absolutely magnificent: poetry, wisdom, sadness, 
satisfaction, fantasy, realism. Far better dragons than Tolkien’s or George RR 
Martin’s, far better written – the whole shebang, except for humour. But then, 
Tolstoy didn’t go in for jokes much either. She taught me that there is nothing 
wrong with life or with death: the one is to be delighted in, the other 
accepted – Daniel Mccormick in Coatbridge, Scotland


The Earthsea <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earthsea> books by Ursula K Le 
Guin, which as an adult I find have greater moral depth than Tolkien and are 
better written and more focused than George RR Martin’s. –QuesoManchego 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3079058>

The Earthsea Trilogy by Ursula Le Guin has been something of a personal bible 
since I was a child. –punkmonkey 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3734871>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6e15547473867a615791d8d6ef7d2e6da5b0379%2F0_83_2550_1529%2F2550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6e15547473867a615791d8d6ef7d2e6da5b0379%2F0_83_2550_1529%2F2550.jpg>
 Ursula Le Guin during an interview in San Francisco in 1985. Photograph: M. 
Klimek/Bettmann/CORBIS 
Start with: The Earthsea 
<http://io9.com/10-reasons-why-le-guins-earthsea-books-can-still-chang-1459354329>
 series orThe Left Hand of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/27/winter-reads-the-left-hand-of-darkness>
 – “they are some of the very few titles which I would be confident enough to 
name as true classics, novels that will endure well beyond our lifetimes,”wrote 
Alison Flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/sep/11/ursula-k-le-guin-genre-medal-for-distinguished-contribution-to-american-letters>

Further reading:


 * My inspiration: SF Said on Ursula Le Guin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jul/15/sf-said-my-inspiration-ursula-le-guin>
 * Ursula Le Guin: ‘Wizardry is artistry’
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/20/ursula-le-guin-wizardry-is-artistry-interview-national-book-awards>
 * ‘Gentlemen, I just don’t belong here’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2015/oct/07/letters-of-note-what-writers-said-in-pictures#img-1>
 – her fantastic 1987 letter, responding to a request asking her to write a 
blurb for a science fiction anthology that contained no female voices 
4. Virginia Woolf (1882-1941)

To the Lighthouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/aug/10/virginia-woolf-to-the-lighthouse>
,The Waves <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/waves-8.html>, Orlando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/05/winter-reads-orlando-virginia-woolf>
,Jacob’s Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jul/20/fromthearchives.virginiawoolf>. 
Virginia Woolf. Because you can taste every word. –Lope82 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14449252>

Mrs Dalloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/01/100-best-novels-mrs-dalloway-virginia-woolf-robert-mccrum>
, elegant and lyrical stream of consciousness that I prefer to Joyce. –alloleo 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3862059>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d0e293437bd71115692fa4450f3a308282fb52a%2F0_10_1980_2474%2F1980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d0e293437bd71115692fa4450f3a308282fb52a%2F0_10_1980_2474%2F1980.jpg>
 Virginia Woolf. Photograph: George C. Beresford/Getty Images 
I would like to put in a word for Virginia Woolf, and especially for the 
under-appreciated Orlando, where the long-lived protagonist starts out as a 
young nobleman before becoming a wife and mother. The book runs from 
Elizabethan England to 1928 and says a lot about the position of women while 
being both clever and funny. Perhaps Woolf is a bit too “literary” for some 
tastes, but Mrs Dalloway, To the Lighthouse , The Waves and A Room of One’s Own 
must surely speak to many. I think (hope) she will come to be recognised as one 
of the greatest writers of the 20th century. –JackSchofield 
<https://moderation.discussion.gutools.co.uk/moderation/users/846296/> 

To The Lighthouse, it had a huge impact on me when I first read it. It really 
made me consider and reconsider how I think and find direction. I loved Lily 
Briscoe and that devastatingly matter-of-fact middle chapter/section that 
splits the novel. There are so many books by women that I love, but TTL is my 
favourite. –daveportivo <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4134703>

Pretty much all of Woolf, whom I read voraciously during the late 90s and 
still dip into now and then for a quick dose of writerly inspiration. Hard to 
pick any one favorite, fiction or non-fiction. But A Room of One’s Own changed 
my life.–Jenny Bhatt 
<https://moderation.discussion.gutools.co.uk/moderation/users/12254745/>

Start with: Mrs Dalloway 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mrs-dalloway-12.html> – “Woolf’s great novel 
makes a day of party preparations the canvas for themes of lost love, life 
choices and mental illness,”wrote Robert McCrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/01/100-best-novels-mrs-dalloway-virginia-woolf-robert-mccrum>


Further reading: 

 * Portraits of Virginia Woolf: here, the true face of the modern writer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/20/virginia-woolf-portraits-in-art-modern-writer>
 * Virginia Woolf should live on, but not because of her death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/may/27/virginia-woolf-live-death-suicide-fiction>
, by Holly Williams 
 * Woolf it down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/16/bloomsbury-cooks-virgina-woolf>
: on how the Bloomsbury set shows they were almost as obsessed with eating as 
with art 
5. Clarice Lispector (1920 - 1977)

If a writer such as Clarice Lispector is to be considered significant from a 
feminist point of view, then it would probably be due to the absence of 
anything in her work or life which could be said to resemble the stereotype of 
the “Lady Novelist”. As well as living like a sort of secular hermit, her 
writing is elusive and mystical, being much less concerned with plot and 
character than with abstract ideas, such asThe Apple in the Dark 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/838038.The_Apple_in_the_Dark>’s 
consideration of the nature of artistic creation orAgua Viva 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/153462.The_Stream_Of_Life>’s obsessive 
focus on trying to isolate single moments in time. Although she could write 
movingly about women’s experiences (especially inThe Hour of the Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/18/clarice-lispector-hour-of-the-star>
), her almost stubborn unworldliness otherwise gives the lie to the awful old 
cliché that women are somehow deficient in considering the abstract, and shows 
that women are as unrestricted in subject matter as men. She really is one of 
the oddest and most individual writers I’ve read. –Jacob Howarth in Oxford
 Clarice Lispector. Photograph: Courtesy Paulo Gurgel Valente 
I heard of her just a month ago, from a Korean American friend. All I can say 
about her at this stage is that she knows me better than I do. I am readingThe 
Complete Stories 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/315513/> published 
2015, which is full of lovely and shocking surprises. I finish one of her 
stories with a huge grin that lasts all day, another story may leave me arguing 
with myself ... each one is having an profound impact on me.

She inspires me more than any other author in this second half of my life. Her 
uniquely fluid style reveals a mind so perspicacious, so permissively poetic … 
and utterly radical. As a feisty feminist, I find peace in Lispector’s 
reveries; she defies convention at every level by writing from deep within her 
psyche, embracing human flaws and foibles as perfectly natural. Her trademark 
self-acceptance is so refreshingly robust that I have found myself at times 
interrupting my reading with whoops of awe and admiration for her freedom of 
thought and spirit. –Mars Drum

Start with: The Hour of the Star 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hour-of-the-star-2.html> – all the Brazillian 
author’s talents and eccentricities come together in her most famous, final 
novella about a poor typist in Rio,says Colm Tóibín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/23/wild-heart-clarice-lispector-review>


Further reading:

 * A brief survey of the short story, part 56 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/mar/05/clarice-lispector-short-story-survey>
: “This darkly addictive Brazilian writer is more concerned with perceptions of 
objects than conventional plot structures”, wrote Chris Power 
 * The True Glamour of Clarice Lispector 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/the-true-glamour-of-clarice-lispector>
, by Benjamin Moser for the New Yorker

 * Brazil’s Virginia Woolf 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/clarice-lispector-brazils-virginia-woolf-1439224027>
, by Brenda Cronin for the Wall Street Journal 
6. Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie (born 1977)

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie>’s Americanah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/11/americanah-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-review>
 has moved me like no other in recent memory. I would describe it as 
transformational because it provided an insight into the reality of what it 
means to be a young, ambitious, highly intelligent, sometimes single black 
woman in contemporary America. It’s an honest book about race, identity and the 
constant longing and nostalgia one feels for this metaphorical place called 
home. I was also moved by the story because it touchingly describes the loving 
relationship between the two central characters, showcasing that neither space 
nor time can erase love.

We usually go back to the same desires and preferences we had as 15-year-olds, 
and Americanah captures this sentiment. Moreover, it is a transformational book 
because it portrays Nigeria as a place that is mythical, marvellous, chaotic 
and slightly dangerous, yet also wildly fascinating, with a magnetic power to 
attract its brightest emigrés back to its shores. Reading this has made me 
realise that some of the most powerful narratives in contemporary fiction have 
been written by young, highly educated female African writers, who are tired of 
the old clichés frequently bandied around about Africa. Ngozi Adichie is a new, 
powerful and incredibly talented voice; her novel Americanah is the expression 
of a different African tale, of a continent and its people that have many more 
magnetic stories to tell, as well as critiques to raise about the so-called 
enlightened West.—beograd 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38778233>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad086eea10f0408c6bc730eefe6e81de53a9d313%2F0_0_4499_2999%2F4499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad086eea10f0408c6bc730eefe6e81de53a9d313%2F0_0_4499_2999%2F4499.jpg>
 Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, photographed in 2007. Photograph: Felix Clay for the 
Guardian 
Start with: Americanah <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/americanah.html> – “a 
superb dissection of race in the UK and the USA,”wrote Elizabeth Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/15/americanah-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-review>

Further reading:

 * ‘I decided to call myself a Happy Feminist’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/17/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-extract-we-should-all-be-feminists>
 – her world-famous TED talk 
 * ‘Don’t we all write about love? When men do it, it’s a political comment. 
When women do it, it’s just a love story’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-interview>
 – interview by Emma Brockes 
 * Every 16-year-old in Sweden will receive copy of We Should All Be Feminists
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/04/every-16-year-old-in-sweden-to-receive-copy-of-we-should-all-be-feminists>
7. Margaret Atwood (born 1939)

The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret Atwood. She predicted all that is happening 
today in that book. –shofmann <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15548144>

Everything about it is scarily easy to imagine. Her descriptions of how women 
began to be punished for abortions reminds me of legislation happening right 
now in the USA, for example. –getebi 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11701437>

Start with: The Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/handmaid-s-tale.html> – “Atwood’s chilling 
tale of a concubine in an oppressive future America is more vital than ever,”
wrote Charlotte Newman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/26/the-handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood>

Further reading:

 * Haunted by The Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood> 
- Atwood on the legacy of her iconic novel

 * Margaret Atwood webchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/live/2015/sep/25/margaret-atwood-webchat-the-heart-goes-last>
 – her answers to your questions 
 * ‘I set myself a schedule of three to five pages a day’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/03/margaret-atwood-i-set-myself-a-schedule-of-three-to-five-pages-a-day>
 – Atwood on writing 
8. Zadie Smith (born 1975)

White Teeth, by Zadie Smith. Could read it over and over again. –Sarah Hassam 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13923841>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd84071bec2355334c2db237eb5025fbb70d21517%2F0_0_2322_3390%2F2322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd84071bec2355334c2db237eb5025fbb70d21517%2F0_0_2322_3390%2F2322.jpg>
 Zadie Smith, photographed at the Edinburgh books festival in 2001. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
On Beauty by Zadie Smith is absolutely brilliant. Smith is often categorized 
first by race and gender and thus is never considered the peer of other modern 
literary fiction writers like Franzen and Rushdie, but she easily beats them at 
their own style. –emason1121 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14478449>

Start with: White Teeth <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/white-teeth.html>, a 
novel on the lives of various multicultural families living in London; “an 
audaciously assured contribution to this process of staring into the mirror,”
wrote Caryl Philipps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/jan/09/fiction.zadiesmith>

Further reading:

 * Fail better <http://faculty.sunydutchess.edu/oneill/failbetter.htm>: “What 
makes a good writer? Is writing an expression of self, or, as TS Eliot argued, 
‘an escape from personality’?” Thanks to Jenny Bhatt and MildGloster for
pointing us <https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/70621711> 
towards this 2007 essay.

 * Windows on the Will 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/03/10/windows-on-the-will/>: Smith’s 
essay about watching the new Charlie Kaufman filmAnomalisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anomalisa>, and Arthur Schopenhauer, was 
recently published on the New York Review of Books. “I went to see Anomalisa, 
largely because of how interesting Smith made it seem,” sharedMildGloster 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15040504>.

9. Elena Ferrante (born 1943) 

Of the many beautifully wrought themes explored in Elena Ferrante’s masterful 
Neapolitan series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/31/elena-ferrante-literary-sensation-nobody-knows>
, one that especially speaks to me, as a woman, is the question of what it 
means to attain presence versus what it means to disappear. Lila and Lenú, the 
central characters, each struggles tonot disappear, despite the forces of 
class, history, and violence conspiring against them as women. Each tries to 
avoid what Lila loathingly describes as the problem of “dissolving margins,” 
when “the outlines of people and things suddenly dissolved, disappeared.” 
Reading Ferrante has led me to wonder: How many times have I, as a woman, faced 
being erased – in relationships, in career, in the larger social order? How 
many far less-privileged women, in hostile corners of the world, face the 
threat of vanishing completely, dissolving into the boundaries of others 
without a trace? –Veronica Majerol, New York, NY

Start with: The Days of Abandonment 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/days-of-abandonment.html>, a short novel 
Ferrante wrote before her famous Neapolitan series – a great taster, and 
brilliant in its own right.


Further reading:

 * Elena Ferrante: the global literary sensation nobody knows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/31/elena-ferrante-literary-sensation-nobody-knows>
 * Elena Ferrante: ‘Anonymity lets me concentrate exclusively on writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/19/elena-ferrante-anonymity-lets-me-concentrate-exclusively-on-writing>
’ – an interview by Deborah Orr 
10. Angela Carter (1940 - 1992)

When I was at university I saw someone give a paper on Angela Carter’s 
dystopian masterpiece The Passion of New Eve. It was probably another year or 
so before I got my hands on a copy but I was not disappointed.

The premise alone – a man captured by radical feminists and surgically 
transformed into a woman so that he may bear the messiah – was enough to pique 
my interest, but it was Carter’s hallucinatory prose and rich symbolism that 
made this novel unforgettable. –elbartonfink 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13210022>

Start with: Nights at the Circus 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nights-at-the-circus-2.html> – the story of 
winged circus performer Sophie Fevvers’s travels through 19th-century Europe, 
that wasnamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/06/angela-carter-uk-oldest-literary-prize>
 the best-ever winner of Britain’s oldest literary prize, theJames Tait Black 
award <http://www.ed.ac.uk/news/events/tait-black>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0ecd16f66435873c7ec80a815d53e1035ff4058%2F0_244_4031_2419%2F4031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20inspiring%20female%20writers%20you%20need%20to%20read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2F10-inspiring-female-writers-you-need-to-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0ecd16f66435873c7ec80a815d53e1035ff4058%2F0_244_4031_2419%2F4031.jpg>
 English novelist Angela Carter sitting on a park bench in Paris in 1988. 
Photograph: Sophie Bassouls/Corbis 
Further reading:

 * Angela Carter: a portrait in postcards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/22/angela-carter-postcards-susannah-clapp>
 * A brief survey of the short story: Angela Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/mar/22/survey-short-story-angela-carter>
, byChris Power <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chrispower> 
 * Femme fatale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jun/24/classics.angelacarter>: Angela 
Carter’s subversive take on traditional fairy stories inThe Bloody Chamber 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bloody-chamber-and-other-stories-2.html> is 
as shocking today as when the collection first appeared in 1979, wrote Helen 
Simpson

We are painfully aware that this list could go forever. So, please, add more 
authors to the conversation by leaving your thoughts in the comments.
 