
Catherine Jere, research officer, Unesco Education for All global monitoring 
report 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/efareport/reports/2013>

There is a global shortage of teachers: Moving beyond access to improve the 
quality of education available to all is vital to address the learning crisis. 
Teachers are central to this. Support from NGOs in the area of teacher 
professional development, as well as pre-service education, can help build 
capacity within countries. I have seenexamples of this in Malawi 
<http://en.unesco.org/>, where NGO-trained student teachers are well regarded 
by the schools where they are posted. An important approach in the training 
provided is ample experience of working in rural classrooms - and with 
communities - before being posted to schools.

Vikas Pota, chief executive, Varkey Gems Foundation 
<https://www.varkeygemsfoundation.org/home>

Get engaged: The crux of improving the quality of education lies in engagement 
â€“ whether it be the engagement of parents by teachers, teachers of their 
students, or the engagement and training of teachers in effective learning 
techniques. However, there cannot be a one-size-fits-all model for improving 
the quality of learning. Interventions have to be tailored to the needs of 
specific situations.

Marguerite Clarke, senior education specialist, Human Development Network, 
World Bank <https://blogs.worldbank.org/>

Raise the standing of teachers: One of the countries we're working with in 
Africa noted that it was more economically rewarding to join the army than 
become a teacher. When prospective teachers are sent this message, how can we 
be surprised that the cream of the crop are not going into teaching?

Sharath Jeevan, founder, Stir Education <http://www.stireducation.org/>

How school can lead to jobs: The odds improve dramatically if you can create a 
more articulated pipeline between schooling and the workplace. One way to do 
this is through national qualifications frameworks that articulate the various 
skills and expertise recognised within that particular economy.

Yumiko Yokozeki, regional education adviser for western and central Africa, 
Unicef <http://www.unicef.org/wcaro/>

Effective education benefits the whole community: Learning is not just in 
school. In rural Niger where the school management committees were strong, 
communities started supporting schools and then parents started to realise the 
need for them to be able to read and write. It was an example of a whole 
village transforming to a learning community surrounding a school.

Struggling in a second language: In many countries in Africa, majority of 
children study in their second, third or fourth language. This is already an 
enormous handicap for learning. More mother tongue teaching would be good, 
however, some languages are not formally written and it is difficult to produce 
textbooks. Some countries have hundreds of languages (over 200 in Cameroon) and 
it is not practical to use mother tongue education for each of them. The most 
practical solution would be to have pre-school and early years of primary 
school as a bilingual bridge from mother tongue to the language of instruction 
(French, English or Portuguese).

Catherine Henny, education operations officer, Global Partnership for Education
 <http://www.globalpartnership.org/>

More local language books are needed: Access to reading and other materials in 
mother-tongue languages has had a significant impact on learning in the early 
grades. Many organisations such asRoom to Read <http://www.roomtoread.org/> and 
Save the Children <http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/> are working to publish 
titles in local languages.

Loise Gichuhi, co-ordinator, education in emergencies, University of Nairobi 
<http://www.uonbi.ac.ke/> and founder of Education Bridge Africa 
<http://www.educationbridge-africa.org/>

Qualifications must be more than pieces of paper: Teacher training is not just 
for certificates but for relevance and the education stakeholders must look for 
ways of maintaining the teacher in the classroom. This can be done by 
developing training framework tied to to the needs of the country.

Teaching in the mother tongue: The value of English speaking is very high 
among parents. This complicates the choice of the language for instruction. We 
know research advocates the use of mother tongue to improve learning outcomes.

Amowi Phillips, international representative, Mmofra Foundation 
<http://mmofraghana.org/>

Culturally relevant reading materials are important: A robust creative and 
local publishing environment is very important. TheGolden Baobab Literary prize 
<http://www.goldenbaobab.org/> is one of the African organisations doing good 
work in this field.

Pinterest inspiration: As children in Africa gain access to technology, it is 
important that they recognise themselves and their stories in the digital 
content that they consume. We support this bycurating cultural content for 
children on a number of Pinterest boards <http://www.pinterest.com/mmofraghana/>
.

Isabelle Duston, founder, Et4d <http://www.et4d.com/>

Use mobiles to teach teachers: After the mobile learning week at Unesco, I 
came out very impressed by the models using technology as a tool to improve the 
professional development of teachers. Technology used by students would be 
great, but it's not realistic in most countries.

Federico Rincon Mora, educational and creative consultant, The World Literacy 
Foundation <http://www.worldliteracyfoundation.org/>

Mobiles can help with adult literacy: Illiteracy problems in Latin America are 
due to education systems from the past. Therefore, 40 million adults in this 
region can't read or write. But everyone has a mobile phone. We are introducing 
m-learning in El Salvador, a country which has an illiteracy level of almost 
20% of the population.

Read the rest of the advice shared in the Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/feb/17/improving-global-literacy-education>
.

Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 