
1 SWV – Give it to Me <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rZu3Hn6ev-o>

The 1990s golden age for American all-woman R&B trios – Brownstone, Kut Klose, 
Jade, Monkenstef, 702, BlackGirl – was an era ushered in by New York City's 
Sisters With Voices. Lelee, Coko and Taj were gospel choir-honed singers who 
crafted sweet, melismatic harmonies, with Coko's nasal, almost Martian soprano 
giving them an inimitable edge. The previous decade's R&B scene had found 
paragons in restrained, classy soul artists such as Anita Baker and Luther 
Vandross, but by the early 90s, a rowdy new kind of R&B reigned, one that had 
shacked up with hip-hop to morph into the hopped-up Keith Sweat and Teddy 
Riley-helmednew jack swing 
<http://www.complex.com/music/2012/07/the-25-best-new-jack-swing-songs/> sound. 
Taking cues from the processed dance pop that Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis had 
crafted for Janet Jackson in the late 80s, swing was accelerated, slang-driven 
and sexually charged, and while SWV's biggest hit,Right Here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOKd_et0A4o&feature=kp>, was wholesome, 
radio-friendly gold, the sisters were equally adept at turning out provocative, 
feministy do-me classics likeDowntown 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QauOxyAeTvI> ("You gotta go downtown/ That's 
the way to my love"),Black Puddin' <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WRkO78lJXYo> 
("Women in the 90s want more from a brother than a part-time lover who's wack 
undercover") and the overlooked but joyously quintessential New Jack banger, 
Give It to Me.

2 TLC – Creep <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LlZydtG3xqI>

Originally conceived as a female Bell Biv DeVoe 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6blgjF6UkU> by execs at by Atlanta's LaFace 
Records – an Arista imprint dubbed the Motown of the South – TLC would fast 
succeed their male equivalents. TLC's early sound was classic new jack, but 
with a rowdy, girl gang edge: Rozonda "Chilli" Thomas harmonising sweetly with 
Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins's alto while Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes dropped feisty, nasal 
rap verses about safe sex and sisterhood. Their sound quickly matured, taking 
R&B next-level with 1994's sophisticated urban pop groundbreakerCrazySexyCool 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/crazysexycool-mw0000120130> – the first 
girl-group album in music history to reach diamond status. The trio could move 
from slinky slow jams to socially conscious grooves with ease, and their 
reputation as one of R&B's most badass groups was fully legit: when shoddy 
record contracts saw them broke despite CrazySexyCool's monster profits, the 
trio responded by storming their label's offices with a crew of female ex-cons 
in tow, holding Arista's then-president Clive Davis hostage. TheOrganized Noise 
<http://www.complex.com/music/2010/05/the-25-greatest-organized-noize-songs-of-all-time/>
-producedWaterfalls <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8WEtxJ4-sh4> became TLC's 
signature, but Creep, the darker, Billboard-charting boom bap-and-trumpet hit 
that preceded it in 1994, was 90s R&B at its most thrilling.

3 Total – No One Else <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vRKf9ecdSic>

Rap-R&B hook-ups are ubiquitous now, but up until the early 90s, hip-hoppers 
guesting on R&B songs was daring new territory. This new form of collaboration 
required singers who could hold their own next to their MC peers, and Kima, 
Keisha and Pam – the New Jersey trio who'd made their debut on the hook of 
Notorious BIG'sJuicy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JZom_gVfuw> – proved 
they were up to the challenge with No One Else, weaving their voices around a 
typically rambunctious verse from Da Brat. Total were the self-styled bad girls 
of P Diddy's Bad Boy Records. While TLC were swaggering around in baggy jeans 
and Dr Martins, Total were rocking pre-Matrix chic: sleek leather trench coats, 
slick, cropped hair and black shades. Their 1996 eponymous debut album was 
tender, romantic and occasionally filthy, and while No One Else proved Total 
could sample one of hip-hop's cornerstones – Boogie Down Production's 1987South 
Bronx <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5WlcpEEOHw> – and make it their own. 

4 Mary J Blige – Mary Jane (All Night Long) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NbYhySUUH-0>

A cover of Anita Baker's Caught Up in the Rapture 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AGl1-BlsYqM> saw Bronx-raised, gospel choir 
star Mary J Blige signed to Uptown/MCA at 18 years old. With P Diddy mentoring 
from the executive producer's chair, Blige pioneered hip-hop soul: a sub-genre 
of R&B that married streetwise soul songs with hip-hop instrumentals. Ruthless 
Records' artistMichel'le 
<http://singersroom.com/content/2013-09-12/Michelle-Says-I-Learned-From-Abuse-Beatings-From-Dr-Dre/>
 had lain the groundwork for hip-hop soul with her 1989 self-titled debut, but 
Mary's 1992 debut –What's the 411? 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/whats-the-411-mw0000081462> – proved to be the 
true game-changer. There were elements of swing, but Blige radiated a 
melancholic Lady Day vibe that set her apart from her peers. 1995'sMy Life 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/my-life-mw0000626804> established her skill for 
mining the darker aspects of 90s living – depression, addiction, abuse – 
speaking to the tribulations of a black America ravaged by HIV/Aids, gang 
violence and crack epidemics. But in Mary Jane (All Night Long), Blige offered 
a joyously retro-sounding respite: warm, booming drums, soft funk bass, breezy 
flutes and a playful, lover's call.

5 Adina Howard – Freak Like Me <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hsEgF1aKCSM> 

By the mid-90s, Lil Kim and Foxy Brown had successfully bumrushed the hip-hop 
boys' club with an aggressive, pornographic breed of femme-fatale rap, and 
R&B's solo vocalists – notablySmooth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2725WPGNwdY> (the "female mack 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=mack>"), Joya and Michigan's 
Adina Howard – were perfecting a similarly hardcore sound. Howard's 1995 single 
set a new benchmark in urban raunch pop; Freak Like Me was hood romance at its 
most graphic, a pheromone-fuelled G-funk anthem for the ladies – empowering or 
degrading, depending on which feminist set you claimed. WhileLL Cool J 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mYt5ouu4088> was romancing women in the back 
seat of his jeep, Adina was steering her own ride, cruising the ghetto for 
"roughneck bruthas". Six years later,Sugababes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dSAGsiVSoeE> would reboot Howard's 
platinum-selling single, stripping out the Chronic-style synths for Gary 
Numan's Roland-assisted new wave. But the original – all suspension-rocking 
beats, summer funk and Howard's brittle caramel vocals – has grown old 
flawlessly.

Reading on mobile? Listen to this playlist on Spotify here 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/guardianmusic/playlist/0PMJgs9c3ngVLQupjlsGPD>

6 Aaliyah – One in a Million <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_B0_RW5oSI4> 

By 1996, R&Bs babygirl – a baggy-jeans-and-Timbaland-boots-wearing tomboy with 
a smooth, soulful falsetto – was collaborating with Timbaland and Missy 
"Misdemeanor" Elliot, the duo responsible for the eerie, dislocated cyber-funk 
that would become the bedrock of R&B and hip-hop for the best part of a decade 
from the mid-90s, propelling the likes ofGinuwine 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WJrherMXv9I> and Destiny's Child 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ijD5WLTGnYY> to success. One in a Million set 
the standard for this new breed of sound, a spacious, cosmic slow jam built on 
stuttering slo-mo/triple-time percussion and Aaliyah's silvery night song. One 
in a Million was the antithesis of new jack's turbo drum machine rhythms, and 
established Aaliyah as the voice of a new R&B age.

7 Jodeci – Freek'n You <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oYwL-FzFDKQ>

Elliot and Timbaland won their first major label paycheques working behind the 
scenes on Jodeci's 1993 opusDiary of a Mad Band 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/diary-of-a-mad-band-mw0000107201>. The pair were 
onboard courtesy of Jodeci's DeVante Swing, who'd recruited them into his 
R&B-hip-hop collectiveSwing Mob <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swing_Mob> – a 
side project that would fizzle out (only to be reborn as Da Bassment) shortly 
before Jodeci's last album dropped in 1995. Diary … marked the pinnacle of 
K-Ci, JoJo, Dalvin and DeVante's reign as R&B's leading Romeos, delivering an 
album rich with swagger, seduction exquisite harmonies.Cry For You 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mtzM-wWKXe0> – which the Isley Brothers would 
sample in 2001 – saw them turning male vulnerability into high devotion: "Do 
anything you want me to/ Get on my knees for you." But later single Freek 'n 
You – a potent fever dream of sexual yearning – epitomised the quartet at their 
lusty best.

8 D'Angelo – Brown Sugar  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H_WzjiTzZBA>

By the time D'Angelo appeared on the scene in the mid-90s, R&B fans were 
feeling desensitised by swing's bombastic, processed vibe, and found themselves 
hankering after something more grounded. Neo soul sated that desire, with a 
mellow, Afrocentric jazz sound that valued live instrumentation and paid homage 
to past titans such as Marvin Gaye and Curtis Mayfield. Erykah Badu became neo 
soul's de-facto queen, but D'Angelo – the son of a Pentecostal minister – was 
just as instrumental to neo soul's coming of age, a triple-threat heartbreaker 
who could song write, perform and produce. Chart-riding singleLady 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YBB8valskCQ> helped make his 1995 debut album 
into a sleeper hit, but Brown Sugar's title track was the album's true sweet 
spot – a smoky, sensual, boom bap-lite jazz joint.

9 Lauryn Hill – Ex-Factor <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cE-bnWqLqxE>

Motherhood, faith and the politics of love were central themes in Lauryn 
Hill's debut solo album,The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/the-miseducation-of-lauryn-hill-mw0000034642>. 
New Jersey's finest had risen to fame in Grammy-bagging hip-hop trio the 
Fugees, under the nom du rap L Boogie, proving herself as a polymath vocalist 
capable of switching from intellectual rap verses to soaring velvet melismas. 
Hill was frequently included under the neo-soul umbrella, but where artists 
such as Badu and D'Angelo were channelling African elements into their oeuvres, 
Miseducation – which had been recorded in Jamaica's Tuff Gong studios – drew on 
West Indian flavours, including Hill's reworking of Bob Marley's Turn Your 
Lights Down Love. Ex-Factor lacked the tempo-riding punch thatDoo Wop (That 
Thing) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T6QKqFPRZSA> packed, but it typified 
Hill's skill for gifting R&B with rich, erudite ghetto-soul anthems of the 
heart.

10 Monica – Before You Walk Out of My Life  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ptiz0KtR16E>

Let us end with Monica's Before You Walk Out My Life, a fittingly sentimental 
closer. Once the noughties had rolled round, Monica had been eclipsed by 90s 
glamazons such as Mariah Carey – but millennials who were old enough to buy 
Pure Swing compilations with diligently saved pocket money (or bootleg copies 
from better-funded school friends) will remember Monica as one of R&B's primo 
round-the-way sweethearts.Don't Take It Personal (Just One Of Dem Days) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=asXau88O5Is>, which became known rather crudely 
to some as "The PMS song", proved Monica could do hip-hop-sampling jams for the 
jeeps and the club, but Before You Walk Out My Life, from Monica's debut 1995 
albumMiss Thang <http://www.allmusic.com/album/miss-thang-mw0000122320>, was 
chaste mid-90s R&B at its finest – a bittersweet, sappy soundtrack to moving on.

• What do you think of Charlotte's choices? Nominate the songs she should have 
included – and say why – and we'll do an alternative 10 of the Best for 90s R&B 
on Friday 28 February.
 