
Radar Architecture and Art

Founded by architect and music lover Marco di Piaggi in 2008, Radar has 
established itself as a gallery that focuses on art firmly rooted in and 
influenced by the city. De Piaggi considers the gallery an "avant-garde 
monitor" and uses his association with Amsterdam's underground music scenes as 
a conduit for what's happening. For example, in spring 2011 local tagging hero
Laser 3.14 <http://www.laser314.com/> (equally loved and despised throughout 
town) brought his spray-painted poetry and vibrant, dystopian canvases to the 
gallery's cosy new space, which is situated (somewhat ironically) on the ground 
floor of a typically gabled Amsterdam house. Radar seeks to remain radical and 
urgent, as exemplified by the exhibitionStreet | Spirit 
<http://www.radar-amsterdam.com/art.html>, which features Polish painter 
Nisja's strangely calm cityscapes contrasting with the immediacy and frenzy of 
Marcel Ozymantra's large canvases.
• Rozengracht 77A, no phone, radar-amsterdam.com 
<http://www.radar-amsterdam.com/#>, free admission. Open Fri-Sat 1pm-5pm and by 
appointment

Aschenbach & Hofland
 Photograph: Sven-Ole Frahm 
Like so many success stories of cultural Amsterdam, this gallery began as a 
squat in the 80s and is now recognised as one of the best in the city. Owner 
Gerhard Hofland focuses on emerging talent as well as mid-career artists and 
has featuredJochen Mühlenbrink 
<http://www.gerhardhofland.com/exhibit-detail.php?expoid=164>'s memorable 
trompe l'oeil paintings of the backs of paintings, complete with faux sticky 
tape, stapled edges and packing notes; a claustrophobic "down the rabbit hole" 
gallery installation incorporating vibrant canvases and urban tribal sculpture 
from Simon Hemmer, Lutz Driessen and Seb Koberstädt; and the wonderful abstract 
musings ofSven-Ole Frahm 
<http://www.gerhardhofland.com/exhibit-detail.php?expoid=165>, with their 
geometric strips set on – and cut away from – bold fields of primary colours. 
Once the appetite for art is sated, a wander around the marble foyer of this 
Jugendstil print foundry (built in 1901) is highly recommended.
• Bilderdijkstraat 165c, +31 20 412 1772, gerhardhofland.com 
<http://www.gerhardhofland.com>, free admission. Open Wed-Sat 1pm-5pm 

Galerie Fons Welters
 Photograph: Gert Jan van Rooij 
Tucked away on a nondescript residential Jordaan street, just off bustling 
Rozengracht, Galerie Fons Welters is one of the city's most consistent 
providers of cutting-edge contemporary art. The gallery has been central in 
promoting and artistically supporting young artists from the Netherlands and 
beyond since 1988. The larger, more traditional high-ceilinged "white cube" 
space in the rear has accommodated a ghostly slide projector installation from 
English artistClaire Harvey 
<http://www.fonswelters.nl/artist/claire_harvey/#images/c_harvey_when_what_was_when_2010_overview_3>
's "life in black and white" miniature world, plus more conventional sculpture 
and painting exhibitions from established artists such asFolkert de Jong 
<http://www.fonswelters.nl/artist/folkert_de_jong/#images/black_lincoln_pink_hat_2>
 andSven Kroner 
<http://www.fonswelters.nl/artist/sven_kroner/#images/sven_kroner_3011_2010_acrylic_on_canvas_170_x_240_cm>
. In contrast, the smaller Playstation project area in the front of the gallery 
caters to up-and-coming talent, often fresh from the academies. From painting 
through sculpture and installation to multimedia and performance, this gallery 
is a must.
• Bloemstraat 140, +31 20 423 3046, fonswelters.nl <http://www.fonswelters.nl>
, free admission. Open Tues-Sat 1pm-6pm

KochxBos
 Photograph: Ray Caesar/Bubbles 
In the converted living room of a ground floor house in a typically 
claustrophobic Amsterdam street, Esther Koch and Hans Bos have taken their 
fascination for the surreal and avant garde and created a superb showcase for 
today's top international lowbrow and underground art. The offerings are always 
varied and hung with a designer's eye for detail. Previous exhibitions include
Ray Caesar <http://www.raycaesar.com/work>'s engrossing digital prints, 
depicting his Victorian future-world denizens, the ink and acrylic 
carnivalesque creatures by Toulouse-born painterCiou 
<http://www.ciou.fr/news.html>, and in spring 2011 the gallery hosted the first 
solo show in the Netherlands bySarah Maple <http://www.sarahmaple.com/main.htm>
, England's "heir to Emin". Featured works included her provocativeCock photo 
series 
<http://bidisha-online.blogspot.com/2011/02/artist-sarah-maple-shows-off-her-cocks.html>
 and herself-portrait <http://www.sarahmaple.com/paintartpage.htm> of a Muslim 
woman tenderly cradling a piglet. Nestled alongside cafes and fashion boutiques 
in the picturesque Jordaan, KochxBos is a colourful and strangely refreshing 
tonic to the quaint surroundings outside.
• Eerste Anjeliersdwarsstraat 5, +31 20 681 4567, kochxbos.nl 
<http://www.kochxbos.nl/>, free admission. Open Wed-Sat 1pm-6pm 

Kulter
 Kulter 
This self-described "tasting room" (or proeflokaal in Dutch) is definitely 
worth the cycle or tram ride out to Amsterdam's newest art-buzz neighbourhood, 
Bos en Lommer. Based in the ground floor of a corner house in a purely 
residential street, it specialises in bridging art with performance, music and 
words and as a collective that organises events in collaboration with other 
artist-run initiatives. But perhaps Kulter's true accomplishment is the 
creation of a relaxed and homely atmosphere, right down to the servings of 
bread and homemade soup on the stove at openings. The art, and the artists, are 
extremely accessible and very international. Shows tend to involve recent 
academy graduates of all disciplines and nationalities, as exemplified by the 
site-specific installations, drawings, performances and paintings from the 
multicultural and nomadicPalatti collective 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Palatti/164831170214156>.
• Sanderijnstraat 21, +31 61 740 4955 (SMS in advance to check), kulter.nl 
<http://www.kulter.nl/info.html>, free admission. Open Mon-Tues, Thur 9am-2pm, 
Fri 9am-6pm, Sat-Sun 3pm-6pm

Mediamatic
 Photograph: Willem Velthoven 
In a large exhibition space in a charmingly decaying former bank building, 
Mediamatic explores the influence of new technologies and media on culture and 
society through intriguing exhibitions, workshops, lectures and film 
screenings. Its exploits include the already-legendary interactiveArcade 
<http://www.mediamatic.net/page/166500/en> show, which traced the development 
of the gaming industry – from Pong through handhelds to motion-activated 
consoles – with plenty of playable examples; a fixed-gear biking exhibition 
replete with a race track through the gallery; and Pièce de Résistance, which 
asked visitors to submit personal souvenirs that exemplify a revolutionary 
event, from the second world war up to the present day – think leaflets, 
photos, posters or, perhaps, the occasional brick.
• Vijzelstraat 68, +31 20 427 4137, mediamatic.net <http://www.mediamatic.net/>
, admission prices vary with event. Open Mon-Fri 1pm-7pm, Sat-Sun 1pm-6pm 
(times often vary by exhibition)

P/////akt
 Photograph: Jean Bernard Koeman 
Opened in 2003, this east-side gallery maintains an "anything goes" attitude, 
encouraging site-specific work and stimulating the artists to incorporate the 
full scope of the space's whitewashed walls into their work. In 2010 the 
gallery completed the series Space Is A Word, a three-part examination of art 
as a mental space – rather than physical – that featured large canvases from
Gino Saccone <http://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=147312015311257&index=1>, 
Jean Bernard Koeman 
<http://www.yangahham.com/8group/8group/Jean_Bernard_Koeman.html>'s 
architectural models andFrederik van Simaey 
<http://www.frederikvansimaey.hi-ka-sk.be/>'s playfully existential 
installations, including a striking sculpture of folding beds, bikes and 
ladders. Debate, performance and book launches are also part of this gallery's 
mandate as it seeks to bridge the gap between the art, the artist and the 
public.
• Zeeburgerpad 53, +31 20 468 8395, pakt.nu <http://www.pakt.nu/>, free 
admission. Open Thu-Sun 2pm-6pm

Smart Project Space
 Smart Project Space 
Situated in Amsterdam's hip Oud-West neighbourhood and occupying a foreboding 
brick building that used to house an anatomical pathology laboratory, this 
project space offers art alongside a lot more. The film programming is 
impressive: multiple rooms screen a well-selected assortment of arthouse flicks 
from around the world, mostly subtitled in English. Dinner and drinks are on 
offer in Lab 111, which offers visitors the opportunity to dine on a converted 
dissection table under surgical lights – surprisingly, an experience that's not 
as strange as it sounds. Studios are provided for a fortunate few, who use this 
multi-disciplinary playground for work; and lastly, of course, there are the 
galleries – spacious, bright rooms that accommodate a varied programme 
featuring local as well as international young talent. In 2011 these galleries 
hosted the finalists of the Prix de Rome competition, won by Finnish new media 
artistPilvi Takala <http://www.pilvitakala.com/cv.html>. 
• Arie Biemondstraat 105-113, +31 20 427 5951, smartprojectspace.net 
<http://smartprojectspace.net/>, admission prices vary with event. Open Mon-Sat 
noon-10pm, Sun 2pm-10pm; cinema open Mon-Thu, Sun 8pm-midnight, Fri-Sat 
8pm-2am; Lab111 open Mon-Sun noon-1am, Fri-Sat noon-3am

Upstream Gallery
 Upstream Gallery 
Upstream Gallery opened its doors in November 2003, since when the space has 
been exhibiting an exhilarating mix of contemporary art from the Netherlands 
and abroad. The general vibe is straightforward and in-your-face – and the 
gallery is aptly sited in the gentrified, but still cool, De Pijp 
neighbourhood. Past shows have featured the monolithic concrete and glass 
sculptures byCristian Andersen 
<http://www.upstreamgallery.nl/cristian-andersen/>; stop-motion nightmares from 
Cristóbal León <http://www.upstreamgallery.nl/christobal-leon/>; and 
installation, video and photographs fromKatrina Daschner 
<http://www.upstreamgallery.nl/katrina-daschner/> such as the sexually charged 
Murderess series featuring hooded, axe-wielding women in bleak, wintry forests. 
A memorable recent installation from the ever-electrifyingMarc Bijl  
<http://www.upstreamgallery.nl/wp-content/uploads/mb-2010-black_dawn.jpg>
displayed a mesmerising, life-sized black Christ standing upon a stack of white 
painted pallets, hands outstretched, epoxy dripping like melting wax from arms, 
hands and face. The work here is always at an intense level.
• Van Ostadestraat 294, +31 20 428 4284, upstreamgallery.nl 
<http://www.upstreamgallery.nl>, free admission. Open Wed-Sat 1pm-6pm and by 
appointment

W139
 Photograph: Henni van Beek 
Sex, drugs and art make familiar bedfellows, and they all contributed to the 
formation of this gallery in the heart of Amsterdam's infamous red light 
district. Originally a theatre, the space was squatted in 1979 by five young 
artists in need of a place to show their work. Painting, performances and punk 
rock were to be the beginning of one the city's most original hubs of artistic 
endeavour. More than 30 years later, it still maintains some of its worn 
industrial demeanour, while scrubbing up to carry a clean museum vibe whenever 
necessary. With room for gigs, exhibitions, book launches, parties, film and 
debates touching on hot topics such as the uneasy relationship between politics 
and art, W139 is perpetually in motion, frequented by skinny-trousered 
hipsters, bespectacled geeks and paint-spattered freaks alike. And who knows, 
the tattooed girl that's selling you a book at their kiosk one week might be 
exhibiting at one of the city's blockbuster museums the next.
• Warmoesstraat 139, +31 20 622 9434, w139.nl <http://www.w139.nl/en/>, 
admission prices vary with event. Open Mon-Sun noon-6pm

• Russell Joyce is an editor of Unfold Amsterdam 
<http://www.unfoldamsterdam.nl/>, a poster publication and website about what's 
on in Amsterdam
 