
Wave dodging and walking at Sennen cove, Land's End

Some of Cornwall's wildest beaches can be a hassle to access with kids and 
their paraphernalia. But Sennen cove provides eye-popping scenery, 
sandy-bottomed surf and facilities galore: bang-on-the-beach cafe, beach-side 
parking, surf hire, loos and seafront shops for supplies and souvenirs. While 
you can spend all day making footprints in the sand and dodging the 
shore-break, it's only a mile's stroll along theSouth West Coast Path 
<http://www.southwestcoastpath.co.uk/> to Land's End 
<http://www.landsend-landmark.co.uk/> (if you've got buggy-bound children, 
follow the National Cycle Trail). For most, the appeal of Britain's most 
south-westerly point is in the rugged scenery and views to Longships 
Lighthouse, but for children who prefer spoon-fed entertainment, there's a crop 
of penny-pinching (and frankly quite tacky) tourist attractions, including a 4D 
film experience.
• Sennen cove, Penzance, 0871 720 0044, sennenbeach.com 
<http://www.sennenbeach.com/>, sennen-cove.com <http://sennen-cove.com/>, 
parking £3, entry free

Train from St Erth to St Ives
 Photograph: Alamy 
Bag a window seat on this branch-line that hugs the coast on its journey from 
St Erth to St Ives. No other 15-minute train ride serves up such generous 
lashings of seaside eye candy guaranteed to keep noses pressed against the 
windows. And with so much to pack in before the return journey there's no need 
for disappointment when the train comes to a halt above the white sands of 
Porthminster beach (pictured). Mind the swooping gulls as you lickMoomaid of 
Zennor <http://www.moomaidofzennor.com/> ice-cream, made from local milk, and 
keep your eyes peeled for dolphins on a walk around the chapel-topped 
promontory known as the Island. You can also enjoy child-friendly culture on 
family art trails around Tate St Ives and the Barbara Hepworth Museum.
• Trains leave St Ives, St Erth and Lelant Saltings Park and Ride every 30 
minutes at peak times,firstgreatwestern.co.uk 
<http://www.firstgreatwestern.co.uk/>, adult return £4, family return £8. Tate 
St Ives and Barbara Hepworth Museum, Porthmeor beach, 01736 796226,
tate.org.uk/stives <http://www.tate.org.uk/stives/>. Open daily, adult £10 
entry to both sites, children free

Parrots and playtime at Paradise Park, Hayle
 Photograph: Alamy 
While Crealy <http://www.crealy.co.uk/> with its masses of adventure rides is 
often name-checked as Cornwall's "big day out" for families, the lesser-known 
Paradise Park always comes up trumps with visitors and locals alike. It's home 
to the World Parrot Trust so birdlife takes centre stage, but there are all 
sorts of animals to see, from snakes to red pandas. Feeding times for penguins 
and otters are huge crowd-pullers (be warned that otters dine on dead chicks), 
as are the free-flying bird shows that see eagles and owls soar through the 
audience. With farm animals to pet, a miniature train and indoor soft play, 
come rain or shine this place is paradise for younger children.
• Paradise Park, Hayle, 01736 753365, paradisepark.org.uk 
<http://www.paradisepark.org.uk/>. Open daily, adult £8.95, child £6.95 (aged 
three-15), under-threes free

Cycle from coast to coast 
 Photograph: Alamy 
While the Camel Trail 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/sustrans-near-you/south-west/easy-rides-in-the-south-west/camel-trail>
 is perhaps Cornwall's best-known family biking route, the web of mineral 
tramways criss-crossing the county is also perfect for tag-alongs and trailers. 
Of these the Coast-to-Coast is a firm favourite: 15 miles of flat(ish), mostly 
off-road trail through aworld heritage mining site 
<http://www.cornish-mining.org.uk/> between Portreath and Devoran. If your 
glutes can go the distance, you'll tick off sea views, woodland and engine 
houses, yet even short sections wend through quarries harking back to the 
mining era. Whether you start at the top (Portreath), the tail (Devoran) or 
somewhere in between, there are plenty of pitstops en route for tired little 
legs (or whiny passengers): grab a children's activity pack from The Bike Barn 
(near Portreath), stop for cake at Bissoe's Bike Chain Cafe and sip local ales 
at Devoran's Old Quay Inn.
• Mineral Tramways Coast-to-Coast Path (tinyurl.com/cyclecoast-to-coast 
<http://www.sustrans.org.uk/sustrans-near-you/south-west/easy-rides-in-the-south-west/mineral-tramways-coast-to-coast>
). A day's bike hire from Bissoe Bike Hire (01872 870341,cornwallcyclehire.com 
<http://cornwallcyclehire.com/>, adult from £10, child £8) and the Bike Barn 
(01209 891498,cornwallcycletrails.com <http://cornwallcycletrails.com/>, adult 
mountain bike £15, child seat/trailer/tag-along from £5)

Kitesurfing at Perranporth
 Photograph: Alamy 
Since kitesurfing blasted onto the watersports scene, equipment has become 
safer and easier to use, and fans of this high-adrenaline sport are getting 
younger. From the age of seven, children can enjoy an hour's power-kiting 
lesson on the beach, learning the basics and sliding along the sand on their 
feet and bottoms. For kitesurfing proper you need to be around 12 to take the 
theory and safety techniques on board, but within a day you could be hooked 
into a harness and bouncing across the waves on your tummy. Though it may sound 
ungainly, this "body-dragging" technique is vital for getting to grips with a 
kite in the water before progressing to your feet on a board.
• Mobius Kite School, Perranporth, 08456 430630, mobiusonline.co.uk 
<http://mobiusonline.co.uk/>. Power kiting from £18 per hour, kitesurfing intro 
from £65

Rock-pooling and rolling (down sand dunes), Crantock beach
 Photograph: Alamy 
Giant sand dunes, caves to explore and easy access – it's little wonder 
families flock to Crantock beach. Windbreaks, deckchairs, boards and wetsuits 
can be hired wave-side and a kiosk serves snacks and ice-cream, so all you need 
is bathers and towels. As well as consistent surf there's scope for more 
toddler-friendly rock-pooling, crabbing and paddling in the River Gannel, which 
trickles down the eastern flanks of the mile of sand. Cross the river (bridge 
at low tide, ferry at high tide, adult £1.20, child 60p) to the Fern Pit Cafe 
for a scone with jam and cream (£2.05) or sandwich with freshly caught crab 
(£6.75). If rain stops play, spin into Newquay for an array of activities 
including the Blue Reef Aquarium (bluereefaquarium.co.uk 
<http://bluereefaquarium.co.uk/>). 
• National Trust car park £4 per day (members free). Fern Pit Cafe, 
fernpit.co.uk <http://www.fernpit.co.uk/page2.htm>. Cafe and ferry open end May 
to mid-September

Coasteering on the north coast
 Photograph: Alamy 
Everyone heads to Newquay to go surfing, so how about getting beyond the 
breakers and exploring this wild coastline on a coasteering trip? Not for 
faint-hearted families, coasteering will take you swimming through gulleys and 
caves, riding whirlpools, scrambling up cliffs and leaping seaward from rocky 
ledges. You might even come face-to-face with seals and dolphins. You'll be 
kitted up in wetsuit, lifejacket and a helmet, and be prepared for your heart 
to pound as you experience wave-lashed creases of north Cornwall inaccessible 
by any other means. Depending on your nerve and ability you can even step up a 
gear to a power coasteer from Polzeath, which takes you to even more remote 
parts of the coastline on board a powerboat.
• Pure Activities, 01637 861700, pure-activities.co.uk 
<http://www.pure-activities.co.uk/>. Half-day coasteering sessions £40 
(Newquay), £52 (power coasteer, Polzeath). Minimum age 10, participants must be 
able to swim. Surfing for kids and family groups also available

Lappa Valley Steam Railway, near Newquay
 Lappa Valley Steam Railway, near Newquay, Cornwall 
Here you can puff through the woods on one of Cornwall's oldest train tracks. 
With a striking engine house and mining chimney at its heart, this old mineral 
tramway site is steeped in history; but what kids get excited about – as well 
as the trains – is the crazy golf, brick-path maze, electric cars and boating 
lake. Take the branch line to the outdoor activity centre at Newlyn Halt, but 
the favourite "again, again" ride seems to be the dinky woodland railway that 
loops under tree canopies, making kids whoop with joy as parents snap photos 
from the sidelines.
• Lappa Valley Railway, St Newlyn East, 01637 510317, lappavalley.co.uk 
<http://www.lappavalley.co.uk/>. Open April–October, adult £11.95, child £9.25 
(aged 3-15). Family and afternoon saver fares available

Bike and buggy trails at Cardinham Woods, Bodmin
 Photograph: Alamy 
With four circular trails – from the 3km buggy-accessible Lady Vale to the 
5½km Lidcutt Valley Walk – Cardinham Woods serves up perfect terrain for 
walking, gentle mountain biking and simply mooching around by the stream. 
Meander along riverside paths perfect for little legs and buggies, or wend up 
into woodland and bag glorious views over the vale. Pick up a family Treasure 
Trail card (along with homemade cake) from the cafe if you want to play 
wildlife bingo or solve bird brain-teasers en route. However, with barbecues 
and benches lined up in the waterside picnic area, it's easy to while away a 
day grazing and playing ball without setting foot on any trails at all.
• 01208 72577, forestry.gov.uk/cardinham <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/cardinham>
. Car parking £2 per day, Treasure Trail cards £2 from the Woods Cafe,
woodscafecornwall.co.uk <http://woodscafecornwall.co.uk/> 

Play King Arthur at Tintagel Castle
 Photograph: Alamy 
These 13th-century ruins cling to the mainland by a wave-lashed granite neck. 
It's a staggering location, but much of the magic of Tintagel Castle also comes 
with conjuring up images of knights on horseback galloping through the 
crumbling archway, and the Earl of Cornwall feasting in the skeleton of the 
great hall. It's supposedly the birthplace of King Arthur, and it's impossible 
not to get swept away by local myths and legends as you step into Merlin's 
Cave. It has more than 100 uneven steps so this isn't terrain for tots, but 
there is a buggy-accessible footpath from the Arthurian-themed village.
• Tintagel Castle, english-heritage.org.uk 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/properties/tintagel-castle/>, 01840 
770328. Open year-round, adult £5.50, child (5-15 years) £3.30

• Hayley Spurway lives in Hayle, St Ives Bay and writes about family 
activities on her blog (seainsight.co.uk <http://www.seainsight.co.uk/>)

Have we missed your favourite family day out in north Cornwall? Add your tip 
to the comments below
 