
Rabit – Cruel Winter

In this, the age of worry, anxiety has gone from silent disease to 
Tumblr-blogged, socially acceptable phenomenon. And as any mindfulness app 
developer will tell you, it’s become an industry off the back of there being 
more reasons to be anxious than ever before. Alerts about plane crashes and 
terrorism pop up on our phones alongside aggressively aspirational Instagrams; 
psychological abuse on Twitter is only a click away.

It’s tempting to hide under a duvet with whalesong or Jason Derulo on repeat, 
but pay heed to the musicians that don’t flinch, like Houston producer Rabit. 
His staggeringly beautiful new trackCruel Winter <https://youtu.be/6GIElecy1Ac> 
encapsulates all of digital life’s violence and information overload. He took a 
dollop of our always-on culture, the brand newKanye West song Champions 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GSNEBPH56UY>, and reshaped it just hours after 
its release, time-stretching the rapper into a ragged spectre surrounded by 
clouds of noise. The spiritual void in Fomo-inducing lyrics about Gucci and 
supermodels reveals itself under Rabit’s ultraviolet light. He, and his peers 
like Chino Amobi, Amnesia Scanner, Elysia Crampton and the Janus collective, 
revel in the access-all-areas freedom of the internet, drawing on everything 
from grime to musique concrete for their productions. But they also acknowledge 
how suffocating it is being sat, as we all are, at the information coalface.Ben 
Beaumont-Thomas

Beyoncé – Sorry
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feded58c021ba8b334b71b0734ae81c9a6196aff0%2F0_40_4608_2764%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feded58c021ba8b334b71b0734ae81c9a6196aff0%2F0_40_4608_2764%2F4608.jpg>
 ‘She has adjusted the dial in pop artistry’: Beyoncé. Photograph: Kevin 
Mazur/Getty Images 
As statements of female power in pop go, few have resonated so hard as 
Beyoncé’s this year. The raw rage of such a famous woman eviscerating her 
cheating husband would be compelling in most circumstances. To do it against 
the most ambitious production - in both sound and vision - of her career is the 
clincher. The albumLemonade demands detailed attention, not just for the 
voyeuristic snoop inside the Beyoncé and Jay Z marriage but becauseBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> has adjusted the dial on pop 
artistry: how will the megastars in her orbit now compete?

The best example comes with Sorry 
<http://www.metatube.com/en/videos/304949/Beyonce-Sorry-Official-Explicit-Music-Video/>
, in which Beyoncé deals with the fury of a woman scorned by sticking her 
middle finger, quite literally, to it. There is no plaintive mourning, no gooey 
balladry for a broken heart. Her move is minimalist avant R&B, a snatch of 
Soulja Boy layered on rapid-fire drum claps, over which she snarls at us and 
her assembled girl gang that she ain’t sorry: don’t care, don’t think about 
him, have a good time, make him beg. It’s no coincidence that Serena Williams, 
the embodiment of black female strength, guests on the video. Female 
solidarity, the endurance and resilience of women, is where the song draws its 
core message; a defiant determination to stand tough together and goof around 
even when it hurts. And all to a beat that slick? Well, to paraphrase Nicki 
Minaj: “Taylor, Miley, what’s good?”Nosheen Iqbal

The Stone Roses – All for One
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cddac41960268a4b57987174e485395944c213c%2F0_226_3520_2112%2F3520.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cddac41960268a4b57987174e485395944c213c%2F0_226_3520_2112%2F3520.jpg>
 ‘A deeply conservative retrenchment’: The Stone Roses’ Ian Brown. Photograph: 
Brian Rasic/Brian Rasic/Getty Images 
In a year when pop’s biggest events have come from the worlds of hip-hop and 
R&B –The Life of Pablo, Lemonade, Views – rock seems to be going through its 
jazz phase. Like jazz, a music that once drove popular culture has been 
relegated to the margins. Most of it is now heritage rock, reviving the past, 
revisiting forgotten heroes. Take the Stone Roses’ comeback single.All for One 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0XZ9qjMil8> was their first new piece of 
music in 21 years, and it was everything the Roses were not a quarter of a 
century ago: a deeply conservative retrenchment rather than a leap forward. 
Unlike the old Stone Roses, who took from the past but filtered it through the 
present, this sounded like one of the groups who came in their wake, 
serviceable but uninspired.

Yet nostalgia has its place. The most emotionally intense shows I’ve seen this 
year have beenBruce Springsteen’s epic sweeps 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0XZ9qjMil8> through 43 years of his 
recordings, where the meaning of the words is changed by Springsteen’s ageing. 
And the 1975’s second album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/25/the-1975-i-like-it-when-you-sleep-for-you-are-so-beautiful-yet-so-unaware-of-it-review-great-pop-if-not-great-art>
 made the case that loving the past need not date a band: songs that sounded 
like an entire 1984 episode ofTop of the Pops put through a blender with 
judicious contemporary seasoning and lyrics that placed them firmly in 2016, 
winning them a huge and young audience.

“The past was yours but the future’s mine,” Ian Brown sang, all those years 
back, to an audience that took the words on trust. He couldn’t live up to his 
own prophecy, and the question now is whether any other singer fronting a rock 
band could sing those words and be believed.Michael Hann 

Chvrches – Warning Call
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2042df617827c773b9257864c2987319820506eb%2F0_148_2707_1625%2F2707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2042df617827c773b9257864c2987319820506eb%2F0_148_2707_1625%2F2707.jpg>
 ‘A rousing anthem’: Chvrches’ Lauren Mayberry. Photograph: James 
Gourley/Rex/Shutterstock 
In the late 90s the Cardigans would cluster around a PlayStation on their tour 
bus to quicken those lingering hours spent on the road.Gran Turismo was the 
Swedish band’s favourite game, a Japanese motorsport simulator after which they 
titled their 1998 album and further immortalised with the hit tribute,My 
Favourite Game <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JsMUQK4jdsQ>. Two years later 
the circle was completed when that song became the opening track on the sequel,
Gran Turismo 2, and record companies saw afresh the medium’s potential to pipe 
songs into the ears of radio-dodging gamers. For many artists, placing a song 
on, say, a Fifa soundtrack has now become a career goal, one that serves dual 
commercial and artistic purposes: securing royalties and, potentially, fans.

In the mid-2000s video games became more than just another venue for artists 
to showcase their work. The rise ofGuitar Hero and its squall of impersonators 
allowed players to role-play their favourite bands, playing along with the 
guitar, bass or drum parts on plastic instruments. The genre reached its peak 
with the release ofThe Beatles: Rock Band, a loving tribute to the band’s 
career and back catalogue, produced by George Martin’s son Giles at a cost to 
publisher MTV of many millions of dollars.

This week the relationship between video games and artists further deepens 
with the release ofWarning Call <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gwonWE_fGVc>, 
a rousing anthem song written by Scottish electronic shoe-gazers Chvrches 
specifically for the gameMirror’s Edge. Just as that errant ‘v’ is a product of 
the times (a guarantee the band’s name will snag in Google search results) so 
Warning Call’s Amiga-synths and pitter-patter drum patterns represents another 
evolution: a strengthening bond between credible artists and video games.Simon 
Parkin

Anonhi – 4 Degrees
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9d66e64c12b330c2cb646c1d91567d5a3d353d1%2F0_1051_3737_2242%2F3737.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9d66e64c12b330c2cb646c1d91567d5a3d353d1%2F0_1051_3737_2242%2F3737.jpg>
 Anohni and (Fennec) foxy friend. 
When I interviewed Anohni <http://anohni.com> earlier this year she told me 
she was terrified; scared to make her new album,Hopelessness, and scared to 
talk about it, because it is so political, and because its politics are so 
punishingly bleak. Like Nina Simone when she wroteMississippi Goddam, 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=Mississippi+Goddam&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&gfe_rd=cr&ei=hORfV_WaHe707Ab4wqeYBQ>
 or Marvin Gaye when he madeWhat’s Going On, the 45-year-old singer did it 
because the fear of saying what was on her mind was outweighed by the shame of 
not saying it. “If you’re afraid of a piece of work,” she told me, “it’s 
usually because it has a potency that’s worth exploring.”

It is possible to write a great protest song without having any skin in the 
game but the most powerful recent examples flow from emotional necessity. When 
Beyoncé sings Formation or Kendrick Lamar raps The Blacker the Berry, 
they’renot surveying racism from a distance. They’re insisting on the 
fundamental physical reality from which their political message flows. This 
kind of protest song, like Anohni’s, is an essential act.

Anohni <https://www.theguardian.com/music/anohni>, formerly known as Antony 
Hegarty, sang hauntingly intense songs about emotional extremes that found a 
surprising degree of mainstream acceptance. WithHopelessness, she projects her 
emotional anguish on to a global screen, experiencing drone warfare, economic 
exploitation and ecological cataclysm as personal wounds.

4 Degrees <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fi0q0O4V5Qs> is a poisoned anthem, 
a homicidal breakup song and a disaster movie. Every time I hear it I shudder. 
As drums churn and a synthetic orchestra blares, Anohni twists complacency 
about climate change into apocalyptic relish: “I want to see them burn / It’s 
only 4 degrees.” These are the consequences of our daily actions, she’s saying. 
This is the world-fire we’re all feeding. You can think a lot about the 
implications of climate change and not feel them as viscerally as you can 
through Anohni’s vortex of fear and guilt and rage and glee. Brave, ingenious, 
disturbing and necessary, it reminds us what a protest song can do.Dorian 
Lynskey

Chance the Rapper – Mixtape

When hip-hop artists make sweeping statements about their peers with the aim 
of taking them down a peg or two, there’s usually a fair amount of hyperbole 
involved, if not outright untruth. How can you prove you’re the greatest rapper 
alive and that everyone else is a shameful sellout? By and large, you can’t. On
Coloring Book, the excellent new mixtape from Chance the Rapper, one such 
generalisation stands out as being close to verifiable. “How can they call 
themselves bosses/ When they got so many bosses?” he demands on the trackMixtape
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZobKsVHF72M>, adding: “You gotta see what 
your boss say/ I get it straight out the faucet.”

The difference between Chance, an abundantly talented 23-year-old rapper from 
Chicago, and the majority of his big-name peers is that they are bound to 
record contracts and he – despite commanding a huge following in the US, making 
appearances onSaturday Night Live <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p1uO80jaVPo> 
and trading guest spots with the likes of Kanye West – isn’t. Following his 
breakthrough full-length mixtapeAcid Rap, which he released for free online in 
2013, Chance was besieged by labels offering him lucrative deals. He turned 
them all down and spent the next three years dabbling with side projects before 
dropping his third mixtape last month.Coloring Book, which debuted on Apple 
Music, was streamed 57.3m times in its first week, sending it to number 8 in 
the Billboard album charts – the first time a streaming-only set had made the 
list.

Launching a successful DIY music career is not a new phenomenon, and the 
internet has certainly made it easier to market yourself without label support, 
but Chance has carved his path with such apparent ease, it’s as if the 
conventional route is a weird anomaly to him. The question is whether his 
example will become the norm. The chorus of Mixtape, which worries about the 
demise of free distribution, suggests otherwise, but the track rebuts its own 
concerns by showcasing another talented young rapper, Lil Yachty, who has yet 
to sign a contract and is, for the moment at least, getting it straight out the 
faucet with no bosses around to give him grief. Despite the faintly elegiac 
tone here, it’s hard to think of another track that expresses quite so clearly 
the startup mentality of the millennial generation.Killian Fox

Ghost Town DJs – My Boo (AKA The Running Man Challenge)

Remember Silentó’s Watch Me (Whip/Nae Nae) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vjW8wmF5VWc>? You may not, unless you are 
either a school child or someone hip to the swag of the playground. With its 
tinny keyboard line and chanted chorus, the song spread like wildfire through 
2015, narrowing the already slim distance between US dance battles and UK 
playgrounds, where this kind of pop is greedily consumed.

Teenage rapper Silentó’s stroke of genius lay in compiling a number of 
teachable street dances 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/pop-shop/6398451/so-you-know-you-cant-dance-tinashe-the-whip>
 with longer histories into one catchy single, one that has amassed more than 
900m YouTube views to date.

Dance craze memes are a byproduct of the internet age with its jerky gifs and 
bite-size Vines. But viral dances are no 21st century innovation. The advent of 
the foxtrot caused a moral panic in the 1930s; when Bill Haley’sRock Around The 
Clock <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xSzdn8ipyws> emerged in 1954, Decca 
Records actuallylabelled it a foxtrot 
<http://www.songfacts.com/detail.php?id=1794>.

Since then, the churn of moves has been dizzying; the internet has only served 
to grease the lightning. No one can be unaware of theHarlem Shake meme 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4hpEnLtqUDg>, popularised in 2013 via YouTube 
tribute uploads that – confusingly – was almost certainly not the same dance as 
the original Harlem Shake.

Last year was a great year for short, sharp hip-hop moves that lent themselves 
to distribution on Vine, where users upload short, looping videos. Rapper 
iLoveMemphis was responsible for two Silentó-like meme-ifications,Hit The Quan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JrCUEjSzLAk> and Lean and Dabb 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RuVjLlCqLNQ>.

The Dab gained a charmed life of its own. Probably originating in Atlanta, the 
move was disseminated out of hip-hop, through sports stars (basketball players 
like Lebron <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4_p-TVHnqBg>, even footballers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S-bT3Gjv834>) celebrating successes with this 
jerky sideways feint. Very soon, parents over here were admiring how their 
children were politely sneezing into their elbows. The Dab was declared over 
when enoughwhite people on US network TV 
<http://indy100.independent.co.uk/article/bill-gates-did-the-dab-dance-and-now-its-almost-definitely-over--WyxZSmjdrxZ>
 were doing it. Now, it seems, that point has been nearly reached withthe 
Running Man Challenge <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L1xT_0aQ2iU>, a great 
little constipated jig invented by two bored New Jersey finance students. It 
has, among other things, propelled its accompanying soundtrack – a relatively 
obscure 1996 song – back into the chartsin Australia and on iTunes 
<http://www.thefader.com/2016/05/03/running-man-challenge-ghost-town-djs-my-boo-itunes-charts>
.Kitty Empire

Sophia Grace – Girl in the Mirror
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e5359979f53d15a68aceb20c78b6cfff3f9ca4c%2F565_0_4302_2581%2F4302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e5359979f53d15a68aceb20c78b6cfff3f9ca4c%2F565_0_4302_2581%2F4302.jpg>
 ‘Don’t care what you say’: Sophia Grace. Photograph: Young Hollywood/Getty 
Images 
One might, if brave or drunk, argue that Sophia Grace 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/SophiaGraceBrownlee> is the ultimate modern pop 
icon. Here’s an artist who shot to fame at age eight after aNicki Minaj YouTube 
cover <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C7hTAp6KrGY> went viral. Her peers may 
have taken the Essex-born, Ellen DeGeneres-approved singer at face value, but 
by 2015 singleBest Friends <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DdsIVUuO7GM>, 
Sophia had been adopted, via endless shared GIFs and memes, as an ironically 
embraced emblem of pop uselessness. Now her new singleGirl in the Mirror 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xl5OrG5Jkx0> is a selfie-esteem anthem for 
generation Snapchat. “You’re too short, too fat, too skinny,” she sings, 
mocking critics. “Well excuse me if I think that I’m pretty.”

Sound familiar? In some ways pop’s future sounds like its last 60 years. 
Here’s a 13-year-old singer making declarations about being herself in a song 
written by adults. And celebrating individuality with the line “don’t care what 
you say, cos I’m original” doesn’t work in this hyper-cynical rewrite, right 
down to the advice-from-mum line, of a hit from two summers ago — Meghan 
Trainor’s All About That Bass.In terms of expressing freedom within rigid 
parameters, it’s like adding one’s “personal” touch to a photo by deploying one 
of the predefined filters Instagram has chosen to make available.

It’s proof, too, that however much your Biebers and Beyoncés push pop’s 
envelope, the music industry will always find a way to create songs like this.
Peter Robinson

Dave – JKYL + HYD
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48f16dcdb1ec0ae7ef6103df9e2b2616d9d1cad8%2F243_0_1035_621%2F1035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48f16dcdb1ec0ae7ef6103df9e2b2616d9d1cad8%2F243_0_1035_621%2F1035.jpg>
 ‘A passionate plea to his peers’: Dave Photograph: BBC 1Xtra 
Let’s not mince words: Dave is probably the best name for a rapper there has 
ever been. Fortunately, there is more to his appeal than this. The 
multitalented south London 17-year-old (grade 7 piano, studying ethics and law 
at college) displays wisdom and lyrical dexterity beyond his years, as well as 
a litany of personal suffering – two brothers in jail, bailiffs at the door, 
“broke as hell” – that drives his anguished social commentary. Along with other 
young anti-establishment MCs like “street politician” Novelist, Dave proves it 
is UK rap and grime that are best documenting our social ills.

It’s Dave’s single from earlier this year, JKYL+HYD 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcBv9KYopG4>, an emotionally wrought disavowal 
of teenage poverty, drug-dealing and death, that cuts the deepest, a kind of 
first-person Too Much Too Young for generation vexed. Dave laments how, having 
lost family members and role models, he learned to “stand on my own like 
Sicily”. Having established his credentials, he then pleads with a generation 
of lost souls, listening to soulless rap. A similar message favouring 
“realness” over “fake” lyrics about cars and drug deals would sound preachy 
from an older MC, but from a 17-year-old it’s a passionate plea to his peers: 
“they wanna hear your story, this trap thing bores me”.

Dave’s frustration at the futility and claustrophobia of what the tabloids 
call “postcode wars” is profound, and spills into some bleak humour: “Man are 
still beefing over ends / [but] we don’t own this land – and we don’t like this 
weather.” Outside the ends, he wants to tell his peers, “there’s a life that’s 
real”. Thirteen years ago Dizzee Rascal lamented that his generation would “
defend a couple of square metres of pavement in the end 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-cYAbUPXj3s>”; the problems of urban 
deprivation and petty crime haven’t gone away – nor has the ability of 
dazzlingly young musicians to document that plight with power.Dan Hancox

Christine and the Queens – iT
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b4aea86795b4d5b3c1216f850dfe95c8beae0f4%2F0_1198_5048_3030%2F5048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20songs%20in%20the%20key%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2F10-songs-in-the-key-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b4aea86795b4d5b3c1216f850dfe95c8beae0f4%2F0_1198_5048_3030%2F5048.jpg>
 ‘Curiously ambiguous’: Héloïse Letissier of Christine and the Queens. 
If gender fluidity was music’s hashtaggable hot topic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/dec/28/gender-fluidity-went-pop-in-2015-miley-cyrus-angel-haze-young-thug>
 last year, then Christine and the Queens’ subsequent rise proves it’s anything 
but a blog-happy fad. A pansexual artist in a sharp Dior Homme suit, she’s a 
pop outsider putting queer identity politics front and centre, propelled by 
sophisticated electronic beats and some enviable voguing dance moves. Christine 
is the drag queen-inspired alter ego of Héloïse Letissier, who is already a 
celebrity in her native France. But the acclaim that greeted the 
English-language version of her debut album in February suggests it is possible 
to break into the international pop market if you’re not from Sweden – and 
crucially, that society is starting to accept nonconformist sexuality beyond 
the buzzwords.

The album’s opening track, iT <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9XeN3MSbyk>, 
sets out Letissier’s stall, smouldering in the molten grey area between male 
and female (its French incarnation originally surfaced in 2011). Ideas are 
subtly blurred, being as it is a seductively catchy pop song about penis envy. 
A smoky electro pulse, glassy drum claps and a viscous bassline create a sort 
of glacial simmer as Letissier imagines life as the opposite sex, before the 
chorus asserts: “I’m a man now.” Like the rest of her music it’s curiously 
ambiguous: lyrics appear either lost in translation or deliberately 
impressionistic; others suggest emotional bruising among the confrontation, as 
when she laments: “She draws her own crotch by herself/ But she’ll lose because 
it’s a fake.”

Gender and identity may inform a large part of Letissier’s work but, like the 
best pop music, her songs have a universal quality that transcend the 
discourse. In 2016, it’s possible to be subversive and showstopping, 
politicised and polished. Her place at pop’s top table awaits.Kate Hutchinson
 