
In a recent live chat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/food-sustainability-agriculture-challenges-opportunities>
, a panel of experts joined readers online to discuss the future of sustainable 
agriculture in the face of changing weather driven by climate change and 
increasing competition for food. Here are 10 things we learned:

1. We shouldn't just "accept" climate change

Just because climate change is happening and its effects are already being 
felt, we shouldn't give up on efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
Agricultural GHG emissions, make up about 25% of global GHG emissions, but 
there's a lot that can be done to reduce this.

Richard Waite, associate, Food, Forests and Water Program, World Resources 
Institute <http://www.wri.org/> explains: "By intensifying agriculture on 
existing land and protecting the remaining forests, we can eliminate emissions 
from land-use change. And by addressing key emissions from agricultural 
production â€“ from cows and other ruminants, from fertilizers, and from rice 
production practices, we can greatly reduce emissions from agricultural 
production."

2. We don't need to "accept" a world with 9.6 billion people by 2050

The world population is growing, but fertility rates have fallen rapidly over 
the last few decades as girls gain better access to education and reproductive 
health services. African governments have made health and education a priority 
but greater investment could reduce the population challenge and the demand for 
food.

This is especially important in sub-Saharan Africa where half of population 
growth between now and 2050 will occur. Arecent report from WRI 
<http://www.wri.org/publication/achieving-replacement-level-fertility> 
estimates that achieving replacement level fertility (the rate of fertility at 
which a population exactly replaces itself from one generation to the next) in 
Sub-Saharan Africa by 2050 would reduce food demand by around 600tn 
kilocalories (kcal) per year by the mid-century. This would close 9% of the 
6,500tn kcal per year global gap between food available in 2006 and food needed 
in 2050.

3. Switching crops is the future

Emphasis will be on climate smart agriculture in the short-term, but in 10 to 
20 years time, the focus will be on switching crops, says Jason Clay, senior 
vice president, market transformation,WWF <http://www.wwf.org.uk/>. As climate 
change affects commercial crops, alternatives will have to be sought out. Clay 
points that sorghum is already being substituted for corn and maize because it 
can be used in feed and produce like beer. In Mexico, the government is looking 
to varieties of cocoa to replace coffee crops, which may not be suitable to 
grow by 2025 due to blight and heat as a consequence of climate change.

With the right technical assistance and packages of better genetics, 
management practice and inputs, switching crops could be an opportunity for 
smaller farmers struggling with current crops to leapfrog previous performance 
and become more productive.

4. Research breakthroughs need more investment

Moving to adapted crop varieties that are more resilient to climate change is 
feasible, says Chris Brown, general manager for environmental sustainability, 
at agri-businessOlam International <http://olamgroup.com/>. But for the next 
wave of research breakthroughs, the FAO has estimated that we will need 
$45-$50bn annual spending globally. It's currently at $4bn.

5. Cultivating trees on farms can boost crop yields

According to Waite, over the last few decades, farmers in Niger have managed 
the natural regrowth of native Faidherbia trees across 5m hectares. The 
Faidherbia fixes nitrogen in the soil, protects fields from wind and water 
erosion and contributes organic matter to soils when its leaves drop. Compared 
to conventional farms in the country, yields of maize in these agroforestry 
systems can be doubled and farmers in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Zambia are taking 
note.

6. Small-scale farmers are vital to domestic food security

Small-scale farmers have a guaranteed and growing market for staple crops, but 
the UK produces 24% less food than it consumes, says Charles Tassell, farmer 
and co-founder ofAgriChatUK <http://www.agrichatuk.org/>. This comes today, as 
MPs warn that theUK's ability to feed itself is threatened by complacency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/01/uk-food-security-threatened-complacency-mps-report>
. Over the last 20 years, the UK's self-sufficiency for domestically-grown food 
has fallen from 87% to 68%, while yields of its most important staple crop, 
wheat, have not increased for at least the last 15 years.

Brown argues that governments, banks and companies must coordinate to support 
the 500m global smallholders to scale-up agri-production enterprises. This 
support should include legal land tenure, global policies for a level playing 
field, access to capital and markets, structured training (both agriculture and 
business development), and investment in technology and infrastructure.

7. Urban farms suit tomatoes, not cows

If urban farmers reduce the need for transport, refrigeration and packaging, 
and source inputs from local waste streams, then city farms could offer a 
sustainable alternative for growing fruit and vegetables, says Oscar Rodriguez, 
director ofArchitecture and Food <http://www.architectureandfood.com/>. 
However, livestock farming and urban living make a less practical combination.

8. Meat is off the menu

Achieving replacement level fertility, reducing food loss and waste, reducing 
biofuel demand for food crops and shifting our diets, will all go some way to 
closing the gap between food available and food required. Any meaningful change 
to consumption patterns and the environmental impacts of food production 
though, will have to involve knocking animal products off the menu, especially 
beef. Chris Hunt, director of GRACE's food program, points to consumer 
campaigns likeMeatless Monday <http://www.meatlessmonday.com/> as evidence of 
trending in the right direction.

9. The definition of a "good" farmer is culturally complex

What is good criteria for one person, may be shocking for another, says Louise 
Manning 
<http://www.rau.ac.uk/the-rau/academic-staff-profiles/school-of-agriculture/louise-manning>
, senior lecturer in food production management, Royal Agricultural University. 
In terms of animal welfare, stocking density might be considered an indicator 
of negative performance but in terms of resource management, a positive one.

10. Everyone has a role to play

The WRI report on Creating a Sustainable Food Future 
<http://www.wri.org/publication/creating-sustainable-food-future-interim-findings>
 estimates that we need about 70% more food in 2050 than we have today in order 
to provide every one of the 9.6 billion world population with a daily intake of 
3,000 calories. It's a huge challenge, but unlike other sustainability 
challenges, everyone can play a part in the solution.

Everyone needs to eat, so be it reducing food loss and waste, eating 
lower-impact diets or investing in sustainable production - countries, 
companies, and consumers can make a difference. Surrounded by abundance, the 
challenge is making consumers care. On this, Liz Bowles, head of farming at the
Soil Association <http://www.soilassociation.org/>, points out that if everyone 
tried to grow their own vegetables it would bring home just how difficult food 
production is.

The food hub is funded by The Irish Food Board. All content is editorially 
independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member <https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 