
Job: founder, chief executive, Audioboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo>

Industry: digital media

Age: 46

Staff: 7

New entry

Mark Rock is the serial entrepreneur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/megas/judge-mark-rock> behind Audioboo 
<http://audioboo.fm/>, a service described by our panel as the single most 
important new media tool of the past two years.

The sound-sharing application, which allows users to record and publish audio 
clips of up to five minutes' length 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/26/audioboo-youtube-twitter>, 
democratised radio, or at least a short-form, on-demand version of it.

Like a spoken word equivalent of YouTube, Audioboo has high-profile users from 
Stephen Fry <http:> and Chris Moyles to Channel 4 News, the Open University, 
the British Library 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/18051-richard-ranft-from-the-british-library-s-sound-archive-praises-audioboo>
 and the Guardian, whichused it to cover the G20 protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2009/mar/26/g20-protests>.

With initial investment from Channel 4's technology innovation fund, 4iP, 
Audioboo hasreceived further backing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2010/jun/07/digital-media-audioboo> from 
UBC Media, Imagination Technologies – which will incorporate the feature on 
some of its digital radios – and the former Oftel chairman Don Cruickshank, who 
became its chairman.

"Audioboo has already changed the way we use audio, now it is going to 
reinvent the way we think about digital radio," said our panel. "It is a 
fascinating piece of new technology."

Rock previously co-founded Static2358, a digital technology company that owned 
and launched interactive TV channel Playjam, which it sold for $60m in 2001.

He went on to found audio and video research and development outfit Best Before
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2008/jan/21/elevatorpitchbestbeforetak>
, a small team based in south London and one of the UK's few successful 
technology start-ups to launch during the depth of the recession, where he 
created Audioboo.

"Innovation around audio and the web has all been about music," said Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2010/jun/07/digital-media-audioboo>. 
"This is an experiment to connect people who create audio with people who 
listen to traditional radio."

Initially launched as a website and free iPhone app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/26/audioboo-youtube-twitter>, it 
has now been extended to other platforms and developed as a premium paid-for 
service, Audioboo Pro.

Rock was critical of Channel 4's attitude to the app after the initial funding 
by 4iP. "We have found it difficult to get support from the general Channel 4 
organisation,"he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/audio/2009/jun/23/tech-weekly-podcast-intellectual-property-audioboo>
.

"Both Channel 4 and 4iP have been startled by the success; they probably don't 
realise the complexity of what we have done, how difficult it is to make 
something that is very easy to use."
 