
It’s interesting how particular years acquire historical significance: 1789 
(the French Revolution); 1914 (outbreak of the first world war); 1917 (the 
Russian revolution); 1929 (the Wall Street crash); 1983 (switching on of the 
internet); 1993 (the Mosaic Web browser, which started the metamorphosis of the 
internet from geek sandpit to the nervous system of the planet). And of course 
2016, the year of Brexit and Trump, the implications of which are, as yet, 
unknown.

But what about 2007? That was the year when Slovenia adopted the euro, 
Bulgaria and Romania joined the EU, Kurt Vonnegut died, smoking in enclosed 
public places was banned in the UK, a student shot 32 people dead and wounded 
17 others at Virginia Tech, Luciano Pavarotti died and Benazir Bhutto was 
assassinated. Oh – and it was also the year that Steve Jobs launched the Apple
iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>.

Tech innovations ratcheted up a pace of change that was already outrunning 
society’s ability to adapt

And that, I suspect, is the main – perhaps the only – reason that 2007 will be 
counted as a pivotal year, because it was the moment that determined how the 
internet would evolve. Not that many people appreciated it at the time. After 
all,Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> was an intruder into a 
mature and established global market, dominated by firms like Nokia, Motorola, 
Sony and BlackBerry. In that context, the iPhone looked weird – I mean, you 
couldn’t even change the battery! But it was a truly revolutionary device, 
because it embodied the seminal insight that phones were actually handheld 
networked computers – which could also make voice calls if necessary.

The iPhone was the first real smartphone and it changed the world because it 
changed the way people connected to the net. It began the inexorable drift away 
from desktop and laptop computers as our gateways to the internet. In the next 
10 years or so, another 5 billion of our fellow citizens will get internet 
connectivity, and almost all of them will acquire it via a smartphone. Which 
means that – as network infrastructure improves – people will be online for 
most of their waking lives. For many this will be a great boon. But it also 
means –as Jonathan Zittrain pointed out eight years ago 
<http://futureoftheinternet.org/>– that they will be connecting via closed, 
tightly controlled devices with no user-modifiable components. And this in turn 
implies consolidation of the power of the companies that make the devices and 
provide the connectivity.

The more you look at it, the more significant 2007 seems to be. The New York 
Times columnist Thomas L Friedman even uses it as the cornerstone of his new 
book,Thank You For Being Late: An Optimist’s Guide to Thriving in the Age of 
Accelerations <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/thank-you-for-being-late.html>. 
He points out that 2007 was also the year Facebook and Twitter really took off; 
whenHadoop <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_Hadoop> emerged as a software 
framework for processing very large data sets; when Airbnb was dreamed up, the 
Amazon Kindle was launched and IBM started work on building theWatson 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watson_(computer)> computer system, which was 
capable of answering questions put to it in natural language and went on to win 
the US quiz showJeopardy! in 2011, defeating two former winners of the prize. 
And Google unveiled the Android mobile operating system, which made smartphones 
affordable for the masses.

2016 in metaphors: dead turkey, frozen moose and man digging his own grave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/2016-in-metaphors-dead-turkey-frozen-moose-and-man-digging-his-own-grave>
Friedman feels strongly about 2007 because it was the year the final edition 
of his bestselling bookThe World Is Flat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2005/may/15/society.politics> came 
out. “And then I stopped,” he says, “thinking that I had built a pretty solid 
framework that would last me as a columnist for a while.” In 2010, he sat down 
to write another book, and dug out the first edition ofThe World Is Flat just 
to familiarise himself with what he had been thinking back in 2004. “I cracked 
it open to the index,” he writes, “ran my finger down the page, and immediately 
discovered that Facebook wasn’t in it! That’s right – when I was running around 
in 2004 declaring that the world is flat, Facebook didn’t even exist yet, 
Twitter was still a sound, the cloud was still in the sky, 4G was a parking 
space, “applications” were what you sent to college, LinkedIn was barely known 
and most people thought it was a prison, Big Data was a good name for a rap 
star, and Skype, for most people, was a typographical error. All of those 
technologies blossomed after I wroteThe World Is Flat – most of them around 
2007.”

Friedman’s point is that those tech innovations ratcheted up a pace of change 
that was already outrunning society’s ability to adapt. When combined with 
globalisation and climate change, they have created a perfect storm (Friedman 
calls it a “hurricane”) that people find destabilising and sometimes 
terrifying. Which brings us back to 2016. “Trump and the Brexiters”,he writes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/opinion/sunday/dancing-in-a-hurricane.html?_r=0>
, “sensed the anxiety of many and promised to build a wall against these 
howling winds of change. I disagree. I think the challenge is to find the eye.” 
In order to find it, he maintains, politics, geopolitics, workplace, ethics and 
community all need to be “reimagined”. Correct: but you don’t have to be a 
cynic to conclude that Friedman is spitting into the hurricane.
 