
It sounds unlikely, but the 'Albanian Riviera' is set to become the new 
'undiscovered gem' of the overcrowded Med.

Until now, holidays to Europe's most secretive corner have tended to be guided 
tours, taking in historical sites such as Butrint and the surprisingly elegant 
city of Tirana, but more and more operators are beginning to offer holidays to 
the country's long, sandy beaches. 'There aren't many undiscovered countries 
left in Europe, but Albania is certainly one of them - tourism is still in its 
absolute infancy,' said Derek Moore, chairman of the Association of Independent 
Tour Operators. 'It has a stunning coastline with miles of empty beaches, and 
many cultural sites to discover.'

Inghams (020 8780 4433; inghams.co.uk <http://www.inghams.co.uk>) has a new 
programme to Albania for 2009, including the resort of Durres, pictured, which 
offers historical sites - Roman baths, an impressive amphitheatre and 
atmospheric Old Town - with stunning sandy beaches just 4km out of town. 
Inghams has four hotels in Durres, including the beachfront Iliria. A week 
costs from £419 including flights and transfers.

Inghams' 'Albanian highlights' tour offers two nights in Durres and also 
includes time in Tirana and the beautifully tranquil Lake Ohrid.

Other resorts along the coast are also opening up to tourism; as well as its 
guided tours, Sunvil (020 8568 4499,sunvil.co.uk <http://www.sunvil.co.uk>) now 
offers stays at the Rapo Hotel in Himara, which boasts miles of unbroken sands 
stretching out either side of the village. A week in Himara costs from £808 
B&B, including flights to Corfu and ferry crossing. Other companies are 
starting to offer programmes to Albania: Cox and Kings (020 7873 5000;
coxandkings.co.uk <http://www.coxandkings.co.uk>) has a new tour for 2009 
combining Albania with Macedonia, taking in the mountainous interior and the 
beaches. It costs from £1,395, including flights, transfers and 11 nights' B&B 
accommodation.
 