
The pumping of water, sand and chemicals underground at pressure to crack 
rocks and release gas dominated headlines in 2013.Fracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fracking> for shale gas, even if the 
process has not actually been producing much energy beyond its homeland in the 
US, has barely been out of the public consciousness.

In the UK, drilling for oil by fracking explorers Cuadrilla in Sussex roused 
one of the biggest environmental protests in years,as thousands marched outside 
the village of Balcombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/18/fracking-protesters-march-sussex-balcombe-drilling>
 andGreen party MP Caroline Lucas was arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/19/caroline-lucas-arrest-balcombe-anti-fracking>
. A similarseries of protests was mirrored in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/16/fracking-wind-turbine-blade-manchester-drilling>
, later in the year.

Public figures and industry bodies lined up to say the technology should go 
ahead in the UK, from David Cameron down to geologists, water companies and 
some environmentalists, and the government laid out sweeteners of £100,000 for 
communities who live near any shale gas wells that are fracked.
 Caroline Lucas, MP for Brighton, was arrested for refusing to move from a 
sit-in outside a fracking site entrance in Balcombe. Photograph: Dave 
Evans/Corbis 
Around the world, the Polish environment minister was sacked for not 
green-lighting fracking projects quickly enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/20/climate-talks-polish-environment-minister-sacked>
 – halfway through the UN climate talks, no less – fracking licences were 
granted for a wildlife reserve in Botswana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/18/botswana-accusations-fracking-kalahari>
 and indigenous protesters in Canada fought against the expansion of shale gas 
operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/21/new-brunswick-fracking-protests>
. Enormous potential reserveswere identified in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/05/australia-huge-deposits-shale-gas>
.

The ramping up of exploration and awareness around shale gas is part of the 
wider picture of fossil fuel companies looking for unconventional sources of 
energy. Elsewhere, companies continued their efforts to push into the Arctic to 
drill for oil and gas.

When a small group of Greenpeace activists boarded one of those efforts, a 
Gazprom rig in the Barents Sea, it inadvertently turned into one of the biggest 
stories of the year.

The Russian authorities, which had allowed a similar protest the year before, 
responded bywinching armed coastguards off a helicopter onto the group's Arctic 
Sunrise vessel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/19/greenpeace-protesters-arrested-arctic>
, arresting the 28 activists and two journalists onboard, and detaining them 
without trial for several months, before finally releasing them on bail. They 
are still in Russia, andhave been told they cannot leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/13/arctic-30-told-they-cannot-leave-russia>
 – yet.
 A mobile phone image of a Russian helicopter over the Greenpeace ship the 
Arctic Sunrise, moments before armed personnel boarded the vessel. Photograph: 
Greenpeace/AP 
Coal, the dirtiest of all fossil fuels, hasn't gone away, despite talk of gas 
replacing it, theUS taking steps in the summer to clean up old coal power plants
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/20/epa-limit-us-coal-plant-pollution>
, andDaw Mill, one of the UK's few remaining coal mines, closing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/07/daw-mill-colliery-closure-650-miners>
. Instead, the respected energy thinktank, the IEA,predicted that coal was now 
on track to challenge oil as the world's biggest source of energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/dec/18/coal-challenge-oil-international-energy-agency>
, and UK greenhouse gas emissionsjumped 4.5% because coal was so cheap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/28/uk-co2-emissions-up-2012>.

It emerged that China now burns almost as much coal as the rest of the world 
combined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/30/china-burns-half-coal-worldwide>
 – bad news for the climate, but good news for Australia,which approved two 
mega coal mines in Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2013/nov/07/climate-change-keystone-galilee-queensland-coal-mining>
. The short-term impacts of coal were still on display – some of the most 
dramaticsmog episodes of the year in major cities of China including Shanghai 
and Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/06/schoolchildren-air-pollution-shanghai-eastern-china>
 were blamed on coal-burning. 

The year ended with the UK and US saying they would no longer fund coal 
projects in the developing world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/20/coal-un-climate-talks-warsaw-developing-countries>
 and theUN's climate chief telling the coal industry to leave its reserves in 
the ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/02/coal-industry-un-climate-chief-ignoring-reality>
.
 China consumes nearly as much coal as the rest of the world combined 
Photograph: US Energy Information Administration 
Nuclear power <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/nuclearpower> had a 
good year in the UK, but a bad one pretty much everywhere else. 

Most of Japan's nuclear reactors remained offline, forcing the country to rely 
on imported fossil fuels for energy. A steady drip of worrying news emerged 
from Fukushima,where workers continued cleanup efforts on the nuclear power 
station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/03/fukushima-daiichi-tsunami-nuclear-cleanup-japan>
 amidrepeated leaks of radioactive material 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/04/fukushima-radiation-deadly-new-high>
.

In the UK, energy company EDF struck a deal with the government guaranteeing 
an above-market rate for nuclear electricity,paving the way for the country's 
first new nuclear power station in over 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/20/nuclear-power-station-hinkley-edf>
. But critics said the deal was a bad for consumers, and just this week the 
boss of Ineos, one of the UK's biggest energy consumers,said the electricity 
from the new reactors would be too expensive 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-25390456>.

The government also tried to restart stalled efforts to find a geological site 
for a long-term underground nuclear waste dump,by changing the rules on which 
councils have the final say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/12/county-councils-nuclear-waste-dump-sites>
.
 From left to right: Nigel Cann site director of Hinkley Point C, Ed Davey, 
David Cameron, Vincent de Rivaz, chief executive of EDF and Henri Proglio, CEO 
and chairman of EDF, examine site plans for Hinkley C nuclear power station at 
Hinkley Point. Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
In the UK, Labour leader, Ed Miliband, sparked a debate over energy prices by 
promising to freeze them until 2017 if his party comes to power in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/24/ed-miliband-labour-freeze-prices-2017>
. In response, prime minister David Cameron was reported as saying he would"get 
rid of the green crap" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/21/david-cameron-green-crap-comments-storm>
 – the subsidies for environmental and social programmes on energy bills. The 
political tussle inside the coalition ultimately led to changes that cut£50 off 
the average household's energy bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/05/george-osborne-green-energy-fracking-tax-autumn-statement>
 but watered down the government's main scheme for making energy companies 
insulate people's homes.
 Ed Miliband, the Labour leader. Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex Features 
Meanwhile, renewable energy continued its upward march, despite subsidies 
being cut in several countries. In the UK, the amount of wind power installed 
at sea and on landwas up by over 40% on the year before <>, including the 
opening of the world's biggest offshore windfarm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/04/offshore-windfarm-cameron-london-array>
, the London Array, which David Cameron attended and called "a great day for 
Britain and a big win for renewable energy."

Elsewhere in the country new plans for a barrage across the Severn estuary 
were rejected, and thegovernment delayed (again) an incentive scheme to 
encourage householders to switch to renewable forms of heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/27/green-heating-scheme-delayed-again-rhi>
, such as biomass.

Globally, it emerged that wind power had expanded by around 20% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/11/wind-power-capacity-grew-2012>
 in 2012 and several countries, notably Spain and Germany,set new records for 
how much wind power they generated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/04/windfarms-break-energy-record-spain>
. The cost of solar photovoltaic panels, which generate electricity, plummeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/13/surge-renewable-energy-solar-panel>
. 
 London Array offshore windfarm. Photograph: Mark Turner/London Array Limited  