
It's said there are only seven master plots in fiction 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/3632074/Everything-ever-written-boiled-down-to-seven-plots.html>
 (or five, or 20, depending on who's counting). But at the current rate of 
rehash, scientists predict there will be only seven master franchises come 
2025. These will include:Spiderman <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0948470/> 
(played by a different 26-year-old every three years); that thing withVin Diesel
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/vin-diesel-vows-to-keep-fast-and-furious-franchise-revving-on-8607090.html>
 and the cars (Fast and Forty-fourious will see the gang of ageing speedsters 
pull off a heist on mobility scooters); and any amount of spun-offStar Wars 
<http://starwars.com/> characters (to be tired of Boba Fett 
<http://starwars.com/explore/encyclopedia/characters/bobafett/>'s backstory is 
to be tired of life). Oh, andPoldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/may/09/bbc-poldark-adaptation>.

Poldark's back, in case you missed the news, or perhaps assumed the reports 
had wormed through some tear in the commissioning continuum from 1996, which is 
the last time the 18th-century Cornish romantic saga was revived. Although 
you're not supposed to call the latest a revival. I'm probably doing the BBC 
drama boss who announced the news a disservice, but I found myself reading his 
quote on the matter in a tone of stagey affront. "I've read reports saying 
we're bringing back Poldark," he told journalists. "We're not bringing it back 
– we're adapting a classic piece of fiction."

Whatever they're doing, let's hope it won't be the last time they do it.

Come 2025, I see myself slinging another chair leg on the fire and sitting 
down to the latest reboot of the series – Poldark Origins – in which we learn 
the backstory that led toGeorge Warleggan 
<http://www.poldark.activeboard.com/t9330718/ralph-bates-george-warleggan/> 
becoming such an endlessly fascinating villain. Perhaps erstwhile Poldark star
Trudie Styler <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/trudie-styler> will 
play her original character's grandmother, in a piece of casting described as a 
wry nod to Poldark's universe of superfans.

Meanwhile in Hollywood, whose thirst for new ideas is often deemed to have 
been slaked sometime in the early 1980s, 2013 is a record year for sequels and 
prequels and reboots. One tally put this year's sequel count at 31, with 
reboots at 17.

As for the rash of TV spin-offs and rehashes, while the exceptional one is 
invigorating, most have a tendency to make the small screen look very small 
indeed (although the low water mark is still the2001 revival of Crossroads 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0264970/>). If I might rehash a point I myself 
have made previously, there used to be a rigid law of ITV commissioning which 
stated that all drama serials had to be a spin-off ofHeartbeat 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0101114/>, or have the word "heart" in the title. 
There was the 60s Yorkshire copper drama Heartbeat, obviously, then there was
The Royal <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0313122/>, which was set in a hospital 
that served the same bit of Yorkshire in which Heartbeat was set, then there was
The Royal Today <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1189017/>, which was set in the 
same hospital, only in the present day, then there wasWhere The Heart Is 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0154094/> – Yorkshire again – and Wild At Heart 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wild_at_Heart_%28TV_series%29>, and so on and so 
on.

All that was in the years BD (Before Downton), of course, but even now, the 
same principles of continuity prevail. Of casting the lead in Poldark, a source 
told the Times: "Dan Stevens would be good." Ah,Dan Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jan/02/downton-abbey-gq-best-dressed>
, latterly of Downton – and why not? People who die in Downton could turn up in 
Poldark, a bit like people who die in EastEnders or Corrie rising like Lazarus 
in Casualty or its sister show, Holby City. "There was a time," the producer of
Cathy Come Home <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/feb/15/2>, Tony 
Garnett, remarked tartly last month, "when I thought the whole of the BBC 
output would be set in one place – Holby."

It is testament to Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/armandoiannucci>'s sublime gift for 
satirising the future as well as the present that the classic "monkey tennis" 
scene inI'm Alan Partridge <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I%27m_Alan_Partridge> 
– in which Partridge pitches hilariously moribund TV ideas to a Beeb 
commissioning editor – has become only more resonant with each of the 16 years 
since it was broadcast. (And my apologies, because even quoting it in a column 
about telly has become as hackneyed as most of Partridge's programme concepts.) 
"Shoestring, Taggart, Spender, Bergerac, Morse," Partridge rattles off. "What 
does that say to you about regional detective series?" "There's too many of 
them?" hazards the BBC boss. "Another way of looking at it," counters 
Partridge, "is: people like them – let's make some more of them."

We are now five years into a period of grim economic hardship, and the 
reactionary period of flourishing creativity that many people predicted has 
simply failed to materialise. There doesn't seem to be a counterculture, only 
the full spectrum dominance of More of the Same, from the endlessly reiterated 
reality TV archetypes to the inoffensive dramatic revivals.

Just as bakers and confectioners have thrived in the economic downturn, 
providing a cheap and easy comfort to consumers, so the vogue within drama is 
for the salvingly familiar. It's a retroculture, really – the dramatic 
extension of all thosenostalgia shows in vogue at the turn of the millennium 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Love_the_%2780s_%28UK_TV_series%29>, in which 
the likes of Kate Thornton or Jason Donovan were deployed as talking heads to 
reminisce knowingly about funny olden stuff like deely bobbers and the miners' 
strike and other things that happened when they were a five-year-old at stage 
school.

When they come to film I Love 2013, doubtless as-yet-unborn Kardashians will 
explain that all the Poldarks and Upstairs Downstairses were the fictional 
version of a peppermint cream, requiring no chewing – the perfect cultural 
fodder for a country in the retirement home of international life.

Twitter: @MarinaHyde <https://twitter.com/MarinaHyde>
 