
Arkansas is not a state that is hurting for greater abortion restrictions – 
not even in theeyes of abortion foes 
<http://www.aul.org/2015-life-list-state-rankings/>. So when Arkansas became 
the first state 
<https://www.aclu.org/news/arkansas-passes-first-abortion-restriction-2015> 
this year to enact new anti-abortion laws, it provoked the ire of reproductive 
rights groups across the country.


And that was only the beginning. Arkansas soon emerged as the nation’s leader 
<http://www.thv11.com/story/news/2015/04/12/arkansas-legislature-leads-nation-in-2015-anti-abortion-laws/25678151/>
 in new abortion restrictions for 2015 – a title the statestill holds 
<http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/updates/2015newlaws.pdf> as the year 
comes to a close.

This is the year in reproductive rights writ small: Arkansas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> was just one of dozens of states 
where conservative lawmakers piled several strict new anti-abortion laws on top 
of the hundreds of measures already enacted in the four years prior.

And looking ahead, lawmakers have set the wheels in motion for a new batch of 
2016 restrictions in response to a series of now debunked videos that purport 
to expose wrongdoing by Planned Parenthood.

Across the US, legislators approved 57 new anti-abortion measures in 2015, 
according to a recent count by the Guttmacher Institute, a thinktank supportive 
of abortion rights. That is down from previous highs in 2011, which saw 92 new 
restrictions, and 2013, which saw 70. But it is more than double the number of 
new laws enacted in 2014.

The number of new measures in 2015 surprises those who wondered if lawmakers 
weren’t running out of ready avenues to restrict abortion.

“After 2013, many thought this had run its course,” said Elizabeth Nash, a 
researcher at Guttmacher. That year, the thinktank reported that lawmakers had 
hita new milestone 
<http://www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/updates/2013/statetrends42013.html>: 
they had passed more new anti-abortion restrictions in the last three years 
than in the entire preceding decade. “But 2015 tells us, no, we’re very much 
still in the midst of this wave of restrictions.”

All told, lawmakers across the country introduced 
<http://www.reproductiverights.org/sites/crr.civicactions.net/files/documents/USPS-Year-End-Report-Vs-6.pdf>
 some 400 abortion restrictions, a tally by the Center for Reproductive Rights 
found.

In a break from previous years, the laws most heavily favored by abortion foes 
in 2015 pose direct barriers to women seeking abortions. Earlier laws were 
aimed at causing abortion clinics to close. This year, two states, Arkansas and 
Tennessee, passed laws that force women wanting an abortion to make two 
in-person trips to the abortion clinic instead of one. The first trip, which 
must take place two full days before the second, is for anti-abortion 
counseling. Florida passed a similar, 24-hour waiting period that is the 
subject of a court fight. And North Carolina and Oklahoma established a 72-hour 
waiting period between a woman’s first call to an abortion clinic and her 
appointment.

Other popular laws restrict certain methods of abortion with little to no 
supportive evidence from mainstream medical groups.One of these 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2015/01/31/3617078/fetal-dismemberment-bills/> 
is a model law appearing to criminalize a procedure commonly used when a woman 
is more than 12 weeks pregnant. Anothernarrows the window of time 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/09/conservatives-block-abortion-pill> 
in which women can use medication to end their abortions – a more private, less 
expensive option that has made abortion widely available to many rural women. A 
bill passed in Arkansas even suggests to women that they can reverse an 
abortion performed with medication, an assertion which isnot backed up 
<http://www.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2015/04/new-law-forces-arkansas-doctors-push-unproven-abortion-reversal-treatment>
 by any credible evidence.

And battle lines are already being drawn for next year. In July, as most 
legislative sessions were drawing to a close, a little-known anti-abortion 
group unleashed a series of videos edited toshow Planned Parenthood officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/27/planned-parenthood-videos-heavily-altered-abortion>
 illegally selling fetal tissue obtained from abortions. The accusations in the 
video have been disproved. But the videos erupted into five separate 
congressional investigations of Planned Parenthood and unsuccessful efforts by 
Republicans in Congress to strip the group of some half a billion dollars in 
federal family planning funds. (The funds are not used for abortion.)

At the state level, legislators scrambled at the end of their lawmaking 
sessions to introduce bills restricting fetal tissue for medical research or 
outlining costly ways for abortion providers to dispose of fetal tissue. 
Sometimes acting in concert with Republican governors, they took action to 
relieve Planned Parenthood of hundreds of thousands in state and federal family 
planning funds and Medicaid contracts.

Those efforts – in states such as Arkansas, Louisiana, Ohio, Texas and Utah – 
have spawned court fights that will spill over into 2016. In Utah, Governor 
Gary Herbert is vowing to cut funds for STI testing to Planned Parenthoodover 
the objections 
<http://www.deseretnews.com/article/865639021/Utah-health-department-warned-governor-cutting-Planned-Parenthood-funds-a-bad-idea.html?pg=all>
 of officials in his health department.

And abortion foes are preparing to use the videos as inspiration for further 
restrictions. Americans United for Life, a legal advocacy group that is the 
source of most anti-abortion legislation, has already circulateda package of 
model legislation 
<http://www.aul.org/2015/12/aul-launches-infants-protection-project-ensuring-humanity-unborn-legally-protected-respected/>
 for 2016 in response to the videos. Charmaine Yoest, the president of AUL, 
described the bills as designed “to advance legal protections for the humanity 
of the unborn, as well as to address ongoing abortion industry abuses”. Many of 
the bills contain measures the group has promoted before, but a spokeswoman 
identified one bill as new: a proposal to broadly restrict the handling of 
fetal tissue, including for medical research.

 “The states didn’t fully absorb the shock of those videos in 2015,” Nash 
said. “The fallout is far from over.”
 