
Deaths are rarely to be celebrated, but there is one passing that certainly 
won’t be widely mourned: that of Adobe’s Flash.

2015 was the year the bug ridden security flaw finally went into terminal 
decline. Once the darling of the new interactive web (we’re talking in the late 
1990s), enabling video, web apps and fancy ads, Flash has become bloated and 
dangerous, loved only by hackers on the open web.

As web browsers and operating systems have become more secure, Flash has stuck 
out like a sore thumb. It’s more of a liability than ever, accounting for a 
considerable amount of the malware attacks website visitors are subjected to.
Even repressive regimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/13/hacking-team-ethiopia-attack-data>
 considerFlash a primary tool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/08/warning-adobe-flash-vulnerability-hacking-team-leak>
 to let them access individuals’ computers.

So-called drive-by attacks, which allow hackers to take over computers when 
users simply view a site, often use vulnerabilities in Flash. The plugin just 
can’t be trusted anymore.

At the same time improved web-native technology, in the form of HTML5 and 
WebGL, has meant most of the common applications for Flash seen on the open web 
can be done without it.YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/30/flash-youtube-nostalgia>, 
Twitch,Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/21/facebook-ditches-flash-video-html5>
, Google’s Chrome,Firefox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/14/facebook-end-adobe-flash-firefox-blocks-hacking>
 and Amazon have all migrated away from it. Some actively block it.

Flash hit by another zero-day vulnerability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/14/flash-hit-by-another-zero-day-vulnerability>
Even advertisers, who have been slow to move away from Flash, have started 
dumping the plugin. While 100m Flash ads were displayed year-on-year ending 
June 2015, that number is widely expectedto be significantly lower by next year 
<http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/flash-obsolete-time-agencies-adapt/298946/>
 as browsers such as Chrome, used by over 57% of the desktop-using world 
according to data from Statcounter, begin blocking certain Flash elements by 
default.

It took until December this year, but even Adobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> has now started to distance 
itself from its own product.

Over the past few years the company – which inherited Flash as part of its 
purchase of web software developer Macromedia in 2005 – has been working to 
support both HTML5 and animation framework WebGL within its Flash animation 
tools. Having noticed that more than a third of the content created within 
Flash Professional was actually HTML5, the company decided to dump Flash from 
the name entirely and call it Adobe Animate CC. It is still supported, but when 
the name Flash is so toxic it’s dragging products down, the writing is on the 
wall.

There are, however, still some reasons for Flash to exist. 
Software-as-a-service systems – those used by companies to manage employee 
history, claimbacks and budgets – often rely on Flash to power web apps running 
in browsers. Native apps running on the desktop could do the job just as well 
but most businesses are unlikely to rush to change. (Those systems are also 
part of the reasonInternet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> 
Explorer 6 continues to exist, but that’s a story for another day.)

So Flash may live on in the captive environment of company intranets for a 
while yet, but its life in the wilds of the open web finally seems to be coming 
to an end.

Mobile devices have been Flash-free for years and they work better than most 
desktops. That speedy, more secure experience will increasingly come to 
desktops too. RIP Flash, we won’t miss you.

 * Apple, Google and Microsoft: weakening encryption lets the bad guys in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/23/apple-google-microsoft-weakening-encryption-back-doors>
 * Facebook ditches Flash video in latest blow to maligned plugin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/21/facebook-ditches-flash-video-html5> 