
Welcome to this week’s roundup of the latest, greatest Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> apps and games, covering 
smartphones and tablets.

All these apps have been released for the first time – ie not updates – since 
the last roundup. All prices are correct at the time of writing, with “IAP” 
indicating use of in-app purchases.

You can read the previous Best Android Apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/series/best-android-apps> roundups for 
more recommendations, but if iOS is your platform of choice, check theBest 
iPhone and iPad Apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/series/best-iphone-and-ipad-apps> 
roundups. On with this week’s selection!

APPS

Numerous (Free) <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.numerousapp>
Numerous is a good idea, promising a fast way to check “the most important 
numbers on your life” in one place. Which can be personal stuff from Fitbit 
activity and Twitter followers to stock prices, through to work stats drawn 
from services like Salesforce and Google Analytics.


Yahoo Livetext - Video Chat (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.yahoo.arrow&hl=en>
Apparently Livetext is “the most natural way to have REAL conversations”, 
which suggests someone in Yahoo’s marketing department needs to get out and 
speak to people in the REAL world a bit more. But this is interesting: a 
neatly-designed video messaging app with text-chat built in.


The best Android apps of 2014
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/22/the-best-android-apps-of-2014>
5K Runner: Couch to 5K (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.clearskyapps.fitnessfamily.RunC25K>
Having gone from 5k to couch over the past year and a half, any app that can 
reverse my slide back to blogger-physique is welcome. This has been popular on 
iOS, and is now available on Android: a running-trainer with an exercise 
programme promising to have you scampering 5km at a time within a couple of 
months.


Bestie by Camera360 (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=us.pinguo.selfie>
Few slogans are as 2015 as “Best Selfie Every Time!”. If the quality of your 
selfies is worrying you, Bestie is worth a look: it may sound silly but there 
are serious features from respected photography app Camera360 here to touch up 
your self-shots. And filters, obviously. Always filters.


Sainsbury’s Magazines (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.sainsburys.magreader&hl=en_GB>
To me, Sainsbury’s Magazines is the aisle I have to steer my six year-old son 
away from to avoid ‘no you can’t have another thing with a plastic toy on the 
front’ tantrums. Here, though, it’s the supermarket chain’s app for reading a 
range of popular (grown-ups’) magazines digitally, with a decent range to 
choose form.


The Best Song (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.thebestsong.app>
The best song of 2015, as any fule kno, is Hot Chip’s Huarache Lights. But on 
the tiny chance that you disagree, this music-discovery app will help you find 
alternatives. A Tinder-style interface sees you swiping through hand-picked 
tunes to find new ones you like.


Push ups 0-100 Pushup Trainer (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.clearskyapps.fitnessfamily.PushupsPro>
This comes from the same developer as 5k Runner, and as the title makes clear, 
is all about push-ups. Again, there’s a goal and timescale: 100 push-ups at a 
time within 10 weeks, as long as you follow this three-times-a-week programme.


Kaboom (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.anchorfree.kaboom>
Snapchat may have popularised the idea of self-destructing social media posts, 
but other developers are exploring how it can work elsewhere. Kaboom, for 
example, lets you post to Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp, but specify a time 
for them to be deleted.


V – Live Broadcasting App (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.naver.vapp&hl=en>
Periscope for Korean and Japanese pop stars, in a nutshell. As such, it’ll 
only appeal to K-Pop and J-Pop fans for now, although given that it’s made by 
the parent company of messaging app Line, which has huge followings for the 
likes of Taylor Swift and Katy Perry, perhaps some Western stars will give it a 
go too. Anyway, expect live broadcasts and lots of interaction with stars 
including Bigbang, Jun Hyo Seong and Wonder Girls.


Disneyland (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.disney.wdpro.dlr>
Finally, an official app for Disneyland, which should come in handy if you’re 
planning a visit. You can buy tickets, peer at maps of the attractions, and see 
how long you’ll have to queue up for them – all the better for gauging whether 
your restless children will put up with the delay.

 Five Nights at Freddy’s 4 for Android. 
GAMES

Five Nights at Freddy’s 4 (£2.32) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.scottgames.fnaf4>
The Five Nights at Freddy’s games have been making scaredy-cat gamers jump for 
a while now. This latest game is creepier than ever, moving the 
demonic-animatronic-animals action to the home of the child hero, with you 
having to fend them off overnight. Excellent, as ever.


Angry Birds 2 (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.rovio.baba>
As our full review explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/06/angry-birds-2-review>, some 
of Angry Birds 2’s freemium features will grate on players who enjoyed the 
original games, but are unlikely to put off the Candy Crush crowd. The 
bird-slinging pig-exploding action looks better than ever, with some neat 
gameplay touches. Hopefully some of the wait-timer aspects will be tweaked in 
the coming weeks.


The best Android games of 2014
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/22/the-best-android-games-of-2014>
Earthcore: Shattered Elements (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tequilagames.elementsfree&hl=en>
The card-battling genre can be intimidating for newcomers, and this is 
definitely one of the richer (but thus more complex) examples. Even so, it’s 
well worth a look as an alternative to something like Hearthstone, as you get 
to grips with elements and skills, as well as crafting your own cards.


Piloteer (£2.33) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.whitakr.Piloteer>
A “physics-based game about learning to fly”? Don’t worry, this is no Flappy 
Bird clone. Instead, this is a characterful actoin game that sees you flying a 
jetpack around and trying not to crash it (note: you will crash it though, but 
the ragdoll physics make that quite fun too).


Roald Dahl’s Twit or Miss (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.prh.DahlTwitOrMiss>
For everyone who grew up with Roald Dahl stories (which is essentially 
everyone, certainly here in the UK) this will bring back fond memories of two 
of his foulest creations. The game sees you flinging food morsels back at Mr 
Twit to ensure Mrs Twit doesn’t wake up, with some well-tuned scoring making it 
a fun challenge for parents as well as kids.


Super QuickHook (£1.91 + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.noodlecake.quickhook>
Would it make the wrong impression to call this an endless swinger? Super 
QuickHook sees you running and swinging your way through a colourful world, 
using a grappling hook for the latter. The levels are varied, and there are 
plenty of secrets to explore: it’s not as one-dimensional as some in its genre.


A Day in the Woods (£3.80) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.retroepic.adayinthewoods>
Little Red Riding Hood is the inspiration for this quirky puzzle game, which 
is beautifully realised. You have to slide tiles around a board to help Red 
collect flowers and berries, while avoiding things that want to eat her. It 
looks great, and plays just as well.


Adventure Time Puzzle Quest (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.d3p.cmo>
Once upon a time – pre-freemium boom – Puzzle Quest was the only blend of 
match-three puzzling and RPGs that you needed. Is it still a hit in 2015 
though? This is pretty fun, blending Puzzle Quest with the (ace) kids’ show 
Adventure Time. The odd bug aside, it’ll please fans of either brand.


Cosmonautica (£4.99) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.chasingcarrots.cosmonautica&hl=en>
This space-strategy game has been billed as a blend of Elite and The Sims, 
which sets it apart from clones in both those genres. There’s a zip and sense 
of humour here too, as you wander the galaxy trading and managing your crew.


Farming Simulator 16 (£3.99 + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.giantssoftware.fs16>
Finally: farming. The Farming Simulator series has built a fervent base of 
fans, and while it’s a more serious take on the area than the likes of 
FarmVille and Hay Day, the rhythms of managing your crops and livestock work 
perfectly for mobile play with a bit more meat to it.


That’s my choice, but what Android apps and games have you been enjoying this 
week? The comments section is open for your recommendations.
 