
The weekly Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> apps 
roundup has been on hiatus since the end of 2014 in favour of a monthly 
collection, but there’ve been plenty of comments on related apps articles 
requesting a return to a more regular column.

Well, here it is: the revived best Android apps of the week (and the same for 
iOS) – it will be reverting to a weekly roundup from now on.

As before, apps that use in-app purchases will be marked with (Free + IAP) 
rather than (Free). Prices are correct at the time of writing, but they can 
rise or drop at a moment’s notice, so if you’re coming to this feature late, be 
aware of that.

On with this week’s crop!

APPS

Star Walk 2 (£1.96) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.vitotechnology.StarWalk2>
While the UK recovers from watching this morning’s sky full of grey cloud 
eclipse, how about an app for stargazing? Star Walk 2 is a sequel to the 
popular astronomy app, helping you identify and learn about constellations, 
planets and satellites. And if your children are interested, there’s also the 
newStar Walk Kids app 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.vitotechnology.StarWalkKids>.


Tinkerplay (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.autodesk.tinkerplay>
Tinkerplay is Autodesk’s latest app tapping in to the emerging market of 3D 
printing. It’s a creative app for creating “fun characters, scary creatures or 
anything else”, snapping body parts together using the touchscreen interface, 
then – if you have the necessary hardware – printing them out.


Swipes - Plan Tasks (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.swipesapp.android>
I’m constantly in search of the app that will bring order to my work-life 
chaos. Swipes looks like a fighting contender: a to-do list app that includes a 
timeline for your daily plans and – uh-oh – the ability to “snooze” tasks for 
later.


Connect (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.connect.connectcom>
There are quite a few apps trying to replace the default contacts app on your 
smartphone. Connect, the latest, looks interesting: aggregating your email, 
phone and social networking contacts, plotting them on a map, and pulling in 
their social updates too.


Atari Fit (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.atari.mobile.atarifit>
Atari may be best known for its arcade games, but this is something of a 
curveball: a mobile fitness app. It encourages you to work out – with more than 
100 exercises included – rewarding you with coins to unlock games like Pong, 
Super Breakout and Centipede. It’ll also connect to apps like RunKeeper and 
Google Fit, or activity-tracking devices from the likes of Fitbit and Jawbone.


Dr. Panda’s Ice Cream Truck (£0.79) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tribeplay.pandaicecream>
Dr Panda has become a familiar brand for tens of millions of children over the 
last couple of years. Now he’s back with a playful ice-cream-making game that 
gets kids concocting treats for an array of cartoon animals.


Gojimo: GCSE, A Level Revision (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.educationapps.gojimo&hl=en_GB>
It’ll soon be exam revision time for teenagers in the UK, and this is one of 
the apps hoping to help them make the most of their swotting. It covers all the 
main subjects, maths and English included, with students able to choose their 
specific exam board to ensure they’re only revising useful information.


Ultimate Fan Live (Free) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ultimatefanlive.ultimatefanandroid>
This app combines fantasy football – the soccer kind of football, since you 
ask – and social networking features. Designed to be played along with English 
Premier League and Champions League matches, you choose players, trigger 
power-ups during real games and try to beat friends.


Tradiio Music (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tradiio>
Tradiio isn’t the first app trying to help you discover new music by turning 
bands into a virtual stock exchange, but it’s good fun. You invest in songs, 
and earn virtual currency if they catch on with other players. Its long-term 
success will depend on the quality of the music that it spotlights.


Montessori Math City (£2.49) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.lestroiselles.MathsCity&hl=en>
Another educational app for children, this. It’s a maths app helping kids 
learn to count up to 1,000 using Montessori teaching methods. Children mark 
their progress by collecting items for their virtual city.

 Five Nights at Freddy’s 3 for Android. 
GAMES

Five Nights at Freddy’s 3 (£2.39) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.scottgames.fnaf3&hl=en>
The Five Nights at Freddy’s games are all excellent: spooky, inventive 
adventures set in a pizza parlour staffed by animatronic creatures. Horror 
movie fans will see the flaw in that plan. This latest version refines the 
formula well.


Stick Cricket 2 (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.sticksports.stickcricket2>
The original Stick Cricket game remains a marvellous time-sucker, and while 
not all App Store reviewers love this sequel, there’s plenty to enjoy. Your job 
is to batter runs against increasingly talented bowlers, with a varied career 
mode to work your way through.


Frozen Synapse Prime (£2.99) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.doubleeleven.frozensynapseprime>
Sci-fi strategy game Frozen Synapse is a treat on any platform, including this 
new “Prime” version for Android. There’s plenty to get your teeth into as you 
explore its 40 solo missions, learning the best tactics to get the most out of 
your team.


King of Thieves (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.zeptolab.thieves.google>
King of Thieves is the work of Cut the Rope developer ZeptoLab: an 
action-puzzle game based on stealing gold and setting traps to keep your own 
loot safe. It’s colourful and the asynchronous multiplayer is well-worked.


Angry Birds Stella POP! (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.rovio.ABstellapop>
Just like the Bubble Witch Saga games, this takes its inspiration squarely 
from classic console series Bust-a-Move / Puzzle Bobble. You fire coloured 
bubbles at other coloured bubbles to make matches of three or more, except here 
(obviously) there are pigs and Rovio’s Angry Birds Stella characters. 
Unoriginal, maybe, but nicely done.


Dungeon Hunter 5 (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.gameloft.android.ANMP.Gloft5DHM>
If swords, monsters and dungeon-crawling are your thing, Dungeon Hunter 5 is 
well worth a look – as long as you’re not harbouring fond memories of earlier 
games in this series that weren’t freemium. It looks good and there’s fun to be 
had, but it can sometimes feel a bit over-aggressive in nudging you to pay.


MiniDrivers (Free + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.minidrivers.formula1.com>
Sitting somewhere between Mario Kart and Micro Machines, this pocket-sized 
racer sees you speeding around 20 tracks grabbing power-ups to see off rival 
drivers. Neat graphics and unaggressive in-app purchases add up to a satisfying 
package.


Lego Marvel Super Heroes (£3.30 + IAP) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.wb.lego.marvel>
The latest in Legos line of branded action games is as fun as ever, with a 
host of Marvel superheroes available to play – from Spider-Man to Wolverine. 
There are 45 missions to explore, with pixel-perfect graphics and plenty of fun 
to be had.


Dark Echo (£1.49) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.rac7.DarkEcho>
Warning: this game includes “a horrifying evil that devours both sound and 
souls”. Insert your own UKIP / Justin Bieber / Jeremy Clarkson joke here, 
obviously. But then explore what’s one of the most innovative Android games 
this year: 80 levels of creepy sound-visualised adventuring.


Table Tennis Touch (£2.99) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=uk.co.yakuto.TableTennisTouch>
Finally, one of the most playable sports games on iOS makes its way to Android 
in the form of Table Tennis Touch, where your on-screen swipes translate 
beautifully to smashes and slices against a series of increasingly-tough 
opponents.


Those are my choices, now tell me yours. What Android apps and games have been 
floating your boat this week and/or what do you think of the apps above? The 
comments section is open for your thoughts.
 