
Broadchurch star Olivia Colman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/olivia-colman>, Great British Bake 
Off judge Mary Berry and Newsnight host Kirsty Wark have been named among the 
30 most powerful women in British TV and radio, in a list drawn up by the Radio 
Times.

Also featured are presenter Clare Balding, and comedians Miranda Hart and 
Victoria Wood <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/victoria-wood>.

The list is split between on and off-screen talent, including Sherlock 
producer Sue Vertue, the writer of Last Tango in Halifax and Happy Valley, 
Sally Wainwright, andElisabeth Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/elisabeth-murdoch>, founder of MasterChef 
producer Shine.

Alison Graham, Radio Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-times> 
television editor, who chaired the panel that drew up the list, said for too 
long a woman's place on TV had routinely been as victims in crime dramas, but 
things were improving.

"A revolution has been rumbling quietly in the background and it's now reached 
the foreground as clever, talented and formidable women prove that our gender 
provides much more than disposable props," Graham added.

She singled out Claudia Winkleman, who will co-host Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> this autumn 
with Tess Daly after Bruce Forsyth left the show. "Yes, two women hosting one 
of the biggest shows on television, all by themselves! The fact that this is 
such a big deal in 2014 shows just how pitifully slowly television has reacted 
to the seismic changes in wider society."

The list was drawn up by Graham, Woman's Hour presenter Jenni Murray, Bafta 
chief executive Amanda Berry, Comic Relief co-founder Emma Freud, 
producer/quizmaster Richard Osman, and Victoria Brooks, founder and director of 
Milk Publicity.

Other actors on the list include Sheridan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sheridan-smith>, soon to be seen playing 
Cilla Black in an ITV biopic, and Sarah Lancashire, who has featured in BBC1 
dramas Last Tango in Halifax and Happy Valley.

Woods' As Seen On TV and Dinnerladies collaborators Julie Walters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julie-walters> and Anne Reid make the 
list. Reid recently starred with Derek Jacobi in Last Tango in Halifax.

TV executives on the list include BBC1 controller Charlotte Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/charlotte-moore>, her BBC2 counterpart Kim 
Shillinglaw, and Channel 4 chief creative officer Jay Hunt. From radio there is 
Helen Boaden, director of the BBC's national stations.

Radio Times's list also features Nicola Shindler, the producer of Last Tango 
in Halifax and Happy Valley.

Other names from TV production include Beryl Vertue, mother of Sue, who has 
credits ranging from Steptoe and Son to Men Behaving Badly andSherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>.

Writers on the list include Call the Midwife creator Heidi Thomas and Abi 
Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan>, who has credits including 
The Hour and Birdsong.

The comedian and writer Dawn French is also on the list, with actor Joanna 
Lumley, presentersKirstie Allsopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/kirstie-allsopp> and Mary Beard, and 
comedian Sarah Millican.

The top 30 is completed by Anne Mensah, Sky's head of drama, State of Play 
producer Hilary Bevan Jones and Pippa Harris, executive producer of BBC2's 
Shakespeare adaptations The Hollow Crown.
 