
Paul Keating once said Sydney was the only place to live in Australia – the 
rest were camping out.

The New South Wales capital can certainly lay claim to being one of the most 
beautiful cities in the world. London and New York have a glamour, history and 
majesty about them, and San Francisco, Seattle, Auckland and Vancouver have 
gorgeous natural harbours, but Sydney manages to combine big-city polish with 
verdant nature and the glory of the world that is its harbour.

The CBD needs a bit of a facelift and an energy infusion – it can be fairly 
lifeless on weekends. But if you stick to some of Sydney’s more natural 
attractions, choose some of its new and exciting restaurants, try some small 
bars and take a trip out to some of the city’s lesser known foodie suburbs, 
you’ll have an incredible 48 hours.

Friday

4pm: kayaking, Point Piper

Head down to Rose Bay, towards the Point Piper end, and you’ll find the Point 
Piper Kayak Centre <http://www.kayakhire.com.au> – which is essentially a shed 
under the shade, filled with kayaks and standup paddleboards. We are given the 
option of choosing fast, “racing” kayaks – easy to tip over – or the more 
sturdy, old-fashioned variety.

We opt for the later. It’s a gloriously sunny day on the harbour, with little 
breeze. We head left towards Double Bay, giving us superstar views of the 
Sydney Harbour Bridge (and a glimpse of the Opera House sails) and pull up our 
kayaks on the beach at Shark Island. There are few boats out on the harbour 
this afternoon and the paddling is peaceful – almost meditative.

But be warned: weekends can get hectic with pleasure crafts and you need to 
have your wits about you to avoid harbour traffic including ferries.

Kayaks start at $20 for the first hour then drop to $10 an hour after that.

 6pm: drinks at Australian 18 Footers League, Double Bay

After kayaking, wander around to Double Bay where this small yacht club 
<http://www.18footers.com.au/club/index.html> boasts a big view of the harbour. 
It’s relaxed, with mostly outdoor seating, and far away enough from the 
Friday-night city hordes to grab a good table.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99fc8b4afff00b00b53942316e7612fab685c4b1%2F0_343_955_573%2F955.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99fc8b4afff00b00b53942316e7612fab685c4b1%2F0_343_955_573%2F955.jpg>
 The Opera Bar at sunset. Photograph: Nikki Marshall 
Harbourside bars abound in Sydney and there’s none more popular than the Opera 
Bar in the Sydney Opera House 
<http://www.sydneyoperahouse.com/visit/opera_bar.aspx> complex. If you want 
more of a buzz than Double Bay can offer and are happy to fight for a table, 
take a ferry from Double Bay to Circular Quay and follow the noise (it is 
noisy!) to the Opera Bar.

8pm: dinner at Acme, 60 Bayswater Road, Rushcutters Bay

One of the most unusual, and delightful dining experiences in Sydney is the 
newly openedAcme <http://weareacme.com.au/>. It’s an Italian restaurant – but 
not Italian as I’ve had it before.

The team behind the restaurant promise “interesting and affordable pasta” 
which includes macaroni and bucatini with pig’s head and egg yolk or goat, 
spicy nduja and fresh mint. This is not novelty food but a wild mixture of 
flavours and a fusion of styles that work. We love the roasted carrots with 
ricotta and almonds, steamed pipis, lime, pepper and carpaccio parmigiana.

We nab a window seat so we can watch the passing parade of revellers heading 
into Kings Cross (if you’re there early enough you can see the fantastic sunset 
over Paddington) and enjoy wines from regional NSW.

9.30pm: drinks in Surry Hills

After dinner, take a cab into Surry Hills to experience some of Sydney’s 
classic old pubs.

We drink at the Hollywood Hotel 
<https://www.facebook.com/hotel.hollywood.sydney> in Foster Street, Surry 
Hills, where there’s a mirror ball and friendly bar staff but none of the 
hipsters sometimes associated with this part of town.

We also drop into the Shakespeare Hotel, a fairly rough-and-ready drinking 
establishment that has been particularly popular with the journalists who work 
in nearby Holt Street and theatre staff from Belvoir. Once again, it’s 
unpretentious and there’s good, cheap food available upstairs.

If you feel like a late night, book a room at George Street karaoke bar Mizuya 
 <http://www.mizuya.com.au/>or Surry Hills’ Ding Dang Dong. Love of late-night 
karaoke seems to be a particularly Sydney thing – perhaps feeding into 
Sydneysiders’ narcissistic fantasy of being a rockstar celebrity.

Saturday

8am: Bondi to Bronte hike

Get up early and head to Australia’s most famous beach. Wear your walking 
shoes – you’ll be doing the spectacular cliff walk – a distance of 3.5km from 
Bondi to Bronte.

Starting at the south end of Bondi – near the Icebergs pool – there are a few 
sets of stairs, but the view across to Ben Buckler, the point at the northern 
end, is gorgeous. The track is crowded with joggers and ambling sightseers so 
make sure you stick to the unwritten protocol of walking to the left – 
otherwise you could find yourself jostled off the path by one of the Glamazons 
who run it each day.

Breakfast can be taken in Bronte at one of the many cafes on the small hill 
that faces the beach. They’re all good for fresh juices, strong coffee and 
bacon and eggs, and are happy to serve you in your swimmers and towel – the 
vibe is casual. If you have the energy you can stay on the cliff walk past the 
sprawling cemetery to Clovelly or you can turn around and head back to Bondi 
for a swim either in the ocean or in the magnificent Icebergs pool and gym.

A swim in the saltwater lap pool can be bracing and challenging – if there’s 
big swell that crashes over the sides. Reward yourself with delicious coffee 
from the pool’s kiosk and a peerless view.

Noon: shopping, Paddington


After the beach head to Paddington for some shopping. Oxford Street was once 
thriving but is now looking a little on the sad side – with lots of shopfronts 
up for lease.

It’s still worth a look but my favourite shopping strip in Sydney is Williams 
Street, off Oxford Street. There are some fantastic independent stores in 
refurbished terrace houses along with a great chocolatier and a deli down the 
end of the road.

Keep walking and allow yourself to get lost in Paddington, Darlinghurst and 
Surry Hills’ lovely backstreets.

3pm: Art Gallery of NSW and Brett Whiteley Studio

As well as the main gallery – the impressive Art Gallery of NSW alongside the 
Royal Botanic Gardens – Sydney’s art scene is home to some wonderful smaller 
galleries.

In the back streets of Surry Hills, Brett Whiteley Studio <http://www.art 
gallery.nsw.gov.au/brett-whiteley-studio/> is a monument to one of Australia’s 
great artists, who died too soon in 1992. See where he worked and some of his 
key pieces of art.

The Art Gallery of NSW (free) is also a collector of Whiteleys. His Lavender 
Bay series is worth seeking out – the harbour, in deep blue hues, is 
quintessentially Sydney.

4pm: White Rabbit Gallery, Chippendale

The White Rabbit Gallery <http://www.whiterabbitcollection.org/> (free), 
focuses exclusively on contemporary Chinese art, with exhibitions rotating 
through the white, cube-like spaces. Founded by Sydneysiders Kerr and Judith 
Neilson, it exhibits works produced after 2000. There’s nowhere like it 
anywhere in Australia and there’s a really cool gift shop attached.

6pm: early dinner at Din Tai Fung in Chippendale or World Square in the city

You don’t forget your first dumpling at Din Tai Fung 
<https://www.dintaifungaustralia.com.au/> – for a start, it could easily take 
the skin off the roof of your mouth.

The Shanghainese dumplings are filled with meat and/or vegetables and encased 
in a velvety pouch that is also filled with scalding-hot liquid. You are meant 
to pierce the dumpling and let the juice ooze out before dipping it into soy 
and chilli then popping it into your mouth. Sadly my friend didn’t pierce her 
dumpling and a boiling jet of liquid shot out, causing her mouth to blister. 
Staff are accustomed to this and have paw-paw ointment on hand to assist with 
burns.

But it’s worth the pain. These are some of the best dumplings in Australia and 
you can eat well for under $30. Favourites include the gem dumplings of 
different colours and the truffle dumplings. I also recommend getting a rice 
dish and trying the pork noodles. Delicious!

7pm: see a show (at Opera House, Angel Place, Sydney Theatre, Golden Age 
cinema or Belvoir St Theatre)

You’re in Sydney. You should see a show. The Opera House is an obvious spot to 
see the likes of the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, the Australian Opera or a 
big-name touring production. The Wharf at Walsh Bay is one of Sydney’s most 
picturesque precincts, while Belvoir has some of Australia’s best actors and 
playwrights in its stable.

The Golden Age cinema in Surry Hills has a chic bar attached and is about as 
far from a multiplex vibe as you can get.

10pm to late: drinks at Baxter Inn or Frankie’s Pizza 

Frankie’s is all checked-tablecloth Americana with a rockabilly feel, while 
Baxter Inn is a dimly lit basement bar that is great for a late-night whiskey.

Melbourne has long had the edge on Sydney in terms of the small-bar scene but 
Sydney is fast catching up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42c4e208ce6abe6f8ec9658eb83827c03003eefa%2F0_158_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42c4e208ce6abe6f8ec9658eb83827c03003eefa%2F0_158_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
 The Harbour Bridge and the city can be glimpsed from Nielsen Park, one of 
Sydney’s harbour beaches. Photograph: Alamy 
Sunday 

9am: Nielsen Park – swim and breakfast

Sydney is home to a gorgeous string of harbour beaches – many on the eastern 
side of the city. Protected by shark nets, shaded by huge Moreton Bay figtrees, 
with views to the national park on the other side of the harbour (or else 
glimpses of Sydney’s CBD), Nielsen Park is one of Sydney’s gems.

Even better, there’s a lovely restaurant and kiosk so you can have a big 
breakfast after you’ve swum your morning laps.

11am Cabramatta – Food tour (I Ate my Way Through Cabramatta)

Thirty kilometres west of Sydney’s CBD and a 50-minute drive or train ride, 
Cabramatta is the Vietnamese food capital of Sydney.

On the day of our visit, locals are in traditional costume, preparing to 
honour the former prime minister Malcolm Fraser whose policy after the Vietnam 
war resulted in a large-scale resettlement of Vietnamese to Cabramatta. In 
Freedom Plaza, old timers play mahjong and drink coffee Vietnamese-style – 
strong, thick and with condensed milk.

Our guide, Amy Ta, grew up in Cabramatta and knows all the great dishes to 
order and where to get them. First off is a bowl (to share) of bun bo hue – 
subtly different from a pho, with thicker noodles. It is fragrant with beef and 
lemongrass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77d56236b43c50d2ccef1bffece7b04db8d646c2%2F0_67_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Sydney%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20where%20to%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2F48-hours-in-sydney-what-to-do-where-to-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77d56236b43c50d2ccef1bffece7b04db8d646c2%2F0_67_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 A fruit and vegetable store in Cabramatta, Sydney’s Vietnamese food capital. 
Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
As we queue on the footpath with dozens of others, Ta assures us the next 
little hole-in the-wall place does the best crispy chicken in Cabramatta. She’s 
wrong. This is possibly the best crispy chicken in Sydney. Dipped in sauce and 
enjoyed with mint and rice, it is still lingering in my memory as I write this 
weeks later.

We visit several other unassuming places to try their specialty dishes until 
at the fourth place we beg for the tour to stop. It is possible to eat so much 
you can burst. We pay $99 each, with food included.
 