
The Hunter valley in New South Wales is one of Australia’s best known wine 
regions, boasting more than 150 vineyards.

The area has also become a haven for foodies, with new restaurants springing 
up all the time, making the most of the views: picturesque rolling hills and 
row after row of grapevines.

Driving from Sydney to Pokolbin, a village in the centre of the valley, takes 
about two and a half hours, depending on traffic. Alternatively, those coming 
in from a little further afield can opt to fly to Cessnock airport, close to 
the heart of the valley.

Getting around can be difficult without a car. Taking one of the numerous 
Sydney-based guided tours is an option, but they offer little flexibility if 
you want to linger at a winery. Hiring a van with a driver is another option 
for those travelling in large groups.

A note of caution: when visiting the Hunter valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/jun/17/the-hunter-valley-wine-regions-cellar-doors-eight-of-the-best>
, wear stretchy pants to accommodate all the food and drink you’ll be 
consuming. You’ll need them.

The Hunter Valley wine region's cellar doors: eight of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/jun/17/the-hunter-valley-wine-regions-cellar-doors-eight-of-the-best>
Friday

7.30pm: Dinner and drinks at Harrigan’s Irish Pub

Harrigan’s stands against the gentle and understated restaurants Pokolbin is 
known for. It is unashamedly loud and boisterous, especially on a Friday night 
when a rock band belts out covers of Rihanna and Kings of Leon.

One of the pub’s biggest drawcards is its fireplace. After the five-plus hour 
drive from Canberra, sitting by the fire feels as comforting as a mother’s 
embrace.

The menu is similarly comforting, offering up heartwarmers including creamy 
vegetable soup ($12.90) and chilli prawn and chorizo pasta ($29.90). The fried 
fish is a deep golden brown and comes with something called “artisanal hand-cut 
fries”. That’ll cost you $23.90.

The wines are, predictably, local and bar staff are happy to help you navigate 
the extensive choices.

9.30pm: retire to the Longhouse

A thick fog has settled over the region and the night is cool. The Longhouse 
<http://www.thelonghouse.net.au/> is off the beaten track a bit, nestled 
farther from the road than other offerings in the area. I drive down a couple 
of dirt roads, avoiding roos and potholes.

The Longhouse contains three separate units. Ours has two bedrooms, a 
fireplace, and windows the length of the living room. In the morning we’ll be 
able to sit out on the shared balcony and take in the views but for now our 
main aim is getting the fireplace roaring.

The accommodation was designed and built by architecture students looking for 
practical experience in construction and features nifty, tucked-away cupboards 
and spacious, modern bathrooms. Two-bedroom apartments cost between $400 and 
$600 a night depending on when you travel and how long you stay.

A floor-to-ceiling bookcase offers every Graham Greene book you can think off, 
plus a selection of boardgames and DVDs spanning the breadth of tastes from The 
Princess Diaries to The Last King of Scotland.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438550476016%2F5499d517-9165-4031-b075-ec1705745369-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438550476016%2F5499d517-9165-4031-b075-ec1705745369-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The outdoor patios at the Longhouse. Photograph: Shalailah Medhora for the 
Guardian 
Saturday

9.30am: Handmade Hunter markets

After taking in the spectacular views from our unit, my friend and I drive 
into town to visit theHandmade Hunter markets 
<http://www.handmadehuntermarkets.com.au/>.

The morning is cold and clear, and we make a beeline for a stall in the 
distant corner that sells woodfire pizzas and bacon and egg rolls ($6).


Once food and warm beverages have been consumed, we take a leisurely walk 
through the markets. I am an unashamed lover of candles and I buy a sandalwood 
musk one for $15.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438550720431%2Fe1cbac2f-c88d-4027-b733-bd901458e9e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438550720431%2Fe1cbac2f-c88d-4027-b733-bd901458e9e9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Some of the gifts on sale at the markets. Photograph: Shalailah Medhora for 
the Guardian 
My friend, a recent resident of Newcastle, is drawn to the Striking/Newcastle 
<http://www.strikingnewcastle.com.au/> photography stall. The photos are of 
electrical storms and are breathtaking, but the explanation of how each one 
came about by the photographer, Shane Williams, is what really draws you in. 
Many of his shots are of the big storm in April of this year.

We buy a chorizo and capsicum roll from the Blackbird Artisan bakery 
<http://www.hunterhunter.com.au/tiles/blackbird-artisan-bakery> stall (for the 
road, my friend reassures me as she tears off a chunk and stuffs it in her 
mouth), while its owner tells us the bread’s background. The bakery is located 
in the old Maitland jail, where, legend has it, weapons were once smuggled in 
via loafs of bread.

10:45am: Kevin Sobel winery

Before leaving the markets, we take a peak inside the cellar door of the host 
venue,Kevin Sobel Wines <http://www.sobelswines.com.au/>.

I enjoy one of their petit verdot varieties – a grape making a bit of a 
resurgence in the region, which isn’t known for its heavy reds.

We meet a dozen or so French and Scottish men on a bucks’ weekend – or as one 
of them says with a wink so as not to scare the wine servers, a “corporate 
retreat”.

It’s not yet 11am but these lads are already tipsy. I have a feeling we’ll be 
seeing them again on our travels and, as we wave goodbye, we glimpse the 
suffering face of the bus driver tasked with ferrying them around the vineyards.

12pm: Briar Ridge Vineyard

Briar Ridge’s <http://www.briarridge.com.au/> chief winemaker, Gwyn Olsen, is 
the toast of the town – she’s just been named the Hunter valley’s rising star 
of the year.

The winery manager, Steve Pike, is on hand to take us through a tasting. My 
friend is taken by the crisp white wines and meaty reds and decides to become a 
member of the wine club. Members come together every year and create their own 
blend. If Olsen gives it the tick, the winning blend is sold to the public.

I’m enjoying the 2014 white blend ($28 a bottle), which is unlike any other 
wine I’ve tasted. It is savoury, reminding me of tomato plants and ground 
pepper. I buy two bottles.

2pm: lunch at Muse Kitchen

Situated in the Keith Tulloch winery is Muse Kitchen 
<http://musedining.com.au/index.php/muse-kitchen/>, our lunch destination. It’s 
lovely and light, with a garden where children are playing.


We ask the chef to bring out his favourites in the banquet menu, costing $75 
for four courses. The fried brussel sprouts with maple, chilli salt and feta is 
a highlight for me. The main is the chef’s take on shepherd’s pie, featuring 
slow-cooked lamb and creamy polenta.

If you’re a dessert person, it’s pretty hard to go past the coconut cloud. 
Made up of little other than whipped coconut cream and fresh blueberries, it’s 
delightfully light and tasty.

The food is of course paired with wines. I opt for a sweeter semi-dry semillon 
($7 a glass or $24 a bottle) to start, and a half glass (I’m driving, after 
all) of shiraz to round things out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438550850055%2Fbc63017c-f647-4f04-ba12-d400a2ee2ede-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438550850055%2Fbc63017c-f647-4f04-ba12-d400a2ee2ede-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The view from Muse Kitchen at Keith Tulloch Wines. Photograph: Shalailah 
Medhora for the Guardian 
3:30pm: Hunter Distillery

Hunter Distillery <http://www.hunterdistillery.com.au/> is one of the few 
non-wine options in Pokolbin and is packed when we arrive. It becomes even more 
jammed after a costume party hens’ event arrives for a tasting.

The manager, Neil, takes us behind the scenes where the spirits are made, 
talking us through the intensive process. The organic vodkas are distilled at 
least four times, and the highly alcoholic and corrosive off-casts from the 
process are used as cleaning agents for factory floors.

The business opened in 2013 and has already outgrown itself. A new factory 
with twice the number of distilleries is on the cards.

Mango liquor is the best seller and I can see why. It’s tropical and fruity 
without being overly sweet – perfect to sip in a spritzer on a summer’s day. I 
walk away with a bottle of that, and the ginger variety, both costing $25 for 
250ml or $40 for half a litre.

6pm: Restaurant Botanica

After ditching the car at the Longhouse, my travel companion and I make our 
way toRestaurant Botanica 
<http://spicersretreats.com/spicers-vineyards-estate/dining/> where we meet 
another friend who lives nearby. She’s excited about dining at Botanica, one of 
the newer offerings in the Hunter.

The menu lists a variety of seafood and meat dishes. We decide to go for the 
$79 three-course option after eyeing off a number of the delicious-sounding 
desserts.

I get the beef cheek and scallop entree, and the slow-cooked pork belly main. 
My dessert is a passionfruit masterpiece and makes me thankful that I broke the 
habit of a lifetime by deciding against the chocolate parfait.

My friends and I share in some rose sangria ($13 a glass) to end the evening. 
The combination of the slightly dry wine and the fruity chunks is glorious – 
one of the best drinks I’ve had all day (and I have sampled quite a few so by 
now I consider myself an expert).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438551146094%2Fafb5e35e-d3d5-4ffe-87e4-ab0b6955f033-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438551146094%2Fafb5e35e-d3d5-4ffe-87e4-ab0b6955f033-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The picturesque Hunter. Photograph: Destination NSW 
Sunday

10am: Cafe Enzo

After packing up and bidding farewell to the Longhouse we head to the quaint 
Peppers Creek Village where we findCafe Enzo <http://enzohuntervalley.com.au/>.

It’s a beautiful morning and we opt to sit outside, next to a giant water 
feature that has enthralled several small children.

The food is rustic and hearty. My breakfast arrives on a wooden board and the 
fresh orange juice in a mason jar. The home-made baked beans are tomatoey with 
ham hock, a definite highlight. Breakfast costs anywhere between $15 and $30, 
depending on what you opt for, and there are plenty of options for those who 
want to mix and match.

11am: Hunter Valley Gardens

Today is the last day of the Snowtime festival at the Hunter Valley Gardens 
<http://www.huntervalleygardens.com.au/>, and the place is teeming with 
youngsters. The fake snow festival has drawn children from far and wide to the 
gardens, which host 8km of walking paths.

Entry is steep though – nearly $30 for an adult – and my friends and I decide 
to walk around Pokolbin instead and look at the shops (the bookstore and alpaca 
wool shop are highlights).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438551784660%2F91b2878a-60c1-4f65-861a-e52c698d516d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Pokolbin%20in%20the%20Hunter%20valley%2C%20NSW%3A%20where%20to%20eat%20and%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2F48-hours-in-polkobin-in-the-hunter-valley-nsw-where-to-eat-and-drink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438551784660%2F91b2878a-60c1-4f65-861a-e52c698d516d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Don’t forget to take some wine home with you after a trip to the Hunter. 
Photograph: Destination NSW 
1pm: Hunter Valley Smelly Cheese Shop

It’s nearly time for us to leave but, before we do, we stock up on goodies at 
the Hunter Valley Smelly Cheese Shop. True to its name, this venue is not for 
the faint-hearted or the sensitive-nosed. Only four people are allowed into the 
temperature-controlled cheese room at once.

We buy four types of cheese, as well as garlic and fennel salami, marinated 
olives, pesto dip and fresh bread, and take our picnic out into the sun. A 
tasting plate of crackers and cheese, featuring hard, soft and blue varieties, 
can be bought for $25.

We crack open a wine from neighbouring Tempus Two 
<http://www.tempustwo.com.au/> cellar door and soak up the last few moments of 
a brilliant weekend.

• More information about the Hunter valley can be found at the Visit NSW 
tourism website <http://visitnsw.com>

 