
I knew Adelaide had a reputation for staid conservatism before my first visit, 
but it didn’t hit home until I was wandering the city’s streets in a 
nicotine-deprived stupor at 6pm on a Sunday, desperately searching for 
somewhere to buy cigarettes.

“Welcome to Adelaide!” my friends messaged me. Yeah, yeah. 

My arrival had been much more congenial: a perfect powder blue sky and the 
promise that the place was on the up and up. Between the rejuvenation of 
Adelaide’s restaurant and bar scene, the broadening of the Barossa’s appeal 
beyond wine sales at the cellar door and the redevelopment of the Adelaide Oval 
sports precinct, the southern capital was, I had been told, having its moment 
in the sun.

My short-lived nicotine quest aside, 48 hours there confirmed this was, 
indeed, the case.

Sunday

1pm: lunch at 2KW Bar & Restaurant
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e93d9b68bc5b8baff1f582acaf13e1d2b9896f%2F0_0_1204_1549%2F1204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e93d9b68bc5b8baff1f582acaf13e1d2b9896f%2F0_0_1204_1549%2F1204.jpg>
 Charcuterie, olives and bread at 2KW restaurant in Adelaide. Photograph: Adam 
Brereton for the Guardian 
Several storeys up, overlooking parliament house and across to the Adelaide 
Oval,2KW <http://www.2kwbar.com.au/> is a bright, airy restaurant and bar with 
a fantastic menu. Big plates for sharing are in vogue everywhere and here they 
don’t disappoint: oysters, sardines and charcuterie to start, with more 
substantial dishes of braised kangaroo and crispy skin duck afterwards. Much of 
the fare is sourced locally, including the wine; among the highlights were 
Pike’s2014 Clare Valley riesling 
<http://www.pikeswines.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Riesling-Traditionale-2014.pdf>
 (fresh and much drier than I had expected – pick up a bottle, you won’t regret 
it) andThe Bogan, Kaesler’s 2012 shiraz 
<http://kaesler.com.au/wine/bogan-shiraz/> (knockout flavour and more tannin 
than a Chesterfield sofa).

2pm: hoofin’ it around Adelaide


Adelaide is pretty flat. That’s great if you like to walk, which I do. The 
city was flooded withCrows <http://www.afc.com.au/> and Port 
<http://www.portadelaidefc.com.au/> supporters heading to the newly developed 
park to watch the game on a big screen and eat from food trucks. I went for a 
wander to check out the city’s famous churches, which really are beautiful. 
Perhaps I’d overdosed on Lutheranism but Victoria Square, the open and austere 
city centre, felt more like a Victoriaplatz. The mild culture shock had me 
wondering about Sydney’s residual Irishisms.

7pm: dinner at Street ADL <http://streetadl.com/>

His jokes were pretty salty, which only intensified my raging thirst for wine

Back to the food. To call ADL eclectic would be an understatement. Alongside 
the ubiquitous share plates, this time a mixed bag ofstreet food 
<http://streetadl.com/wp-content/uploads/website-7.5.15.pdf> – ceviche, 
bruschetta, sang choi bow, quesadillas – is a kind of Australiana sub-menu of 
roasted pumpkin, saltbush and macadamia nuts, eucalyptus-smoked lamb and so on. 
Then there’s food truck standards such as mac-and-cheese-burgers and roasted 
corn cobs ... it’s as if the chefs are trying to run with half a dozen food 
trends at once. As far as pub grub goes, it was pretty hearty. Better was the 
country and western singer who ripped out a solid Jolene on request. Even 
better was the decent range of bottled beers (I couldn’t face any more grape 
juice).


9pm: small bars of Adelaide

Redrawn licensing laws, in force from 2013, set off Adelaide’s small bar 
scene. Along Peel Street, there are a few joints that would not seem amiss in 
the trendier parts of Melbourne or Sydney:Clever Little Tailor 
<http://www.cleverlittletailor.com.au/>, all wood panels and snug booths; 
Udaberri Pintxos y Vino <http://udaberri.com.au/>, which serves Spanish nibbles 
and cocktails; andMaybe Mae 
<https://www.facebook.com/Maybe-Mae-476220975850155/>, which follows the 
speakeasy trend by disguising its entrance behind a wood panel in a staircase. 
I managed a few mugs of porter before well and truly hitting a wall and beating 
a retreat back to the hotel.

Monday

8am: wine wine wine

After a solid day of eating and drinking in Adelaide, it was time for a change 
of pace: eating and drinking in the Barossa Valley. The region has long been 
known as Australia’s prime region for grape-growing, winemaking and Germans, 
but is being transformed in subtle and interesting ways. There are innovative 
small vineyards flourishing in the shadow of the all-consuming Jacob’s Creek 
industrial complex and the area is becoming a foodie paradise, as you may have 
guessed from thatNick Cave tourism advert where they roll around in the dirt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MoMp-V_CRdc>. 

I joined a tour group run by Life is a Cabernet 
<http://www.lifeisacabernet.com.au/>, whose owner, Ralf Hadzic, used to be the 
guy in the cat suit on popular TV show Fat Cat and Friends. His jokes were 
pretty salty, which only intensified my raging thirst ... for wine.

Ballycroft Vineyard and Cellars <http://www.ballycroft.com/> was the first 
stop. Owner and winemaker Joe Evans is a stickler for quality, letting the soil 
and sun do their work while he keeps a close eye on the grapes. He’s big on 
permaculture too and, during a foray into cheesemaking, sprayed whey on the 
vines to control pests.

Ballycroft’s “small berry” shiraz is the result of careful cultivation; rather 
than overwatering, leading to high berry weight, Evans aims for less juice and 
more flavour and colour from the skins. The cellar-door experience was 
wonderful – this winemaker knows how to spruik his wares and there was plenty 
to taste too. Eftpos is, luckily, available on site.

10am: morning tea at Tanunda bakery
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dabfaf10ca474b38e9558a34a3ba9af7e0cda8b%2F0_256_1575_945%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dabfaf10ca474b38e9558a34a3ba9af7e0cda8b%2F0_256_1575_945%2F1575.jpg>
 Cream-filled doughnuts are among the offerings at Tanunda Bakery. Photograph: 
Adam Brereton for the Guardian 
Germans began to settle the Barossain the mid-19th century. Some came freely – 
winemaking families among them – and others as religious refugees, fleeing 
state interference by Frederick III in the conduct of Lutheran worship. The 
immigrants brought much of their traditional life with them, which explains the 
varieties (hello, riesling) and the age of some of the vines (some of the 
shiraz vines here were planted in 1847).

Other traditional practices continue too. At Tanunda bakery 
<http://www.tanunda-bakery.com.au/>, a local institution, there is a 
mind-boggling selection of bread, German doughnuts and strudels. The coffee was 
good, too, in that frothy European style. Bring a working pancreas and an 
appetite for whipped cream and icing sugar.

11am: riesling tasting at Siegersdorf lookout

The amazing Siegersdorf lookout – a high-altitude vineyard planted, 
improbably, on limestone – escapes the worst of the summer heat and moisture 
and produces the nicest riesling I think I’ve ever tasted. Looking out over the 
rolling green hills, you’d have no idea that, at the top of summer, it 
frequently peaks above 40C down on the flat. The wine itself was really 
delicate with a nice fruity mid-palate and a bit of fizz. Just wonderful andnot 
that expensive 
<https://www.danmurphys.com.au/product/DM_73064/hardys-siegersdorf-riesling.jsp;jsessionid=8476C8E755205C8B0DFD4A91C762CA67.ncdlmorasp1302?bmUID=kZOT0JX>
 to order online.

12pm: lunch at Artisans of Barossa

Six wineries comprise the Artisans of Barossa 
<https://www.artisansofbarossa.com/>, a co-operative cellar door/restaurant. 
They’re all subregional winemakers, some older and some younger, and there’s 
loads on offer as far as variety and price is concerned. The restaurant,Harvest 
Kitchen <http://www.harvest-kitchen.com.au/>, opened in March 2015 with 
MasterChef contestant Tracy Collins at the helm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c53a2fea97f1ef2c7f6a7b27c4d424603f61a93%2F0_0_1575_1102%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c53a2fea97f1ef2c7f6a7b27c4d424603f61a93%2F0_0_1575_1102%2F1575.jpg>
 Empanada is among the outstanding menu items at Harvest Kitchen. Photograph: 
Adam Brereton for the Guardian 
If you’ve come for big sips of Barossa shiraz, you’ll find them here, 
alongside more unusual offerings. The Spinifex rosé was a particular treat – 
bone dry with a peach tint, rather than the familiar sickly pink stuff. The 
food is outstanding too. After the endless share plates, I longed for an entree 
and main, but was brought around by the $55pp “Feed me like a Barossan” menu 
with its sizeable dishes of moreish grain-based salad, empanadas, fried chicken 
and roast lamb.

Looking out over the vineyards as you graze through all the produce on offer, 
one thought does pass through your mind: by now it would be highly illegal for 
me to drive.


2pm: Maggie Beer’s farm shop

Maggie Beer’s little pates, spreads and quince pastes are a staple of 
cheeseboards everywhere and, if youvisit her farm store 
<https://www.maggiebeer.com.au/visit-us>, you can taste as much as you want. 
The store, beside a charming dam, has coffee and more substantial food on 
offer, while peacocks freely cavort in the car park. Truth be told, I was too 
full from lunch to properly appreciate it and had already bought enough wine to 
cart around. Perhaps it would be wise to schedule a visit in the morning – 
before you’re bursting at the seams and hankering for a nap.

2:30pm: Tscharke’s Place

By the time we arrived at Tscharke’s Place <http://www.tscharke.com.au/>, my 
capacity to drink loads more wine had been miraculously restored. The winery is 
a fascinating interweaving of history and modernity; the Tscharke family can 
trace their Barossa roots to Prussian immigrants who bought land in the area in 
1869 and the hi-tech winery is adorned with old family photos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d0ee2f702de6a2f8b654f940e50f5ec4a27eb1%2F0_0_1575_1575%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Adelaide%3A%20German-influenced%20wine%20and%20cakes%20make%20a%20foodie%20heaven&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2F48-hours-in-adelaide-barossa-foodie-eating-and-drinking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31d0ee2f702de6a2f8b654f940e50f5ec4a27eb1%2F0_0_1575_1575%2F1575.jpg>
 Tscharke’s winery in the Barossa valley is built on a long heritage in the 
region. Photograph: Adam Brereton for the Guardian 
Damien, the winemaker, is a young viticulturist concerned with sustainability 
and it shows in recent improvements to the site. In particular, to beat the 
heat, a huge underground storage facility has recently been excavated. The 
wine, stored in a long concrete vault, will ferment in a more stable 
environment and this will cut out the outrageous expense (and carbon emissions) 
of air conditioning above-ground storage in 40C heat.

The tasting, held in a separate underground room below the main house, was 
great fun. Experimental “emerging wines” can be had for a steal too. We tried 
Eva Frizzante, a sweet fizzy white made for a German palate and named for 
Damien’s wife (and drunk in decent quantities at their wedding, we were told).

7pm: a game

The Adelaide Oval redevelopment 
<http://www.adelaideoval.com.au/137/fast-facts.aspx> has been a huge deal for 
the cityscape, bringing footy and soccer into a central position. Team signings 
in Rundle Mall are now only a short walk across the footbridge from the 
stadium, which hosts high-profile international matches. Liverpool FC played 
Adelaide FC in an exhibition game in July, and the stadium will host a World 
Cup qualifier with the Socceroos in March. If you’re a sports fanatic, you’ll 
already know all this and the revitalised scene in Adelaide will make your trip 
a treat.
 