
“What this island is about is art, food and wine – in any order you like,” 
we’re told on arrival at Waiheke, a 35-minute ferry hop from the centre of 
Auckland, New Zealand’s largest city.


Heart-stoppingly beautiful, the 20km-long island is one of those idylls first 
“discovered” by hippies and artists, followed this century by foodies and 
multimillionaires: think Ibiza, Martha’s Vineyard, Byron Bay.

Property prices may have soared 
<http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=11379344> but 
they haven’t paved paradise. The 8,000 permanent residents are united by their 
love of the good life, along with gorgeous views, glorious beaches and 
Waiheke’s blissed-out bohemian vibe.

A Māori name for this place is Motu-Wai-Heke, which means “island of trickling 
water”. And it’s true there’s plenty of water. But what strikes me more is the 
abundance of coves. Exploring the island, we leave one stunning bay behind, 
climb a hill then gasp as another view of the bright turquoise ocean opens up 
in an entirely unexpected direction (we gasp a lot on Waiheke). Its many 
peninsulas resemble the tentacles of a giant green octopus emerging from the 
sea to bask in the warm, dry microclimate of the Hauraki Gulf.

In many ways Waiheke is a microcosm of New Zealand itself – blessed by nature, 
serving up seriously good food and wine, and populated by happy, welcoming 
people who are so laid-back they laugh at Australians for being uptight. The 
weather is milder though. Summer, with an average maximum daily temperature of 
29C, is peak season on the island but winter is relatively warm, with highs of 
19C dropping to 9C overnight.

If you’ve flown a long way, Waiheke is a good place to ride out jet lag before 
embarking on a tour of the country. Here’s how to spend 48 hours unwinding here.

There are buses on the island and tramping trails 
<http://www.aucklandcouncil.govt.nz/EN/parksfacilities/walkingtracks/Pages/waihekeindividualwalks.aspx>
 abound, but for ease of getting around hirebikes 
<http://www.fullers.co.nz/destinations-tours/waiheke/bike-waiheke.php>, 
scooters or a car <http://www.waihekerentals.co.nz/vehicles/>. 

Day one 

5pm: settle in, kick back

There are so many views on Waiheke you’d be pushed to find a room without a 
pleasing one. Relax and enjoy. Open a bottle, or just breathe out.

Among the scores of hotels, apartments and holiday homes, the top-rated resort 
on TripAdvisor 
<http://www.tripadvisor.com.au/Hotels-g285729-Waiheke_Island_North_Island-Hotels.html>
 isDelamore Lodge <http://www.delamorelodge.com/>, boasting one of those 
died-and-gone-to-heaven infinity pools on a ridge not far from the biggest 
village, Oneroa. If you like to be “in town”, the Oyster Inn offers a glam 
beachy vibe. A budget option near the island’s one supermarket isStarfish on 
the Bay <https://www.airbnb.com.au/rooms/4746678>, a charmingly cluttered 
garden apartment with an outlook over Okahuiti creek and a resident overseer in 
the form of Napoleon, an elderly and affectionate siamese cat. Its whitewashed 
walls and bright blue cushions bring Santorini to the south Pacific.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d880e0ffdf389c23f9287402621a3166f1a00a6%2F0_0_3246_1948%2F3246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d880e0ffdf389c23f9287402621a3166f1a00a6%2F0_0_3246_1948%2F3246.jpg>
 Owhanake Bay from the breakfast table at at Marino Ridge 
My sister and I are staying at Marino Ridge 
<http://www.marinoridge.co.nz/luxury-waiheke-island-accommodation>, newly built 
by Peter and Caroline Davey on a private drive just up the road from Delamore 
Lodge. We’re in one of three suites with views overlooking Owhanake Bay.

It’s billed as “luxury hosted accommodation”, which we had feared might mean 
it was a B&B with pretensions. It’s nothing of the sort: think ultra-exclusive, 
super-friendly boutique hotel. The room fit-out is impeccable and yet we’re 
still in a home – one of those fabulous ones you glimpse from a road and wonder 
who lives there.

Clearly this pair are pros when it comes to hospitality. Over excellent wine 
and exquisite canapes we discover why. As a couple they worked on superyachts 
in Europe: Pete as the skipper and Caroline as steward and private cook. Marino 
Ridge is their “retirement” home, designed with the dream of welcoming their 
overseas friends. Rooms cost NZ$650 a night in the winter season, NZ$845 in 
summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafce6de3a793b9d0d6ab2e53dc86ac2bbf57288f%2F0_0_3264_2448%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafce6de3a793b9d0d6ab2e53dc86ac2bbf57288f%2F0_0_3264_2448%2F3264.jpg>
 Caroline and Peter Davey with Isla and Fabio 
The Daveys are warm, interested and interesting. As we all make a fuss of 
Marino’s two most pampered residents – standard poodles Isla and Fabio – they 
share their passion for Waiheke, telling us where to go and what to see; which 
restaurants are terrific. We feel as though we’re meeting for the first time a 
glamorous aunt and uncle (by the time we leave we’re hoping they’ll adopt us).

7pm: dinner at Cable Bay

Whatever you do on Waiheke, make sure you find somewhere to sit on the 
north-western side of the island, looking towards Auckland, in time to see the 
sun set behind the distant city.Cable Bay Vineyards <http://cablebay.nz/> is as 
fine a spot as any, offering breathtaking views from its two restaurants, the 
Dining Room and the Verandah. Both open on to a beanbag-dotted grassy slope 
overlooking the water.

The Verandah serves small bites, sharing plates and wood-fired pizzas. We opt 
for the fine-dining alternative of the Dining Room: the food is fab (we spend 
NZ$60 each on two courses) and the service fantastic. For dessert we share the 
milk and dark chocolate with malt caramel and smoked vanilla ice-cream. It’s a 
flavour bomb. We look at each other in awe.

Day two

9am: mobile massage

We’d requested avocado on toast for breakfast (Caroline discovered my sister 
likes olive oil and has three local varieties for us to try), so when we’re fed 
we put on robes and are led to a room where Karyn Sneddon ofAnu-Spa 
<http://www.anumobilespa.com/> and her colleague Cushla have set up massage 
tables. I can’t remember much of what follows but after an hour involving shea 
butter, sensory deprivation and hot stones – apparently it was Anu’s signature 
jet lag treatment with facial rehydration, priced at NZ$100 – I ask Karyn what 
style of massage she practises. “Whatever is needed!” is the reply.

10.30am: guided tour 

A good way to get your bearings is to put yourself in the hands of a local 
guide for a private or small group tour. One of the first people we meet on the 
island is Michelle Clarke ofWaiheke Bespoke Tours 
<http://www.waihekebespoketours.co.nz/>, who greets us with hugs and introduces 
herself as a “purveyor of unique experiences”. Her emphasis is on luxury with a 
choose-your-own-adventure spirit.

We hitch a ride with Jenny McDonald, a former midwife who has lived on the 
island since 1978. The name of her company,Ananda Tours 
<http://www.ananda.co.nz/>, comes from a Sanskrit word meaning pleasure, bliss 
and happiness. (Can you spot a theme developing here?) Ananda has several tours 
to choose from, along with the option to design an individual itinerary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5188b17cff3cb22e7ff303d018f9074f8fbca8%2F239_0_3302_1980%2F3302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5188b17cff3cb22e7ff303d018f9074f8fbca8%2F239_0_3302_1980%2F3302.jpg>
 Artist Gabriella Lewenz in her studio at Church Bay 
Jenny takes us to the huge Church Bay home and studio of painter Gabriella 
Lewenz <http://www.lewenz.net/Artist.asp?ArtistID=31905&Akey=SENQB3G9>. Born in 
Greece to American parents, Gabriella lived in Pakistan and the States before 
settling with her family on the island in 1997 in search of a simpler life.

In a light-filled space smelling of pine and turpentine, she shows us her 
abstract oil-based works and outlines her plans to offer an “artstay”. For a 
minimum NZ$2,000 spend, visitors can commission a painting then unwind in her 
guesthouse for at least a week at no extra charge while she creates a 
show-stopping souvenir for them to take home.

Stop two is Peacock Sky <http://www.peacocksky.co.nz/Home> in Onetangi, near 
the centre of the island. We meet the vineyard’s top dog Sky, a border collie. 
Waihekeans clearly love their pets: all the dishes at Peacock Sky’s restaurant 
are named after dog breeds. We stay in the tasting room but there’s food on 
offer. Owners Connie (Canadian) and Rob (British) offer cellar-door food 
pairing, matching their wines with bite-sized morsels. We sample chardonnay 
with an Indian-spiced meatball; dry rosé with salmon and sweet chilli; a 
smooth, peppery merlot malbec with a pork sausage; and a berrytastic cab sav 
that turns a dark chocolate brownie into blackforest gateau. It’s inspired, 
revelatory – there should be far more of it.

Next we next pull into Rangihoua Estate <http://www.rangihoua.co.nz/> to taste 
award-winning olive oils. First planted in 1996, the property now has more than 
1,000 trees producing Greek-style Koroneiki, Spanish-style Picual and 
Tuscan-style Frantoio fruit. Cue more sampling and sighing noises. We also 
discover Waiheke Herb Spread, a green blast of goodness containing, among other 
things, nasturtium, dandelion, thyme, sage and lavender.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54adc286c1ae11db7bd969879543db79fda625ef%2F69_0_3424_2056%2F3424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54adc286c1ae11db7bd969879543db79fda625ef%2F69_0_3424_2056%2F3424.jpg>
 Roosters’ retreat, a sanctuary for noisy birds 
1pm: lunch at Stonyridge

On the way to our fourth and final stop we pass a small reserve with a tree 
full of chickens. “Oh, that’s roosters’ retreat,” Jenny says. She explains that 
after an elderly islander died, the council moved his noisy birds there from a 
residential area. Other residents started dumping their roosters as well. 
Dozens of birds are now cared for by the community, their numbers swelled by 
opportunistic ducks. When it rains they shelter in the bus stop.

For lunch we pull up at one of New Zealand’s most acclaimed vineyards, 
Stonyridge <http://www.stonyridge.co.nz/>. The first Bordeaux varieties and 
olive trees were planted here in 1982 by Stephen White, a former 
round-the-world yachtsman whose sidelineis teaching yoga 
<http://www.stuff.co.nz/business/better-business/63384582/How-I-keep-well-Stephen-White>
.

We take seats in the Veranda Cafe and attack a platter of cold cuts, cheeses 
and antipasti. We also check out the photographs of famous visitors: it’s clear 
that most of the big-name performers who play Auckland are brought here. Lunch 
over, we settle into squishy seats under palm trees and gaze at the hills.

3pm: check out Oneroa

The strip of shops isn’t long, but there are fashion boutiques, homewares 
stores, a fruit and veg palace, abottleshop 
<http://waihekewinecentre.com/index.php?route=common/home> with a pay machine 
that pours samples of the island’s most lauded wines, and“artisan gelato” 
<http://www.islandgelato.co.nz/#about> in a converted shipping container. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43c85d2ad78c67f6b7c794518f22eaa899b5d11%2F159_0_3268_1961%2F3268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe43c85d2ad78c67f6b7c794518f22eaa899b5d11%2F159_0_3268_1961%2F3268.jpg>
 The Island Gelato Company in Oneroa, Waiheke’s biggest village 
We check out [ space ] contemporary art gallery 
<http://www.spaceartgallery.co.nz/index.html>, operated by a collective of 
seven island artists. On duty is Sydney-born sculptor and painterPaul Radford 
<http://www.paulradfordartist.com/home/>. “Yes,” he says, “the secret’s out 
about Waiheke.”

Up the hill we spend a happy half hour rummaging through Victorian Gilt 
<http://www.victoriangilt.co.nz/>, which sells antiques and collectables. Its 
owner, Gill Ward, is another Waiheke “retiree”. Three years ago, after 30 years 
in business in Auckland, she moved her shop to the island. Her collection of 
Victorian, Edwardian and art deco jewellery is tough to spot amid the jumble 
but it’s impressive.

There’s jewellery of another kind to be seen a few doors up at the showroom of 
Christine Hafermalz-Wheeler <http://www.goldsmith.co.nz/>, Waiheke’s “artist 
goldsmith”. Born in East Germany but raised near Stuttgart, Christine learnt 
metalwork from her plumber father.

Her bling blends intriguingly cut gemstones with pebbles and fossils. When 
David, her British husband who runs the store, sees how much we admire it he 
packs us off up the road to meet her at home.

Her workshop, looking out over the sea in two directions, must be one of the 
most beautiful of any artist, anywhere. Christine shows how she uses a 
mouth-blown torch to solder then lets us try on some of her one-off creations. 
The showstopper is a 99-carat aquamarine in the shape of a Māori canoe set in a 
necklace with blue diamonds and shells. It represents the story of her journey 
to Waiheke.

Christine is warm, calm and radiates contentment. In this haven for the ageing 
of Aquarius, we’ve met someone who seems to have her feet planted firmly on the 
path to enlightenment.

5pm: swim

Pick a cove! Any cove! I swim in the pool at Marino Ridge and have a dip at 
Palm beach, east of Oneroa. It may be late but the water is warmer than it 
looks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b0f8dbd1be42502932d4391cf20d3141122c0f%2F198_72_2127_3192%2F2127.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b0f8dbd1be42502932d4391cf20d3141122c0f%2F198_72_2127_3192%2F2127.jpg>
 Cotechino sausage and braised lamb shoulder at Te Motu 
7pm: dinner at the Shed at Te Motu

We’re looking forward to our meal at Te Motu 
<http://www.temotu.co.nz/the-shed/>, a vineyard down a dirt road near 
Stonybridge. It’s Peter and Caroline’s pick as the best restaurant on the 
island.

In a modern rustic setting next to the veggie garden we share chicken liver 
parfait, braised lamb shoulder and cotechino sausage with polenta, peach 
mostarda and kale. It’s fuss-free food: simple and sublime – and the equal of 
any meal I’ve had anywhere.

Day three 

11am: ziplining 

First off, treat yourself to a sleep-in or a sunrise swim. Feeling the bliss? 
Now it’s time to fire up again.

New Zealand is known for its love of high-adrenaline activities. Waiheke has 
EcoZip Adventures <http://www.ecozipadventures.co.nz/>: three flying foxes 
built over vines and remnant native forest on a hillside in Onetangi. This is 
bungee-lite – you’d have to be petrified of heights to be fearful here. But 
it’s fun. We strap on harnesses and helmets and off we zip.

The best bit is the walk back up the hill along a gently rising boardwalk. Our 
guide Alex – the first person I’ve met who was born on Waiheke – gives us a 
lesson on the island’s natural history. Before humans came, the only mammals 
here were two tiny species of bat. That meant birds were the apex predators. 
(When Captain Cook visited New Zealand in the 18th century, she tells us, the
dawn chorus <http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/speech/10106/joseph-bankss-journal> 
lasted half the night and was so loud he had to anchor further off shore.) The 
Polynesian settlers brought pigs and rats, the Europeans a plethora of 
predators that decimated the birdlife.

Alex seems to know every plant in the forest. We take turns hugging her 
favourite tree.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f93534a3743fdf302c9051b80678d8147c199d%2F0_231_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f93534a3743fdf302c9051b80678d8147c199d%2F0_231_2448_1469%2F2448.jpg>
 Guide René Hawkins at EcoZip Adventures 
1pm: lunch at Mudbrick

There are views galore at Mudbrick Vineyard & Restaurant 
<http://www.mudbrick.co.nz/>, a thriving enterprise on a hill near Oneroa. It’s 
owned by Robyn and Nick Jones, Aucklanders who bought the site as a lifestyle 
block in 1992. We’re led to an outdoor table beside topiary-filled garden and a 
Provence-style building made of – yes – mud bricks, and watch busloads of 
visitors arriving. Our platter – a vast board of hot and cold delights 
including prosciutto, vitello tonnato, ceviche, prawns, squid and roasted 
vegetables – is testament to why they come.

Later we wander through the grounds to a hilltop pony paddock with 360-degree 
views of the island. What a block. What a lifestyle.

3pm: explore eastern shores

By this time, if you’re anything like us, you’ll be so smitten with Waiheke 
you’ll want to see every part of it. If you have a car, set aside two hours for 
the loop around the eastern, less developed side of the island. The distance 
isn’t great but there are narrow dirt roads and you’ll want to pull up to take 
pictures. We head clockwise, past Cactus Bay and Owhiti Bay, the site of 
pre-European settlement. We skip Stony Batter, a network of wartime gun 
emplacements and tunnels, but stop for a drop atMan O’ War Bay Vineyard 
<http://www.manowarvineyards.co.nz/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6eb54ab363a8b729ba3203403a548636ee6912%2F0_20_3394_2036%2F3394.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20on%20Waiheke%20Island%2C%20New%20Zealand%3A%20where%20to%20go%2C%20what%20to%20do&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2F48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6eb54ab363a8b729ba3203403a548636ee6912%2F0_20_3394_2036%2F3394.jpg>
 The ferry harbour on Waiheke Island. 
As we head south towards Orapiu we park three times to look out over glorious 
coves, each view furnished with a rough-hewn wooden seat for hikers. They’re 
all over the island, providing quirky comfort even in the most isolated 
locations. It’s so typical of this place. There’s probably a coffee table book 
in it: The Benches of Waiheke.

Finally it’s ferry time. On the boat back to Auckland we turn our eyes from 
the island slipping out of sight and pore over the local paper’s property pages.

The writer was a guest of Tourism New Zealand <http://www.newzealand.com/> and 
Air New Zealand <http://www.airnewzealand.co.nz/>
 