
Bamurru Plains sits on the edge of what it describes as Australia’s Okovango 
Delta, the Mary River floodplain.

The luxury bush retreat is set on a small portion of the 77,000 acre Swim 
Creek Station, which supplies live export buffalo and cattle to Asia. It is 
three hours from Darwin but feels much more remote and wild. At this time of 
year, early in the dry season, the waters haven’t fully receded and the 
wilderness is alive.

This is not cocktails-by-the-pool, finery at dinner style luxury. It is next 
level glamping, an escape to the wild for those not quite inclined to rough it. 
We are in what feels like the middle of nowhere, sleeping in elegant safari 
bungalows perched on the edge of a wetlands plain teeming with birds and 
buffalo and crocodiles and wallabies, and it is an exceptional balance of the 
outdoors and comfort. There is no phone signal or Wi-Fi, an initially 
terrifying prospect for someone so plugged in, but I get used to it quicker 
than I’d have imagined.


Closed during the wet season, Bamurru opens early in the year for fishing 
safaris before moving on to wilderness experiences as the waters recede.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437365622141%2F64f25285-527c-40e4-ba1c-04bdbe547829-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437365622141%2F64f25285-527c-40e4-ba1c-04bdbe547829-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The swimming pool meets the bush at Bamurru plains – a safari experience 
driving distance from Darwin. 
Friday

3pm, exploring the wetlands


Along a dirt road through the bush, I cross a couple of cattle grates and meet 
my guide, Larissa, who will drive me the rest of the way.

After winding through eucalypts and purple turkey bushes 
<http://www.yuruga.com.au/archives/whats-a-leptospermum/> for half an hour we 
arrive at Bamurru Plains, a collection of 10 huts perched on the edge of a 
sweeping green wetland. Inside the central lodge – a long and open timber room 
with a 30 seat dining table and clusters of couches – I’m greeted with a 
deliciously cold drink, and Larissa details the weekend’s activities to come.

Outside I see buffalo, birds, and agile wallabies wandering throughout the 
grounds, and I wonder if they even notice we’re here. I’m given the reassurance 
that any noises in the night will be them. One year, after a particularly wet 
monsoon season, a crocodile did drag a wild pig under one of the huts, but 
still – any noises are almost definitely the wallabies.

Kakadu national park: what to do, where to go, what to see
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/29/kakadu-national-park-what-to-do-where-to-go-what-to-see>
I’m in the farthest safari bungalow at the end of a dirt path. The bungalows 
take the best of camping, and remove the annoying parts – like tent zippers, 
low ceilings, dirt floors and long walks to bathrooms. From the back it looks 
like a sweet and rustic corrugated tin shed, set on stilts in its own clearing. 
But walking inside reveals a stunning timber bedroom with a large and low bed 
surrounded on three sides by a pale netting instead of walls. I can see the 
bush and wetlands around me, but no one can see in. The angle of the huts mean 
none of us are looking at each other.


Attached to the gorgeously detailed room is an equally beautiful tin and 
timber bathroom with a hot shower fashioned from a smooth tree stump.

Late in the afternoon we jump back in an open LandCruiser and make our way 
slowly to a nearby billabong, stopping frequently to examine trees, flowers, 
and birds. We cross the plain, avoiding the craters dug by wallowing buffalo, 
to the waterhole which has shrunk to a fraction of its wet season size. We park 
on the opposite side for sundowners and bush-tucker canapes – salsa and creamy 
cheese on bread slices, and smoked crocodile with sundried tomatoes and capers. 
The guests take this opportunity to get to know each other, trading travel 
stories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437365860688%2F042f451c-7e41-4a5f-a4af-43f6f1ffd026-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437365860688%2F042f451c-7e41-4a5f-a4af-43f6f1ffd026-1020x612.jpeg>
 You can get close to crocs on the airboat – just not too close. Photograph: 
Wild Bush Luxury 
7pm, dinner

Back at the lodge we all freshen up before meeting for dinner at the single 
long table. It’s a convivial dinner party of strangers, but in the small and 
friendly group no one stays strangers for long.

The chef, Glen introduces himself and details the dinner to come. A delicious 
and tender marinated kangaroo skewer on sweet potato and wild rocket for 
starter, followed by a succulent barramundi steak with a salsa mix and slightly 
dry polenta, with prosciutto wrapped beans on the side for main. Dessert is a 
very rich tiramisu, heavy on the cream. Wines are paired.

Bamurru’s very down to earth general manager, John Cooper, invites the guests 
out to the deck where a fire is crackling, and we settle in for the evening.


Lighting the way with the provided torch I head back to my bungalow, and the 
night is quiet, save for the rustling wallabies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366403027%2Fc36b493b-3301-48dd-9f7b-aa5604493ffa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366403027%2Fc36b493b-3301-48dd-9f7b-aa5604493ffa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dinner at Bamurru – there is a focus on native ingredients but also classics 
like tiramisu. Photograph: Wild Bush Luxury./Supplied. 
Saturday


Dawn, wildlife wake-up call and airboat


I’m up early twice. The first time is a little before dawn courtesy of a few 
blue winged kookaburras in a nearby tree. The second wakeup is more welcome, as 
the sun rises over the long grass and blinks into the bungalow at the foot of 
my bed. The mesh glows in the morning light, and the animals begin to stir. I’m 
already on safari and I’m not even out of bed yet.

After a comfortably late breakfast of eggs and bacon and a continental buffet, 
we head towards the airboats. Expectations are high after other guests raved 
about it last night. The boats sit low and flat, with an enormous fan to push 
it over the reeds and grasses of the wetlands. We don our earmuffs and take our 
seats, and our guide, Logan, zooms across the open floodplain. The airboats get 
us incredibly close to it all – I feel much more a part of the environment than 
a sequestered observer.

Thousands of magpie geese, egrets, and the odd jabiru lift to the air as we 
chase flocks like a kelpie rounding up seagulls. Herds of buffalo raise their 
heads nonchalantly, staring at the boat before galloping away awkwardly through 
the knee high water.

A slow cruise around the tree line finds three crocodiles – much to the 
excitement of the kids in our group of seven. Tall ghostly gums reflect on the 
still, glassy water, and when the boat is stopped and the engine off, it is 
quiet and peaceful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366031329%2Fe9411aac-6a4a-42fd-8ba6-95b96046029d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366031329%2Fe9411aac-6a4a-42fd-8ba6-95b96046029d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 On safari in the Northern Territory. Photograph: Wild Bush Luxury/Supplied. 
 12pm, lunch and down-time


Lunch is a surprisingly filling meal of still warm rolls and a sweet potato 
and persian fetta salad so delicious I try to replicate it as soon as I get 
home. Then it’s a few hours of welcome downtime to read by the pool with a 
drink in hand and watch the wildlife amble around the deck munching on the 
grass and pandanus – this is after all a luxury retreat, and not an action 
adventure. A helicopter from the station flies overhead, prompting thousands of 
disturbed birds to take flight.

R&R is cut a little short so we can embark on our river cruise earlier and 
catch the low tide. The banks of the long and winding Sampan river are exposed 
and now is our best chance of seeing crocs (not that missing out was ever a 
danger in a region with the world’s highest concentration of the reptile.) A 
short drive takes us through part of Swim Creek station and past the airfield, 
which was new to me but not for those who flew in.

The cruise is pleasant but hot with the afternoon sun coming in low, rendering 
the canopy nearly redundant. Larissa and John hunt out more than a dozen crocs 
sunning themselves in the mud, and point out the bird life. If this is your 
first chance to see the top end’s reptilian superstars then you won’t be 
disappointed but for me it had nothing on the morning’s airboat trip.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366538261%2F8a6d9c22-ab95-47cc-85cd-d612fa02dde5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366538261%2F8a6d9c22-ab95-47cc-85cd-d612fa02dde5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Water lillies – outback style at Bamurru plains. Photograph: Wild Bush 
Luxury/Supplied. 
7pm, dinner and bonfire


Dinner is even better than the night before, and chef Glen generously gives us 
his recipe for the world’s best pureed cauliflower cheese, as well as a few 
other tricks to make vegetables taste like anything but. Sharp and delicious 
scallop ceviche is served with wasabi, and the following duck confit falls off 
the bone. Blueberry pannacotta to finish leaves us feeling very satisfied.

Over the course of dinner John details the ethos of Bamurru, as envisioned by 
the owner, Charles Carlow. Bamurru is powered primarily by a bank of solar 
panels on site, with a back up generator which goes through just 30 litres of 
fuel a day. It isgeared towards conservation 
<http://www.bamurruplains.com/about-us/eco-credentials> and minimising its 
environmental footprint – all cans and bottles are driven to town for 
recycling, which has the added benefit of a small cashback through the NT’s 
recycling scheme.

I ask John if they intend to build more bungalows and increase the number of 
guests – it’s largely booked up most weeks – but John says it’s unlikely. The 
obvious economic incentives are not worth the impact it would have on the guest 
experience. He gestures around the table: imagine another 10 people sitting 
here? You wouldn’t get to know everyone like you do with this small group. John 
tells me of a recent visit to another nearby resort, where the first thing he 
noticed was a name-tag on a staff member. He doesn’t want Bamurru to be the 
kind of place where staff need name-tags.

The night moves again to the fire, and then later the self-serve bar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366713590%2Fc5ebda31-d4a2-42b5-8fe5-6ce4ee27c199-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Bamurru%20Plains%3A%20luxury%20safari%2C%20the%20Australian%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2F48-hours-in-bamurru-plains-luxury-safari-the-australian-way%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437366713590%2Fc5ebda31-d4a2-42b5-8fe5-6ce4ee27c199-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Taking to the waterways in the Northern Territory. Photograph: Wild Bush 
Luxury/Supplied. 
 Sunday


The kookaburras are at it again, and I wonder if the lodge offers a hunting 
package. Probably not. Breakfast is scrambled eggs and smoked salmon as the 
main meal. The serve-yourself coffee pod machines and tea are popular today.

Those who are here for another night gather for their morning’s activity, and 
we say our goodbyes.

I had been offered the chance to go on another airboat tour, and while it is 
supremely tempting, I don’t feel like I’ve spent enough time enjoying the 
actual lodge. After breakfast I wander around the site – as far as it’s safe to 
go after a warning not to get between the buffalo and the wetlands. Then I 
enjoy the time to myself by the pool, watching nature and enjoying the 
remoteness. A young buffalo calf wobble past the deck on shaky legs.

All too soon, it’s home time for me. Larissa drives me back to my car, and I 
head back to civilisation. About 45 minutes out my phone starts to beep, 
signalling my return to the world. It’s a tempting thought to turn back around.

Price

The Ultimate Wilderness Experience is $950 per adult, per night twin-share and 
includes all meals, beverages and activities. The Floodplain Chillout is $550, 
but doesn’t include activities which range from $150 for a 4WD safari to $2,245 
for full day tour to Arnhem Land by small plane.

The Guardian was a guest of Bamurru Plains.

 