
Joshua Oppenheimer

The Texan director’s feature debut, The Act of Killing (2012), and its 
follow-up,The Look of Silence (2014), explore the aftermath of massacres in 
Indonesia. Both were nominated for Oscars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77659f8cd2f816aedb18bbffffdb2687f850d496%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77659f8cd2f816aedb18bbffffdb2687f850d496%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Joshua Oppenheimer, photographed at home in Copenhagen. Photograph: Katherine 
Anne Rose for the Observer 
Salaam Cinema <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q8rCjQ8gbEE>, Mohsen 
Makhmalbaf, 1995

For this film, Mohsen Makhmalbaf announces a casting call: thousands of people 
turn up and there’s a riot to get in. Each participant is channelling their 
worries and hopes into the desire to be in a film. He interacts with them in 
this dictatorial way, which makes the film ultimately about power and 
authority. He demands that people cry on command. One woman becomes so 
frustrated that she does start to cry, so he says OK, you’ve made it. And she’s 
so happy, but then there’s the disappointment as she realises this was her 
moment on screen. She thought there’d be a script and a real film to make 
afterwards. It’s a devastating, beautiful film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf86fa2d3aa0be1d86789d7beb4f947d47156114%2F0_75_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf86fa2d3aa0be1d86789d7beb4f947d47156114%2F0_75_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 A scene from Close-Up by Abbas Kiarostami. 
Close Up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sSynUYdf4Lg>, Abbas Kiarostami, 1990

A man pretends to be Mohsen Makhmalbaf, the director of Salaam Cinema. He 
insinuates himself into a family’s life out of loneliness, to make friends. At 
one point the family realise he’s not really the director and have him 
arrested. The film follows this man’s trial in an Iranian court, and then the 
real Mohsen Makhmalbaf meets the man and takes him to the family.


The impostor’s fragility ultimately embodies what it means to be poor and 
struggling in life, and through that you feel how sad it is that we live in a 
world where people are measured by wealth and power, and the cruelty that any 
human being could ever feel insignificant.

Gates of Heaven <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5P1pTey4rpI>, Errol Morris, 
1978

This was Errol Morris’s first film. He was taking his time with it so Werner 
Herzog promised “If you finish this film I will eat my shoe,”which he did 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Herzog_Eats_His_Shoe>. It’s about two 
families in California who run pet cemeteries, and it looks at humans’ 
relationships to their pets. It’s an odd mystery, a pet. We eat animals, we use 
them for labour, but then we keep them in our home as objects upon which we 
project love that we maybe lack elsewhere. Morris has these carefully crafted 
tableaux: there’s one continuous shot where a woman has a 15-minute lament, 
complaining about aspects of her life, and that’s where the film becomes 
something altogether greater and more mysterious.

Loss Is to Be Expected, Ulrich Seidl, 1992 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6_oxI7ojV5E>

This was made shortly after the fall of communism in eastern Europe and it 
looks at two communities on either side of the Czech-Austrian border. There’s 
an elderly man in Austria looking for a new wife, and he meets a lone single 
woman on the Czech side of the border.

There are these amazing scenes where they go on a date to a funfair and then 
to a sex museum. She’s much more sexually comfortable than he is, which is a 
source of incredible comedy. But it’s about desire and love and the fulfilling 
of our quotidian needs and the necessary, wilful blindness towards our deeper 
needs because ultimately, to contemplate those needs is to contemplate our own 
mortality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52902cd3831173fccf95b196ab458ce2687c26a9%2F0_61_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52902cd3831173fccf95b196ab458ce2687c26a9%2F0_61_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 A scene from The Hour of the Furnaces. Photograph: Tricontinental films 
The Hour of the Furnaces <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9_I5_oMrWYo>, 
Octavia Getino and Fernando e Solanas, 1968

This is a furious, angry film about neocolonialism in Argentina, and it’s the 
most devastating look at colonialism I’ve seen in nonfiction films. The 
sections about Argentina’s oligarchy, and the exploitation on which they 
thrived, are so poetically rendered that you relate to the horror of 
dictatorship purely through your emotions.

It was made secretly and was screened at illegal opposition meetings, in 
defiance of the authoritarian rule. People were arrested for screening it. I 
imagine that seeing it at the time you would come out feeling like you’d have 
to do something about the situation. There are sections ofThe Act of Killing 
where I surely had this film in the back of my head.KB

Lucy Walker: ‘The Up series showed me what the medium was capable of’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b9c8d7e361261bcd7b7adb5e7ed481773793e03%2F0_298_3992_2394%2F3992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b9c8d7e361261bcd7b7adb5e7ed481773793e03%2F0_298_3992_2394%2F3992.jpg>
 Director Lucy Walker. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
British director Lucy Walker has been Oscar-nominated twice, for Waste Land 
(2010) andThe Tsunami and the Cherry Blossom (2011). She is currently working 
on a follow-up toBuena Vista Social Club.

Hoop Dreams <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ph2Y-epihlk>, Steve James, 1994

Hoop Dreams follows two very talented African American boys in Chicago who get 
a basketball scholarship to go to a prestigious, predominantly white high 
school. It follows them for five years and it’s a spectacular example of a 
longitudinal documentary where you get to glimpse the machinery of life. You 
get a real sense of time unfolding and the big forces that act on us. The 
twists and turns are subtle, nothing much happens, and yet it feels incredibly 
dramatic and compelling because it’s so well crafted and the characters are so 
beautifully rendered. I watched it repeatedly when I was making my first film,
Devil’s Playground <http://lucywalkerfilm.com/>, because it follows young 
people through this pivotal period in their lives, and I was trying to 
understand how you could get so much narrative, emotion and character into a 
film. There’s a scene where the mum is icing a birthday cake for her son’s 16th 
birthday. It’s an interview, in the sense that the film-maker is asking her 
questions and she’s talking to camera, but it doesn’t feel like one, it’s so 
much more cinematic and compelling and the activity is so perfect.

Streetwise <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jtwv9h5CSKE>, Martin Bell, 1984


This film had its beginnings in a photojournalism assignment for Life magazine 
by the photographerMary Ellen Mark  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2015/may/26/mary-ellen-mark-legendary-photographs-in-pictures>
about a group of street kids living in Seattle. She persuaded her husband, 
Martin Bell, to make a film about them. It’s just so intimate that it’s hard to 
believe the film-maker is actually in the room with these kids. It’s like he’s 
put on a cloak of invisibility. I could have chosen any number of cinema vérité 
masterpieces but for some reason this moves me. I’ve made quite a few films 
with young people and it’s fascinating because the plot of their lives is so 
close to the surface: one conversation can change the course of your life when 
you’re young in a way that is rare when you’re older – and you can capture that 
nano-second when the course of a life’s direction is altered. When you put a 
camera and a film crew into a room, the observer’s paradox is almost always 
true – you can’t capture life because you’re in the way of it. But these kids 
seem unaware of the camera and they’re behaving in a way that feels like life 
unfolding. The filmmaker is so present with them, you can’t help but understand 
what they’re going through, and to understand is to feel empathy and to want to 
help.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8e5f3b392336ee7ab91c19118c2601199526f9a%2F0_0_1489_893%2F1489.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8e5f3b392336ee7ab91c19118c2601199526f9a%2F0_0_1489_893%2F1489.jpg>
 The Five Obstructions by Lars Von Trier. 
The Five Obstructions <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YPmRMipnSM>, Lars von 
Trier and Jørgen Leth, 2003


In this underrated film the iconoclastic Danish director Lars von Trier 
challenges experimental film-maker Jørgen Leth to remake one of his earlier 
films,The Perfect Human 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8a5TTsN2MGU&ebc=ANyPxKryB0m-mRb5pzUzC78TQa8fLFweWjHm29NwoEKpD_hVtBqDbxiYZeu10HMcZAlS2yO2AZvILGxVZCBDsps8lS8ERpfatw>
, five times, each time with a different creative constraint. The first 
“obstruction” imposed by von Trier, for example, was that the film had to be 
made in Cuba, using shots of no more than 12 frames. Another was that it had to 
be made as a cartoon. It’s basically these two creative egos going up against 
each other and it gives a fascinating insight into the film-making process, 
what goes on in a director’s head and how you cope with stress and constraint 
and challenge. It’s delicious and playful and there’s never a dull moment 
watching these two maestros needling each other.

The Gleaners and I 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jn8nHJTb_LY&ebc=ANyPxKqm9Up5soUvZT0pI9y0LE62KrG-5AJqQlzm9smuyY88DuHWe3DKDOU6a-eLmDUBLL7q1hm93i6YZ2NUs_j8zRujgy6tSA>
, Agnès Varda, 2000

This film was made during the early days of the hand-held digital camera, when 
for the first time you could capture something high-quality enough to show on a 
big screen on a camera that would fit in your handbag. It’s an essay about the 
people who pick through other people’s leftovers, whether it be the remains of 
the harvest in the countryside, or in cities. It’s very casual, but Varda is so 
astute and the quality of the film-making is such that it becomes something 
very beautiful, a meditation on life. We’re having this golden age of 
documentary right now and it’s being driven by technology. In the past you 
would need to write a script first because the editing process was so laborious 
but now you can shoot a whole bunch of stuff and capture life in a way that you 
couldn’t before and this film, shot by a 72-year-old woman using a very low-key 
format, shows you just what level of artistry is possible.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd530aadea9f4d3a639b5fe86b8617d91cc09af27%2F0_108_1685_1011%2F1685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd530aadea9f4d3a639b5fe86b8617d91cc09af27%2F0_108_1685_1011%2F1685.jpg>
 Jackie in 21Up, 1978. Photograph: ITV 
Up series <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UcrTX6x_qpw>, Michael Apted, 1964

I’m fascinated by longitudinal film-making and this series, which has followed 
the lives of 14 British children since 1964, when they were seven years old, 
showed me what the medium was capable of. This series is head and shoulders 
above any other attempt to record dramatically a whole human life. And because 
it’s a whole group of people, you learn not just about the individual but also 
about the system in which they’re living. I can’t think of any other artefact 
in our culture that can tell us so much about Britain in our lifetime and how 
society is evolving as this body of work. It’s illuminating and fascinating and 
it’s one of the things that inspired me to do the work that I do.JO’C

Alex Gibney: ‘Fake home movies don’t bother me – you might as well object to 
dreams’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafce938f654a1ce23ee86233443ff91fc49891ab%2F0_144_4926_2956%2F4926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fafce938f654a1ce23ee86233443ff91fc49891ab%2F0_144_4926_2956%2F4926.jpg>
 Going Clear director Alex Gibney. Photograph: Larry Busacca/Getty Images 
Alex Gibney’s award-winning films include Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room 
(2005),Taxi to the Dark Side (2007) and Mea Maxima Culpa: Silence in the House 
of God(2012). Last year he released documentaries on Scientology and Steve 
Jobs. He says: “I don’t believe in ‘five best films’. But I do believe in 
influential films. These are five of mine.”

Night and Fog <http://www.liveleak.com/view?i=f32_1324912040>, Alain Resnais, 
1955

What really impressed me about this film was its concision. It’s about the 
Holocaust, but it has a simple and horrible beauty to it, because it describes 
the terrifying nature of the Holocaust through a powerful series of images and 
a narration that was specific, naming the collections of items of the prisoners 
and survivors. It’s the cruel poetry of detail that is so heartbreaking: the 
handles of the ovens, the fingernail scrapings on the ceilings of the cells. We 
see piles of combs, shaving brushes, shoes and a vast mountain of human hair. 
It took something so horrible but found a way to go to the heart of the matter 
through simple details.

Gimme Shelter  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPNeh4d9guk&ebc=ANyPxKoxl8hdDDfdLRgQLkgNgkVBjtONYAVAltzHyfTiIxL97sFA2DCwia8woBlBv0ZNHqlKmtNBq0shc68ZDPDb_r9MmYvxYg>
, Albert and David Maysles, Charlotte Zwerin 1970

Here you see the Rolling Stones on tour singing about sympathy for the devil, 
but their posturing about satanism blows back at them at the Altamont music 
festival. It’s structured like a detective story: it starts with a murder – a 
Hell’s Angel stabs somebody who seems to have a gun in the audience – and then 
you go back in time. Maybe one of the most powerful scenes is of the Stones 
listening to a playback of Wild Horses in the studio. It’s stunning in its 
simplicity. That film went way beyond a concert show; it celebrates music but 
it’s really about a moment in time and how dark forces get unleashed. It’s 
powerful both in its observation and its analysis, which is a rare combination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F589e5d4d949378ee2c385acfd4adc9b065452b23%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F589e5d4d949378ee2c385acfd4adc9b065452b23%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Leon Gast’s When We Were Kings. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
When We Were Kings  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IfUHYUpmTFs>, Leon Gast, 
1996

This is maybe the greatest sport film ever made. It has wonderful cinema 
vérité footage of the “Rumble in the Jungle”, the famous 1974 fight between 
Muhammad Ali and George Foreman. Gast has the most magnificent material, 
particularly in Muhammad Ali on a run, dancing, gooning for the camera, at his 
most charismatic. And then the brooding figure of George Foreman. But Gast 
wasn’t able to put that footage together, and in comes Taylor Hackford, shoots 
some interviews with people who were there, notably George Plimpton and Norman 
Mailer, and through their recollection you also have a sense of analysis and 
understanding rather than mere observation. So it’s combining those two things 
in the film that really is magnificent.

Stories We Tell <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ytq4VZ2Nyxg>, Sarah Polley, 
2012

This is a detective story that’s very much in the first person. It’s about 
identity, trying to understand your childhood, and ultimately paternity. Sarah 
Polley is digging back into the relationship between her mother and father, who 
she discovers isn’t her biological father. In some quarters she was criticised 
for using a series of fictional home movies that she manufactured, but it 
didn’t bother me at all – they might as well object to dreams and memories, 
because those are everyday recreations. The trick is finding the poetry in 
them. It’s a very powerful film about memory and exploration and love, because 
she comes to appreciate her adoptive father in a way she might not otherwise 
have done.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a8f2917540cca627042318bc7ac7f3df1e2d88d%2F67_0_1405_843%2F1405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a8f2917540cca627042318bc7ac7f3df1e2d88d%2F67_0_1405_843%2F1405.jpg>
 Waltz With Bashir, an animated documentary. 
Waltz With Bashir  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_J9uoLMhMhs>, Ari Folman, 
2008

Part of the small but growing category of the animated documentary, Waltz With 
Bashir is really a film about repressed memory, and the recollection of Israeli 
soldiers trying to understand why they’re having these nightmares. The idea of 
using animation to convey what is mostly going on inside their heads, in their 
imaginations, is such a powerful one. It doesn’t become clear until almost the 
end that the soldiers all took part in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camp 
massacre in Lebanon in 1982. And the very end of the film includes just the 
slightest bit of real footage: a woman wailing in the wake of that massacre. It 
really is one of the most poignant films about the trauma of war. KB

Kim Longinotto: ‘All the good TV documentaries are on the BBC at the moment’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40808706d5b67404259bef96a053d915fd99a35e%2F0_182_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40808706d5b67404259bef96a053d915fd99a35e%2F0_182_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Film-maker Kim Longinotto. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
British film-maker Kim Longinotto tackles themes such as female genital 
mutilation (The Day I Will Never Forget) and women fighting abuse (Sisters in 
Law). Her most recent film, Dreamcatcher, is on Chicago women trying to leave 
the sex industry.

Sherman’s March <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MOOgDDrcCjg>, Ross McElwee, 
1986

I saw this at film school, then watched it again at a festival a couple of 
years ago and thought it was so charming, so good. It has a very simple 
premise. The director is meant to be making a film about General Sherman’s 
march through Georgia during the American civil war, but he falls out of love 
with the idea. Instead, the film becomes about his attempts to find a 
girlfriend, shot as a kind of video diary – an approach that was completely new 
at the time. It’s so candid and affectionate and lovely, and everyone at the 
festival loved it. Not many films bear rewatching, but this one does.

Tales of the Grim Sleeper <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MspO5rC6Vps>, Nick 
Broomfield, 21

Nick Broomfield has become much more serious and political in recent years and 
this is a difficult and committed film. It’s about a man who was arrested in 
2010 for killing as many as 100 prostitutes in Los Angeles over a period of 25 
years. What’s extraordinary is how he managed to get away with it for so long – 
the police didn’t pursue because his victims were mostly black prostitutes. 
It’s a very timely film, in terms of Black Lives Matter and police abuses in 
the US, and I thought he got it just right. It’s also a really good crime story.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb393f0d3bf1e05c13252621718c4c9b466165821%2F196_0_3319_1992%2F3319.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb393f0d3bf1e05c13252621718c4c9b466165821%2F196_0_3319_1992%2F3319.jpg>
 Solar Mamas. 
Solar Mamas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oGMgHZ1WzxA>, Jehane Noujaim and 
Mona Eldaief, 2012

This is a film about Bedouin women trying to get solar energy in their village 
in Jordan. It follows one woman travelling to a college in India to become a 
solar engineer. I like it because it’s not saying, “Oh, look at these poor 
women.” Instead, it shows women actively changing their lives and I found that 
very inspiring. So many documentaries tell you what to think. This one doesn’t 
– it puts you straight into the story and you get to know the characters just 
by watching them. It was part of a very good BBC series on poverty. That’s 
where all the good TV documentaries are at the moment: on the BBC.

Virunga <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxXf2Vxj_EU>, Orlando von Einsiedel, 
2014

I watched this in the cinema, which was good because it’s very beautifully 
filmed – a real spectacle. It’s set in a reserve in the Congo, which is home to 
the last mountain gorillas on earth and it follows the people who are trying to 
save them, as well as the corrupt people trying to get the land to drill oil. 
There’s a moment when the people in a neighbouring village are attacked. It was 
filmed so well, I don’t know how they did it. You’re right in the thick of it 
and you feel so angry, because you know it all comes down to corruption and 
greed.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cb2812a0b5443b5834444a43ac989bdc39fc71c%2F66_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cb2812a0b5443b5834444a43ac989bdc39fc71c%2F66_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Five Broken Cameras. 
Five Broken Cameras <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q_93nOqwmhU>, Emad 
Burnat, Guy Davidi, 2011

This is about a Palestinian man who films the destruction of his village’s 
olive groves by the Israeli army. His cameras keep getting broken by the 
Israelis, hence the title, but he just kept filming. I think he was feeling: 
“There’s an incredible wrong being done to my people, I’m going to film it, 
even if I die doing it.” Then he linked up with an Israeli film-maker, who 
edited the footage. I remember people saying he shouldn’t have worked with an 
Israeli, but I thought it was so great that they came together and made 
something very powerful which showed us what is really going on in Palestine. KF

James Marsh: ‘In my view there should be no boundaries to film-making’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17b19054723507e21dc664cf67229a45dcff3de4%2F0_181_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17b19054723507e21dc664cf67229a45dcff3de4%2F0_181_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 James Marsh at the 2015 Palm Springs film festival. Photograph: C 
Flanigan/Getty Images 
James Marsh is a British film-maker, best known for the Oscar-winning 
documentaryMan on Wire (2008) and the acclaimed Stephen Hawking biopic, The 
Theory of Everything.

Man with a Movie Camera <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z97Pa0ICpn8>, Dziga 
Vertov, 1929

This was the first truly subversive, playful documentary. It’s notionally a 
day in the life of a city in the Soviet Union and so it has, on a purely 
sociological/historical level, great value. But what it does beyond that is to 
show you the means of production: the filming, the cutting room, the editing – 
all the things that are going into the making of this film. It’s way before its 
time, theTristram Shandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/28/100-best-novels-tristram-shandy-sterne>
 of documentaries, if you like. It’s so inventive and it has techniques that, 
87 years later, still look pretty revolutionary: the freeze frames and slow 
motion. It’s just full of inventive and brilliant formal ideas as well as being 
a very beautiful film to watch. And it’s informative too, showing us the Soviet 
Union in a halcyon period before Stalin’s terror, when you felt that things 
were still possible in a new political context. Of course we now know that 
Vertov suffered in the Stalin era, as many other independent artists would have 
done, but there’s a sort of optimism and a playfulness to it that you wouldn’t 
expect from a Soviet documentary from 1929.

Le Sang des Bêtes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9LBRr2bGGUE>, Georges 
Franju, 1949

This is a documentary about an abattoir that was made in Paris just after the 
second world war. If the film had been shot in colour it would be unwatchable, 
it’s so gory and weird and disturbing, but it’s in black and white and so it 
becomes a bit more abstract. There are images in that film that I think are 
some of the most powerful I’ve ever seen. There’s a surreal sequence where lots 
of sheep have been beheaded and they’re all dancing without their heads on this 
conveyor belt. It’s like a bit of choreographed horror, but it’s all real. The 
director Georges Franju went on to have a career doing very artistic horror 
movies in French cinema, most famously a film calledLes Yeux Sans Visage. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/18/eyes-without-a-face-dvd-review-georges-franju>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6476ece487a19dd338d2f8c7c3a519021cd30d9%2F0_49_1072_643%2F1072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6476ece487a19dd338d2f8c7c3a519021cd30d9%2F0_49_1072_643%2F1072.jpg>
 The War Game by Peter Watkins. 
The War Game 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VWr7omWJHyo&list=PLXE1pLvhfDyBpUKqyxqHhAxxRi9RW0Bdc>
, Peter Watkins, 1965

In this film, Watkins takes a possible scenario – a nuclear attack on London – 
and shows you very carefully, each step of the way, what is likely to happen. 
It was banned by the BBC for many years because it was just too harrowing a 
depiction of a reality that everyone at that time was very concerned about: 
this was in the middle of the cold war and at the time there were dozens of 
warheads pointing at us. It’s like a documentary made by Brecht – you’re 
staging something to flush out a reaction in the audience, and that reaction is 
one of utter horror. Some people would say this is not a documentary because 
everything was staged, but it’s a speculative documentary – the director is 
saying: “This is how it could be and I’m going to show you this in a way that’s 
very truthful.” It’s very responsible, even if the imagery is very disturbing: 
you’re seeing bobbies firing at people in the street, people with their clothes 
burned off. His information is sourced directly from the government and based 
on scientific fact, so the bed of it is factual, and people responded to it as 
if it were a real documentary.

It’s a brilliant and bold piece of film-making. He’s reinventing the 
documentary and subverting it. In my view there should be no rules and no 
boundaries to film-making, and the impact this film had shows you how much he 
got right.

The Battle of Chile <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b5GeEzBKGsQ>, Patricio 
Guzmán, 1975, 1976, 1979

This is a trilogy of films that chronicles the coup against the democratically 
elected leftwing government of Salvador Allende. It shows you the breakdown of 
a society and the triumph of the greater evil once there’s a political vacuum, 
so it’s a very strongly political film but it’s also, dare I say it, incredibly 
exciting. For me, this is the first great example of a film-maker being there 
while it’s all actually happening and there are moments in it that are utterly 
heartbreaking. Notoriously, there’s one point where they are filming a 
demonstration and you hear a gunshot and you see the camera just fall down and 
tip over and the cameraman has been shot and killed. That shows you the terror 
of these situations, where no one is safe from the forces of darkness, but also 
the commitment of the film-maker to document this, to extract a proper 
historical document from these terrible events. It’s a work of great bravery 
and definitive historical significance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89d50c98a98c3b8c28237475554c74249ac50053%2F413_72_788_473%2F788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89d50c98a98c3b8c28237475554c74249ac50053%2F413_72_788_473%2F788.jpg>
 Primate. 
Primate <http://www.zipporah.com/films/32>, Frederick Wiseman, 1974

Wiseman is probably my favourite film-maker in fiction or nonfiction, and 
Primate meant a lot to me because I made a film [Project Nim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142243/project-nim>] that emerged from 
some of its ideas. It’s a portrait of a primate experimental laboratory in 
Texas and there’s imagery that you cannot forget. You see operations on animals 
that are still alive, their brains being looked at while they’re still 
twitching around, so it’s very disturbing and upsetting. It’s an interesting 
window on the hubris of science, which does things for its own sake because it 
can do them. A lot of the experiments done in this laboratory seem utterly 
pointless.

Wiseman is a purist. He doesn’t use commentary, he doesn’t use music, he 
doesn’t use interviews, he just observes things and then finds a rhythm in his 
cutting room to show you the reality, usually of an institution, and the human 
fallibilities of institutions.Primate is really about the humans, not the 
animals. The animals hold a mirror up to people in that institution, and we 
don’t pass that test very well.J’OC

Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy: ‘Documentaries can change the way people look at things’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F528b674af891f11feaafe81430f44d8659a9db83%2F0_577_1656_994%2F1656.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F528b674af891f11feaafe81430f44d8659a9db83%2F0_577_1656_994%2F1656.jpg>
 Oscar-winner Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy. Photograph: Niaz Ali/Demotix/Corbis 
The journalist and film-maker Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy was born in Karachi, 
Pakistan. Her filmsSaving Face (2012), about acid attacks in Pakistan, and A 
Girl in the River (2015), which tackled the subject of honour killings, both 
won Oscars for best short subject documentary.

Amy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/02/amy-asif-kapadia-documentary-amy-winehouse>
, Asif Kapadia, 2015

It’s so rare that someone’s life has been so well documented. From when Amy 
Winehouse was very young right up to the time she died, people were filming 
her: her family, her friends, the media. I absolutely loved the way Asif 
Kapadia told her story using all that footage – as if he was with Amy her whole 
life. As a viewer, you really get to know her and understand what she went 
through. You’re cheering her on, hoping that she does get over her addiction, 
does beat the paparazzi, does come out on top. The film made me realise how 
much of her life was not in her hands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdefef37386cd9a690e99f025aeeb778ddb1a3f19%2F38_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdefef37386cd9a690e99f025aeeb778ddb1a3f19%2F38_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Iraq in Fragments. Photograph: BBC/Quicksilver Media 
Iraq in Fragments <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTQXQVNJ6cI>, James 
Longley, 2006

I was amazed that this film was shot on a camcorder, because it was so 
beautiful and it showed Iraq in a completely different light. All the images 
coming out of Iraq at the time were images of war. This showed what everyday 
life felt like – it was almost as if the director was shutting the war out. You 
felt the violence, but he doesn’t show it. The film records three different 
perspectives. One storyline follows a young Sunni boy without a father in 
Baghdad, another shows you the followers of the Shia cleric Moqtada al-Sadr in 
the south, and in the third you’re with a Kurdish family in the north who are 
happy the Americans are there. It also tracks how Iraq has changed from one 
generation to the next.

Buena Vista Social Club <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mwyGPg8cYvY>, Wim 
Wenders, 1999

Cuba was a mystery to many people when this film was made. It was under 
sanctions and closed off to the US. WithBuena Vista Social Club, it was as if 
Wim Wenders put aside the sanctions, the politics, and played with the language 
of music. These musicians and their stories moved people, whatever their 
politics. The film put you on the streets of Havana, you saw how people ate, 
how they interacted with each other, the way they danced and sang. Even without 
being political, the film is political, because it shows you what life was like 
inside Cuba at a time when the only perspective you got on the country was 
through a news lens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82ff626a92bb9124d916735077839eb4e997c236%2F0_40_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82ff626a92bb9124d916735077839eb4e997c236%2F0_40_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 The Thin Blue Line. 
The Thin Blue Line <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OVltIJHDO3Y>, Errol 
Morris, 1988

This film showed me that documentaries can change the way people look at 
things. It’s centred on a murder that took place in 1976: a young man stole a 
car, picked up a hitchhiker called Randall Adams and later a policeman was shot 
and killed by someone in the car. Adams was given a life sentence for the 
murder but Morris’s documentary showed, by exploring the testimony and the way 
the police put the case together, that he had been wrongly accused. A year 
after the film came out, Adams was released from prison. That was the bit about 
the movie that really shook me. It oscillated between art and activism. It was 
a gripping drama but it also had an impact in the real world.

Bowling for Columbine <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hH0mSAjp_Jw>, Michael 
Moore, 2002

This was a landmark film for me because it made documentaries popular – people 
who didn’t normally watch documentary films watched this. It tells the story of 
the Columbine high school massacre and the investigations that followed, but 
more than that it tells you about the National Rifle Association, about gun 
violence, about how schools in Michigan had become battlegrounds. His interview 
with Charlton Heston, who was the NRA’s president at that time, was very 
powerful and I remember the scene where he goes into a bank and gets a free 
hunting rifle for opening an account. On the way out, he asks: “Do you think 
it’s a little dangerous handing out guns at a bank?” He told the story 
beautifully and he asked the questions a viewer would want to ask.KF

Franny Armstrong: ‘By the end of Some Kind of Monster, I quite liked Metallica’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F999ab3ffb145946931490115a20946f7a5ef15a6%2F0_122_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F999ab3ffb145946931490115a20946f7a5ef15a6%2F0_122_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
 Franny Armstong, film-maker and green campaigner at home in Camden. 
Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
Franny Armstrong is the UK director of The Age of Stupid, a reflection from 
2055 on climate change,McLibel, about the McDonald’s court case, and Drowned 
Out,, on the fight against the Narmada dam.

Global Report <http://genome.ch.bbc.co.uk/e4b0197498c5404d807c535033b92c03>, 
Peter Armstrong, 1981

This was a BBC documentary made by my father in the 1980s. I remember he took 
me on a trip to New York when I was eight years old and I ended up watching it 
over and over again. It just really blew my mind. I’d never been out of the UK 
and suddenly I was seeing this extreme wealth on show in New York and at the 
same time being hit by the extreme poverty in my dad’s film. I’ve chosen it 
because I think that’s where my whole drive to change things for the better 
came from. It shows five different stories from different parts of the world. 
It’s a bit similar toUnreported World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/25/unreported-world-review-krishnan-guru-murthy-khmer-rouge>
, but back then it was considered groundbreaking. It was telling the stories 
that the rest of the media weren’t telling and the one that stuck with me was 
the story about a little boy my age in India who was having to sell peanuts on 
the side of the road in order to make money for his family. That was my 
introduction to the concept of inequality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32d4847dd2692098059a1391d9f69f07ee69b944%2F0_151_4284_2571%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32d4847dd2692098059a1391d9f69f07ee69b944%2F0_151_4284_2571%2F4284.jpg>
 David Siegel and Jackie Siegel in The Queen of Versailles. Photograph: Lauren 
Greenfield 
The Queen of Versailles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AdJYzgJ4CwI>, Lauren 
Greenfield, 2012

Inequality is obviously one of the key issues of our time and I think this is 
the best film I’ve seen on the subject. The film-makers were following this 
mega-rich American family, the Siegels, who were building the biggest house in 
the United States – a mansion in Florida inspired by Versailles – and then the 
financial crash happens and they lose lots of money and they can’t finish it. 
They’ve got lots of children who are being looked after by a Filipina nanny, 
who we learn hasn’t seen her own children for years because she can’t afford a 
ticket to go home. The thing that really stayed with me was when the children’s 
pet lizard dies because nobody had fed it and it turns out that they didn’t 
even know they had a pet lizard because they’re so overwhelmed with material 
possessions. Everyone in the film is unhappy, the ones who’ve got too much 
stuff and the woman who can’t see her own kids. It’s an amazing example of the 
story of a major global issue being told in a very small way, in this case 
through a dead lizard.

Blackfish <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fLOeH-Oq_1Y>, Gabriela 
Cowperthwaite, 2013

This is perhaps an odd choice, because I haven’t actually seen it as I find 
the subject matter too upsetting, but I’ve chosen it as an example of a 
documentary that sets out to change something material and succeeds. It’s about 
Tilikum, a performing killer whale being kept in captivity at SeaWorld. In the 
last few weeks, SeaWorld has announced thatit will no longer breed orcas in 
captivity or acquire any new ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/17/seaworld-to-stop-breeding-killer-whales-orcas-blackfish>
. It shows how one extremely powerful documentary can work alongside 
campaigning and holding demonstrations to bring about change.

Lessons of Darkness <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EPwmsbbcG6Q>, Werner 
Herzog, 1995

Lessons of Darkness is by the far the most powerful anti-war film I’ve ever 
seen. It was shot just after the first Gulf war, when the Iraqi oilfields were 
famously set on fire. The film is essentially just a continuing aerial shot of 
these burning oilfields set to beautiful music. It’s completely mesmeric and 
beautiful in an apocalyptic way, and it just goes on and on. You can’t believe 
how big, how many and how endless these oilfields are, or how wanton the 
destruction is. And just when you’re thinking “OK, I’ve had enough” it cuts to 
a mother and a child and the mother just tells the story of what happened to 
her family during the war, and then she says, of the boy who is about five 
years old: “This child has never spoken again.” And that’s all there is to the 
film. It’s so bold. You have to be Werner Herzog to get away with that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8f8cccc5987e1ca42eef8c050bdebcddcf5016e%2F0_84_1636_982%2F1636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8f8cccc5987e1ca42eef8c050bdebcddcf5016e%2F0_84_1636_982%2F1636.jpg>
 James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich of Metallica in Some Kind of Monster. 
Some Kind of Monster <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFX6IA_4hH8>, Joe 
Berlinger, Bruce Sinofsky, 2004

I’ve chosen this as a bit of light relief, because it’s rip-roaring fun. The 
film follows the heavy metal band Metallica as they go through group therapy. 
God knows how the directors ever got permission to do it, but it’s just so 
incongruous to see these ageing rockers discussing their personal problems in 
such an open way. What strikes you is the difference between their tough image 
and music and the pettiness of their squabbles over who gets the most credit on 
a record. It follows them over a couple of years while they’re rehearsing a new 
album and searching for a new bass player, but you also get to see them trying 
to balance their personal lives with being heavy metal performers – you see one 
of the band membersgoing to his daughter’s ballet class 
<http://movieweb.com/movie/metallica-some-kind-of-monster/james-hetfield-attends-ballet-class/>
, for example. It’s way more absurd than Spinal Tap, but what’s most strange is 
that by the end of it I actually quite liked their music and I’m really not a 
heavy metal fan. J’OC

Khalo Matabane: ‘Some film-makers try to be objective, but Herzog isn’t shy’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e0ce6821cae44251779a7f78a23b3efc8c18949%2F289_0_1909_1145%2F1909.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e0ce6821cae44251779a7f78a23b3efc8c18949%2F289_0_1909_1145%2F1909.jpg>
 Khalo Matabane at Sydney film festival, 2014. Photograph: Don Arnold/Getty 
Images 
Khalo Matabane was born in Limpopo, South Africa. His documentaries include 
Nelson Mandela: The Myth and Me and Story of a Beautiful Country, a road movie 
that explores post-apartheid South Africa.

When the Levees Broke <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=32MxnMJRtgE>, Spike 
Lee, 2006

I saw this four-part documentary in a single night at a friend’s house in 
Amsterdam and I was completely blown away. It’s an angry, in-depth look at how 
the levees failed in New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina and what happened in 
the aftermath. It really moved me and gave me an insight into race relations in 
the US and what it means to be poor in a developed nation. The images of bodies 
floating in the water and people trying to save themselves and their neighbours 
have really stayed with me, and the music by jazz trumpeter Terence Blanchard – 
who also appears in the movie – is really memorable.

Capturing the Friedmans <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UaatTnsx9-s>, Andrew 
Jarecki, 2003

This felt more to me like fiction than documentary – I remember watching it 
and thinking, can these people be real? It’s about a father and son in Long 
Island who were convicted of molesting children in the 1980s. The film-maker 
Andrew Jarecki discovered that the family had an archive of home movies from 
the time, documenting how they coped with the accusations and the trial. What 
amazed me was the access: I’ve always been curious how Jarecki managed to 
persuade the Friedmans to bare their souls and let him use the videos. The 
result is a disturbing portrait of a very unconventional family.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b60cca4483e6a6af10303444aaf403194c8fa9%2F0_150_3186_1912%2F3186.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b60cca4483e6a6af10303444aaf403194c8fa9%2F0_150_3186_1912%2F3186.jpg>
 Werner Herzog and friend in Grizzly Man. 
Grizzly Man <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gWycuaWJFCM>, Werner Herzog, 2005

What I remember most from this documentary is Werner Herzog’s voice. 
Ostensibly this is a film about a man called Timothy Treadwell, who spent many 
summers living among grizzly bears in Alaska and was eventually mauled to death 
and eaten by an enormous brown bear. Herzog turns it into a much grander 
meditation on loneliness and man’s relationship with nature. Many film-makers 
try to be objective and avoid giving their opinions, but Herzog isn’t shy about 
being authoritative. When he addresses the camera directly in that strange 
monotone of his, it’s almost like you’re listening to the voice of God.

The 3 Rooms of Melancholia <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JJNR7rbg-uY>, 
Pirjo Honkasalo, 2004

I saw this at a film festival in Amsterdam and it had a huge impact on me. It 
confronts you with images of war from Chechnya, with a particular focus on the 
children caught up in the conflict (the second Chechen war that began in 1999). 
It’s incredibly sad but I really liked that it didn’t try to push a war-is-bad 
message on you, like a Michael Moore film. It just provides testimony and lets 
you make up your own mind. I was also struck by the artistic nature of the 
film-making and how images of war and catastrophe can also be beautiful. I’m 
sure people had problems with that, but it meant the images stuck with me long 
after I saw the film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1215c8a6ada80cba5373e126c6352366720cc135%2F0_84_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1215c8a6ada80cba5373e126c6352366720cc135%2F0_84_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 A dance performance from Pina. 
Pina <http://www.pina-film.de/en/>, Wim Wenders, 2011

I didn’t know anything about Pina Bausch or contemporary dance before I saw 
this film – I only went to see it because Wim Wenders directed it. The fact 
that I really enjoyed it and didn’t want it to end just goes to show what power 
documentaries can have. Pina Bausch died just as Wenders was preparing to make 
a film about her, so instead he filmed her dance troupe in Germany talking 
about Pina and re-enacting her work. One detail I really loved was the way he 
disconnected the voiceovers from the images of the people who are speaking. It 
added to the film’s very strong emotional effect.KF

Molly Dineen: ‘Adam Curtis made us look again at our own world’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff09cd54ba706af838f3ca0d40795c79c59ed92b2%2F0_88_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff09cd54ba706af838f3ca0d40795c79c59ed92b2%2F0_88_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
 Film-maker Molly Dineen. Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Born in Canada and raised in Birmingham, documentary director and 
cinematographer Molly Dineen won Baftas for her 1993 seriesThe Ark and 2007 film
The Lie of the Land, and Royal Television Society awards for 1987’s Home from 
the Hill and 1989’s Heart of the Angel.

Into Eternity <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qoyKe-HxmFk>, Michael Madsen, 
2010

I saw this when I was on a jury at a documentary festival in Nyon, and it was 
really unexpected. It’s about Finland burying its nuclear waste in a deep, deep 
cavern, with two diggers silently burrowing into the bedrock. That’s intercut 
with interviews with scientists talking about how you can leave a signal for 
future civilisations not to go into this burial chamber. This stuff is so toxic 
for 100,000 years, so we’re not talking about any sort of signposting we will 
understand; there may be whole different ways of communication. There was 
something really affecting about that. And the interviews are fabulous, because 
they’re very unpromising – just straight-on head-and-shoulders shots of 
scientists – but they’re humorous and warm and compassionate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-27%23img-27&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63128474fa10109731e187d508279feb5d9103c5%2F0_0_2047_1228%2F2047.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-27%23img-27>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-27%23img-27&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63128474fa10109731e187d508279feb5d9103c5%2F0_0_2047_1228%2F2047.jpg>
 Le Joli Mai. 
Le Joli Mai <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oev6gGMTF9o>, Chris Marker and 
Pierre Lhomme, 1963

They showed this to us when I first went to the National Film School and I 
absolutely loved it. It’s about the beautiful month of May in Paris, and it 
starts with a voiceover by actress Simone Signoret, saying as only French 
people could, “It’s the most beautiful city in the world and against this set, 
8 million Parisians act out a play.” And it’s this fantastic springboard into a 
series of observed vignettes: famous people, shopkeepers, passers-by, mothers, 
sons, black, white, men, women.

It’s like a wonderful complex tapestry – without wanting to sound like a 
pillock – of life. And this was the first time France hadn’t been at war since 
1939, so there’s this beautiful feeling about it.

Aileen: Life and Death of a Serial Killer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u5G3Tye-cu4>, Nick Broomfield And Joan 
Churchill, 2003

This is the last interview with Aileen Wuornos [who killed seven men in 
Florida in 1989-90] before she’s executed. There’s a very interesting tension 
as to whose film it is. She sees it as her opportunity to set the record 
straight, saying it was self-protection – I thought she came across well and I 
was incredibly moved by her situation. But on the other hand Nick and Joan are 
making the film about her. At the end it’s very shocking because he asks her a 
question she doesn’t like and she’s screaming, “fuck you, Nick”, as she’s 
dragged off to be executed. And yet you feel it’s something he had to ask, 
because I suppose in a documentary you have to have the film‑maker in charge.

The Power of Nightmares <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EaLPFayD8FA>, Adam 
Curtis, 2004

I think that Adam Curtis is a completely independent voice, and he presents 
situations and current affairs back to us in a radical way.The Power of 
Nightmares is a three-part BBC documentary where he addresses al-Qaida and the 
fact that it’s been very useful for governments to have something to be scared 
of. In the context of the whole world being terrified of al-Qaida, this made 
you rethink received opinion; he made us look again at our own world.

I love his delivery and the way he uses archive material and music. His style 
is so unusual and imaginative and rich and draws on all sorts of other cultural 
references that we have.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-28%23img-28&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58a3f2feb8f1c9087d36b9e92ff037e558caea16%2F0_118_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-28%23img-28>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-28%23img-28&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58a3f2feb8f1c9087d36b9e92ff037e558caea16%2F0_118_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Sisters in Law. 
Sisters in Law <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8HlyxqdGbtA>, Kim Longinotto, 
2006

This is about two female judges in Kumba, Cameroon dealing with cases of 
violence against women. Kim Longinotto and I work in a very similar way, so I 
think I appreciate her films even more. It’s difficult to immerse yourself in 
another culture, and in a different language, when to a European this is a very 
alien community. Kim always puts herself out to the nth degree: she manages to 
be in the right place and observe and tell the story through character. I think 
it’s because of her character – she’s warm, she’s humble, she’s sensible – that 
she relates to people so well, and boy, does it come across here. It’s a 
brilliant film.KB

Angus Macqueen:‘Television’s contribution to the documentary form has been 
huge’
 Angus Macqueen. 
Angus Macqueen is a British film-maker whose latest film is The Legend of 
Shorty (2014), about the search for Mexican drug lord Joaquín “El Chapo” 
Guzmán. Other films includeGulag and The Death of Yugoslavia.

Man on Wire <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EIawNRm9NWM>, James Marsh, 2008

This is the story of an event in 1974, when a French tightrope-walker named 
Philippe Petit decided to sling a wire between the Twin Towers in New York and 
walk across it. It’s not an easy story to tell on film, but they did an 
extraordinary job. I loved the decision to shoot it like a heist movie, showing 
how Petit and his gang staked out the towers and set up the rope without anyone 
noticing. The director got across the lunatic absurdity of the whole project 
and the sense that Petit’s walk was not just a physical feat but also an act of 
art. Too often, documentaries are painful and difficult to watch, but this was 
a real pleasure.

Little Dieter Needs to Fly <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=edxvznzklCA>, 
Werner Herzog, 1998

This is one of Werner Herzog’s less well-known documentaries. It’s an 
astonishing story about a German-American military pilot called Dieter Dengler 
who grew up in Germany during the second world war, then went to America, 
enlisted in the air force and fought in Vietnam. He crashed his plane over Laos 
and was taken prisoner by Laotian troops, then handed over to the Viet Cong. 
Herzog takes him back to revisit the whole ordeal and meet his former captors. 
It’s a remarkable piece of documentary film-making. Herzog later turned the 
story into a feature film calledRescue Dawn, which wasn’t very good. This is 
the one you need to see.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-29%23img-29&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9059726658bcff3d322649479b3587ab7480902%2F0_59_2042_1225%2F2042.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-29%23img-29>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-29%23img-29&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9059726658bcff3d322649479b3587ab7480902%2F0_59_2042_1225%2F2042.jpg>
 A scene from Shoah. 
Shoah <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eN4hPn-ABRw>, Claude Lanzmann, 1985

This is Claude Lanzmann’s nine-hour film about the Holocaust. My film Gulag 
was pretty directly inspired by it, though I would never claim to any of its 
greatness. What’s remarkable aboutShoah is its monumentality: Lanzmann wanted 
to make a monument out of a documentary, and he didn’t care if you thought it 
was too long because the extraordinary nature of this event – the organised, 
mechanical destruction of human beings over an extended period of time – cannot 
be told in 45 minutes or an hour. It’s painful to watch but magnificently made. 
His meeting with Jan Karski, the Pole who reported what was going on in the 
Warsaw ghetto to the allied governments, is almost a film in itself. Lanzmann 
also finds some of the perpetrators and gets them to talk. Once you’ve seen it, 
it’s impossible to forget.

Pandora’s Box <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h3gwyHNo7MI>, Adam Curtis, 1992

I think Adam Curtis is in many ways the most important documentary voice on 
British TV, simply because he puts across mad arguments and compels you to 
engage with them. This was his first series for the BBC (his best known is 
probablyThe Power of Nightmares) and his imaginative use of archive material is 
completely striking. The subtitle is “A Fable from the Age of Science” and it 
deals with a lot of things he’s fascinated by – communism, game theory, DDT, 
nuclear power – weaving them together in a very original way. It’s really worth 
seeing if you can find it.

China: Beyond the Clouds <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5WePBLVHx0>, Phil 
Agland, 1994
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-30%23img-30&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6129991656987093d7cbe772946240345a7bdef1%2F176_0_2208_1325%2F2208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-30%23img-30>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20documentaries%20you%20need%20to%20see&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2F50-best-documentaries-alex-gibney-joshua-oppenheimer-james-marsh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-30%23img-30&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6129991656987093d7cbe772946240345a7bdef1%2F176_0_2208_1325%2F2208.jpg>
 China: Beyond the Clouds. Photograph: Channel 4 
This is a great documentary series made in China in the early 90s. Agland was 
an anthropologist and he’d already made a wonderful series in the 80s about the 
Baka tribe in Cameroon. ForBeyond the Clouds, he spent several years in a small 
town in Yunnan province telling the stories of various characters he met. He 
focuses on normal people but in doing so tells us about China’s past as well as 
its present and the monumental change that was coming. It was beautifully shot, 
because he’s a very fine cameraman, and very memorable. Television’s 
contribution to the documentary form has been huge and this is television at 
its best.KF
 