
Campaigners opposed to a multimillion-pound programme of BBC cuts, including 
the closure of 6 Music andAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network>, are planning mass 
demonstrations outside the corporation's offices in seven cities today .

Plans to axe the two digital radio stations and cut back other areas of BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> activity, including its online 
operation, were announced by the director general, Mark Thompson, in March.

Campaigners will mark the end of the BBC Trust's three-month consultation on 
Thompson's strategy review by organising "flashmobs" in London, Birmingham, 
Bristol,Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>, Leeds, Cardiff 
and Glasgow.

Thousands of people are expected to voice their opposition to the cuts by 
gathering outside BBC offices at 1pm today armed with musical instruments, 
whistles and party hooters.

A flurry of submissions have been made to the BBC Trust, including music 
industry trade body the BPI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/24/6-music-bpi-aim>, in recent days.

The music industry is campaigning against the closure of 6 Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music>, arguing that it supports new acts 
and provides licence-fee payers with a wide variety of musical styles that is 
not rivalled in the commercial sector.

Demonstrators at the BBC Trust's London offices on Great Portland Street will 
hand in a petition signed by 80,000 people while buskers play outside, 
according to protest organisers.

The mass demonstrations have been organised by 38 Degrees, a not-for-profit 
organisation set up to make it easier for members of the public to get involved 
in campaigns, the National Union of Journalists and the organisers of the 
campaigns Save 6 Music and the Save the Asian Network. Members of the NUJ and 
the broadcasting union Bectu will be taking part in the Portland Street 
flashmob.

38 Degrees helped to organise the noisy protests in favour of voting reform 
earlier this month outside the Cabinet Office in London, where senior figures 
from the Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties were taking part in 
negotiations about forming a coalition government.

The executive director of 38 Degrees, David Babbs, said: "These flashmobs show 
just how strongly we feel about opposing these cuts to the BBC ... Let's hope 
the BBC Trust recognise this strength of public opinion."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 