
Job: Global Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> founder and 
Global group chief executive
Age: 33
Industry: broadcasting
Staff: 1,250
New entry

Ashley Tabor is head of the most powerful commercial radio group in the 
country,home to Classic FM, Heart, Capital and LBC 
<http://www.thisisglobal.com/radio/>, listened to by an average of more than 18 
million people a week.

Tabor, founder of Global Radio and chief executive of the Global group, has 
enjoyed several significant wins in the past 12 months, including Capital's
return to form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/13/magin-london-rajars> in London 
and thesuccessful rollout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/mar/23/heart-global-radio-rebrand>
 of the Heart brand across the country.

Global's biggest win of all, an automatic extenstion to the licence for its 
most valuable asset, Classic FM, in the Digital Economy Act wasnot without 
controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/26/talksport-radio-head-interview>. 
There have also beenbig job cuts  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/21/global-radio-restructure>at 
Global as it looks to benefit from thenewly relaxed regulatory environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/15/commercial-radion-ofcom-local-programming>
.

The Global boss is the son of Michael Tabor, who amassed a fortune 
<http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/media/article4769451.ece>
 from bookmaking, horsebreeding and property, and helped bankroll the £545m 
doublepurchase of GCap Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/apr/01/gcapmedia.globalradio> and 
Chrysalis Radio that created Global's broadcasting empire.

Tabor's hirings have been astute, including the former Associated Newspapers 
executive Stephen Miron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/10/stephen-miron-mediaguardian-100-2009>
, who oversees the commercial side of the business, whilethe former Capital 
Radio boss Richard Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jun/09/globalradio.radio> – widely 
regarded as one of the best programmers of his generation – looks after the 
content, with both men reporting to Tabor. Global Radio's chairman isthe former 
ITV chief executive Charles Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/mar/10/charles-allen-career-highs-lows>
.

Unlike Park, the former "headmaster" of BBC1's Fame Academy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xwMO5ZCv4cw>, Tabor prefers to stay out of the 
limelight. He previously managed a talent management and music publishing 
business looking after Corinne Bailey Rae and the former The X Factor 
contestants Shayne Ward and Chico Slimani.

Tabor left school at 16, going straight into radio working at Capital and 
Chiltern FM, and once shared a flat with Chris Moyles, prompting occasional 
speculation that theRadio 1 breakfast DJ <http://twitter.com/chrisdjmoyles> 
might one day return to Capital.

The radio industry's next big challenge is digital. Tabor's support for the 
new platform is crucial if theindustry's 2015 digital switchover target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/08/digital-radio-uk-ford-ennals> – 
or anything like it – is to be reached.

The BBC cannot drive digital listening without commercial radio's support, and 
commercial radio's support counts for little without Tabor on board.
 