
It’s safe to say Regurgitator were in on the joke decades before the rest of 
us when they madeI Like Your Old Stuff Better Than Your New Stuff 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TjHy6VjA3r4>, the opening track of their 
second album, 1997’s Unit.


There was a certain bittersweet quality to the stature that song would develop 
as the years passed. Whether or not it was a nod, one presumes, to the 
perceived chasms between debut album Tu-Plang’s thundering hitKong Foo Sing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWAMsIxwt60> and the band turning the 
electronica dial to 11 in Unit, in later years it was hard not to think of the 
song as the band further explored pastiche and the hits were fewer and farther 
between (Crush The Losers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aPTa9Hgy5vc>, 
anyone?).

That said, I Like Your Old Stuff isn’t Unit’s greatest achievement; that 
honour goes to ! (The Song Formerly Known As), the record’s fourth and final 
single, and its second most successful (the top spot was claimed by unmitigated 
runaway hit,Polyester Girl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2BxVBziFvtU>). 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjJ1l4UJW04Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjJ1l4UJW04Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjJ1l4UJW04Y&media=>
As a perfect crystallisation of Regurgitator’s wilfully paradoxical nature, ! 
is unmatched: it’s a towering slab of electronic fuzz, tailor made for giant 
stadiums and the sort of raves that bring to mind The Matrix’s Zion scenes, and 
yet the song is about staying home and listening to records in the living room 
with your significant other.

If “irony” was Regurgitator’s game at the time – the beyond-minimal album cover
 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_(album)#mediaviewer/File:Regurgitator-Unit.jpg>
 created by The Shits (co-frontman Quan Yeomans and his then partner Janet 
English) and guitarist Ben Ely that went on to win best album artwork at the 
Arias; the throwaway pop song that became their biggest hit – then it was true 
irony that Yeomans’ confessional love song cum shut-in manifesto was one of the 
band’s most gargantuan moments, sonically.

Indeed, ! is one of the few songs I find genuinely frustrating (Black 
Sabbath’s Supernaut is another) for no reason other than the fact that I have 
not been able to find a sound system worthy of its quality. I will inevitably 
sit with it on repeat, pressing the volume ‘+’ button with increasing futility. 
It would be a fitting end were I to manage to get ! to play at a level that 
would eventually send me from this plane of being in a manner not unlike one of 
Michael Ironside’s victims from Scanners.

Performing the song in a giant arena, on the other hand, was another matter 
altogether, something that had eluded the band even at the height of Unit’s 
popularity (though they gave it a red hot go on ABC’s dearly missed Recovery in 
September of 1998).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvugbRT-wAhs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvugbRT-wAhs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvugbRT-wAhs&media=>
When the band finally toured Unit in 2012, Yeomans reflected on the fact that 
the payoff for finally being able to replicate the sound live was a loss of 
that anarchic quality that made Regurgitator’s name in the first place. “The 
bad thing about [the songs] is it’s a bit like a Vegas show; you don’t really 
have the chaos that I like in a live show,” he oncesaid in an interview 
<http://www.messandnoise.com/articles/4519442>. “You can’t just throw in a 
bunch of weird shit in the middle of it. It’s very structured, and that takes a 
little bit of the fun out of it for me.”

Aspects of that record have not aged well (chief among them Polyester Girl, 
and Magoo’s production, which at the time seemed so mind-blowing, but feels 
overwrought today). And in terms of pound-for-pound pop wizardry, it’s 1999 
follow-up, … art, that takes the crown, with songs Freshmint! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TljyVCEkYpE> and Happiness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bqbTUqMZkS8> elevating chintzy electronica to 
a transcendent level. And yet Unit endures in the collective unconscious as 
Regurgitator’s calling card.

For a certain generation of Australians, there’s been a collective rush to 
prove we are much cooler than we were in our late teens and early-20s when Unit 
exploded across Australia’s airwaves, with many adopting a sort of “I didn’t 
even like their old stuff” stance when it comes to Regurgitator. I am not one 
of them: I had Quan, Ben and drummer Martin’s photos stuck to my school diary 
in 1997 and I cased the joint outside my local video store the day Unit was 
released, ready to buy a copy.

I remember that day like it was yesterday – chiefly because I think I blew up 
Dad’s stereo speakers by trying to turn ! (The Song Formerly Known As) up to 11.
 