
Next up on the Future of Journalism 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/digitalcontent/2008/06/_future_of_journalism_the_sche.html>
schedule: the phenomenon of live blogging, Twitter and the swathe of new cheap, 
easy and accessible live news tools.

Guardian.co.uk started live coverage with the 2002 football World Cup, said 
sport editor Sean Ingle, and the format is now one of the most popular on the 
site. Theminute-by-minute football reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/apr/16/minutebyminute.sport> and 
over-by-over cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jun/08/englandvnewzealand2008.englandcricketteam2>
 are still the most popular, but the team has also covered motor racing, 
tennis, golf,horse racing 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/sport/2008/04/04/talking_horses_134.html> and 
even snooker. A busy live post can generate more traffic than anything else on 
the site.


Anna Pickard, Dave Hill, Andy Carvin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-carvin>, chair Katharine Viner, Rachel 
Sterne. Photo Anna Gordon/Guardian

"A good live blog has all the information as well as being quick, but it is 
also trying to entertain - it needs to be funny and quirky. It's like a really 
intelligent pub chat - it might occasionally turn into a bar room brawl but it 
allows our journalists to get down and dirty with the public in a way they 
couldn't before."

Wouldn't sport addicts get their fix more easily through a live radio show? 
No, said Ingle, because it's about having plenty of voices. The sports team 
moderate comments to post on the live reports (which aren't technically on a 
blog system) , but sometimes have 700-800 emails in one day and pick the best 
of those.

'People have an innate need to join in'

Over on the live TV blogs for shows like The Apprentice 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/organgrinder/2008/06/the_apprentice_series_four_epi_10.html>
 andBig Brother 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/organgrinder/2008/06/live_blog_big_brother_launch_n.html>
, Anna Pickard welcomes free-for-all comments. "The exciting bit is that a 
community builds around the event, and what started as a small group of people 
who would say 'I saw that', now works as a standalone review of a show."

"I think conversation is the best thing about the internet, and live blogs 
introduce this idea of simultaneous conversation. People have an innate need to 
join in. And anyway - I'm one of those people who can't just sit in front of a 
TV because I'll always have my laptop open checking the football scores with 19 
tabs open at once."

NPR: Head first with new technology

Andy Carvin, the former Rocketboom <http://www.rocketboom.com/vlog/>er and now 
senior product manager forNPR <http://www.npr.org/>'s communities, is a 
textbook early adopter who is applying his expertise and personal interest in 
new technology to NPR's shows.

The strategy for NPR is "to dive in head first," said Carvin. Recent projects 
have includedGet My Vote <http://www.npr.org/getmyvote/>, where members of the 
public could upload videos detailing their concerns and interests in the US 
elections to the candidates.

The daily Talk of the Nation 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/rundowns/rundown.php?prgId=5> call-in show can 
only accommodate so many callers, but the show's blog fields between 70-100 
comments with each shows and producers feed these back in to the discussion.


Andy Carvin. Photo Anna Gordon/Guardian

And when Carvin was about to miss a deskside performance by the folk musician 
Vic Chestnutt <http://www.npr.org/getmyvote/>, he persuaded a colleague to 
switch on a laptop's webcam andstreamed live 
<http://www.andycarvin.com/archives/2008/05/vic_chesnutt_live_at_npr.html> 
using the broadcast tool Mogulus. There were just over 70 viewers, but Carvin 
said that wasn't bad for a broadcast that didn't exist 10 minutes earlier. "It 
wasn't good quality, but then the professional recordings we were doing there 
would take a week to finish."

"Community has always been part of the internet, from Usenet discussion boards 
in the early eighties to the thriving online communities we have now. It's just 
that the technology has got ridiculously simple."

Twitter is a conversation in your pocket

Carvin is a big fan <http://twitter.com/acarvin> of Twitter 
<http://www.twitter.com>, the micro-blogging/messaging service. He said NPR 
never exactly had a strategy for this, but as a personal user he could se the 
benefits and now NPR Politics uses its account to call for ideas for topics and 
guests, and also blogged the primary election process.

Carvin has 2,300 followers and is on first-name terms with about 500 of those. 
He says it is not so much 'micro-blogging', as it has been described, but 'a 
conversation in your pocket'. "Twitter is like the quintessential American 
diner. The first time you show up, people are minding their own business, and 
when you come back for breakfast you might start talking to the waitress until 
eventually it becomes your family. And if you don't show up, people get 
worried."

It occurred to me that Twitter is often included in discussion about the 
changing news process, and there have been many discussions online about how to 
use Twitter as a reporting tool. But whileTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> has huge potential for 
publishers, it is, at its core, a communication tool. It's like round looking 
at a phone, trying to plan some editorial that uses the phone - when actually 
the thing to do is just to use it to talk to people.

Twitter has left its back door open for developers, which means there are a 
host of interesting third-party tools likeTweetscan 
<http://tweetscan.com/alerts.php>, for example, which allows you to watch for 
particular keywords. It was well covered that Twitter users have picked up on 
several earthquakes before the mainstream media and theUS Geographical Survey 
<http://www.usgs.gov/>, but if we see Twitter primarily as a communication 
rather than a publishing tool that isn't so surprising.

When techie veteran Dave Winer tweeted about what felt like an explosion, 
Twitter acted like a system of checks and balances and the community quickly 
worked out that rather than a terrorist attack, Washington had experienced a 
rare seismic tremor. That all happened before the USGS had noted it, said 
Carvin.

Audiences can detect authenticity

Rachel Sterne founded the citizen journalism site Ground Report 
<http://www.groundreport.com/> when she left university. The site has run 
stories onfood prices in the Philippines 
<http://www.groundreport.com/World/Southeast-Asia-Coping-with-the-Rice-and-Food-Crisi>
,Taleban activity in Pakistan 
<http://www.groundreport.com/Arts_and_Culture/Taliban-militants-on-the-prowl-near-Peshawar>
 not reported in the mainstream press and photos afterCyclone Nargis hit Myanmar
 <http://www.groundreport.com/World/Myanmar-The-perfect-storm>. Making news 
available on mobiles, rather than focusing on desktop PCs, is far more 
important for those communities, said Sterne.

Her take on Twitter is that it is what RSS should have been, by tailoring and 
filtering information to you according to your network. It also brings back the 
element of serendipity.

Ground Report appeals for stories but edits and verifies pieces when they come 
in; a bigger problem that authenticity is copyright infringement and people 
submitting poems, she said. But the community does a lot to police itself: 
"There's an obsessiveness among that community - they can detect authenticity." 
She said Hillary Clinton's campaign had been undermined by a 'home-made' viral 
video that turned out to be fake. "That had the opposite effect of antagonising 
hundreds of thousands of people."

Dave Hill: Twitter is demystifying journalism

Guardian old-timer Dave Hill 
<http://commentisfree.theguardian.com/dave_hill/profile.html> is a newbie when 
it comes to Twitter <http://twitter.com/davehill>, but no less enthusiastic. He 
has recently live blogged and Twittered hustings for the London Mayoral 
election. "They provided me with a laptop and a phone and this thing called 
'bluetooth'... I normally like to rewrite things ten times before I file, and I 
thought it impossible that anyone would find any of this coherent and accurate."

"But it's beginning to become clear what the beauty of these forms of 
communication are; the immediacy of reporting by the seat of your pants, of 
making it up as you go along. It's frightening to do, but if you can make it 
feel live I can see why it's a joy to read."


Dave Hill. Photo Anna Gordon/Guardian

Twitter, he says, is more mischievous. Hill managed to Tweet that he had eaten 
one of Jackie Ashley's sandwiches 
<http://twitter.com/DaveHill/statuses/802058792>, and that went down rather 
well. "It's a slight subversion of what's going on in journalism. In the old 
days, the political commentators had gravitas and wisdom - this is demystifying 
all that."

"It's a different way of seeing things and requires different things of you. 
You ca express things in a different way, with greater brevity, economy or 
humour - and there are infinite ways of covering the same event."

â€¢ The Future of Journalism series is an internal Guardian conference. Full 
coverage , and video highlights, will be added to the schedule page 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/digitalcontent/2008/06/_future_of_journalism_the_sche.html>
as it is published.
 