
Sixty years ago this week, on 7 October 1955, Allen Ginsberg read Howl aloud 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVGoY9gom50> for the first time, at the Six 
Gallery in San Francisco. It’s a poem with many anniversaries – Ginsberg began 
writing it in mid-1954, and it wasn’t published until 1956 – which may be why 
Hal Willner organiseda 60th-anniversary celebration of it 
<https://www.acehotel.com/calendar/losangeles/howl-benefiting-dlf> at the Ace 
hotel in Los Angeles in April of this year, with a lineup including Courtney 
Love, Beth Orton, Devendra Banhart, Nick Cave, Macy Gray and Peaches.

That lineup hints at just how Howl has permeated popular culture and, unlike 
almost any other piece of literature, helped shape music as it is today.

Ginsberg, interdisciplinary before many other artists, made many personal 
forays into music, from collaborating with Paul McCartney, Philip Glass andthe 
Clash 
<http://www.openculture.com/2014/07/allen-ginsberg-performs-with-the-clash-his-punk-poem-capital-air.html>
 to his 1981 experimentalBuddhist punk anthem, Birdbrain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hc4Oda0hrnY>. If you look in the background of 
the famous film for Bob Dylan’sSubterranean Homesick Blues 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=67u2fmYz7S4>, you can spot him standing to the 
singer’s right.

Lawrence Ferlinghetti: ‘Most of the poets were on something, but somebody had 
to mind the shop’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/04/lawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets>
Howl, though, was where it began, a hallucinatory tour-de-force that started 
the arms race between poetry and rock’n’roll. It terrorised civilised society 
in the 1950s – in 1957, a clerk at theCity Lights bookstore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/25/san-francisco-city-lights-bookshop-beats>
 in San Francisco was jailed for selling it, while City Lights’ publisher, 
Lawrence Ferlinghetti, was prosecuted – and acquitted – for publishing it.

Howl is about drugs, promiscuity, youth alienation, capitalism, 
industrialisation, expression, conformity, sexuality and the beauty of being in 
the gutter. It glows with an idiosyncratic interest in self-expression and the 
belief that the writer should refuse inhibition and self-censorship. It 
dismantled cultural mores and boundaries on a macro-cosmic level but also 
inspired a new wave of musicians through style, metre and imagery.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQN1BrD73lSs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQN1BrD73lSs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQN1BrD73lSs&media=>
Ellen Willis, in her 1967 essay Before the Flood 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=YhvBfNXvoQoC&pg=PA1&lpg=PA1&dq=before+the+flood+cheetah&source=bl&ots=ERy3C2xKK1&sig=gaJoIKXTZUZbuziO9PwdQZvb4wo&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CC0Q6AEwAmoVChMIosmTpNGyyAIVAS4UCh3TaAl4#v=onepage&q=before%20the%20flood%20cheetah&f=false>
, wrote that Dylan’sA Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-H2Vvfg0d3k>, from his second album, owed much 
to Ginsberg’s “Biblical rhetoric and declamatory style” – but you could include 
much of his other work in the debt. Willis drew parallels between hippie 
culture – the bastard child of the Beat generation, born when the beats and the 
mid-60s San Francisco counterculture cross-fertilised – and folk culture. “Both 
movements rejected intellect for sensation, politics for art, and Ginsberg and 
Kerouac glorified a grassroots America that included supermarkets and cars as 
well as mountains and apple pie,” she wrote. Within Howl, there is a damning of 
authority, yes, but it lies with a celebration of human life that would provide 
nutrients for the next generations.

Cue Patti Smith, on whose work Ginsberg left an indelible mark. Music 
photographer Kevin Cummins, who photographed Ginsberg in Manchester in 1979, 
when the poet was feted by the punk establishment in England, suggests Smith’s 
1974 debut Piss Factory wouldn’t have existed without Howl. “People didn’t 
write poetry like that.Piss Factory 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y6aUbrZYjYE> is a poem with a beat and nobody 
was doing that at the time,” he says. Cummins remembers how important the poem 
was for the artists he was mixing with, such as Joy Division, Morrissey and 
David Bowie. “It opened a world for us that we didn’t know as much about.”
 The Rolling Thunder Revue including Joan Baez, Bob Dylan, Allen Ginsberg and 
Roberta Flack perform a benefit concert in 1975. Photograph: Images Press/Getty 
Images 
Howl, and Judge Clayton Horn – the man who dismissed the case against 
Ferlinghetti and ruled the poem was of “redeeming social importance” – set a 
new world in motion, where musicians could express their sexuality without 
checking themselves for Victorian notions of decency. It was a rocket up the 
backside of conformity and censorship, allowing talk of cock and balls and cunt 
and semen without shame or blush: in New York, the Fugs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fugs> took the lesson to heart, and Ginsberg 
returned the favour, writing the liner notes for their second album in 1966.

The musician Peaches <https://www.theguardian.com/music/peaches> is more 
forthright. Howl “started a revolution”, she says. “To be so brave and so open 
about the situation in America and homosexuality while using a style of writing 
which was almost a stream of consciousness that was confusing to people was 
completely powerful.”

But Ginsberg needed to be encouraged: Howl’s delight in visceral human urges 
and saying the things that weren’t supposed to be said came after he was 
instructed by Ferlinghetti to “speak from the heart”.

“He wasn’t afraid of being human,” says David Wrench, producer for FKA Twigs, 
Jungle and Caribou. “There’s nothing to be ashamed of. It’s all celebratory.”

Wrench has observed the poem’s constant presence among younger bands. “Bands 
often have books in the studio and Howl is there all the time. Maybe with some 
Blake or Plath. It keeps coming back because it inspires people.”

Even if a musician hasn’t heard Howl, they’re part of its ecosystem, because 
it’s one of the building blocks of modern rock’n’roll: you may not have been 
influenced by Howl, but you’ve been influenced by something it influences. 
“It’s a bit like Smells Like Teen Spirit,” says Catherine Anne Davies, who 
records and performs as the Anchoress. “We forget how amazing it is and how at 
the time it would have been so shocking.”

The nuts and bolts of Howl matter, as well as the social impact. Like Patti 
Smith and Dylan before her, Davies draws on Ginsberg’s verbal techniques. “I’m 
acutely attuned to metre and line and how Howl is about spontaneous and 
improvised expression; the composition seeps into my work,” she says.
 Devendra Banhart … celebrating the 60th anniversary. Photograph: Matthew 
Eisman/WireImage 
Ginsberg played around with words, using them to create the chassis of the 
poem, the first section of which is built on the word “who”. “I depended on the 
word ‘who’ to keep the beat, a base to keep measure, return to and take off 
from again onto another streak of invention,” he wrote in 1959.

Devendra Banhart grew up in California in the 90s and remembers Howl turning 
him on to poetry. “It was the first time I read a poem that made me sweat, the 
first time that I read a poem that meant I couldn’t speak. I hit my head. This 
is the power. Here’s a living, profound experience in words.”

It was the gateway for Banhart’s interest in Buddhism, too; and Ginsberg was a 
gateway for generations of western musicians to explore eastern religions, 
which swept into rock music a whole new realm of spirituality and mysticism.

But 60 years after it was first performed, is it still relevant? “It didn’t 
sound in the least bit dated,” Banhart says. “Allen is writing about injustice 
and there’s still injustice; he’s writing about liberation, there’s still the 
need for liberation; he’s writing about the thirst for peace, freedom, 
revolution, all of those things are still a prominent concern of our times. If 
anything, they’ve been magnified. Howl doesn’t have an expiration date.”
 