
Afghanistan’s president, Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, has welcomed back Sharbat 
Gula, the green-eyed “Afghan Girl” whose photo in National Geographic in 1985 
became a symbol of her country’s wars, after she was deported by Pakistan.

 Pakistani security officials escorted Gula overnight from a hospital in 
Peshawar, where she had been staying sinceher arrest last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/national-geographic-afghan-girl-arrested-pakistan-false-papers-sharbat-gula>
 for living illegally in the country, and handed her over to Afghan authorities 
at the Torkham border.

Gula’s deportation comes amid Pakistani pressure to send 2.5 million Afghan 
refugees back home even thoughAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is facing a bloody Taliban 
insurgency and would struggle to look after so many returnees.

 “I welcome her back to the bosom of her motherland,” Ghani said as an 
expressionless Gula stood beside him during a small ceremony at the palace in 
Kabul. “I’ve said repeatedly, and I like to repeat it again, that our country 
is incomplete until we absorb all of our refugees.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fafghan-girl-sharbat-gula-welcomed-home-president-ashraf-ghani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98f3c38b5d0ce452647554062f36021553de7eda%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Afghan%20girl'%20welcomed%20home%20by%20president%3A%20'She%20represents%20our%20hope'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fafghan-girl-sharbat-gula-welcomed-home-president-ashraf-ghani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Afghan%20girl%27%20welcomed%20home%20by%20president%3A%20%27She%20represents%20our%20hope%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fafghan-girl-sharbat-gula-welcomed-home-president-ashraf-ghani%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98f3c38b5d0ce452647554062f36021553de7eda%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Photographer Steve McCurry next to his photos of Sharbat Gula. Photograph: 
Ulrich Perrey/AFP 
 Ghani promised to provide Gula with a furnished apartment to ensure she 
“lives with dignity and security in her homeland”.

 Gula, wearing a blue burqa that was pulled back to show her face, did not 
comment during the ceremony, which her children also attended.

 She was for years an unnamed celebrity after an image of her as a teenage 
refugee was featured on National Geographic magazine’s cover in 1985, her 
striking green eyes peering out from a headscarf.

After her arrest, the ‘Afghan Girl’ is once again a symbol of refugees’ plight 
| Steve McCurry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/afghan-girl-arrest-refugees-sharbat-gula>
The image became a symbol of Afghanistan’s suffering during the 1980s Soviet 
occupation and the US-backed mujahadeen insurgency against it.

 The Soviet withdrawal in 1989 led to the collapse of the Kabul government and 
years of civil war until the Islamist Taliban movement seized power in the 
mid-1990s.

 After the Taliban regime fell to the US-backed military action in 2001, 
National Geographic sent the photographer Steve McCurry to find the girl in the 
photo, eventually identified as Gula.

 “The woman who stands next to me became an iconic figure representing Afghan 
deprivation, Afghan hope and Afghan aspirations,” Ghani said. “All of us are 
inspired by her courage and determination.“

 Gula had been living in Pakistan’s northwestern city of Peshawar for years 
with her children and husband, who died five years ago.

 