
One day during his last year at primary school, Jon Adams drew a picture of a 
street in Portsmouth, the city where he still lives. The scene he drew had no 
people in it, but its representation of everything else suggested a talent 
beyond his years.

The headteacher happened to see the picture, and said he wanted to put it up 
in the school’s entrance hall. “And that was an honour,” Adams says, 
“particularly for someone who didn’t think they were any good, because they’d 
been told they weren’t any good, every day.”

Adams was asked to write his name on the back, an instruction that threw up a 
choice. He had difficulties with writing, and he knew his class teacher could 
be cruel. “If I asked for help, I knew what he would say: ‘Oh, he can’t even 
spell his own name, what rubbish is that?’ So I did it myself.”

The teacher called Adams to the front of the class. “I went up, gave it to 
him, he held it up in front of the class, and then he tore it up. He said, 
‘He’s spelled his name wrong – he’ll never be anything.’”

This happened 45 years ago. In recent years, Adams has been treated for 
post-traumatic stress disorder, caused at least partly by that episode, and how 
long it lived on, not just in his memory, but in his understanding of the world 
and his place in it. The story says a lot about the inhumanity that was once 
rife in the British education system; but it also shines light on what it’s 
like spending a lot of your life being not just misunderstood, but routinely 
insulted. “Someone telling you you’re no good every day worms its way inside 
your head,” Adams says. “Inside, you know you’re all right, so there’s this 
conflict going on.”

Since April 2013, Adams has known that he has Asperger syndrome 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/asperger> – or, to put it another way, that he is 
autistic. Ten minutes online will tell you that Adams’ condition comes down to 
a so-called“triad of impairments” 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/about/what-is/myths-facts-stats.aspx> to do with 
social interaction, communication and imagination, or what some people call 
“flexibility of thought” – although the fact that Adams is a prolific artist 
suggests that, in his case, that last criterion might be misplaced.

Since 2013, many diagnoses of autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> have also included a range of 
sensory issues, among them aversions to certain textures, sounds, smells and 
tastes, as well as a deep dislike of sudden noise. In Adams’ case, these seem 
to blur into a complex kind ofsynaesthesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/nov/19/synaesthesia-cross-overs-senses>
: he understands music as something he can touch, and experiences the colour 
yellow as a profoundly unpleasant taste, like mould.

Adams sometimes talks about his condition in front of an audience, and there 
is one question that always comes up. “It goes: ‘My son’s eight, he sits in his 
room all day, he does Lego, he does complicated drawings, he won’t talk to 
anyone else – how do I make him socialise?’ Well, you don’t. He’s made his 
world. One day, he’ll show it to you. Don’t let him grow up thinking that the 
way he’s thinking and what he’s doing are faulty.”

***

Jon Adams was formally diagnosed at the age of 52, at an NHS clinic run as an 
offshoot of Cambridge University’sAutism Research Centre 
<https://www.autismresearchcentre.com>, after he was referred there by his GP. 
The initial spark had been a meeting with the centre’s founder and director,
Simon Baron-Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/simon-baron-cohen> (the 
cousin, in case anyone was wondering, ofSacha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sachabaroncohen>), who had spoken with Adams 
at the Cheltenham literature festival.

Adams had begun to realise what sat under a lot of his experiences; at the 
time, the biography that accompanied his work as an artist included the words 
“probably autistic”. From May 2012 until June 2013, he worked as the research 
centre’s artist-in-residence; immediately afterwards, a specialist gave him his 
formal diagnosis, a process that involved an interview and something akin to a 
questionnaire. “I got the letter through, saying I scored 18 out of 18 autistic 
traits, and I had Asperger’s,” Adams says.

I meet Baron-Cohen in a crowded Starbucks near St Paul’s Cathedral in London, 
where he wryly comments on the mixture of chatter, clattering cups and muzak – 
“For a lot of autistic people, this would probably be hell” – and casts his 
mind back over the 35 years he has been thinking about and researching autism. 
He started working with six autistic children in a special unit in Barnet, 
north London, in 1982. Fifteen years later, he set up the Cambridge research 
centre; two years after that, in 1999, he opened a clinic dedicated to 
diagnosing autistic adults.

My son received a diagnosis aged three. He had fixations with particular music 
or places – traits I recognise in myself

“There was a growing awareness that autism wasn’t just about kids,” he tells 
me. “I was receiving more and more emails saying, ‘My son’s an adult, but he’s 
never fitted in. Might he have autism?’ An adult couldn’t go to a child and 
adolescent clinic, so where were they meant to go? If they went to a learning 
disability clinic, and they had an IQ above 70, they’d be turned away. So these 
people were like a lost generation. That was a phrase I used a lot.”

The National Autistic Society estimates that there are currently around 
700,000 people <http://www.autism.org.uk/about/what-is/myths-facts-stats.aspx> 
living with autism in the UK – more than one in every 100 of the population. 
Some of these people have learning disabilities. Some are what the medical 
vocabulary terms “non-verbal”, or unable to speak. Others are so-called 
“high-functioning”, a sub-group that includes those with Asperger syndrome, the 
condition named after the Austrian paediatrician who in the 1940s worked with a 
group of children he famously termed “little professors”. Asperger syndrome is 
distinguished by the fact that people who have it display no language delay as 
toddlers or small children. (Asperger died in 1980, long before the term 
“Asperger syndrome” entered popular usage. It has since beendropped from the 
relevant American diagnostic manual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/dec/02/aspergers-syndrome-dropped-psychiatric-dsm>
, but is still used in the UK.)

It is among this latter group that you will find many of the 20% of autistic 
people currently thought to have been diagnosed as adults. No national figures 
for adult autism diagnoses are available, but anecdotal evidence suggests 
numbers are rising: Baron-Cohen tells me that four years ago, 100 cases in 
Cambridgeshire were referred to his clinic; in the first four months of 2016 
alone, it received 400 referrals.

Most of the terms used to describe autism don’t do justice to the nuanced, 
complicated traits bound up with it. Nonetheless, all its variants are covered 
by the catch-all term autism spectrum disorder, or ASD; people who dispute that 
autism is any kind of “disorder” prefer the term autism spectrum condition. The 
word “spectrum” was first used in this context by the pioneering British 
researcherLorna Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/24/autistic-spectrum-disorder-lorna-wing>
, who died in 2014. Baron-Cohen explains: “What she meant at the time, I think, 
was a spectrum within those who come to clinical attention. Where it’s gone 
since is that this spectrum runs right through society, out into the general 
population.”

My own interest in autism began when my son James received a diagnosis of ASD 
at the age of three. Back then, some things seemed strange: the social distance 
between him and his peers; his fixations with particular music (the Clash, the 
Beatles) or places; his pointed dislike of some foods or sounds (I still curse 
whoever invented the public toilet hand-dryer); his amazing facility with 
technology. Now, these things are simply part of the fabric of our shared life. 
I recognise echoes of myself in some of these traits (the music, the 
technology), and of plenty of other people: more than anything, his 10 years 
have brought me an ever-growing understanding of the complexities of human 
psychology, both among those diagnosed as “on the spectrum” and so-called 
“neurotypical” people.

Unfortunately, the everyday world has yet to catch up. Only 16% of adults 
diagnosed with autism in the UKare in full-time, paid employment 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/professionals/employers.aspx>. In 2014 Baron-Cohen’s 
team found that two-thirds of the patients in their clinic had either felt 
suicidal or planned to kill themselves, and that a third had attempted to do 
so. “To my mind, this is nothing to do with autism or Asperger syndrome,” he 
says. “These are secondary mental-health problems. You came into the world with 
autism, and the way the world reacted, or didn’t react, to you has led to a 
second problem, which is depression. And that’s preventable.”

***

A week after talking to Baron-Cohen, I take the train to the Lancashire town 
of Wigan, to meet 68-year-old Peter Street, who got his autism diagnosis only 
10 months ago. He is an impish, funny presence, and says he loves conversation, 
perhaps a little too much. “I get this deep urge – it’s a pain, almost, to talk 
to people. When I’ve described it to the therapist, I’ve said I’m like a bucket 
of water and it’s full. And then all of it comes out, and it empties.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fautism-diagnosis-late-in-life-asperger-syndrome-john-harris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda6d2e8bcb0ae247263996d3c047a0283fa9ead9%2F0_0_1023_1122%2F1023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='All%20my%20life%20suddenly%20made%20sense'%3A%20how%20it%20feels%20to%20be%20diagnosed%20with%20autism%20late%20in%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fautism-diagnosis-late-in-life-asperger-syndrome-john-harris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27All%20my%20life%20suddenly%20made%20sense%27%3A%20how%20it%20feels%20to%20be%20diagnosed%20with%20autism%20late%20in%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fautism-diagnosis-late-in-life-asperger-syndrome-john-harris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda6d2e8bcb0ae247263996d3c047a0283fa9ead9%2F0_0_1023_1122%2F1023.jpg>
 Peter Street: ‘I get too much for people, and they get too much for me.’ 
Photograph: Rosie Barnes 
After 20 minutes, it becomes clear that Street has the most astonishing life 
story of anyone I have ever interviewed. His mother, he says, became pregnant 
with him when she was raped. In his native Bolton, the two of them were taken 
in by a man much older than her, who employed her as his housekeeper, and then 
married her and adopted Street to give the arrangement a veneer of normality. 
He grew up, he says, with no extended family and very few friends. “I get too 
much for people, and they get too much for me. A lot of the time, I overpower 
people. When I was a kid, when I made a friend, I would go and sit on their 
doorstep, waiting for them. I’m a really early riser, and I can’t cope with 
being late anywhere. I used to go and sit on the doorstep, maybe six, seven in 
the morning. And people obviously didn’t like that.”

His daily routine, he says, often revolved around an outside toilet, and his 
home’s back wall, which he would use for solo games of football and marbles. 
“And that was wonderful, in some sense. It wouldn’t have been wonderful for 
some people, but it was for me.” He also made endless trips to the cinema, 
where he acquired a forensic knowledge of Greek mythology; he mentionsSteve 
Reeves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/may/06/guardianobituaries.filmnews>, the 
musclebound 1950s actor who played Hercules. “I can take certain things in – 
really odd things, sometimes,” he says. “But I can’t take in what most people 
take in every day.”

At school, he found it almost impossible to tune in to the teachers. “They 
were shit with me,” he says. “They knew how to abuse. They were good at it. 
They were bullies. They used to stand me in the corner, in the wastebasket, and 
hit me over the head with the board rubber, to knock some sense into me. I’ve 
always blamed my epilepsy on that.” He started having grand mal seizures when 
he was 15; it is now estimated that arounda third of autistic people also 
experience epilepsy <https://www.autismspeaks.org/family-services/epilepsy>, 
though the relationship between the two is something that neuroscience has yet 
to fathom.

Street left school unable to read or write. He passed through a series of jobs 
– a bakery, a butcher’s shop – some of which came to an end because he found it 
difficult to process complex instructions, before settling into work as a 
gardener and gravedigger. Along the way, he married his wife, Sandra, with whom 
he has three grownup children. “She doesn’t like being with people,” he says. 
“She’s very quiet, very introverted. In a way, she’s a mirror.”

In 1984, after breaking his neck while trying to climb into a transit van that 
was pulling away, Street began three years in recovery. While he was in 
hospital, he met a fellow patient who was an English teacher, and started to 
work with him on his literacy; then, through adult education, he discovered a 
talent for poetry.

While we talk, he hands me an anthology of his work, published in 2009, that 
begins with a poem titled Not Being Me, a perfect glimpse into the autistic 
experience of not fitting in:

Childhood nights were dreams
of being a sheep
then up and out of a morning,
a quick check to see

if by any chance in the night
there had been a change
of being just like all my friends
and not the odd one out

In the late 1980s, Street began to teach poetry in schools and day centres; in 
the early 90s, he became a writer-in-residence at the BBC in Manchester, which 
led to a series of assignments. In 1993, he went to Croatia to write about the 
war that was then engulfing the Balkans. “People with autism, it’s often said 
that they have no emotion or empathy,” he says. “I have too much emotion, too 
much empathy. It broke my heart.” Three experiences preyed on him: a meeting 
with an 18-year-old abandoned in a refugee camp; an occasion when he gave his 
water ration to an emaciated woman with a newborn child; and the experience of 
eating a sumptuous meal in the town of Lipik, with “three or four kids at the 
window, looking in. And I didn’t have the balls to get up and go and give them 
my food.”

By 2014, his inability to put away these memories had become too much. “I went 
to a therapist. And she said, ‘I want you to go and see a friend of mine. She’s 
a specialist in diagnosing people with autism.’ I thought, ‘I’ll go along’, as 
you do. And she gave me these really strange games. They were like a jigsaw 
puzzle: four pieces. White. They were so simple, I thought I could do them – 
and I couldn’t.” He was handed five plastic figures and toys, and told to make 
a story with them. “And I couldn’t do that, either. I couldn’t connect them 
together into one story. She said I was highly intellectual, but on the autism 
spectrum.”

His response was one of enormous relief. “I cried. It was wonderful. 
Wonderful. Because all my life suddenly made sense. And none of it – the 
beatings, the abuse – none of it was my fault. Apart from my family and Sandra, 
I’d put it in the top five greatest things that have happened in my life. 
Absolutely, incredibly wonderful.”

***

Penny Andrews got her diagnosis of Asperger syndrome (though she is perfectly 
comfortable with the term “autistic”) when she was 30. Back then, she was a 
regular user ofLiveJournal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2003/dec/18/weblogs9>, the social 
networking site that was a forerunner ofMyspace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/myspace> and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, and one of her online 
contacts had begun to write about the process of finding out he was autistic. 
“He wrote about it quite openly: all the reasons he’d gone for diagnosis, what 
the procedure was like, seeing half a dozen different psychiatrists before he 
found one who would refer him for diagnosis,” she tells me. “And the more he 
wrote about it, the more I was like, ‘Oh, God, this is me.’”

Andrews is now 35. She also has mild cerebral palsy, which manifests itself in 
spasms in her ankles, knees and wrists. She is a para-athlete whose specialism 
is the 100m, and has a punishing training schedule. She wears a vintage Bowie 
T-shirt, has a wood-cut picture of the Yorkshire town of Whitby tattooed on her 
right arm, and is a prolific and waspish presenceon Twitter 
<http://twitter.com/pennyb>. Andrews is currently awaiting a decision on the 
funding of her PhD, which is focused on the relationships between academic 
libraries and “data flows, digital labour, academic social networking services 
and governance in research support”.

At secondary school, boys pretend to fancy you. It kills you, because you take 
it seriously
Penny Andrews 
She grew up in Nidderdale in the Yorkshire dales and now lives in Leeds. 
Throughout her childhood, Andrews says she had a deep sense of “everything 
being wrong, somehow. Being clever and being a supposedly interesting person, 
but never able to maintain friendships and always, inexplicably, saying 
something wrong.”

Autism among women and girls is only starting to be properly understood. The 
male to female ratio of autistic people currently stands at around5:1 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/About/What-is/Myths-facts-stats>, although 
Baron-Cohen says he and other autism specialists are currently in a “transition 
period” in their research: the actual figure may eventually turn out to be very 
different. “There’s a whole new topic researchers are latching on to, about 
camouflage: whether females – for whatever reason – might be better at hiding 
their autism,” he says, something that is borne out by Andrews’ recollection of 
her time at school.

“You’re not supposed to get on with people’s parents better than them when you 
go round to their houses. I didn’t really want to play with people – I just 
looked really aloof. I read the diary of Anne Frank when I was six, and I 
talked about the Holocaust. But I would try to copy other people, how they 
talked and acted. I’d watch TV programmes that other people watched so I’d have 
something to talk about.Neighbours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/neighbours> and Home And Away.” She 
laughs. “I got a Tamagotchi when everyone else got them, but I had no interest 
in it.”

In the end, teenage etiquette and the nastiness that often comes with it 
proved too much. “Girls are cruel. They exclude each other, and pretend to be 
friends with each other, as a game. And I get sarcasm, but I don’t get 
insincerity. And then, at secondary school, boys pretend to fancy you, because 
that’s the most ludicrous idea they can think of. It kills you because you take 
it seriously. And they invite you to things, and then they don’t show up, or 
they’re round the corner laughing. All of that happened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fautism-diagnosis-late-in-life-asperger-syndrome-john-harris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536a94a440c8ba69abf894e3efef3e13c009a853%2F0_763_6000_3599%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='All%20my%20life%20suddenly%20made%20sense'%3A%20how%20it%20feels%20to%20be%20diagnosed%20with%20autism%20late%20in%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fautism-diagnosis-late-in-life-asperger-syndrome-john-harris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27All%20my%20life%20suddenly%20made%20sense%27%3A%20how%20it%20feels%20to%20be%20diagnosed%20with%20autism%20late%20in%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fautism-diagnosis-late-in-life-asperger-syndrome-john-harris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F536a94a440c8ba69abf894e3efef3e13c009a853%2F0_763_6000_3599%2F6000.jpg>
 Penny Andrews: ‘I would try to copy other people, how they talked and acted.’ 
Photograph: Rosie Barnes 
She has been married to her husband, Emil, for 11 years. “Because he loves me 
the way I am, I’m completely myself with him.” How hard does she find it to 
read other people’s emotions? “It sort of depends. If somebody’s actually 
upset, I can probably feel it quicker than other people. I can feel it too 
much. But I can’t usually tell if people are trying to get out of a 
conversation: if people are trying to leave. You have to tell me: ‘We need to 
stop.’ I can’t tell whether people like me or not, which is hard.”

Plenty of non-autistic people have issues with that, I say, myself included. 
“But they seem at peace with it. Even with people I’ve known for a long time, I 
won’t know whether they like me or not unless we’ve had an explicit 
conversation: ‘Do you actually like me?’ Which turns people off.”

When it comes to understanding autism, how much does she think the world still 
needs to change? “Quite a lot. Because I think a lot of people still don’t 
believe it, or think it’s a really mild thing: ‘Well, it just makes it a bit 
harder for her to make friends, makes her a bit more anxious.’ A lot of the 
time, it’s stressful. Painful. When the sensory stuff is happening, it’s like 
you’re being Tasered.” Andrews mentions people flicking their train tickets, or 
jangling their coins, or whistling. “It’s not just, ‘That’s annoying.’ It’s, 
‘That’s unbearable.’ I have said, ‘I’m really sorry, but can you stop doing 
that?’ But people don’t.”

I have one last question. Self-evidently, Andrews is what some people call 
“high-functioning”. When she meets autistic people who are, say, non-verbal, 
does she feel they are part of the same community? “Yes. And I think we have a 
duty, as people who can speak, to make sure that those people are looked after 
properly, and they’re not exploited, and they don’t have inappropriate people 
speaking for them, or saying things like, ‘He’s got a mental age of three.’ How 
would they know, if they can’t communicate with them? From what I can observe, 
they are experiencing the same thing as me. When I’ve seen a non-verbal person 
have a meltdown, it looks like my meltdowns, only more physical. It looks…” She 
thinks for a minute. “It looks like an unrestrained version of how I sometimes 
feel.”

***

In Portsmouth, Jon Adams talks about what many autistic people call “passing”: 
like Andrews’ pretend interest in Australian soaps and techno pets, it’s about 
managing to blend in, even if that means submerging whole chunks of your 
personality. In Adams’ case, passing took its toll and, in his late 30s, he hit 
an emotional wall. “Not being true to yourself has an effect on you,” he says. 
“I’d been married, and that had failed. I had a girlfriend at the time, and 
that was failing. I had a bit of a breakdown, and it took me a couple of years 
to get used to people.”

He started out on a new path as an artist. The work he does ranges across 
disciplines including sculpture and music, and regularly touches on his own 
story. Among his most affecting works is a piece called My School Pen: an 
old-school fountain pen covered in spikes that perfectly evokes his struggles 
as a child.

You might have imperfections, but the basics of the way you view the world are 
right for you
Jon Adams 
In 2007, he was working on a project with a group of teenagers for a charity 
calledthe Foyer Federation <http://foyer.net>. “The woman in charge said, ‘Have 
you ever considered you’re autistic?’” he recalls. “I said, ‘No, what’s that?’” 
She gave him a copy ofMark Haddon’s novel The Curious Incident Of The Dog In 
The Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/13/mark-haddon-curious-incident-book-club>
, now almost a set text for people interested in the condition. “And I went 
away and I read one page and I cried.”

He wells up now. “You might have faults and imperfections, but the basics of 
the way you view the world are right for you. When everybody tells you, ‘No, 
you’re thinking wrong’, you know you’re not. But ifeveryone tells you that, you 
think you’re faulty. That’s the root of the depression and the low 
self-confidence. So to read those things on a page was emotional. It wasvisual. 
I could see that someone understood. And I thought, ‘OK, maybe I am autistic.’” 
It would be another six years before he was formally diagnosed.

For most adults who receive a diagnosis, the formal recognition might make 
belated sense of their lives, but it tends to make little difference to their 
daily existence. According to the National Autistic Society, 70% of adults say 
they don’t get the help they need. People might just about recognise the 
condition’s more extreme manifestations, but as Penny Andrews puts it, “They’re 
probably not aware of the bulk of autistic adults: people who are sitting 
there, coping with a lot of stuff, and the fact that they’re dealing with all 
this noise and stress and uncertainty that they shouldn’t have to.”

Joblessness among autistic adults speaks for itself. Even such mundane things 
as the ubiquity of piped music, or inadequate signage in public spaces, attest 
to the same basic issue: a society averting its eyes from things that blight 
hundreds of thousands of lives and might easily be improved. We fetishise 
“awareness” of autism, but the point needs to be greater understanding – and 
then practical action.

Simon Baron-Cohen cites one big frustration: if autism comes down to an often 
profound difficulty navigating the world, only a tiny number of people 
currently receive the help they need to do that. “Whether it’s about how to go 
shopping, or how to go for a job interview, or how to reply to your girlfriend. 
To me, if we were a civilised society, we’d be paying for mentors. It doesn’t 
seem unreasonable.”

A government programme called Access To Work means that Adams does get help 
from a support worker called Donna, a calm and empathic woman who accompanies 
him to our interview. Donna is copied into all his emails, and in the course of 
Adams’ work as an artist and a researcher into disability and creativity at 
Portsmouth University, she regularly shadows him for a couple of hours a day. 
Among other things, her job is partly to assist him in the kind of reading 
between the lines that professional and social etiquette demands, but that a 
lot of autistic people find difficult. Very often, she explains, she is there 
to suggest that a particular request or instruction is put in a different way, 
or to remind people in authority that Adams has his own ways of working. “You 
might have a three-week time span to do a piece of work,” Adams explains, “and 
if your line manager is checking you each day to find out your progress – well, 
you might not do anything for two weeks: you might be mulling it over in your 
head.”

Autism in the workplace – an opportunity not a drawback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/11/autism-in-the-workplace-an-opportunity-not-a-drawback>
Adams talks a lot about “systemising”, the quintessentially autistic way in 
which he divines patterns in the world, often immersing himself in them. Music 
is a good example. He hasan app called iMini 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/imini-synthesizer/id603340125?mt=8>, which he 
uses to programme sequences of electronic notes into an on-screen keyboard, 
which he can then use if a spurt of anxiety means he needs to readjust. He 
plays me a bit, which I say reminds me of the kind of experimental music that 
came out of Germany in the 1970s. That’s not a coincidence: “I got really into
Tangerine Dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/23/tangerine-dream-founder-edgar-froese-dies>
 in about 1976 – the repeating sequences were heaven for me,” Adams says. He 
also likes the electronic pioneersKraftwerk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kraftwerk>, which rings loud bells. My son 
is a Kraftwerk obsessive, and regularly zeroes in on particular segments of 
their songs and plays them over and over. Does that sound familiar?

“Yes,” Adams says, and his mind goes back to 1978. “I bought Mr Blue Sky by ELO
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjPqsDU0j2I>. There was a track on the other 
side, and it had a very strange beginning. It was calledFire On High 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yt6o03K_y54>, and I’d play it over and over 
and over again.”

Why? “It aligned me. It made me feel that the world was right and everything 
was together. It felt like it was part of me. It’s like all the stars lining 
up.”

He smiles. “Things like that give me the feeling I’m meant to be here.”
 