
Readers have been sharing stories and pictures from journeys across continents 
on one of the most iconic railways in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/oct/05/share-your-memories-and-pictures-of-the-trans-siberian-railway>
. The Trans-Siberian railway spans almost 6,000 miles from Moscow to 
Vladivostock in the east, but many of you have also told tales of the 
Trans-Mongolian route through to China.


From dining cars to cosy cabins to stunning views across the steppe out of the 
windows, here are some of the contributions we’ve received so far.


First, in the compartment

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007140> 
Snacks and beer on the Trans-Siberian 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007140>

My best friend and I backpacked through Russia in 2003 - this was our cabin on 
the Trans-Siberian. In this pic I'm enjoying a bottle of Baltika beer and a 
packet of choco-pie (a kind of Russian variant on the Tunnock's tea-cake.)

Every day the train would stop at a bunch of small towns, and all the traders 
would jump off to sell the crowds of locals whatever goods they were trying to 
offload before the train got moving again. One woman hopefully tried to sell a 
set of crystal chandeliers at every station, but we never saw her get any 
interest.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Lance Concannon <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Lance Concannon> 

5 October 2016, 11:00 

New friends included ...

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007155> 
Home sweet home with my travelling buddy Jimmy 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007155>

I met Jimmy on the Trans-Siberian in 2014. I'd stayed over in Mongolia for a 
couple of weeks whilst heading towards Moscow and then did the rest of the trip 
on the same train. We spent five days drinking, talking and getting shouted at 
by the staff! We parted ways in Moscow but I'll never forget our little cabin 
and brilliant time we had.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By rachelmclafferty <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/rachelmclafferty> 

5 October 2016, 12:26 

Locals among them

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007259> 
Soldier  
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007259>

This young soldier and his girlfriend (or sister?) spoke very little English. 
They were traveling from st Petersburg to Vladivostok, a trip they took 
regularly because it was cheaper and safer than by plane. They were in the same 
room as me, and refused my offer of vodka.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID4721918 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID4721918> 

5 October 2016, 20:04 

But surely you’d be happier pointing the camera out of the window?

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007169> 
A long ride and never changing view 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007169>

I walked the 14 carriages down the train to take a photo from the end window 
everyday, and everyday there was exactly the same view...

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By becca27 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/becca27> 

5 October 2016, 13:23 

The views are expansive ... as were the trains

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007314> 
Trans-Mongolian travelling through China 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007314>

the longest train we'd ever seen, and we were on it!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Chez Les Matthews <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Chez Les Matthews> 

5 October 2016, 23:18 

Keep looking, surely there’ll be something to look at soon ...

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007180> 
Mongolian Steppe 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007180>

This was taken on a very bumpy bus ride through Terelj National Park, Mongolia 
during a 3 week Trans Siberian Railway trip in June, 2013. An unforgettable 
trip!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By csevans1 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/csevans1> 

5 October 2016, 14:00 

We hope this window was closed ... and that you tried the smoked omul 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007263> 
they might be catching

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007138> 
Ice fishing on Lake Baikal 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007138>

These guys were fishing on Lake Baikal, smoking the fish and selling them to 
people on the train. It was January and so cold it was painful to breath the 
air.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID1519791 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID1519791> 

5 October 2016, 10:46 

That’s better – much more clement weather in which to disembark for a closer 
look

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007142> 
Yurt in the Gobi Desert 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007142>

As part of a Trans-Siberian trip in 2008, we made a stop off in the Gobi 
desert and stayed with local people for three nights. An unforgettable 
experience.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By PeeeeBo <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/PeeeeBo> 

5 October 2016, 11:32 

There were some interesting souvenirs to be had ...

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007167> 
Going shopping 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007167>

Plenty of toys on sale (including a whole rocking horse) to keep everyone 
occupied on the long train ride

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By becca27 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/becca27> 

5 October 2016, 13:21 

And some of that fish on sale ...

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007250> 
Late night shop 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007250>

A last ditch attempt to stock up on snacks before the morning from all the 
vendors.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Kim Lucas <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Kim Lucas> 

5 October 2016, 19:55 

... as well as other passengers’ luggage to contend with ...

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007213> 
Mannequin 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007213>

My girlfriend and I entered our cabin in Moscow only to find it stuffed with 
clothes and mannequin legs in the overhead luggage space. This was to be our 
travelling companion for four days on the journey to Ulaanbaatar and it was 
dressed in the latest Moscow fashions and dangled out of the train window as we 
approached provincial towns. Several hundred people would sometimes be waiting 
to haggle with the group of Mongolian traders and their families who travelled 
back and forth to Moscow.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By frankcarson <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/frankcarson> 

5 October 2016, 17:42 

When you reached the end of the road, however, the place often seemed deserted

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007207> 
Ice Cream Stop 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007207>

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By KatEast <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/KatEast> 

5 October 2016, 17:32 

Finally, the trains themselves

 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007249> 
Train 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b/5007249>

A big Russian train 2007

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID4721918 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID4721918> 

5 October 2016, 19:55 

Thanks for all your contribution so far. Click here to see more of your 
pictures 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57f4c2cbe4b0d9ed530ef23b#contribute>
 