
I am an album. I am on vinyl and I am a CD. I am a tour. If you don’t believe 
me you can search for me on Spotify or seek me out in Frankfurt. It seems not 
to be a joke, though for some time I assumed it was. Or, if it is, it is a very 
elaborate joke.

Assuming it is not a joke, I may have to thank Keith Vaz. 


The news was broken to me in an email from a former colleague on this paper. 
“Morning, Alan,” it read. “I’ve been sent an album – by a group sadly 
unfamiliar to me called Woog Riots – that rejoices in the titleAlan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger>. There is a track of the 
same name, too. It’s possible it may not be up your street, but would you like 
to review it?”


The album arrived a few days later. The cover image was of a hard drive 
resting on a bed of velvet green moss. And, in very large letters indeed: ALAN 
RUSBRIDGER.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc3XCS6cxR8c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc3XCS6cxR8c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc3XCS6cxR8c&media=>
Face it, it’s not the catchiest name for an album. If I’d been marketing 
manager of Woog Riots I think I would have advised them to use almost any of 
the other tracks as the album name. Devils on Horseback has a ring to it. Blue 
Dot is gnomic. Or even George Harrison. He was quite well known.


But, no, they went for Alan Rusbridger. There was a charming card explaining 
themselves.


“Dear Mr Rusbridger,” wrote the group. “You must be surprised that a German 
band choosed you name for an album title. The main focus of the album was 
planned to be about surveillance and the Edward Snowden documents. Then German 
TV showed you being questioned by MPs … we really admired the way you fought 
for freedom of the press.

“This again made us realize how important journalism is … That inspired us to 
write the song Alan Rusbridger. When we were done with the whole album it 
turned out that Alan Rusbridger was something like a key song and the perfect 
album title. We hope you don’t mind and enjoy the album.”


My mind went back to my appearance before the home affairs select committee in 
early December 2013 and the unexpected line of questioning from the chair, Mr 
Vaz.


“Some of the criticisms against you and the Guardian have been very, very 
personal. You and I were both born outside this country, but I love this 
country. Do you love this country?”


And now here is Keith on vinyl, too, over an electro-flavoured wailing organ. 
And then the singers burst in repeating his question: “Do you love this 
country, Mr Rusbridger?” Now there is a thudding bass and the tap tap tap of a 
cymbal. “We love people doing what you did.”


The beat picks up. “Everyone should read a good newspaper,” they sing, for all 
the world as if it were a jingle for the Newspaper Marketing Agency. 
“Newspapers made out of wood.” Er, quite.


I do not feel qualified to describe the exact musical genre, but it has been 
variously described as twee-rave or riot pop.One person wrote 
<http://www.clear-spot.nl/item/392252/woog_riots_from_lo_fi_to_disco.html>: 
“Early Modern Lovers meets the soundtrack for a Volkswagen commercial.” Quite 
possibly.


The chorus follows: “I got a voice,” repeated 10 times. After four or so 
verses it ends with two questions: “Why are you connected to my head bone? Why 
you wanna know all my friends?”


Now, I am not sure if it is ethically acceptable to review an album named 
after you, but otherwise I would not hesitate to use the word genius. Yes, it 
is an overused word, but sometimes you have to call it as you see it.


The geniuses behind this genius are Hamburg-based Silvana Battisti and Marc 
Herbert, <> and Alan Rusbridger is their fifth album. Their website shows them 
to be versatile artists, equally at home on the ukulele and themusical saw 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_aqxiEM4cIY&feature=youtu.be>. According to 
theirFacebook page <https://www.facebook.com/woogriots>, nearly all copies of 
Alan Rusbridger had been sold by 31 March – well ahead of the eight-city Alan 
Rusbridger tour.


So if you find yourself in Hamburg or Berlin or Darmstadt over the coming 
months and you fancy hearing Alan Rusbridger, check out the details of theAlan 
Rusbridger tour <http://www.woogriots.de/index.html>.


It appears not to be a joke at all. They are right about newspapers. And it 
may very well be an act of genius.

 