
Case closed. The FBI has found the "Anthrax Killer 
<http://ap.google.com/article/ALeqM5icCsDXbi3Yojuvo5W4j01VxWio0wD92D1KU80>" – 
and he acted alone. And now that he's committed suicide, just at the moment the 
Feds were about to finally snare the diabolical menace who arguably brought 
utter chaos in days following the September 11 attacks when he'd sent deadly 
letters to Democratic officials and members of the media, his guilt couldn't be 
clearer.

Then again, you may have also believed that whole "Mission Accomplished 
<http://mediamatters.org/items/200604270005>" thing.

The case against Dr Bruce Ivins – the widely-respected bio-terror researcher 
at the US army's medical research institute of infectious disease in Fort 
Detrick, Maryland – wasrevealed by the FBI 
<http://blogs.suntimes.com/sweet/2008/08/justice_department_concludes_d.html> 
in a press conference, following his reported suicide the previous week, 
several ensuing days of bad reporting, laughable evidence-free leaks from 
anonymous government officials to media outlets happy to repeat them, growing 
scepticism from experts in the field of bio-terror research, colleagues of 
Ivins' and anybody who bothered to pay close attention beyond the misleading 
headlines.

The trouble began to reveal itself on the Friday, the same day Ivins' death 
was first reported, when experts in the field of bio-terror research notedone 
simple point <http://www.bradblog.com/?p=6239>: Ivins, the FBI's latest 
supposed "Anthrax Killer" (they had just settled a lawsuit with their last one,
Steven Hatfill <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/09/washington/09anthrax.html?hp>
, in June, to the tune of $4.6m dollars) had "no access to dry, powdered 
anthrax" at the Fort Detrick facility.

Furthermore, colleagues of his claimed, had he tried to create any from the 
liquid version kept at the facility, he'd not have been able to do so without 
being noticed. Even after the FBI finally released a limited subset of one-sided
information <http://www.usdoj.gov/amerithrax/> on Wednesday, the scepticism 
from experts and peers has persisted.

In explaining the exceptionally complicated procedure that Ivins would have 
had to secretly carry out in order to turn the liquid bacteria into the dry, 
powdered, weaponised version said to have been used in the letters which killed 
five and injured 21 others, University of Illinois microbiology professor and 
anthrax researcher Brenda Wilsonnoted 
<http://tpmmuckraker.talkingpointsmemo.com/2008/08/scientists_say_many_questions.php>
 that "People would notice what he was doing. People would be aware of him 
doing it. I know what people are doing in my lab. Even if he wanted to be 
sneaky about it, people would know that things were done."

Remember, the lab in question is an extraordinarily high-security facility 
where the world's deadliest bio-weapons are stored and researched.

The FBI notes, however, that it was Ivins himself who was in charge of the 
vial of liquid anthrax genetically identified as the one from which the spores 
used in the attacks had come. They say that he had often returned to the lab 
after hours during the months preceding the first anthrax attack in 
mid-September. But a closer look reveals that, oddly enough,Ivins' late-night 
hours <http://www.talkingpointsmemo.com/docs/amerithrax/> began to spike in 
August of that same year, well before the 9/11 attacks, when the rest of the 
world, including even George Bush, was largely oblivious to threats of Muslim 
extremist-inspired terror – even though it was spelled out for him in an August 
6 2001 presidential briefing paper entitled: "Bin Laden determined to attack 
inside the US".

But still, perhaps it's just a coincidence that both Ivins and Bin Laden had 
the same thing in mind in August of that year. And that Ivins was unable to 
adequately explain his night-time presence in the lab during that period as 
anything more than an escape from problems at home, is seemingly "close enough" 
for the FBI in building their admittedly wholly circumstantial case. That
hundreds of scientists also had access 
<http://anthraxvaccine.blogspot.com/2008/08/more-than-100-people-had-access.html>
 to the same vial of spores also seems of little concern to the federal 
investigators who said they are "now beginning the process of concluding this 
investigation".

There is little doubt that Ivins was a troubled man. Though whether he became 
troubled enough to kill himself before or after the relentless hounding of 
investigators (who showed photos of anthrax victims to his daughter and 
declared "your father did this" and fruitlessly offered $2.5m to his son as 
enticement to turn on his own father) is yet another open question.

Then there's the therapist who treated Ivins for the last six months or so, 
until being encouraged by the FBI to go to a judge to seek a restraining order 
against him. But the social worker, Jean Duley, whoseembarrassing hand-scrawled 
statement <http://www.thesmokinggun.com/archive/years/2008/0801081anthrax2.html>
 to the judge, declaring Ivins "homicidal" and "sociopathic" and bent on 
revenge killings as long as ago as 2000 – and who spelled therapist as 
"theripist" – hasher own problems 
<http://www.atlargely.com/2008/08/jean-c-duley-te.html>, including a rap sheet 
for drunk driving, possession of narcotics paraphernalia, and apparently no job 
or money for an attorney since sheno longer works 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601087&sid=aGwtzOlYDSok&refer=home> 
at the Maryland facility where she supposedly treated Ivins.

Notably lacking in the FBI's case, is corroboration of the deadly threats of 
revenge killings made by Ivins in group therapy, according to Duley. Nobody 
else from those sessions has spoken up? And if Ivins was known to have begun 
his killing spree in 2000, and theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> 
knew about it, why was he allowed to continue working in the lab, with his 
high-security clearance as late as just last month? Why was he allowed to roam 
free for that matter?

Never mind that. A set of emails, culled from thousands on Ivins' seized 
computers, presumably sent to folks whose names were redacted (so we'll just 
have to presume they're real), reveal one particularly damning piece of 
evidence highlighted in the FBI's case. Ivins wrote, in the middle of a longer 
note on September 26th, 2001: "I just heard tonight that Bin Laden terrorists 
for sure have anthrax and sarin gas." And later in the same letter: "Osama Bin 
Laden has just decreed death to all Jews and all Americans."

That note, the feds say, displays "language similar to the text of the anthrax 
letters postmarked two weeks later warning 'DEATH TO AMERICA,' 'DEATH TO 
ISRAEL.'"

What the FBI doesn't note, is that the first anthrax letter, sent to NBC 
anchor-man Tom Brokaw, was postmarked on September 18, a week before the Ivins 
email, and read: "THIS IS NEXT ... TAKE PENACILIN [sic] NOW ... DEATH TO 
AMERICA ... DEATH TO ISRAEL ... ALLAH IS GREAT."

And what the media, by and large, failed to note when reporting the Fed's 
less-than-convincing squib of evidence, was the first part of Ivins' sentence - 
the part declaring that Ivins had "just heard tonight" about Bin Laden having 
deadly biological weapons.

We're already down into the weeds, so we'll have to get to the sorority girls 
nonsense <http://www.bradblog.com/?p=6247> at another time. Citizen journalists 
on the internet such asGlenn Greenwald 
<http://www.salon.com/opinion/greenwald/2008/08/05/anthrax/>, the folks at 
Talking Points Memo <http://tpmmuckraker.talkingpointsmemo.com/anthrax/>, 
Larissa Alexandrovna ofat-Largely <http://www.atlargely.com/>, Marcy Wheeler of 
EmptyWheel <http://emptywheel.firedoglake.com/> and even my own blog 
<http://www.bradblog.com/>, have already dispatched the absurd claims from both 
those "unnamed government sources" presented to us in the American corporate 
media over the last several days, as well as the FBI's own case.

Sure, Ivins could be the man – the terrorist 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/cenk-uygur/why-is-no-one-calling-the_b_117507.html>
 – who, all by himself, carried out multiple terror attacks on American soil 
after 9/11 (despite repeated claims that we've had none, made by untold 
supporters of Bush who argue there have been no such attacks since 9/11) as the 
FBI has definitively argued. But the actual evidence presented in the case 
falls far short of proving it. And I'm being kind.

But for most who read only the headlines, the last unsolved terrorist attack 
has now been sealed up and can be added to the great success of the "war on 
terror" where "the surge has worked" in Iraq, all is well in Afghanistan and 
"We're fighting them there so we don't have to fight them over here," cause 
that's what we've been told by the government and the American corporate media 
(and I dare you to explain to me the difference between the two.)

Anybody who bothers to look below the headlines, to notice what America has 
become in the bargain – an outlaw nation of organized anarchy, wholly bereft of 
the watchdogs in the media, the government and the courts on whom we once we 
relied upon – in the years since those now-solved anthrax attacks is just a 
deluded, paranoid, conspiracy nut. Like Ivins.

Mission Accomplished.

Try not to notice the report from Associated Press 
<http://ap.google.com/article/ALeqM5icCsDXbi3Yojuvo5W4j01VxWio0wD92DLM6O4> last 
Thursday, not 24 hours after we were informed the FBI had their man. AP's lede: 
"The government is still searching for evidence that Bruce Ivins was solely 
responsible for the 2001 anthrax attacks despite declaring the case solved."
 