
Scraps of broken pottery from test pits dug by thousands of members of the 
public have revealed the devastating impact of theBlack Death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/17/black-death-rats-off-hook> in 
England, not just in the years 1346 to 1351 when the epidemic ripped Europe 
apart, but for decades or even centuries afterwards.

The quantity of sherds of everyday domestic pottery - the most common of 
archaeological finds - is a good indicator of the human population because of 
its widespread daily use, and the ease with which it can be broken and thrown 
away. By digging standard-sized test pits, then counting and comparing the 
broken pottery by number and weight from different date levels, a pattern 
emerges of humans living on a particular site.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Feye-watering-scale-of-black-deaths-impact-on-england-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bba5f0ed41813e40f79b40027a0e74595c92615%2F0_0_1531_1148%2F1531.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Eye-watering'%20scale%20of%20Black%20Death's%20impact%20on%20England%20revealed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Feye-watering-scale-of-black-deaths-impact-on-england-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Eye-watering%27%20scale%20of%20Black%20Death%27s%20impact%20on%20England%20revealed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Feye-watering-scale-of-black-deaths-impact-on-england-revealed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bba5f0ed41813e40f79b40027a0e74595c92615%2F0_0_1531_1148%2F1531.jpg>
 The volunteers excavated in six eastern counties, at 55 currently occupied 
rural locations also known to have been 14th century settlements. Photograph: 
University of Lincoln 
Professor Carenza Lewis has analysed of tens of thousands of bits of datable 
broken pottery, excavated from almost 2,000 test pits in eastern England. The 
sherds, taken from the levels relating to the periods before and after the 
Black Death, suggest a population collapse of around 45%. In some areas, such 
as Binham, north Norfolk, where there was a 71% fall in the amount of pottery, 
the figure is much worse.

Lewis, famous from her years on Time Team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/oct/19/channel-4-time-team>, now 
professor of public understanding of research at the University of Lincoln, has 
used the data to map the aftermath of the Black Death She reports her findings 
innext month’s Antiquity 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0003598X16000697> journal.

Lewis says that the devastation of the Black Death, regarded as exaggerated by 
some 20th century historians, was actually “on an eye-watering scale”. Its true 
extent, she believes, was masked by eventual post-medieval regrowth.

Since her volunteers excavated only in six eastern counties, at 55 currently 
occupied rural locations also known to have been 14th century settlements, she 
believes her figures may be conservative, missing many places where the 
population was completely wiped out and the area permanently abandoned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Feye-watering-scale-of-black-deaths-impact-on-england-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c9026cd76b6915162c9b93e1e925354ce4730e%2F0_0_753_1148%2F753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Eye-watering'%20scale%20of%20Black%20Death's%20impact%20on%20England%20revealed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Feye-watering-scale-of-black-deaths-impact-on-england-revealed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Eye-watering%27%20scale%20of%20Black%20Death%27s%20impact%20on%20England%20revealed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Feye-watering-scale-of-black-deaths-impact-on-england-revealed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c9026cd76b6915162c9b93e1e925354ce4730e%2F0_0_753_1148%2F753.jpg>
 In Binham, north Norfolk, there was a 71% fall in the amount of pottery found, 
indicating a catastrophic population collapse. Photograph: University of Lincoln
Her analysis bears out the terrified contemporary accounts of people who lived 
through the epidemic and saw their world collapse around them. The impact on 
individual communities was catastrophic. At Cottenham in Cambridgeshire, where 
at least 33 out of 58 tenants died, “ruinous” houses were still being reported 
two centuries later.

Some 20th century historians had begun to question the scale of the epidemic, 
partly because relatively few plague pit burials have been found, but Lewis’s 
research bears out the most dire medieval accounts: overall her analysis across 
East Anglia illustrates an average decline of 44.7% in 90% of the settlements 
excavated. The pattern was uneven: Norfolk showed a 65% decline - up to 85% at 
Gaywood and Paston - far worse than Essex or Suffolk. Before the Black Death, 
Great Shelford in Cambridgeshire was a sprawling medieval village, stretching 
more than a kilometre along a high street and two greens: afterwards it was 
reduced to a single 200m row of houses beside the church.

The excavation of some 2,000 one square metre pits was carried out under 
archaeological supervision by volunteer members of the public, some of whom 
were literally digging in their back gardens. The technique could easily be 
applied to a further study across other English regions, and indeed across 
Europe, Lewis suggests.

Her paper ends on a sombre note. “This disease is still endemic in parts of 
today’s world, and could once again become a major killer, should resistance to 
the antibiotics now used to treat it spread amongst tomorrow’s bacteriological 
descendants of the fourteenth-centuryYersinia pestis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/22/plague-has-infected-humans-since-bronze-age-dna-study-shows>
. We have been warned.”

• This article was amended on 26 May 2016. An earlier version said Binham was 
in Norwich.
 