
Two months after my second visit to the Gender Identity Clinic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/01/transgender-mental-health>
, I made an appointment with my GP. Havingdecided against saving sperm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/14/transgender-freezing-sperm>
, I was finally arranging my hormone prescription, which the clinic had sent to 
my surgery.

At least, I assumed they had – I'd seen no confirmation. After a second summer 
trying to 'pass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman>', 
struggling with the increased scrutiny that comes with wearing less (especially 
with the heat ruining my hair and makeup), I was keen to start myhormone 
replacement therapy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hormone_replacement_therapy_%28male-to-female%29>
, knowing that this would be a vital step towards my goal. The GIC had asked 
what I anticipated: some facial feminisation, hip growth and breast 
development, I said, having researched the physical effects on transsexual 
women (which are similar to those for pubertal cisgender women). The 
psychological consequences, I said, remained to be seen.

Returning from leave, my GP couldn't find the GIC's letter, and asked if I 
could remember my prescription. I couldn't. He checked what was available in a 
book, but none of the oestrogens listed sounded familiar. Finally locating the 
correspondence, he found a recommendation forestradiol 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estradiol>, starting on 2mg and rising to 4mg 
after a few months.

I asked if I'd need an anti-androgen shot to suppress my testosterone, as I'd 
heard from friends that it was often combined with HRT. I didn't recall the GIC 
mentioning it, though; finding no information, my doctor said no, and I rushed 
to the pharmacy. Finally, after fifteen months of street abuse, long waits for 
appointments and anxiety over what to disclose to psychiatrists, I was going to 
get my medication and start aligning my body with my mind.

A trip to the pharmacy

Juliet: Can I have my hormones please?
Pharmacist: Yes.

With the small orange-pink tablets came a leaflet headed "Elleste Solo™ 1mg 
and 2mg (estradiol hemihydrate 
<http://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/ estradiol+hemihydrate>)" 
(Incidentally, this drugcosts the NHS nearly two pounds less than the £7.20 
prescription charge 
<http://www.cks.nhs.uk/menopause/drugs_in_this_topic/scenario_premature_menopause/elleste_solo_2mg_tablets>
.) This explained that "Elleste Solo treats the symptoms of menopause (change 
of life). It is usually given to women who have had a hysterectomy (had their 
womb removed)." For me, what it didn't say was more interesting than what it 
did: there was no mention of transsexual women anywhere. Not knowing if the 
side effects that might trouble menopausal women could bother me, I took my 
first pill, resisting the temptation to double or treble my dose.

Although I didn't expect any visible changes for at least a few weeks, I 
warned acquaintances in advance about my anticipated second puberty. This, I 
expected, would mainly involve paintingSmiths lyrics 
<http://www.sing365.com/music/lyric.nsf/SHEILA-TAKE-A-BOW-lyrics-The-Smiths/15923F622FCD1F0C482568AB00298D48>
 on a satchel in Tippex and insisting that not only were the Manics 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lTUR4InMVjQ> better before they "sold out", but 
also thatI discovered the band before they did 
<http://www.chrisrand.com/hmhb/look-dad-no-tunes-ep/lock-up-your-mountain-bikes/>
. Several, I suspected, were hoping to see tears and tantrums (I half-expected 
one in particular to install a hidden camera at my desk) but with the low dose, 
I noticed very little initial effect: I attributed my rising anger toditching 
antidepressants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/05/transgender-journey-depression>
 rather than oestrogen.

These preconceptions about the effects made me reconsider Julia Serano's 
assertion that hormones have become heavily politicised 
<http://www.thescavenger.net/glbsgdq/whipping-girl-interview-with-trans-feminist-julia-serano-28675.html>
, with male aggression often blamed on testosterone and valid female emotions 
and opinions frequently dismissed as oestrogenic. I only felt angrier in the 
office, and soon recognised that my mood owed more to the frustrating realities 
of working fora public sector organisation placed on long notice by a 
government I despised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jan/03/tories-chaos-nhs-sack-lansley>
 than anything else, and tried harder to place my feelings into a social rather 
than chemical context.

My opinions, tastes and interests haven't changed at all, nor has the overall 
balance of my emotions (as far as I can tell, anyway) although now I find my 
feelings a bit harder to ignore, with higher highs and lower lows. Before, I'd 
always felt that my emotions were somehow flattened: I'd often been told that 
the hormones would make me cry more often – not just at things that directly 
affected me – which proved true. I'd always felt emotionally curtailed when 
confronted with sadness, despite understanding the absurdity of phrases such as 
"boys don't cry <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9GkVhgIeGJQ>": the first time I 
noticed this change came as I read a book byOta Pavel 
<http://www.radio.cz/en/section/czechs/bittersweet-prose-a-look-at-the-life-and-work-of-writer-ota-pavel>
, bursting into – strangely cathartic – tears during a story about his elderly 
father's final breakdown.

Having dealt with depression for so long, I'd feared the anticipated lows, but 
they were counterbalanced by the physical changes, slowly but surely modifying 
my body, beginning a second distinct stage of addressing my lifelong sense of 
visceral unease. This one, making me comfortable within myself, felt as 
important asthe first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>, which 
made me content within my world. (Plenty of transsexual people, of course, 
address both concurrently.)

As I watched it slowly change, I realised that I'd never quite felt 'trapped 
in the wrong body', as the cliché goes: more that I could only function if I 
re-launched the symbiotic relationship between my body and mind from a starting 
position that felt right. Afterseeking an alternative for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/16/transgender-journey-trans-counter-culture>
, considering competing social pressures not to modify my body and not to 
present as female without making that presentation as unambiguous as possible, 
the realisation that medically transitioning was the best solution for me was 
genuinely liberating. Finally, slowly, my body was catching up with my mind.

• Juliet Jacques's column appears fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 