
Bemelmans Bar at the Carlyle Hotel is a fitting place to meet Sarah Bakewell 
to discuss her new book, At the Existentialist Cafe. Not for the wall art by 
the bar’s namesake, Ludwig, the author ofthe Madeline stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/24/madeline-by-ludwig-bemelmans-bright-mischief-quiet-melancholy>
 (“In old houses in Paris that were covered in vines, lived 12 existentialists 
writing lines upon lines”) but for the convivial din.

At the Existentialist Café: Freedom, Being, and Apricot Cocktails by Sarah 
Bakewell – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/28/existentialist-cafe-freedom-being-apricot-cocktails-sarah-bakewell-review>
Waiters bring manhattans while a pianist plays jazz. At the closely packed 
tables, conversations buzz. It is a distinctly pleasant way to conduct an 
interview. It is also distinctly difficult to hear.

Bakewell, though, is on a publicity tour, and three days later she is at 
Albertine <http://albertine.com/>, a bookstore run by the Cultural Services of 
the French Embassy, for a Q&A withNew Yorker writer Kathryn Schulz 
<http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/kathryn-schulz>.

Bakewell’s last book, How to Live: A Life of Montaigne in One Question and 
Twenty Attempts at an Answer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/24/how-to-live-montaigne-bakewell>, 
was a bestseller and award winner on both sides of the Atlantic. Researching 
it, she tells Schulz, she read an essay on Montaigne by Maurice Merleau-Ponty.
That took her back to existentialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/04/ten-reasons-to-be-an-existentialist>
, which she read eagerly as an adolescent, and to the existentialists 
themselves. Hence the new book, which seeks to present some familiar names and 
ideas afresh – possibly, to rehabilitate them.

In America, even as the 70th anniversary of Albert Camus’ famous visit 
<https://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/the-limits-of-absurdity> is celebrated, 
Bakewell’s book seems timely. Much of the existentialists’ work is out of 
favour, their political leanings questioned,their personal lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jun/10/gender.politicsphilosophyandsociety>
 held up as examples of hownot to live. Under the porphyry columns and gold 
leaf of Albertine, Bakewell is obliged to play defense, batting back assertions 
such as a suggestion from Schulz that no one “would want to be an 
existentialist now”.

Bakewell points out that much of what Camus, Merleau-Ponty, Jean-Paul Sartre 
andSimone de Beauvoir <https://www.theguardian.com/books/simonedebeauvoir> 
thought and did “only makes sense in context”. And in that context, she says, 
the existentialists were concerned primarily with “freedom, or their idea of 
it”.

At the Existentialist Cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/17/at-the-existentialist-cafe-by-sarah-bakewell>
 begins in Germany after the first world war, with Edmund Husserl and his pupil 
Martin Heidegger. It spans the rise of Nazism and Soviet communism, before 
taking flight after the second world war in a Paris scarred by occupation and 
scared by the bomb, yet intoxicated by the rich possibilities of freedom.

Bakewell discusses this and more, including her elevation of Simone de 
Beauvoir’s feminist masterpiece,The Second Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/12/society.simonedebeauvoir>, to 
the status of key existentialist text. One reason de Beauvoir’s book has not 
been seen as such, Bakewell says in her very British way – self-deprecating, 
funny – is that, as she writes, US publishers tended to put “misty-focus naked 
women on the cover, making it look like a work of soft porn”. Also, the first 
American translator took all the existentialism out.

•••
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fsarah-bakewell-at-the-existentialist-cafe-book-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecaccd70067e905ac7c3c318a2be21f25a16eb32%2F0_307_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Freedom%2C%20or%20their%20idea%20of%20it'%3A%20does%20America%20need%20the%20existentialists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fsarah-bakewell-at-the-existentialist-cafe-book-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Freedom%2C%20or%20their%20idea%20of%20it%27%3A%20does%20America%20need%20the%20existentialists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fsarah-bakewell-at-the-existentialist-cafe-book-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecaccd70067e905ac7c3c318a2be21f25a16eb32%2F0_307_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 ‘All existentialism is applied existentialism,’ says Sarah Bakewell, arguing 
for its relevance to modern life. Photograph: Tundi Euhenia Haulik 
The tape from Bemelmans, it turns out, is salvageable. Shouting over the 
hammering yammer of Friday night in Manhattan, we discuss freedom – or 
America’s idea of it. It’s an attempt on my part to work out why 
existentialism, with its emphasis on freedom and responsibility, should not be 
so popular here.

This is also the year of a presidential election in which, surprise surprise, 
freedom is a constant buzzword. So, I suggest, the American idea of freedom is 
different. For one thing, God isn’t dead here. For another, the American notion 
of freedom tends towards the individual.

“Once Sartre and de Beauvoir became politicised,” Bakewell says, “they said 
that since one is free, what one does really matters. You must choose what you 
do as if you were choosing for the whole of humanity.

“They drew from that the idea that being free is being responsible, and being 
responsible is being committed, being engaged.

“It’s interesting. If it wasn’t for their desire to act for the benefit of 
humanity, if they had just thought you should act for the individual, 
[existentialism] would actually be a much more unpleasant philosophy than it 
is, even though that’s what led them into support for communism.

“It also led them out of having a horrible sort of Ayn Rand, look out for No1, 
greed is good theory – the Gordon Gekko strand of existentialism. They made 
that impossible for themselves.”

[It's not] a horrible Ayn Rand, look out for No1, greed is good theory: the 
Gordon Gekko strand of existentialism
Sarah Bakewell 
Some in the Republican party – House speaker and supposed presidential white 
knight Paul Ryan comes to mind – arequite fond of Ayn Rand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/16/paul-ryan-ayn-rand-admirer>. 
Many voters do not feel noticeably averse to thegreed-is-good 
<http://www.dailywire.com/news/3005/donald-trump-says-greed-good-aaron-bandler> 
of Donald Trump. So, the inevitable question: how would an existentialist have 
dealt with the rise of The Donald?

Quite rightly, Bakewell laughs. “I think he wouldn’t have a lot to say, beyond 
being horrified … It would be more interesting to ask what a psychoanalyst 
would say, about where this rage comes from. I’m afraid Sartre would just see 
it as yet another example of why capitalism is no good.”

And there’s the political point again: the existentialists are tarred by their 
leftwing allegiances. Sartre, for example, supported Stalin, Chairman Mao and 
even Pol Pot.

“He was trying to do the right thing,” Bakewell says, with a very British 
grimace. “To us now it doesn’t seem he did do the right thing, and maybe he 
didn’t. But he was trying.”

Such modern distrust is evident, Bakewell says, “not only here. The same 
happens in Britain and in France to some extent. History hasn’t been kind to 
Sartre’s attempt to reconcile Marxism with existentialism.

“[But] he wasn’t a communist all his life and … his brand of existentialism, 
emphasising freedom, didn’t do anything for the communist ideal. He was in 
trouble with the communists as often as he was in trouble with the right. He 
was usually in trouble with everybody, which is one of the things I quite 
admire him for.

“What I wanted to do in the book was to try to understand his motive, what led 
him to try so hard to reconcile two ideas that cannot be reconciled.”

•••
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fsarah-bakewell-at-the-existentialist-cafe-book-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8be625701f8830341a4e8a9d98b43bf8908d5a16%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Freedom%2C%20or%20their%20idea%20of%20it'%3A%20does%20America%20need%20the%20existentialists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fsarah-bakewell-at-the-existentialist-cafe-book-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Freedom%2C%20or%20their%20idea%20of%20it%27%3A%20does%20America%20need%20the%20existentialists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fsarah-bakewell-at-the-existentialist-cafe-book-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8be625701f8830341a4e8a9d98b43bf8908d5a16%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Albert Camus, 1957 Nobel laureate for literature, seen in 1959. Photograph: 
-/AFP/Getty Images 
Think big, be free, have sex … 10 reasons to be an existentialist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/04/ten-reasons-to-be-an-existentialist>
There is much to be mined from the existentialists’ experience of America, 
much of it with distinct contemporary relevance.

“All existentialism is applied existentialism,” Bakewell says at Albertine. 
It’s one of her central contentions: that a philosophy squarely based on 
experience – rather than the text – must have something of value for anyone who 
reads it.

She repeats, admiringly, Sartre’s contention that in any situation one must 
identify those who will be most disadvantaged, and take their side. At 
Bemelmans, conversation turns, briefly, to the rise of Bernie Sanders.

Then we discuss the NSA and Edward Snowden. Towards the end of her book, 
Bakewell ponders the possibilities of existentialist thinking in the modern 
surveillance state. If we know we are surveilled – not free – we must choose to 
act responsibly, not live unquestioningly, in what Sartre called bad faith.

We discuss Norman Mailer’s infamous – and infamously dull – 1957 essay on 
existentialism in America,The White Negro 
<https://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/the-white-negro-fall-1957>, 
with its expression of nuclear dread. And as we talk, governments worldwide are 
expressing the fear that terroristscould obtain nuclear material 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/01/obama-nuclear-security-summit-stop-madmen-isis-terrorism>
.

Bakewell says: “It’s something that was said by both Sartre and Camus at the 
end of the second world war, after Hiroshima and Nagasaki … that from now on 
the human race always has to live with the knowledge that it can destroy 
itself, and therefore we must decide every day that we want to live, and to 
engage. That’s really the fundamental idea about existentialism, put in a very 
bleak context. It’s not easy.”

Coincidentally, discussion of Bakewell’s own experiences of America, which are 
similar to those of her subjects, also touches on the nuclear question.

Sartre was usually in trouble with everybody, which is one of the things I 
quite admire him for
Sarah Bakewell 
“My view of America is such a mixture of enormous admiration and affection 
mixed with a kind of terror,” she says. “I just came from Washington DC this 
morning, and admittedly this is enhanced at the moment becausethe nuclear summit
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/nuclear-security-summit-obama-russia-absence>
 is going on and there are 50 heads of state in town, but … there is this 
feeling of raw power, even in the architecture of the place.

“To European eyes it’s at once very, very impressive and exciting, and really 
quite freaky.”

The existentialists experienced variations on such thoughts when they visited, 
Bakewell says, “One by one, Sartre in 1945, Camus in 1946 and de Beauvoir in 
1947. And all of them were just amazed, by the colour, the prosperity, the 
advertising, the technology and the sheer optimism.”

De Beauvoir loved the neon glare of Times Square, to the point of wanting to 
take bites from the signs. She spent time witha lover, Nelson Algren 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/first/d/debeauvoir-love.html>, in Chicago. 
Sartre marvelled at American technology and the apparent happiness of the 
American worker.Camus wasn’t particularly enamoured 
<http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/07/14/sartre-and-camus-in-new-york/?_r=0>
 – other than by some locals taking him fora French Humphrey Bogart 
<https://lareviewofbooks.org/essay/the-limits-of-absurdity> – until he spent 
some time with the down and outs of New York City.

“They had come out of Paris where there was rationing,” Bakewell says, “where 
they had been struggling just to feed themselves and heat themselves and the 
streets were drab and grey.

“Camus, for instance, felt quite out of his depth in New York. Until he went 
to the Lower East Side, to the Bowery. And then he said, ‘Ah! Now I feel at 
home.’”

 * At the Existentialist Café: Freedom, Being and Apricot Cocktails, is 
published in the US byOther Press 
<http://www.otherpress.com/books/at-the-existentialist-cafe/> and in the UK by 
Chatto & Windus 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/1089993/at-the-existentialist-cafe/>. Sarah 
Bakewell appears at the Los Angeles Times Book Prizes (9 April), the Los 
Angeles Times Festival of Books (10 April), Town Hall Seattle (11 April) and 
Flying Books in Toronto (13 April)  