
After living in fear for so long, coming out had been hugely liberating, but I 
gradually forgot that as I addressed the many challenges it raised. Once I 
realised that I could progress through the medical pathway more easily than I'd 
thought, and after I'd ensured that my relationships withfamily 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/14/tell-family-transgender>, 
friends andcolleagues 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
 would not break down, I began to consider what possibilities transitioning 
might open up for me.

During my teenage years in the closet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/02/transgender-journey>, I had 
a complex relationship with thedrag queens 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drag_queen> I saw on TV. The trashy British acts 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_O%27Grady#Lily_Savage:_1977.E2.80.932005.2C_2010.E2.80.932011>
 alienated me, with their clichéd caricatures of femininity: my gender issues 
felt serious, and the mockery these performers invited didn't seem too helpful. 
I liked the more self-respecting Americans, though: I never wanted to be 
exactly like the more 'fabulous' drag artists (such asRuPaul 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RuPaul>), but I admired their conviction that you 
shouldn't let your detractors stop you from being yourself, and the panache 
with which they expressed it.

As I delved deeper into transgender subculture 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/16/transgender-journey-trans-counter-culture>
, I found the performance artists in spaces such asClub Wotever 
<http://woteverworld.com> thoroughly inspirational. One of my favourite 
discoveries was 'post-drag', which aimed to inject contemporary queer politics 
into this tired old trope (this piece 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lFXXciWOIBY> about Stonewall 
<http://www.workers.org/ww/1998/sylvia0702.php> by Michael Twaits 
<http://www.michaeltwaits.com/> is my favourite), but the ones I liked most 
were those whose acts centred around their own experiences. Their honest, 
humorous stories, with their colourful style and good-natured audience rapport, 
helped me find the resolve to accept and announce my transsexual status.

Shortly before beginning my transition, I'd made friends with some of these 
performers, particularlyJet Moon <http://www.jetmoon.net/>, whose headline act 
with theQueer Belgrade <http://www.eng.queerbeograd.org/> collective at 
Transfabulous 2008 <http://www.transfabulous.co.uk/previousevents.html> had so 
impressed me. When Jet told me that she wanted to arrange a show featuring 
people new to the stage, I jumped at the chance. As a youth, I'd always wanted 
to perform, but playing male roles (as I did a few times) never felt right; I 
never wanted to do 'drag' either, as I knew this would sell my identity short. 
More confident in my gender after a yearliving as female 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>, I was 
happy to be involved – and excited about how I might share my journey.

Jet and I co-wrote a script 
<http://julietjacques.blogspot.com/2010/07/justin-and-juliet-piece-for-jet-moons.html>
 about my youthful struggles with social pressure to be 'masculine', and 
particularly my identification with footballerJustin Fashanu 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/obituary-justin-fashanu-1161484.html>
, before and after he died. This formed part ofJet Moon's Speakeasy 
<http://jetmoon.net/index.php?option=com_content&view=section&layout=blog&id=7&Itemid=57>
, a collection of stories written with queer and transgendered people about how 
they realised themselves.

The Arcola Theatre <http://www.arcolatheatre.com/> audience, containing plenty 
with similar biographies, were entirely onside (Jet had no trouble getting them 
to sing Happy Birthday to her). They lovedNatacha 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/natacha-kennedy>'s piece on the complexities 
of being a non-transitioning transgender woman, as well as Iris's story of 
moving across Europe, her Arabic heritage disdained in Belgrade and her Serbian 
parentage attracting scorn elsewhere.Jason Elvis Barker 
<http://www.jasonelvis.co.uk/>'s comic monologue on being a pregnant man 
following theThomas Beatie 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/us_and_americas/article3628860.ece>
 furore and Greg Renegado's story about growing up queer on a Dublin estate 
were also well received. (His learning to masturbate from a Mary Whitehouse 
text in his local library was my personal highlight.)

Following Jet's piece about being "raised by drag queens", I knew I'd be 
preaching to the converted. After months ofbeing heckled on the street 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman> (and 
occasionallyonline 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/series/transgender-journey>), this 
prompted no existential crisis (unusually for me): for once, I was more worried 
about losing people by discussingfootball 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/nov/28/norwich-city-ipswich-town-championship>
 than gender. Once I'd got cheers for juggling aJabulani 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/sport/football/international/article7148997.ece>
 in a skirt and heels (OK,wedges), even when I shanked it 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e4fzeK3SQa4> at the fire exit (England's finest 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QiACmicAPxE> couldn't control that thing, so 
what hope did I have?), I realised that I could communicate more freely than 
ever, without the restraints subtly imposed by the everyday stares and 
occasional taunts.

Underlying some of those stares and taunts is the assumption that my gender 
itself is a "performance": that is,false (or less real than other people's). 
Well, itis largely performative, as it is for everyone: my style and mannerisms 
develop in relation to my personality, changing over time, and I enjoy the 
creative potential inherent in this. Perhaps I'm more aware of this process 
because I felt barred from realising it as I wished for so long – like many 
transgendered people over the years, I turned to the stage, allowing me to 
explore it entirely on my own terms.

This needs the right foundation, though: my pre-transitional ambitions to 
perform (or achieve low-level sartorial elegance in my daily life) failed 
because my sex never felt secure. In hindsight, his scuppered my absurd 
undergraduate dream of becomingavant-garde in every walk of life, which was 
really a manifestation of the gulf between my body and my mind, and my 
repression of my transsexual impulse. (Its main consequence was that nobody 
came to my parties for fear of theplaylist 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w9lwuojEREI>. Still, people have done worse 
after reading too much Nietzsche.)

With the resolution of my fundamental body issues in hand, toying with 
gendered objects and concepts became much easier: not only empowering in its 
own right, it meant that finally, I'd found acommunity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/20/transsexual-community> to 
which I wanted to belong. All this before I'd even got my hormone prescription …
 