
Tintin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tintin> expert Benoit Peeters has 
been appointed as the UK’s first ever comics professor, in a move which 
Lancaster University said marked its “full academic commitment” to comic book 
art.

Peeters, author of a biography of Tintin’s creator Hergé and other titles 
about the quiffed Belgian adventurer, will take up his three-year post as 
visiting professor in graphic fiction and comic art next summer. He will, said 
Lancaster, be delivering a series of lectures, running creative writing 
workshops and supervising post-graduate students. The university described his 
appointment to what it said was the first such position in the UK as 
“significant”, adding that it demonstrates its “full academic commitment to 
placing comic book art not just in its creative writing and literature 
department, but also across its wider disciplines, including philosophy”.

We are at a very important moment for the graphic form

Peeters is also the author of biographies of 19th-century comics pioneer 
Rodolphe Töpffer, and French philosopher Derrida, and the co-creator of the 
well-known Belgian comic stripLes Cités Obscures <https://www.altaplana.be/>. 
He said he planned to use the position to explore the “connections between the 
history of graphic fiction and contemporary creation, between the world of 
French and Belgianbande dessinée, and the world of comics and graphic novels”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fgreat-snakes-tintin-expert-appointed-uks-first-comics-professor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51f06015e6d1a1f1fbbdb3faa7ac570222edebee%2F0_18_1076_646%2F1076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Great%20snakes!'%20Tintin%20expert%20appointed%20UK's%20first%20comics%20professor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fgreat-snakes-tintin-expert-appointed-uks-first-comics-professor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Great%20snakes%21%27%20Tintin%20expert%20appointed%20UK%27s%20first%20comics%20professor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fgreat-snakes-tintin-expert-appointed-uks-first-comics-professor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51f06015e6d1a1f1fbbdb3faa7ac570222edebee%2F0_18_1076_646%2F1076.jpg>
 Les Cités Obscures … Benoit Peeters is the co-creator of this series. 
Photograph: Peeters-Schuiten-Casterman/de Formanoir/Coll. King Baudouin 
Foundation 
“I’ve been fascinated for 20 years by everything about comics and graphic 
novels. When I began my research I had hoped the medium would develop in an 
adult and sophisticated way, and this has been the case,” he told the Guardian 
on Thursday. “We are at a very important and interesting moment, for new 
possibilities for the graphic form.”

Peeters said that when he was a student in Paris, he wanted to write his PhD 
on the comics medium, “but that was totally impossible at that time”.

“For a long time France was very conservative about these things. I never 
could have anticipated a proposal like this from Lancaster, so it’s really 
something exciting for me. Canada is different, Belgium is different, but the 
academic world in France – they don’t consider it an academic pursuit,” he 
said. “Things are changing and they will change because it is such an important 
medium. It’s important economically, it’s important sociologically, and it’s 
important in connection with other media, such as movies.”

Citing contemporary works such as Art Spiegelman’s Maus, Chris Ware’s Building 
Stories, and Marjane Satrapi’s Persepolis, as well as the “masterpiece” which 
is Tintin, Peeters said that “we have so many comics – everyday stories, 
fantastical stories, serious stories, funny stories”, that “even those who are 
most sceptical can find at least one book, one author, who will speak directly 
to them”.

“Even if you don’t like [the form], you can see that it is an intellectual 
field to explore, whose history is not complete, and whose aesthetic can be 
explored,” he said.

Peeters’ role at Lancaster has been created in “close working partnership” 
with the Lakes International comic art festival in October, said the 
university. Festival director Julie Tait said she was “delighted that the 
university is simultaneously recognising and celebrating the intellectual 
contribution of comic art to British cultural life, putting the comic medium on 
a par with the status accorded to this form elsewhere in Europe”.
 