
Abdul came to the UK six years ago, a refugee from Afghanistan, at the age of 
15 and without a word of English. It took him three months just to learn the 
alphabet. “It was very hard. Now I’m better but I can’t get a job.” He has 
worked as a mechanic since October, first on an apprenticeship and now 
part-time, but he isn’t allowed to speak to the customers, “because my English 
is not very good”.

He has been learning English on an Esol (English for speakers of other 
languages) course 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/advice/courses/typesoflearning/Pages/anotherlanguage.aspx>
 at a local college. “When I went for a job, they asked me for qualifications, 
which I haven’t got. One of my friends did a mechanic [course] in college and 
he gets paid more than me.” He can’t apply until his English is better. “I’m a 
good mechanic now, but my English is not enough, and they pay me less.”

David Cameron: extremist ideology is 'struggle of our generation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/20/extremist-ideology-struggle-generation-david-cameron>
What else would he get from learning English? “I could make friends, get a 
good job, have a good life. When I go to the hospital I won’t need an 
interpreter.” He can get by in shops and cafes, “but I have an accent, and I 
can’t speak properly. I am different.”

Whether or not migrants can speak English has become a kind of code for 
whether or not migrants actively want to integrate and be a “proper” citizen. 
In 2013, the chancellor George Osborne said“if you are not prepared to learn 
English, your benefits will be cut” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/27/osborne-learn-english-benefits-scapegoat>
, as if immigrants just wanted to come to the UK and wring the system dry. In 
reality, many Esol courses had hundreds, or sometimes thousands, of people on 
their waiting lists.At the same time as Osborne’s speech, Esol funding was 
being cut. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/apr/14/english-lessons-funding-immigrants>

The same thing is happening again. Last week, cabinet minister Matthew Hancock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/10/energy-climate-change-minister-matthew-hancock-donations-climate-sceptic>
 announced that immigrants working in customer-facing jobs in the public sector 
– including police officers, teaching assistants and council workers –will need 
to speak fluent English up to a GCSE grade C level 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-33750709>. This wasn’t only a 
Conservative policy – Labour’s manifesto promised the same. But the government 
has nowwithdrawn Esol funding to some of the most vulnerable groups 
<https://www.tes.co.uk/news/further-education/breaking-news/fe-sector-cuts-will-save-just-%C2%A360-million-minister-reveals>
 (unlike Scotland and Wales, England doesn’t have a national strategy on Esol 
provision).

“It feels to me like this is part of the rhetoric around toughness on 
immigration, rather than actual policy about integrating people,” saysHannah 
Jones 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/sociology/staff/academicstaff/hannahjones/> 
of Warwick University, who has researched how government policy affects 
attitudes towards migrants. “Our research shows [that displaying “toughness”] 
increases worry and fear around immigration – when people are told tough 
measures are happening, that suggests tough measures are needed. This ties in 
quite clearly with a toughness agenda. Jobs already have interviews and 
selection criteria, so a certain level of English is needed. That is not to say 
that being able to speak an adequate level of English to do your job is a bad 
thing, it’s just that there doesn’t seem to be any evidence that there’s a 
problem.”

Most would agree that learning the language of one’s country is a positive 
thing. According to the 2011 census, around 864,00 people in England and Wales 
speak no English, or poor English. They are more likely to be unemployed than 
fluent speakers, and to earn less and have worse health. For women, especially 
– who make up the majority of Esol students – learning English can be extremely 
empowering, giving them more influence, for instance, over family finances, and 
even giving them the skills and confidence to leave abusive relationships.

Whose fault is it that care workers can't speak English?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/12/whose-fault-care-workers-cant-speak-english>
It isn’t just individuals whose lives are improved – the economy can benefit 
from unlocking the skills and experience of migrants, and integration is really 
only possible when more people speak a shared language.

The charity English in the Community <http://englishinthecommunity.org.uk/> 
(EITC), which has taught Esol lessons to migrants in London and Eastbourne, 
used to run 15 classes for 250 people; now they only have enough funding to run 
one class, for around eight people. “The better the level of English people 
have, the better the quality of life they have,” says Zephyr Grayland, EITC’s 
founder. “If somebody is an absolute rock-bottom beginner, you can bet they are 
either unemployed or in an extremely low-wage job, paid below the minimum wage. 
They may be sleeping on the floor of the kitchen [where they work]. We’ve had 
people who have been victims of slavery, people who have been homeless or live 
in refuges. That’s the life they have, which can be very expensive for the 
state.”

She isn’t against rules on language proficiency requirements – “a nudge to 
learn English … opens people’s horizons and gives them a better quality of 
life” – but how can people do it if there isn’t the opportunity, she asks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fdo-you-need-to-speak-english-to-be-good-citizen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438951017978%2Fdd3e1ba9-348c-4316-b07c-f9b5e0c35062-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20can%E2%80%99t%20speak%20properly.%20I%20am%20different%E2%80%99%3A%20do%20you%20need%20to%20speak%20English%20to%20be%20a%20good%20citizen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fdo-you-need-to-speak-english-to-be-good-citizen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20can%E2%80%99t%20speak%20properly.%20I%20am%20different%E2%80%99%3A%20do%20you%20need%20to%20speak%20English%20to%20be%20a%20good%20citizen%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fdo-you-need-to-speak-english-to-be-good-citizen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438951017978%2Fdd3e1ba9-348c-4316-b07c-f9b5e0c35062-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Muslim women in east London, who were given English lessons at the Wapping 
women’s centre. Esol spending grew to around £300m by 2008, but provisions are 
now much reduced. Photograph: Graham Turner for The Guardian 
Under Labour, Esol spending grew between 2001 and 2008 to around £300m 
<http://blogs.channel4.com/factcheck/factcheck-osbornes-english-lessons-are-no-threat/13776>
. Since 2005, anyone not on benefits has had to pay towards their classes, but 
in 2011 the coalition government restricted free classes further to only those 
on jobseeker’s allowance or employment and support allowance (ESA). This meant 
that many who had previously benefited, such as workers on low incomes and 
stay-at-home mothers, could no longer attend.In the last six years, Esol 
spending has been progressively cut, and just over two weeks ago the Skills 
Funding Agencycompletely withdrew funding for jobseekers 
<https://www.tes.co.uk/news/further-education/breaking-news/devastating-additional-cut-decimates-adult-skills-budget>
. Further Education colleges have been told to continue to run courses, out of 
their already-dwindling adult skills budgets, butmany have said this will be 
impossible 
<https://www.tes.co.uk/news/further-education/breaking-news/colleges-must-offer-esol-courses-despite-funding-wipeout>
.

This week, Ian Wybron, a researcher at the thinktank Demos 
<http://www.demos.co.uk/>, suggested volunteers and students, rather than 
experienced teachers, could teach English to migrants 
<https://www.tes.co.uk/news/further-education/breaking-views/opinion-how-ease-pressure-a-creaking-esol-system>
. “That doesn’t really match up with the requirement that everyone has to be up 
to a certain level, and you’re probably not going to get to that level just by 
having a chat with the next-door neighbour,” says Diana Tremayne, co-chair of 
theNational Association for Teaching English and Community Languages to Adults 
<http://www.natecla.org.uk/>.

Non-native English speaking pupils perform best in primary tests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/dec/11/non-native-english-pupils-outperform-primary-schools-tests-london>
The issue of testing, she thinks, is about controlling immigrant numbers in 
the first place, rather than necessarily improving the lives of people already 
here. “We have migrants who are doing jobs that a lot of people don’t want to 
do, probably because they’re very poorly paid, and most of them will also be 
trying to improve their English. I don’t think we’re suddenly going to find 
lots of people who speak perfect English who want to do these jobs if we 
haven’t already.”

“The government,” says Don Flynn, director of the campaign group Migrants’ 
Rights Network <http://www.migrantsrights.org.uk/>, “has made clear the 
intention to send a message that life was going to get tougher [for 
immigrants], and this has to be read against that. People often make the point 
that people should speak English in public-sector jobs, but that is already the 
case. People are expected to have the standard of language that is required of 
them in order to do that job. It is just contributing to the image of the UK 
becoming a more hostile place, and that’s damage that doesn’t need to be done. 
There is a positive story to be told about immigration – it is strongly linked 
to growing economies and good outcomes, but you’re hard-pressed to think of any 
significant politician who has consistently set out a narrative on that.”

On the same day funding cuts to Esol for jobseekers were announced, David 
Cameron made his speech about countering extremism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/20/extremist-ideology-struggle-generation-david-cameron>
 by encouraging integration, and about how important it is for people to learn 
English. “They [the government] don’t seem to link together coherent policy on 
what’s necessary and how to make it happen,” says Tremayne. “To continue to cut 
funding when you want people to speak English seems very illogical.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fdavid-cameron-vows-defeat-poison-extremism-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437395573903%2FKP_361316_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20on%20the%20causes%20of%20Islamist%20extremism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fdavid-cameron-vows-defeat-poison-extremism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20on%20the%20causes%20of%20Islamist%20extremism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fdavid-cameron-vows-defeat-poison-extremism-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437395573903%2FKP_361316_crop_640x360.jpg>
 David Cameron on the causes of Islamist extremism – video 
Some professions have always required excellent English. The General Medical 
Council has always had high standards for the language proficiency of doctors 
who trained outside the EU, and last year increased its minimum pass level on 
theInternational English Language Testing System <http://www.ielts.org/>. They 
were also given new powers to check the language skills of European-trained 
doctors. In the last year, 45% of European doctors – around 780 – who applied 
to the GMC have been prevented from practising in the UK, where previously they 
would have been allowed.

The Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) <http://www.nmc.org.uk/> is following 
suit. Under EU law the NMC is not currently able to ask for evidence of 
language skills of those who trained within the EU, but they are about to be 
given that power. The NHS relies on overseas staff, however, and some have 
warned that stringent testscould have a negative effect on recruitment 
<http://www.nursingtimes.net/nursing-practice/specialisms/management/english-language-checks-may-harm-overseas-recruitment/5085274.article>
. Insisting on “fluent English”, says Sabine Torgler, founder ofEnglish for 
Nurses <http://englishfornurses.org/>, which works with several NHS trusts to 
improve the language skills of overseas nurses, is unrealistic.

“To be able to attend an NHS interview, you have to have a good basic 
understanding of English,” she says, but she would not describe the people she 
has worked with as fluent. “It takes up to 12 months to be at the stage where 
you can have a good discussion with your nursing team as well as the medical 
team, to have a good understanding of the English language – understanding 
colloquial English as well as medical terminology, and understanding the 
culture of the NHS. It is not realistic to say you have to come to England and 
[already] be fluent in English.”

Boris Johnson: it’s a disaster that some UK citizens don’t speak English
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/06/boris-johnson-multi-culty-balkanisation-uk-english-speaking-nhs>
Shereen Hussein is a research professor at King’s College London’s Social Care 
Workforce Research Unit 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/policy-institute/scwru/index.aspx>. She says: “If 
[the requirement for fluent English] included care workers, it would be very 
difficult to achieve. The sector has shortages – it is low-paid and the job is 
hard. There are a lot of issues with recruitment and retention.” She says one 
in five care workers are migrants, and in some cities that figure can be around 
40% or 50%. Colin Angel, policy and campaigns director of theUK Homecare 
Association, <http://www.ukhca.co.uk/index.aspx> agrees. “It appears to be a 
disproportionately high expectation. If private and voluntary sector employers 
act under similar requirements as those placed on the public sector, 
recruitment will be further challenged.” Formal language testing will be also 
be expensive, he adds.

For those in work, especially low-paid jobs, Esol courses have been a way to 
better opportunities. Marina Dimova, 28, was born in Moldova, but spent many 
years in Bulgaria before coming to Britain two years ago. “When I came here it 
was very hard for me to understand people first of all,” she says. She worked 
as a cleaner, then as a waitress when her English was better. “When you know 
all the menu you are speaking almost just about the food, so it became easier. 
You can speak with the customer, but we’re not speaking about something very 
important.”

There were times when she got it wrong, but says British customers were very 
tolerant. Later, when she got a job in a mobile phone shop, she sometimes found 
it hard to explain the vagaries of contracts and different handsets, but her 
British colleagues were always prepared to help. “It was never a problem for 
them to repeat it or help me. I always got support.” Very occasionally her 
customers would express frustration, but hardly ever, she says. “I think they 
like when you are trying to speak English.”
 