
Having changed my name, I considered what else could be done while I waited 
for my firstGender Identity Clinic 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/services/g/gender_identity.html> appointment. The male 
feature causing the most discomfort, physically and psychologically, was my 
facial hair. In order to even attempt to 'pass', I had to shave twice a day, 
before plastering my sore skin with foundation to cover any shadow, with 
predictable results for my complexion, and I soon wished I'd had it removed 
before I began myReal Life Experience 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_life_experience> (especially when I had to 
do all that just to go to the launderette).

I'd always hated my facial hair, even though it functioned as a status symbol 
in my youth. I entered puberty before secondary school: my height, broken voice 
and stubble meant that nobody picked a fight with me, no matter how often I 
admitted to likingpoetry 
<http://www.mcgonagall-online.org.uk/poems/pgassass.htm>. But it also meant 
spending my teens at war with my body, painfully aware that I'd already lost. I 
was so resentful that I refused to shave until I was 13, developing a moustache 
that would have shamedGary Neville 
<http://www.footballtransfertavern.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/neville-150x150.jpg>
. When I hit the lowest points of my adult male life, I often went days without 
shaving – undermining my attempts not to be viewed as masculine, as facial hair 
is one of the most powerful signifiers of maleness. More insecure about its 
visibility with each passing hour, surgically removing my facial hair soon felt 
a matter of urgency.

No Primary Care Trust <http://www.pfc.org.uk/files/BHCPCT.pdf> in the country 
funds hair removal for transsexual women (savingcertain pundits 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-1281171/What-NHS-Bikini-waxes-bisexuals.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
 from spontaneous combustion). The reasoning is that we may not be the only 
person requesting removal of excess hair, so as it's not a life-threatening 
matter, it's deemed easier and fairer not to subsidise it for anyone. Hearing 
rumours in the news about a financial crisis, I decided not to pursue an
individual funding request 
<http://www.brightonandhovepct.nhs.uk/righttreatment/nhsfundingforindividuals/index.asp>
 and resigned myself to paying.

Initial research found a few services in Brighton and Hove, but I had no way 
of knowing which was best. I'd not met enough people, even online, who'd used 
them to form a reliable picture, and Which? magazine had neglected the subject. 
All I knew was that any option would obliterate my savings. Thankful that this 
was the only part of the physical process that would incur significant expense, 
I booked a consultation with a local clinic.

As my stubble is dark, the surgeon tells me, laser surgery 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laser_hair_removal> would work better than 
electrolysis <http://www.tsroadmap.com/physical/hair/zapidx.html>. The latter, 
she says, could take eighteen months, and I cannot shave for two days after 
each appointment. As my hair is so thick, it may not even prove cheaper than 
the £2,000 required for six laser sessions on my face, chest and torso. I left 
wondering where I might find two grand, or what else I could do with it 
(attending every Norwich City game this season could be equally painful). All 
the transsexual women I knew who'd begun hair removal had spent thousands on 
it, so knowing I'd have to do it eventually, I decided to proceed.

The clinic resembles a dentist's surgery, as imagined by Stanley Kubrick 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-2hKzG4LAAs>. An imposing contraption 
<http://bestmedicalsupply.info/images/Maquina%20de%20Depilacion%20LAser.JPG> 
sits next to a reclining chair which is covered in blue paper: above this is 
the laser, with a metal rod to maintain the right distance from my face. After 
washing off thick makeup covering the required two days' stubble growth, I lie 
back and the surgeon blindfolds me. "Now this does hurt?", she says, flicking a 
switch. I see a red light through the blindfold and feel something like a wasp 
stinging on my cheek – over and over.

"What do you do for a living?" the surgeon asks over the whirring. I'm not 
great at small talk at the best of times, but I find it especially tasking when 
being shot in the face. "Nnnurgh" is my most cogent utterance as the laser zaps 
my top lip, and she says that many patients scream at her during sessions, 
which seems somewhat ungrateful. Sympathetically, she calls this a natural 
response to the pain, spraying cold air on my face between bouts of the laser. 
At the end, she asks how it felt: it hurt less than I expected, I say, getting 
up to look in the mirror.

"It's still there!"

The surgeon tells me that the hair isn't burned off immediately, but killed at 
the root. Sure enough, by the time I'm home, plenty of hairs have turned white. 
Having checked with the surgeon, I shave the next morning, apply makeup, go to 
work, come home and go to bed. At 2am, I wake, feeling like my face is on 
several kinds of fire. In agony, I return to the mirror: I'm bright red, and 
covered in spots. I practically bathe in aloe vera but it hurts too much to 
sleep, and I fear that for the next few days,passing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman> is 
going to be much harder.

Gradually, my skin calms down. Once it does, my facial hair appears noticeably 
less strident: the surgeon said it would be reduced by 10-15% per session, 
which looks about right. After each appointment, I walk around more 
confidently, less anxious that my biological sex is going to be betrayed – a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. As Julia Serano writes in her sublimeWhipping Girl 
<http://www.juliaserano.com/whippinggirl.html>, many people are only willing to 
accept someone as female once they're certain they've not spotted any signs of 
masculinity (hence the historical fascination withbearded ladies 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bearded_lady>, before this became a genderqueer 
statement <http://hackgender.org/items/show/52>), and for me, the most 
immediate one had been greatly diminished.

So I realised that the physical process of transitioning would involve 
reversing the effects of puberty, one by one, before a second puberty would 
begin. If only, I wished, I'd hadhormone blockers 
<http://www.tsroadmap.com/early/transsexual-hormones.html> when I was younger. 
(The surgeon highlighted this to me, often asking if my hormone therapy had 
started: I was wise to have laser treatment first, she said, as zapping my 
chest would have hurt far more if I'd done it later.) This would not be the 
first part of the process to involve short-term physical pain for long-term 
psychological gain, but it would be the last to invoke such expense.

I hoped.
 