
I've suffered from anxiety 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/anxiety/Pages/Introduction.aspx> and depression 
<http://www.depression.com/> since the age of 10 – around the same time that I 
realised I was transgendered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/02/transgender-journey>. 
I've spent nearly two decades trying to understand the relationship between the 
two. As Iexplained in my last blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/22/transgender-charing-cross>
, theWorld Health Organisation <http://www.who.int/en/> classifies gender 
dysphoria 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/gender-dysphoria/Pages/Introduction.aspx> as a 
mental illness, and in Britain, transsexuality is treated through mental health 
services. But our complex relationships with our psychologies begin long before 
we enter the gender reassignment pathway and fret about whether or not the 
gatekeepers will judge us mentally fit to transition.

The second I recognised my gender dissonance, I knew my life would become 
harder. At school, I was terrified of those close to me disowning me if it 
became public knowledge (let alone what those who weren't might do). This fear 
grew largely from internalising media reports that presented transsexual people 
as misunderstood social pariahs – at best. I knew no transsexual people, and, 
pre-internet, I didn't know where I might find any, or hear their perspectives 
on life. InSection 28 era Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jul/02/david-cameron-gay-pride-apology>
, sexual or gender difference wasn't seriously discussed in the classroom, so I 
had no outlet – except, maybe, my friends. The only time we saw someone 
transgendered, they pointed and laughed at her. I kept silent.

Leaving school, coming out and finding new friends dispelled my anxiety for a 
while. But, unable to fit into any LGBT community andstill struggling with the 
exact nature of my gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/16/transgender-journey-trans-counter-culture>
 besides the other stresses faced by most twenty-something graduates – dead-end 
job and financial difficulties – I started counselling, unpacking my adolescent 
fear, frustration and paranoia, and used exercise to curb my depression. The 
anxiety remained, seemingly ingrained within my psyche: I'd hoped thatcoming 
out as transsexual to friends and family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/14/tell-family-transgender> 
might temper it, butthe trials of passing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman> and 
finding employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
, as well as negotiating NHS gender services, meant I merely swapped one set of 
worries for another.

Regular readers will have noticed that, so far, my transition had gone as well 
as I could have asked. I'd never expected it to resolve my long-standing mental 
health issues, though – simply that it might make them easier to address. Sure 
enough, I understood my anxiety and depression far better than before 
transition, finally realising that they might be chemical rather than (or as 
well as) psychological. Still, I was reluctant to seek out medication for fear 
that it would complicate any hormone prescription.

I saw my GP, who had me fill out the HAD scale 
<http://www.patient.co.uk/doctor/Hospital-Anxiety-and-Depression-%28HAD%29-Scale.htm>
: I was amazed at how much worse my results were than before my 
pre-transitional psychiatrist assessment. A year before that, I was prescribed 
antidepressants, but did not take them as the possible side effects included 
depression and suicidal thoughts. "Why risk making it worse?" I asked myself, 
leaving the tablets unopened. Now, I thought "I have both anyway – what's to 
lose?", asking the doctor if my 20mgCitalopram 
<http://www.patient.co.uk/medicine/Citalopram.htm> prescription would affect my 
oestrogen treatment 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hormone_replacement_therapy_%28male-to-female%29>
. "No," he said, "but you must tell Charing Cross."

The prescription was too strong. My depression and anxiety improved but my 
energy levels dropped dramatically and my dreams became terrifying. In one, I 
waschased by Frankenstein's monster 
<http://dreammoods.com/cgibin/dreamdictionarysearch.pl?method=exact&header=dreamsymbol&search=Frankenstein>
: although I'd not consciously questioned myself too frequently whilst living 
as female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>, the 
self-doubt and isolation fostered by the lengthy period I'd spent between male 
and female (before even starting on hormones) was manifesting itself in my 
nightmares.

I'd internalised my frustration as everyday activities became increasingly 
complicated. Needing to keep fit, I reluctantly decided not to present as 
female for football, as either changing room offered considerable challenges – 
and 'passing' would be impossible when using the showers afterwards (on the 
pitch, my passing recalls Zidane in his prime 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SvYlvkWpPy4&feature=fvw>, before you say it). 
The sports centre receptionist demanded identification. "That's not you," she 
said, reading my bank card. "I'm transsexual." She stared. "Pre-op." She took 
my money, eyeing me suspiciously. My friends asked what held me up. "Nothing," 
I said. After several such encounters, I quit, counting my blessings that my 
everyuse of a public toilet <http://auntysarah.livejournal.com/249530.html> had 
not become similarly fractious – unlikefor some 
<http://www.sundaysun.co.uk/news/north-east-news/2010/01/31/transsexual-told-she-can-t-use-ladies-toilets-79310-25722822/>
.

I got my dose lowered. The vivid dreams stopped, my energy levels slowly rose 
and I felt much better equipped to deal with whatever life threw at me. By now, 
I'd found that, mostly, my fears had been worse than myreal life experience 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_life_experience>, and as my key 
relationships gradually settled, my happiness increased.

Some people do lose family, friends, lovers, jobs, houses and/or security on 
transitioning, however, exacerbating the internal traumas that precede their 
coming out (sometimes worsened by religious or political beliefs) and the 
effects of a lifetime in a body that doesn't suit them. It's unsurprising, 
then, that transgendered people without access to support have harmed 
themselves,sometimes fatally 
<http://www.lauras-playground.com/transgender_suicide.htm>, as they struggle to 
fight their impulse – whatever causes it.

Some of us find the strength to come through this and realise ourselves in 
adulthood. We enter a second puberty, publicly, facing the inevitable abuse, 
relationship complications, large expenses needed to access necessary 
treatment, the anxiety that comes with entering any gendered space, constant 
(and often interlinked) criticism of our appearances and undermining of our 
identities. That's purely in our personal lives, ignoring a media that 
frequently characterises us as unstable and obsessed with how we look.

Many people are reluctant to get help because we live in a world that 
stigmatises mental health problems, even though approximatelyone in four 
<http://www.oneinfourmag.org/index.html> experiences them at some point. If we 
overcome this double stigma, we may find that mental health professionals 
aren't trained to meet our needs – the few LGBT-specific services in existence 
are under threat of government cuts.

And if we complain about any of this, however bad it gets? We're 
over-sensitive, too thin-skinned, and brought it on ourselves. To paraphrase 
one ofmy favourite filmmakers <http://www.rosavonpraunheim.de/>: it's not the 
transsexual who is perverse, but the society in which s/he lives.
 