
For transsexual people, a strong relationship with a GP is vital. Doctors 
cannot legally block access to medical services – sincea ruling in 1999 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/407225.stm>, they have been obliged to refer 
patients elsewhere if they morally oppose gender reassignment. Now, a good 
rapport remains necessary for more subtle reasons. Telling people that you are 
transsexual is difficult in any circumstance: it is impossible to get onto the 
NHS pathway without coming out to your GP, and for some people, the GP may be 
the first person s/he tells. If, in referral, the doctor shows an obvious 
negative attitude, the patient might feel reluctant to seek help for other 
medical concerns, whether directly related to their transsexual status or not.

This relationship is most important when an issue arises specifically because 
someone is part of the way through transition. Transsexual people often share 
information about local doctors, and some even move practices to stay with a 
particularly good one. Fortunately, I get on well with my GP, so this was 
another relationship that I was able to maintain after I began living as 
female. Unfortunately, he was on holiday when I called my surgery regarding the 
most complex medical situation of my life.

The loudspeaker called me to room six. I left the waiting area. The practice's 
senior partner, unknown to me, sat at his desk. I faltered.

"How can I help?"

"Well …" I said, hoping that he won't think I want to find a sperm bank 
because I'm planning a heist.

"I've been to the gender clinic at Charing Cross and they said that before I 
start on hormones, I should talk to someone aboutsaving some sperm 
<http://www.tsroadmap.com/physical/storage.html>. Is that okay?" I asked.

"Yes, absolutely," he replied. "It's just not something I've dealt with 
before."

"I didn't see it coming either," I said, "but here we are."

"Do you want children? Or expect to have them?" he asked, after collecting 
himself.

"Not desperately", I told him, "but I feel I ought to keep the option open".

He told me that as donors can no longer remain anonymous, the number of people 
donating sperm has dropped, and it can be prohibitively expensive. He gave me 
details of theHuman Fertilisation and Embryology Authority 
<http://www.hfea.gov.uk/>, and The Agora Clinic <http://www.agoraclinic.co.uk/>
, and then, to my surprise, shook my hand as I left.

I called the Agora Clinic. Before I go any further, they said, I need a blood 
test to check for HIV, syphilis, and hepatitis B and C. I returned to my 
General Practice and got the results a few days later: clear.


A trip to the sperm bank

When I was young, I had a computer game called Balance of Power 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balance_of_Power_%28video_game%29>. Representing 
either the USA or the USSR, the player had to maximise their nation's global 
influence without sparking Armageddon. Disregarding the warning that "people 
who play this game without reading the instructions are wasting their time", 
I'd instantly flood Tanzania with troops. The following text would appear: 'You 
have ignited a nuclear war. And no, there is no animated display of a mushroom 
cloud with parts of bodies flying through the air. We do not reward failure.' 
Just as the game did not reward failure, I will not indulge voyeurism.


The balance tips

In fact, I cannot indulge such voyeurism even if I wanted to. I never went to 
the clinic. Though some of my friends urged me every bit as much as my virtual 
advisors did, insisting that though I've always been hopeless with children, 
and never wanted any, this would change. However much fathering a child might 
affect my already complicated female identity, they said, I might regret being 
unable to have children that were genetically mine above any other irreversible 
effect of transition.

I considered my male-to-female friends who'd fathered children some time 
before beginning treatment, and how telling their offspring was the hardest 
part. It would be easier to have a child who'd known nothing else than to 
explain my decision and physical changes to a young girl or boy, I thought, but 
I still hated the thought of someone I'd raised struggling with my transsexual 
history.

Perhaps I'd internalised some transphobia – in part because plenty of the 
abuse I got in the street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman> came 
from teenagers. I worried about how much stick a child fathered by a 
transsexual woman would take at school, and how this might further complicate 
any relationship between me and this hypothetical child. But, I thought, 
children find ways to deal with worse – if our connection was strong enough, 
we'd manage it. (After all,Big Daddy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shirley_Crabtree> coped well enough with being 
called Shirley, didn't he? Well, to a point, I suppose.)

More practically, I fretted about the cost. The Agora Clinic, (whose prices, I 
imagined, would be fairly representative) charge £165 for an initial 
consultation (£55 per fifteen minutes on the phone), and then £395 for 
freezing, with annual storage fees thereafter. Having spent most of my savings 
on a new wardrobe, new ID andongoing hair removal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/08/transgender-journey-facial-hair>
, with prescription charges for hormones to come, it didn't look viable.

Feeling that I'd only reconsider if I found myself in a relationship with 
someone who really wanted children, I decided to press ahead with hormone 
therapy rather than delay it for however long it took to find the money – I'd 
already waited for so long. If I was desperate to have children who shared my 
genes, I'd have found the funds. As it stands, I'm not. Should my mind change, 
I'll adopt: the physical limits of transitioning mean I can't mother someone in 
the conventional sense, but I hope that a young person in need of a home would 
be glad to be my child.

• Juliet Jacques's column appears fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 