
I knew at the start 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/02/transgender-journey> that 
the NHS gender reassignment process would be slow. I wasn't wrong. At the time 
of writing, it's been a year and 11 months since I saw my GP and asked to enter 
the pathway. Since then, I have had two local psychiatric assessments and three 
appointments with theGender Identity Clinic at West London Mental Health Trust 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/gi/gender-identity-clinic/> which have totalled just 
three hours.

On my third GIC visit, I was told I had spent enough time living and working 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
 in my desired gender to be eligible for surgery, and that "we would be talking 
about it" if only myhormone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/12/transgender-health-and-wellbeing>
 levels were sufficient. NHS protocol dictates that transsexual women mustlive 
as female <http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>
 for at least three months before starting hormone therapy. As I began my 'Real 
Life Experience' ahead of my initial local assessment, I'd met this 
requirement, and confronted many of the social challenges posed by transition, 
even before my first trip to west London.

The only definite requirements for full physical transition are hormones and 
surgery (and, for transsexual women,hair removal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/08/transgender-journey-facial-hair>
, and some would argue that GICs are unnecessary. Although I think it right to 
question if gender reassignment should come under mental health services, I'd 
be somewhat worried if there were no patient monitoring, partly as I'd have no 
space to express anyconcerns 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/feb/23/gender-reassignment-transgender-journey>
, but also because the service would likely be threatened by litigation from 
people who felt they should have been stopped from realising their own 
transitional desires.

The broad generalities of the NHS pathway are based on the World Professional 
Association for Transgender Health <http://www.wpath.org/> (WPATH) Standards of 
Care <http://www.wpath.org/publications_standards.cfm>. These are not legally 
binding, but in practice, any provider deviating substantially from their 
guidelines – say, by discarding the RLE – would fall under serious scrutiny. 
Personally, I don't feel that I've had the wrong amount, or type, of 
supervision, but I've wondered throughout if its provision could have been 
quicker, taking into account the waiting lists. At times, the pathway has felt 
like an endurance test, more so than necessary to prove my 'commitment'.

As Brighton and Hove is a city with a relatively high transgender population 
<http:// www.spectrum-lgbt.org/downloads/spectrum_trans_report.pdf>, I was 
surprised at how quickly I had my local psychiatric assessment, which simply 
aims to filter out people entirely inappropriate for GIC referral. A projected 
three month wait became just a fortnight: I was then told that I was suitable, 
but asked to return in two months for 'a check-up'. The second appointment 
lasted just five minutes, and I felt that my time and public money could have 
been saved if the analyst had trusted his instincts. Of course, if some are 
demanded to attend more local assessments than others, then there are potential 
equality issues, but not everyone has the same number of GIC appointments 
before being prescribed hormones or referred for surgery, and the long wait 
before my first visit to 'Charing Cross 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/22/transgender-charing-cross>' 
would have provided ample time to seek further local support if I felt it 
necessary.

The letter telling me the date of my initial appointment stated that two 
failures to attend would require re-referral, as the GIC strives to minimise 
non-attendance. I understood, but wondered if after the first visit, telephone 
consultations could have been offered for people such as me who had fewer 
problems in meeting their requirements – and if these could be offered at short 
notice if anyone cancels.

The attached check list declared that hormones 'may be prescribed on the 
second appointment'. I had my blood tested at Charing Cross Hospital after my 
first WLMHT assessment, but perhaps this could have been done locally, with the 
results forwarded to the GIC, so that they could produce a prescription 
immediately if I could met their criteria. (As an aside, it has been argued 
that hormones can serve as a diagnostic tool: their effects are reversible for 
some time after they become noticeable, allowing anyone who finds the realities 
of the physical changes to be unacceptable to opt out. This is not the current 
approach of the GICs, it should be stated.)

It eventually took fifteen months to receive my prescription 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/01/transgender-mental-health>, 
and in light of this, I don't find it too surprising that some ignore GIC 
guidelines and chance on buying medication online. Remaining within the 
approved services, it is possible to mix NHS and private treatment – often by 
going abroad for surgery – thus bypassing some of the waits. Transsexual people 
can also speed up hormone therapy by paying to see private clinicians on a 
one-off basis for a blood test and prescription, without prejudicing their path 
through the NHS services: if I'd realised how just long it would take, I might 
have made the outlay.

Of course, anyone using the service appreciates how fortunate s/he is to have 
it at all, and realises that within a lifetime, the two or three years taken to 
navigate the pathway is not that much. It feels far longer than necessary when 
going through it, though, and more efficiency in duration would also make 
considerable financial sense – and make our lives more comfortable to lead.

Having addressed many of the social challenges of transition, and discussed 
them in my previous columns, I shall be writing monthly from now until the 
series ends.
 