
One of Africa’s bloodiest wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/07/south-sudan-horrific-attacks-prompt-communities-take-arms>
 is being waged from a three-storey building in a calm, upscale neighbourhood 
in Ethiopia’s capital.

It is here, in a typical suburban villa in Addis Ababa, an easy walk away from 
luxury hotels and burger joints, that Riek Machar maintains his residence.


South Sudan civil war inquiry details torture and forced cannibalism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-inquiry-details-torture-and-forced-cannibalism>
It’s a long way from the frontline.

Machar is a man of many titles. He’s a doctor, with a PhD in mechanical 
engineering from an American university. He’s a hero of South Sudan’s
decades-long war for independence 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-14069082>. He’s a father and a husband, 
a former vice-president, and a seasoned diplomat.

But his most important title today, as South Sudan enters its third year of a 
disastrous civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/28/south-sudan-civil-war-inquiry-details-torture-and-forced-cannibalism>
, is commander-in-chief of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition 
(SPLM-IO).

Along with Salva Kiir, the current president of South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, Machar has presided over a 
vicious internecine conflict.

Tens of thousands of civilians have died since the war began between the Dinka 
and Nuer ethnicities in December 2013, as fighters from both sidesraped and 
pillaged 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-11-02-au-report-exposes-south-sudan-atrocities/>
 their way through towns and villages, while more than two million people have 
been forced out of their homes.

Today, life in South Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, Africa’s 
newest country, is more difficult than it ever has been – and Machar is one 
reason why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3beeaa41c81240d2cfe93ba6c41910f7f29f207d%2F0_96_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20a%20hero.%20I%20created%20a%20country'%2C%20says%20the%20rebel%20driving%20South%20Sudan's%20brutal%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20a%20hero.%20I%20created%20a%20country%27%2C%20says%20the%20rebel%20driving%20South%20Sudan%27s%20brutal%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3beeaa41c81240d2cfe93ba6c41910f7f29f207d%2F0_96_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Men wave flags and cheer at the Republic of South Sudan’s first national 
football match in the capital of Juba 2011. Photograph: Pete Muller/AP 
We meet at the house where he spends most of his time. Security is tight and 
inside heavy curtains are closed against the midday heat, lending the room a 
gloomy, gothic air.

Machar sits in an armchair. “The day is good if it starts with journalists,” 
he jokes. He speaks slowly, in perfect English.

His fighting days are behind him: he’s in his early 60s and it’s obvious that 
the commander-in-chief designation is honorary. In his business suit, Machar is 
clearly not directing the troops himself.

But this doesn’t diminish his importance. As chief negotiator in the recent 
peace talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/08/south-sudan-peace-talks-falter>, 
it is Machar’s job to end the fighting rather than conduct it. This diplomatic 
battle culminated last year inthe signing of a peace agreement 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-08-27-south-sudan-the-beginning-of-the-end-of-the-civil-war/>
 between the rebels and the government which imposed an immediate ceasefire, 
and was supposed to lead to a government of national unity with Machar once 
again in the vice-president’s office.

It hasn’t quite worked out that way. The ceasefire has been repeatedly broken 
by both sides, and Kiir has been reluctant to cede power. Most recently, the 
president unilaterallycreated 28 new states 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/12/south-sudan-president-creates-28-states-151225101750723.html>
 in a clear attempt to derail the transition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aee09d2df083289b0d7b33ebb4643345f435194%2F0_0_3105_1865%2F3105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20a%20hero.%20I%20created%20a%20country'%2C%20says%20the%20rebel%20driving%20South%20Sudan's%20brutal%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20a%20hero.%20I%20created%20a%20country%27%2C%20says%20the%20rebel%20driving%20South%20Sudan%27s%20brutal%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6aee09d2df083289b0d7b33ebb4643345f435194%2F0_0_3105_1865%2F3105.jpg>
 President Salva Kiir. Photograph: Charles Atiki Lomodong/AFP/Getty Images 
Machar, however, remains optimistic. “I am happy with the agreement signed, 
that this is going to usher in reforms. It will also usher in a new system of 
governance, federalism, in my country. And I am satisfied with that.”

But his reliance on the guarantors of the agreement – the Intergovernmental 
Authority for Development, along with international heavyweights including 
China, the UK and US – is misplaced. The international community is out of 
ideas when it comes to South Sudan, and has less influence in Juba than ever 
before.

Also misplaced is Machar’s insistence that only Kiir has failed to uphold his 
end of the bargain. Machar says his troops have stopped fighting, but rebel 
forces have been implicated in multipleceasefire violations 
<http://www.english.rfi.fr/africa/20151203-ceasefire-violations-cast-shadow-fragile-south-sudan-peace-deal>
.

Violence

Machar also claims that he has managed to stamp out the culture of human 
rights violations – includingmass rape 
<https://radiotamazuj.org/en/article/un-spla-io-murdered-raped-civilians-bentiu-october>
,ethnic violence 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2014/02/south-sudan-ravaged-ethnic-violence-2014236519937368.html>
 and theuse of child soldiers 
<https://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/countries/south-sudan/> – which 
characterised the early days of the war, as outlined ina scathing African Union 
report 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-11-02-au-report-exposes-south-sudan-atrocities/>
.

But recent news suggest the contrary. Not only has Kiir conspicuously failed 
to take action against commanders implicated in war crimes, but the human 
rights abuses havecontinued long after 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/12/14/we-can-die-too/recruitment-and-use-child-soldiers-south-sudan/>
 his supposed April 2014 cut-off.

How can you create a perpetrator who is a victim? I am a victim
Riek Machar 
Machar refuses to take responsibility for any of this. When I mention the 
leaked United Nations memo advocating that both Machar and Kiir be hit with 
individual sanctions, he says: “It’s unfair. They are acting without justice. 
How can you create a perpetrator who is a victim? I am a victim. Why would 
sanctions be imposed on me?”

“I spent all my life for liberation of South Sudan, I would have done 
something better for my own self. Resisting dictatorships is more worthwhile 
than accepting them and thinking things will change by themselves.”

Asked if the suffering for a majority of South Sudanese citizens could be 
stopped if Machar and his colleagues gave up the fight, the rebel leader says 
“giving up would be irresponsible” and that “history would not forgive him” for 
it.

So how would he liked to be remembered? “I created a country. I created a 
country,” he emphasises. 

“I’m a hero of the independence. It can never be a mistake. We have found 
ourselves in this despicable situation, but that doesn’t mean that our 
independence is not cherished. We cherish our independence. We fought for it 
for many generations.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb268ee17f371a0bcdeb200735eaf5e12d26d0137%2F0_134_5760_3460%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20a%20hero.%20I%20created%20a%20country'%2C%20says%20the%20rebel%20driving%20South%20Sudan's%20brutal%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20a%20hero.%20I%20created%20a%20country%27%2C%20says%20the%20rebel%20driving%20South%20Sudan%27s%20brutal%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Friek-machar-south-sudan-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero-i-am-a-victim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb268ee17f371a0bcdeb200735eaf5e12d26d0137%2F0_134_5760_3460%2F5760.jpg>
 Members of the SPLA patrol the half-emptied village of Leer, on 3 February 
2016. Photograph: Albert Gonzalez Farran/AFP/Getty Images 
For Machar, the triumph of independence was enough, even if it failed to bring 
the stability, prosperity and rule of law that it was supposed to. And this 
war’s no different: it’s an abstract political concept which makes sense in the 
comfort of his Addis Ababa living room, but overlooks the suffering of the 
people he is supposed to be fighting for.

He also clings on to the idea, shared by many leaders who have spent too long 
in positions of power, that the show can’t go on without him.

South Sudan: world's newest nation 'needs international management'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/south-sudan-worlds-newest-nation-needs-international-management>
“The time for my retirement is coming. It’s inevitable,” he says. But that 
time is not now. “What remains for me is to ensure things are moving correctly 
and for others to take over so if there’s anything I want to live longer for, 
it’s to create stability in the country and to see that the system moves even 
without me.”

The news from South Sudan is not good. On Monday, the African Union said the 
crisis is getting worse 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/02/world/africa/african-union-issues-biting-report-on-crisis-in-south-sudan.html>
. As if to underline that point, government troopswere accused 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-35465136> of suffocating 50 civilians to 
death by locking them in a shipping container in the baking heat.

This is what the war has brought to the people of South Sudan. As much as 
Machar might like to pretend otherwise, this is the ongoing cost of his fight 
for power.

A version of this article first appeared on the Daily Maverick 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2016-02-02-south-sudans-rebel-leader-i-am-a-hero.-i-am-a-victim/#.VrivImThDWZ>
 