
It's so strange to be so popular here. I did Top of the Pops 30 years ago, and 
to have a new generation of young people listening and liking it is fantastic."
Andy Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/andy-williams> has never been 
cooler than he is right now. Actually, you might say that he has never been 
cool until now. Coolness was something he left to others, while he satisfied 
Middle America's taste for what he calls "better music".

That began to change in the mid-1990s, when this better music, otherwise known 
as easy listening, was adopted by a faction of British clubbers and became 
perversely fashionable under the name lounge. Williams and fellow lounge 
progenitors Tony Bennett and Burt Bacharach were lauded for never straying from 
their Sta-Prest sound.

The decisive crossover moment came when Fiat used Williams's old hit Music to 
Watch Girls By in a commercial two years ago, introducing a new generation to 
his mellifluous baritone. The re-released song made the top 10, and a cash-in 
compilation, In the Lounge With, was also successful.

The latest instalment of his comeback is his first British tour in 20 years, 
which starts in Belfast tonight. He claims it's also his last British tour, 
because he's getting on a bit and would rather play golf at his "French-style 
chateau" in Branson, Missouri (one of six houses he owns around the US). 
Branson is an Ozark Mountains town known as the "Las Vegas of the Bible Belt" 
due to the many middle-of-the-road stars who live and perform there year-round. 
The Osmond Family Theatre is a mile down Route 76 from Williams. "They do their 
show on ice skates," he offers with a gently sardonic smile.

Williams, 73 last month, does a gruelling 12 shows a week in his own $8m Moon 
River Theatre, named after his signature tune. Hewn out of Ozark limestone, the 
building is the only place in Branson to have been featured in Architectural 
Digest. The foyer boasts a Henry Moore sculpture and works from Williams's 
collection of Pollocks and De Koonings, although "not the important ones. The 
locals don't really appreciate them. They're not into art that much." Who'd 
have thought the man who calls himself Mr Christmas ("In America I'm Mr 
Christmas, because I've done six Christmas albums. There's a big market for 
them there") was a serious art collector?

Saying that, to look at him you wouldn't know he was Mr Christmas. There's not 
a Pringle sweater to be seen in his hotel suite. No cardigan. No kitsch at all, 
in fact, unless you count his pale green spectacles, the same shade as his 
herbal tea. If anything, he is starting to seem like Mr Cool Rockin' Grandad.

Unlike most Americans of his vintage, he has even hung onto his figure. "I've 
followed the Pritikin low-fat diet for about 20 years. Who wants to be fat? 
There's so many fat people in America. They're nice people," he adds, not 
wanting this to be taken as criticism. "They're just fat."

He has already offended Branson by using the words "damn" and "ass" in his 
act. He almost got picketed. So it must be a relief to be in swinging London, 
eh? He laughs. "If I was 24, I wouldn't go to Branson, I'd live here or New 
York. But I have a great life. We got 7,000 tourist buses at my theatre last 
year. The front door of my house goes onto the golf course and the back looks 
onto a lake."

What he doesn't have back home is the admiration of younger people who see him 
as the emperor of all things easy. The Andy Williams revival is mainly a 
British phenomenon, but he's happy with that. "In the States, lounge has 
different connotations," he says. "I've made jokes that when I get old I'll end 
up in a seedy hotel lounge in Bakersfield [California] doing a flash act - 
singing a bit, then wearing a raincoat and flashing 'em." He hawhaws fruitily.

That's almost shocking coming from a native of Wall Lake, Iowa. Andy started 
singing there at the age of eight, the youngest member of the four-boy Williams 
Brothers. During his 1930s youth the family moved to Chicago, Cincinnati and 
finally Los Angeles, where they got their break doing backing vocals on a Bing 
Crosby record, Swinging on a Star. He croons mistily into his cup: "Would you 
like to swing on a star, carry moonbeams home in a jar?"

No surprise, then, to learn that the adolescent Williams never went through a 
rebellious phase. "You mean smoking or drinking? I was doing that anyway; I 
didn't consider it rebellious. My dad did screw me up, though. His philosophy 
to get us to work was to say, 'You're not as good as the others out there', so 
you had a lack of self-esteem as you grew up. I still have it now - that's why 
I work so hard."

Has he tried therapy? "All therapy does is make you forgive your father. It 
doesn't take away the low self-esteem. It's still in my brain."

He hit a crisis in the early 1970s when his marriage to his first wife, 
Claudine Longet, began to unravel. He and Longet, a French singer who was later 
convicted of the manslaughter of her second husband, were so unhappy that 
Williams decided to try an unconventional treatment recommended by his doctor. 
If anyone from Branson is reading, look away now.

"He said, 'You're having some problems, so you might consider LSD treatments. 
Maybe you and your wife should try it, because you're breaking up.' It was 
illegal in America because of Timothy Leary, so I went to the Hollywood 
Hospital in Canada - my wife didn't come - and did it three or four times two 
days apart.

"It was interesting," he remembers dryly, cradling his cup in both hands. 
"Some of the trips were good, some bad. They guide you through it and suggest 
colours, etcetera. You go back and see yourself being born, see yourself 
pooping in your diapers, you go through a lot of stuff. It changed me - I came 
out realising that the only things important to me were family, friends and 
love. Maybe that's why I'm so cool."

Who would believe it? Apparently, the drug's only adverse effect was a 
short-lived partiality to bell-bottoms and long hair. "Only a little longer, 
though," he says hastily. He has never had a flashback, and has mainly positive 
memories of the "treatment", but he never repeated the experience.

Now that he has outed himself, younger artists will undoubtedly flock to work 
with him on his next project, a duets album. The success of Tom Jones's Reload 
LP has encouraged him to have a crack himself, and he's already musing about 
potential partners. He would like to get, for starters, Pavarotti, Whitney 
Houston and Britney Spears.

Britney Spears? Isn't he setting his sights a bit low? 

"Well, I'd like Madonna, but if we don't get her, then Britney. It's like in 
the old movies, where if you couldn't get Marilyn Monroe for a role you'd go 
for the second or third choice."

At which point his manager, Tennyson Flowers (the name was inherited from a 
great-uncle named after Alfred Lord), arrives with a photographer, the signal 
for the emperor of easy to say goodbye. He half rises, proffers a hand and 
sinks back onto the sofa in one casual movement that barely disturbs the crease 
in his slacks. Impressive.

Â• Andy Williams plays the Waterfront Hall, Belfast (028-9033 4400), tonight, 
The Point, Dublin (00-3531-836 3633), tomorrow, the Royal Festival Hall, London 
SE1 (020-7960 4242), on Friday, then tours.
 