
Thirteen years on, it is easy to forget just how much of a phenomenon Alanis 
Morissette's first major album, Jagged Little Pill, proved to be - particularly 
among women. With its immortal lyric, "D'you still think of me when you fuck 
her?" ringing around the bedrooms of angst-ridden teenagers (and often those of 
their mothers too), the album became the second-biggest seller of the 1990s. It 
was assumed that Morissette would go on to write more pithy, angry songs about 
relationships; instead, she took 18 months off to travel around India with her 
friends, and returned to record music that even she, at times, has called 
"amazingly self-indulgent".

So it is good to see the return of some of that early anger on her new album, 
Flavors of Entanglement. While writing it, she split up with her long-time 
fiance, the Canadian actor Ryan Reynolds, an aspiring A-lister who is now 
engaged to Scarlett Johansson. She says that "this album was like a life raft 
... I wanted my own personal story to unfold as it was happening". As such, it 
is effectively a breakup album, moving from fury to hedonist escape to hope, 
and featuring some fantastically barbed lyrics. On the grinding, juddering 
track Straitjacket, for instance, she castigates her ex-lover, "I don't know 
who you are, talking to me with such fucking disrespect", while on Underneath 
she sings, "Look at us break our bonds in this kitchen/ Look at us rallying our 
defences/ Look at us waging war in our bedroom." It is a raw evocation of the 
loss of someone she had expected to build a life with.

We meet in a hotel in London, and, at 33, Morissette looks rounder and more 
beautiful than the tomboy I first interviewed back in 1996. On her fifth major 
album, she feels that she has come full circle. "What's that line from TS 
Eliot? To arrive at the place where you started, but to know it for the first 
time. I'm able to write about a breakup from a different place. Same 
brokenness. Same rock-bottom. But a little more informed, now I'm older. Thank 
God for growing up," she adds.

Morissette is more approachable than most well-known artists, and laughingly 
admits that she has a problem "setting boundaries". When young women come up to 
her, as they regularly do, wanting to tell their stories about suicide 
attempts, divorce, body image and parental death, she can't bring herself to 
back away.

It is partly this that has inspired her other current project, a memoir 
focusing on women's issues. She is halfway through writing it, and has chapters 
on themes such as sexuality, beauty, relationships and work. Those themes 
underline the fact that for years Morissette has struggled with low 
self-esteem. Growing up in "a chauvinistic, patriarchal environment" in 
Ontario, with her Hungarian/French-Canadian family, she was an established 
actor and pop star from an early age, and spent the late 80s singing bland 
dance pop from beneath a frosted fringe, feeling as if she was "14 going on 
40". In fact, the pressure was so great that at 16 she became anorexic and 
bulimic.

One day, a record executive summoned her to the studio and "suggested I was 
getting too fat, saying, 'You need to go on a diet.' My response was, 'But I'm 
a singer.' He said, 'Yes, well, you need to get small again.' That started a 
whole cycle. Two days later I was sticking my fingers down my throat." She 
feels that the pressure and obsession with body image is one of the key issues 
facing women today. "Europe seems a little softer," she says, "but in America 
it's harsh. In LA, where I live, it's all about perfectionism. Beauty is now 
defined by your bones sticking out of your decolletage. For that to be the 
standard is really perilous for women."

Does she see herself as a feminist? "What's your definition?" she asks. Equal 
pay. Equal rights. That women should be able to fulfil their potential 
regardless of gender. "If that's what the definition is, then yes, absolutely 
...Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are so powerful 
they're scary, and the incentive to squash this has been going on for so long 
that some of us actually believe we're subordinate."

Morissette was 19 when she left Ontario and gave up trying to be "miss 
perfect". She ended up in LA, working with rock producer Glen Ballard, who 
encouraged her to free-associate, and to bring out her unfettered, unruly side 
in her lyrics. Madonna signed her up to her Maverick label, and Jagged Little 
Pill followed. Although passion coursed through the record, Morissette has been 
accused, repeatedly, of being a puppet for male producers. Her response was to 
"over-function"; to micromanage each video and record, and to produce herself. 
"Now I see the futility in that," she says. "I'm still empowered, but it's 
lovely to let the producer or director work without trying to control the whole 
situation." Tori Amos recently suggested that it is almost impossible to have 
real independence as a female artist on a major label - "You're accepted up 
until the point you want to be your own producer and have your own label, and 
then things close down," she said - and Morissette agrees that executives often 
balk at her independence. "It's such a common, daily thing I don't even notice 
it any more," she says. "It's scary for them, especially if there's money 
involved. I'm a liability to them - I'm a woman, I'm empowered, I'm an artist. 
I've had executives who can't come to my shows they're so scared of me. I've 
been a thorn in many people's sides just by existing."

Did going to India make her lose her rage? "No. I felt gratitude. Humility. My 
rage showed up in other ways. I'm always fascinated by how people's rage shows 
up.Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> has a passive-aggressive 
culture, with a lot of sarcasm and righteousness. That went with my weird 
messianic complex. The ego is a fascinating monster. I was taught from a young 
age that I had to serve, so that turned into me thinking I had to save the 
planet."

This was reflected in the role she played in Kevin Smith's 1999 comedy, Dogma, 
a satire on the Catholic church: Morissette was cast as God. Now she doesn't 
feel the need to save the world, or be approved of. "I highly recommend getting 
older! There's less tendency to people-please." Just one look at My Humps, the 
spoof video she put up on YouTube last year as a retort to the rap act Black 
Eyed Peas shows how relaxed and confident she has become. In the video, she 
ridicules the notion of women as doe-eyed sexual decorations, turning the 
tables with her comic domination of some male backing dancers.

Does she think the industry has become easier for female stars in recent 
years, or has the intrusive tabloid focus on the public breakdowns of Britney 
Spears and Amy Winehouse, for instance, made it harder?

"In terms of exposure, there's never been a better time," she says. "You can 
throw things up on YouTube, and release music via the internet. But fame is 
tough to navigate when your relationship with yourself is still healing, and 
the rupture is festering and bleeding in public. I feel compassionate towards 
women like Britney and Amy. But they're big girls. They'll get through it. And 
they wanted it to a certain extent. This fame thing is something you can stay 
out of if you want to."

Morissette recognises that in the fickle world of pop, an artist's strongest 
asset is her music - songs that will move people long after the image fades. 
"That's what I keep coming back to. Is what you're writing who you are, what 
you really want to be doing?" she says. "That's all that matters".

 Â· Flavors of Entanglement is released on June 2.
 