
Stellan Skarsgård <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stellan-skarsgard> is 
pacing down a corridor in a dank building in London’s Docklands. The rooms on 
either side of him are full of random clusters of unloved office chairs, the 
floor tiles are grim. Menace seems to hang in the air. As the cameras roll, the 
Swedish actor makes occasional stops, in order to speak to no one at all. Or at 
least no one who can be seen.

A second take: this time, he is talking to a person walking beside him. Next, 
he’s waiting for a lift, again conversing with thin air. And then suddenly the 
lift pings unexpectedly – and out wandersEddie Marsan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/02/eddie-marsan-interview>, 
straight into the shot. He stops in his tracks with a cheeky grin spreading 
across his face – like if he doesn’t move, maybe no one can see him. He’s just 
been down the shops. It’s a moment of light relief in what has been an intense 
shoot. Someone yells “Cut!” and everyone wanders off to corner offices and 
meeting rooms.

Doubling as a police station, this steel-and-glass monstrosity is, for today 
at least, the set ofRiver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/06/bbc-drama-river-abi-morgan-explore-mental-health-issues>
, Abi Morgan’s new cop series. Morgan brought Margaret Thatcher’s life to the 
big screen inThe Iron Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/05/the-iron-lady-film-review>, 
starring Meryl Streep. Sex addiction followed, with Michael Fassbender inShame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/12/shame-film-review-fassbender>. 
This month, there’sSuffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/suffragette-review-votes-women-carey-mulligan-abi-morgan-bonham-carter>
. River, however, taxed her writing powers in new ways. “This is my first cop 
series – and probably my last. Hats off to anyone who can do them. By episode 
two, we had to completely throw everything away a few weeks before filming and 
start again. Because I’d got it wrong.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444234285883%2Fe9f09089-5fec-4ac4-ac22-ca298c943e04-2060x1483.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I've%20turned%20down%20every%20other%20cop%20show'%3A%20Stellan%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20on%20River&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ve%20turned%20down%20every%20other%20cop%20show%27%3A%20Stellan%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20on%20River&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444234285883%2Fe9f09089-5fec-4ac4-ac22-ca298c943e04-2060x1483.jpeg>
 Filming a scene for River. Photograph: Nick Briggs/BBC/Kudos 
BBC drama River was chance to explore mental health issues, says writer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/06/bbc-drama-river-abi-morgan-explore-mental-health-issues>
But then River, about to air on BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>, 
isn’t your traditional procedural. It melds psychodrama with hallucination and 
paranoia – and has only the very occasional good old-fashioned duffing up of a 
suspect in a dark alley. Skarsgård, who was Professor Lambeau in Good Will 
Hunting and Bootstrap Bill in Pirates of the Caribbean, plays John River, a 
troubled detective who experiences lucid visions. Understandably, these 
interfere with his police work, which he conducts with partner Stevie, played 
by Nicola Walker. River struggles with his cases, mostly murders, as he 
frequently sees the victims for whom he’s seeking justice. The idea of the 
damaged detective who gets results is hardly new. But there’s an 
otherworldliness that sets River apart.

“I had the idea a few years ago,” says Morgan. “I love Truly, Madly, Deeply. I 
thought it was such a beautiful way of examining grief. So I never wanted River 
to be psychic: they’re not ghosts he sees, but manifestations of his grief, 
just as I never believed Alan Rickman was a real ghost in Truly, Madly, Deeply. 
I like the gag of it. You think it’s a cop show, but it’s not. It’s like, ‘How 
do you fuck up the logic of a cop show?’ The types are all in there: the old, 
world-weary cop, the younger sidekick. The stereotypes. I’m hopefully showing 
the idiosyncrasies underneath. It’s also about the fragile mental health we all 
experience. We all have moments when we’re fragile.”

Morgan embarked on the first episode with the hope of getting someone 
Hollywood but credible involved, in much the same way asTrue Detective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/12/true-detective-box-set-review>
 starred Woody Harrelson and Matthew McConaughey. Skarsgård came on board 
almost immediately, after Morgan and producer Jane Featherstone flew to meet 
him in Stockholm. He then, says Morgan, became “the muse” of the piece. “He’s 
one of the most authentic people I’ve ever met. And he’s got that Scandi thing 
going on that’s slightly ‘other’. He’s quite magical – truthful, yet magical. 
He’s a Viking.”

Adeel Akhtar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gW9UGSSvfJU>, who plays a 
befuddled fellow detective, says Skarsgård can be brooding and actorly one 
minute, all poop jokes the next. I finally meet “the Viking” during a brief 
break from filming. He’s sitting on a burst sofa in a tatty glass box of a 
meeting room. The “green room” is another glass box facing this one, stuffed 
full of actors and dry cleaning. There’s an iron. It all feels a long way from 
Hollywood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444234191027%2Fefe234f6-2b85-4215-a2d3-be866d0430ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I've%20turned%20down%20every%20other%20cop%20show'%3A%20Stellan%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20on%20River&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ve%20turned%20down%20every%20other%20cop%20show%27%3A%20Stellan%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20on%20River&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444234191027%2Fefe234f6-2b85-4215-a2d3-be866d0430ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nicola Walker, left, with Stellan Skarsgård and Georgina Rich. Photograph: 
Nick Briggs/BBC/Kudos 
Stellan Skarsgård: Nobody should think they have God on their side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/21/stellan-skarsgard-interview-in-order-of-disappearance-new-review-q-and-a>
“I’ve been offered police series so many times,” says Skarsgård. “I always 
turned them down, because the procedural side bores the shit out of me. But 
here, that stuff is in the background. In the foreground are the man’s 
psychological difficulties.” Indeed, what’s central is a gnawing sense of 
people adrift in grief, notably River, who is almost broken by it. The theme of 
friendship is equally strong, the chemistry between Skarsgård and Walker warm 
and genuine. They eat fast food, sing karaoke and, as Morgan notes, “talk about 
nothing” just like real people.

Skarsgård did not, however, just turn up and do as he was told. “I would 
complain when I wasn’t happy and we’d talk about it. I let everybody know 
exactly what I think about everything, all the time. Sometimes she used what I 
said, sometimes not. But we haven’t been co-writing. She’s the writer. And 
she’s good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444234411332%2Ff4fd8128-359e-418a-b4fb-5470fab6a885-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I've%20turned%20down%20every%20other%20cop%20show'%3A%20Stellan%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20on%20River&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ve%20turned%20down%20every%20other%20cop%20show%27%3A%20Stellan%20Skarsg%C3%A5rd%20on%20River&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fstellan-skarsgard-abi-morgan-river-behind-the-scenes-tv-police-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444234411332%2Ff4fd8128-359e-418a-b4fb-5470fab6a885-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Eddie Marsan as Thomas Cream in River. Photograph: Nick Briggs/BBC/Kudos 
Among the more peculiar aspects of the show is Eddie Marsan’s character, Dr 
Thomas Cream, a real-life serial killer from the 19th century who was known as
the Lambeth Poisoner <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Neill_Cream>. River 
is reading a book about him only to find Cream appear, waxed moustache and all, 
in his darker visions, taunting him. In one brutal scene, River attacks Cream, 
but only succeeds in bloodying his knuckles on a wall. He comes to symbolise 
River’s self-doubt and anger..

“He was the little mosquito I put in the script for myself,” says Morgan. “The 
bit of fun for me. I was googling these incredible quotes about death, but they 
were way too florid for any character. So I gave myself this one person who 
could get away with it. He spews Plato and Aristotle. He’s like tickertape 
running in River’s mind. I wanted to explore the psychosis of a murderer – and 
this was a way.”

River takes Skarsgård through a grimy, twilight world of kebab shops, neon 
karaoke bars, drive thrus, strip-lit stores and housing estate stairwells. 
Aren’t life-like hallucinations, I ask him, just a bit too high concept, within 
the framework of a cop show?

“It gives a lot of freedom to Abi as a storyteller,” he replies. “She can 
bring in dead people, bring in whoever she wants to create some disorder and 
change the pace of normal television storytelling. Abi’s writing is not normal 
television writing. It’s complicated: there has to be a basis of police 
procedural, but it must never take over. Otherwise, the air leaves the balloon. 
Then it’s a normal TV series. And then I wouldn’t be in it.”

 * River starts on BBC1 on 13 October. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06jkk8f>
 