
Having entered the NHS pathway <http://www.pfc.org.uk/files/BHCPCT.pdf>, with 
its expected duration of three years, I wanted to do something immediate that 
would make my transition feel more concrete. I'd lived 'as a woman' for several 
months and the time felt right to secure my identity. Told by friends that the
Gender Identity Clinic <http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/services/g/gender_identity.html>
 in London prefers a legal change of name before prescribing hormones, as proof 
of your 'real life experience', I resolved to legally alter mine as soon as 
possible.

Occasionally, the media run stories on people who have chosen idiosyncratic 
identities 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/4583953/Christine-Hamilton-changes-name-to-Mrs-British-Battleaxe.html>
. The words "changed his/her name by deed poll" always feature prominently, 
presenting it as a dramatic and difficult step. In reality, you can swiftly and 
cheaply change your namein order to make a point 
<http://cabalamat.wordpress.com/2007/10/01/yorkshire-bank-plc-are-fascist-bastards/>
, or just for fun, and just as quickly change it back.

Before I ordered a deed poll <http://freedeedpoll.org.uk/>, though, I had to 
question myself. I felt sure that I wanted to become a woman - but did I really 
want to become 'Juliet'? I'd experimented with other names when I started 
publicly cross-dressing, sometimes suggesting to anyone who asked my name that 
they call me whatever they felt suited (a dangerous policy, on reflection, but 
I was never seriously insulted) but,as in my youth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/02/transgender-journey>, Juliet
 <http://www.babynames.com/name/JULIET> just seemed to fit. And, being 
Shakespearian, it dodged the potential pitfall of names such as 'Kylie' or 
'Britney' that wouldn't have been prevalent at the time I was born. (It was to 
avoid this that I eventually discounted 'Sinitta'.)

Telling friends prompted their stories about how their parents chose their 
names (after a magazine, in one case, but sadly notthis one 
<http://www.zzap64.co.uk/zzap1/zzap1.html>), or how they chose their 
children's, and if they, or their parents, had got it right. When asked if I 
was definitely happy with Juliet, I said that I'd just change it again if I got 
bored of it. Joking aside, I knew my name was right for me: unlike my friends 
and their parents, I had the advantage of knowing the personality involved 
before labelling it.

Although it wasn't chosen in honour of any family member or tradition, I knew 
my parents 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/14/tell-family-transgender> 
would find my renunciation of the name they gave me incredibly difficult. I 
wished I'd had a name like Alex that didn't have to change, or even something 
that could be easily 'feminised' - the nearest I found to my birth name was '
Greta <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greta_Garbo>', which was a non-starter. The 
best compromise I could find was to retain my initials, which meant making 
Juliet my middle name (causing confusion later, as nobody - not even me, 
initially - recognised me by my new first name), and not insisting they use it 
straight away, as I did my friends.

Finally decided, I signed my deed poll, with an old friend as witness. She 
asked how I felt: I just smiled, unaware that the fun would start when I had to 
change my name on every document and account. I still received incorrectly 
titled correspondence months after I thought I'd finally covered everyone who 
provided my services: they all seemed to have different policies on whether 
they'd accept original deed polls or photocopies, and how much evidence of my 
transition they demanded. I had problems, too, when I was surprised at home (by 
the postman, for example) before I'd dressed and done my makeup: they often 
responded apprehensively when I told them that I was 'Miss Juliet', despite 
appearing to them unimpeachably male. (The Conservative canvasser was the most 
bemused, but this may also have beenbecause of my T-shirt 
<http://www.fifthcolumnclassics.co.uk/ekmps/shops/fifthcolumn/images/po001t(1).jpg>
.)

These practical irritations paled beside the social and psychological aspects. 
Having carried two names in my head for most of my life, switching between them 
at will, I'd not realised that most people find it incredibly hard to dislodge 
the first name they attach to someone - and that the longer they've known it, 
the harder it becomes. I tried to be forgiving when people used my old name, 
remembering that many people just aren't good with names full stop.

So my first problem was: when to start correcting people, and how? Friends 
were mortified if they slipped up, and hugely apologetic: I assured them that I 
knew the difference between a mistake and amalicious attempt to undermine my 
identity <http://ladybunny.net/blog/2006/07/miss-calpernia-addams.html>, 
allowing them time to get it right. How much time I didn't know: I judged by 
how often I'd seen each person since coming out, rather than by months passed. 
Soon enough I was almost always addressed as I wished, and felt able to gently 
correct people when I wasn't. (Getting people to use the right pronouns has 
been far harder, signifying as they do not just individuals, but deeply held 
beliefs about the nature of gender. I'll revisit this hornets' nest another 
time.) I gave my parents longer, never correcting them: consequently, the first 
time they called me Juliet became one of the most precious moments of my 
transition.

When discussing the present or the future, Juliet felt perfect. When my 
friends or I talked about my pre-transitional past, it didn't. Inserting my new 
name into anecdotes felt strangely Orwellian, and implausible when talking 
about my schooldays, but it seemed less right to use my old name, especially 
around people who'd never heard it. I dealt with this by censoring such 
references whenever possible, but the bittersweet sense that I'd made a break 
in my life really hit home. My family and friends' worst fear had been that I 
would no longer be the same person, and it was my change of name more than 
anything that prompted them to express it. Once several friends had asked if 
their memories of me became redundant with my old name, I questioned myself: 
was I still the same person? How much did I want to be?

Even when I rarely heard it, I struggled to dislodge my old name from my mind 
- particularly on days when I felt concerned about how well I was 'passing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman>'. 
Sometimes, when I introduced myself as Juliet, the old name sat on the tip of 
my tongue; I'd hesitate, and sound unsure of who I was. As for my friends and 
family, it became easier over time. For me, transitioning was about replacing 
an identity imposed at birth with one that suited me better, but I didn't want 
to rewrite the history symbolised by my old handle. Instead, I reconciled 
myself with it, deciding not to regret time 'wasted' but to relax and enjoy my 
transition. After all, nothing would be easier to change than my name.

â€¢ Juliet Jacques's column appears fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 