
After my gender issues complicated my relationships with 'straight-acting' gay 
men, I had to reconsider my identity - and the centrality of maleness within 
it. Gradually, I came to define as 'transgender 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transgender>'. I understood that transgender 
could include cross-dressers, transvestites, male-to-female (MtF) and 
female-to-male (FtM) transsexuals, and anyone else who considered themselves 
beyond the traditional gender binary. Having found a suitable term for myself, 
which allowed space for me to explore my gender, I wanted to find places where 
I could express myself and meet like-minded people.

I spent time at Brighton's Harlequin club, but it seemed to be winding down: 
the only venue that catered primarily for transgender (although not often, I 
noticed, transsexual) women became a gay club, before closing entirely. It was 
partly replaced by occasional 'tranny' nights, which were always hosted in LGBT 
venues: like the Harlequin, they seemed mostly to attract middle-aged people 
who had not transitioned. Their high-camp playlists and their lip-synching drag 
acts, who avoided any critique of gender, felt unbearably conservative. I 
withdrew from the scene, frustrated.

Explaining my identity became ever more laborious: "I thought 'transgender' 
meant people who ... you know ... cut off their bits," was a common reaction. 
Disillusioned by my failure to fit into the LGBT scene, exhausted from 
constantly compartmentalising my two personas (particularly in a stifling job), 
I entered counselling.

After months of therapy, I stopped seeing myself as divided, considering 
myself essentially female but continuing to present as male. My answer to the 
perennial question of transition (often phrased as "Would you go all the way?") 
shifted: previously "No", it became, "If there was a button I could press ..." 
and then, "Maybe in a few years". The expense and effort put me off - not the 
idea.

I'd read plenty of literature that explored sexual and gender difference in an 
intelligent way. Now I was finding places to meet people who shared my 
opposition to sex and gender norms. This was the queer scene, welcoming anyone 
who defined themselves against mainstream LGBT culture - both its clubs and its 
apparent obsession with accessing 'straight' society's most conservative 
institutions.

My engagement with the queer community began at Brighton Pride 2007, when I 
joined a protest against the army and the police recruiting there, just a few 
short years after they lifted their bans on homosexuals. We hijacked the 
parade, carrying a pink banner reading "Cunts not cops!" I agreed about the 
military, but without police protection there would have been no Pride (as was 
the case in Belgrade last year 
<http://www.internationalviewpoint.org/spip.php?article1714>), regardless of 
how it had been deradicalised since its early 90s inception. Genetic women 
dominated the group - and although I was made welcome, sensing none of the
historical tension between certain lesbian-feminists and transsexual women 
<http://my.execpc.com/~dmmunson/tsc2k/StephenWhittle.htm>, I was the only MtF 
person there.

My friends encouraged me to involve myself more in transgender communities, 
persuading me to enterMiss Transgender 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/1730549.0/> despite my awkwardness about the 
concept of a pageant. I bought a stunning dress and hit the catwalk. I clammed 
up on stage (particularly when askedwhich EastEnders character I'd be 
<http://www.google.co.uk/images?q=kat%20slater&oe=utf-8&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&client=firefox-a&um=1&ie=UTF-8&source=og&sa=N&hl=en&tab=wi>
), but I had fun and I met an amazing range of transgender people, who shared 
my critical attitude towards conventional LGB and particularly T culture and 
helped me find vital support networks.

These were the Clare Project <http://www.clareproject.org.uk/>, a 
volunteer-led meeting place and counselling service for people (both MtF and 
FtM) considering or undergoing gender reassignment, and theGender Trust 
<http://www.gendertrust.org.uk/>. Attending their Trans: Have Your Say forum, 
organised with local LGBT focus groupSpectrum <http://www.spectrum-lgbt.org/>, 
I learned more about the local transgender community, and our place within the 
city. I understood the need to build bridges with the police, who promised to 
recruit a transgender liaison officer (I don't know what became of that), and 
realised just how difficult life could be for trans people, particularly 
transsexuals, who have no option but to be 'out' - especially those whose 
backgrounds were less privileged than mine.

I was still looking for a trans counter-culture. Understanding just how few 
transgender people there are, let alone how few are open about their status and 
want to be involved in a 'scene', I knew this would be tough, but the
Transfabulous festival <http://www.transfabulous.co.uk/> was a revelation. Its 
performances were thrilling: theTransfabulous artists 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCa7O5tAfjg> were far removed from the drag 
queens I'd seen in the past, with pieces bya trans man who funded his sex 
reassignment surgery by working in a lap-dancing club 
<http://ignaciorivera.com/performance/performance.html>, as a woman, another 
FtM who'd found parallels between his physical changes and his mortuary work 
after theSrebenica massacre <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Srebrenica_massacre>, 
and aheartbreakingly beautiful autobiographical piece 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TO4alZ230gA> by two transsexual women.

Happy to delve in and out of this scene, I still felt able to function as 
male. I immersed myself in gay football, playing for theBrighton Bandits 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/news/articles/2005-6024.html> at the IGLFA World Cup 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/news/articles/2005-8864.html/> in London. Finding 
this scene accepting but rather too masculine for me, I found a local 
genderqueer scene, as London'sClub Wotever 
<http://www.myspace.com/woteverbrighton> moved to the south coast. There, I met 
people in transition (mostly FtM) who shared their journeys with me, explaining 
how they entered the NHS pathway and the trials of the 'real life experience 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_life_experience>'.

But eventually, the divide between my body and my mind became unbearable. I 
was no longer able to tolerate being perceived, addressed or treated as male 
and, more crucially, I no longer felt able to function in a male body - my 
coping strategy no longer worked. Seventeen years after first consciously 
realising my transsexual impulse, the time had come to transition - however 
much effort and expense it entailed. The first question was: where to start?

â€¢ Juliet Jacques's column will appear fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 