
I'm standing very close to Anthony Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyneilson>. The Guardian's photographer 
calls for us to get closer still. Our noses are almost touching and I'm 
suddenly struck by an urge to kiss him. There's a cocktail of swagger and 
reserve about Neilson, of diffidence and defiance, of the teenager and the wise 
old man. It's a cocktail I find very attractive.

I want to kiss Anthony Neilson. So I do. On the lips. I suppose I'm hoping for 
a reaction, something along the lines of: "Get away from me, you poof." But 
Anthony happily kisses me back. I'm disappointed and - as the camera clicks 
away - considerably more embarrassed than he is. As I pull away I attempt to 
save face: "Ooh, Anthony, there goes your reputation." He smiles at me. "Think 
so? Do you know what my reputation is?"

I first met Neilson in a room above a pub in 1995. We'd both written plays for 
an evening of erotic scenes. I watched from the lighting box as Anthony 
rehearsed two of his friends. One, dressed as Father Christmas, was tenderly 
practising anal sex with the other, who was dressed as the fairy at the top of 
the Christmas tree. This was unlike any rehearsal I'd ever seen. Neilson was 
sprawled on the floor, drinking beer and chatting with the two actors. There 
was an outline of a script but nothing specific. At some point something like a 
conventional rehearsal must have taken place - lines learned, moves organised - 
but I never saw it. Neilson's main tactic as a director seemed to be to draw 
his actors into an unspoken conspiracy. And it yielded results. The audience 
had the disturbing feeling of being allowed into a private moment. Anyone who 
has seen Neilson's best work - Penetrator, Stitching, The Censor - will 
recognise that uncomfortable but mesmerising sensation.

In 1995, Neilson seemed to me to be impossibly cool. Not long after meeting 
him I wrote the first draft of a play that became Shopping and Fucking; Neilson 
directed a reading of it. Eighteen months later, I bumped into him at the 
opening night of Shopping and Fucking in the West End. "What is this?" Neilson 
teased. "The fucking Rocky Horror Show?" The evening was far too mainstream for 
him. Ever since, we have circled each other amiably, two playwrights on similar 
trajectories - but Anthony always implies that I've sold out. For Neilson, the 
artist as outsider is a powerful myth.

We meet again in Glasgow as Neilson is rehearsing his new play, The Wonderful 
World of Dissocia. The play opens next week in Edinburgh's plush Lyceum theatre 
as part of the international festival. How does he feel about this move to 
mainstage respectability? He chews thoughtfully on a bowl of nachos. "I really 
like fringe spaces," he acknowledges. "I hate being an audience member in big 
theatres. The best venues are small black boxes. But as a writer there's not 
the money on the fringe and - if I'm honest - the prestige." He grins. 
"Nowadays I get two whole columns in a newspaper for some wanker to slag off my 
work."

Of course, he's being sardonic. He may claim to like small spaces, but he is 
also passionate about sharing his work with audiences. "We've got to write 
plays people want to see," he says. "Otherwise there's a danger we disappear up 
our own arses. I think if somebody's never been to the theatre before, and 
stumbles in, they would hopefully still enjoy the work. They should engage with 
the story. That doesn't mean it has to be simplistic, but the story should be 
at the centre of what a playwright does. And what you have to do is balance 
that up with trying something new."

Neilson rarely goes to the theatre. Not, he insists, out of arrogance 
(although there is a healthy dash of arrogance about him), but a fear that he 
will be over-influenced by other plays. "I don't want to think I can't do that 
because so and so has already done it. I want to stay - in a way - quite pure." 
Instead, he is a huge film buff, sloping off to afternoon movies. Film often 
gets closer to his love of story - but he still feels that theatre, at its 
best, has the edge. "Film is slow.Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> has the possibility to be fast, 
reactive. You can add in new bits every night. There should be new stuff 
springing up all over the place."

Dissocia has been stewing in his head for a few years - but that doesn't mean 
he started rehearsals with a script. Many playwrights, myself included, rewrite 
and revise constantly through rehearsal. Neilson works in a more extreme way, 
gradually building up the play during rehearsals. How much of Dissocia did he 
have for the first day of rehearsals? "About 20%."

It's not a way of working that many theatres like. But while Neilson can 
understand that theatres such as the Royal Court and the National like to see a 
script before they commit to a production, he finds working on a play "for 
months and months before it goes off to some fucking script committee" takes 
the edge off his writing. "You can't maintain the level of visceral energy that 
produces something like Stitching for more than a few weeks," he says. "That's 
when I do my best work."

Dissocia is an ambitious piece, a vast dreamscape with mental illness as its 
central theme. Neilson is keen not to suggest that it is a direct attempt to 
stage mental illness. "That would be presumptuous. This is more like The Wizard 
of Oz or Alice in Wonderland, something that might be analogous to mental 
illness. In many ways, it's an experiment in form."

Is mental illness something he has experienced? "Yes," he admits. "There are 
elements of it in my family. When it's in the family it's something that you're 
not so frightened of. It becomes what you know. If you're sitting in a bar and 
somebody comes in who is obviously mentally ill, other people will tend to move 
away. I'll say 'All right?' and end up having a conversation with them about 
how somebody is trying to kill them or whatever."

The impulse to write Dissocia coincided with a period in his life when he was 
"fucked". "I was taking a lot of speed, I was in a relationship with somebody 
who was the most catastrophically mentally fucked-up person I've ever come 
across. I got kind of dragged into her world. And my play The Lying Kind, on 
the main stage at the Royal Court, was panned. One critic called it the worst 
thing the Royal Court had ever done."

His head went into "a kind of a loop. It wasn't exactly depressing. More kind 
of weird." He stopped taking drugs, ended the relationship and started a course 
of St John's Wort. As he recovered, he began attempting to write about mental 
illness, trying to capture its essence by writing in a more absurdist way.

The resulting play contrasts the vivid internal world of the mentally ill with 
the sterility of the objective world. Isn't that a rather romantic idea of 
mental illness? Neilson leans forward, suddenly animated, his sardonic shield 
set aside. "But it's true. You ask anyone. That's why people don't take their 
medication. It's a more colourful, vivid landscape. There's a huge joy in it. 
But there's terrible, crippling awful lows to it. I'm not romantic. I believe 
you should be medicated. I don't think the treatment of people with mental 
health problems is inhumane. But we have to acknowledge that people resist 
taking the medicine. I've been there. I've been a mess. And I've been reluctant 
to take the medication."

The interview has overrun and the cast have been filling the time playing 
volleyball, but now Neilson has to go back to the rehearsal room. We kiss - on 
the cheek this time. "Thanks for doing this Mark," he says. "I'll do the same 
for you when you're down on your luck and trying to promote your new play in 
some pub theatre."

Still the same Anthony - affection and aggression all rolled up together. I 
love him. And so should you.

Â· The Wonderful World of Dissocia is at the Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh, September 
1-4. Box office: 0131-473 2000.
 