
Throughout transition, one question has stood out for me above the others: is 
this the right thing to do? For good reason, of course: any transsexual person, 
as well as the attendant medical personnel and friends, family and colleagues, 
understands the surgical conclusion to the pathway to be irrevocable.

A 'real life experience <http://wiki.susans.org/index.php/Real_life_experience>
' of living in one's desired gender for a minimum period as a means of 
determining suitability for medical intervention is recommended, but not 
mandated, by theWorld Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH)  
<http://www.wpath.org/>organisation's Standards of Care 
<http://www.wpath.org/publications_standards.cfm>. The NHS makes this central 
to their protocol, with gender identity clinics (GICs) demanding at least three 
months prior to hormone prescription, and two years before sex confirmation 
surgery. These lengthy periods (often exaggerated by the waiting lists) aim to 
ensure that nobody undergoes treatment that s/he will later regret.

Since the early 50s, when Roberta Cowell 
<http://www.transgenderzone.com/features/roberta_cowell.htm> and Christine 
Jorgensen <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christine_Jorgensen> hit the headlines, 
media coverage of gender variance has focused on transsexual people, 
emphasising (if not sensationalising) the medical aspects of transition. The 
social implications of coming out as transsexual (or otherwise transgender) 
have received far less attention, but the question of possible regret is just 
as pertinent at this point as at any other: telling people that you want to 
transition is as difficult to reverse as any of the consequent physical 
interventions.

Close friends posed this question as soon as I came out to them, although they 
appreciated that I would not have made such an announcement without giving it 
serious consideration beforehand. We also knew that the medical services would 
ask this more pressingly - as well as telling me on point of entry that my 
local PCT does not fund surgical reversal. After 60 years of evolution, the 
transitional pathway has been structured to root out unsuitable patients at 
various stages. The initial local assessment screens for people who are not 
appropriate for GIC referral – those, perhaps, who may have confused their 
discomfort with gender expectations for what is often called (perhaps 
unhelpfully, given the psychiatrists' aim to separate these from a patient's 
sex)gender dysphoria 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/help/diagnoses_and_conditions/gender_dysphoria> – that 
is, a transsexual impulse.

Nowadays, the GICs – at least 'Charing Cross'  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/22/transgender-charing-cross>
(that is, West London Mental Health Trust) – do not police gender presentations 
as rigorously as in the past, aiming instead to explore and manage their 
patients' expectations of life in their target bodies. This is slowly becoming 
more widely understood by transsexual people, but I've still heard voices at
community meetings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/20/transsexual-community>
expressing concerns about how openly worries can be explored within the GIC 
system for fear of jeopardising treatment. This means that not only can people 
spend long periods between appointments internalising their anxieties, but – 
more troublingly – feel they cannot discuss them in confidence with a qualified 
professional.

I've been fortunate enough not to experience any real doubts or regrets so 
far, partly becauseI spent years before transition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/16/transgender-journey-trans-counter-culture>
 working out that considering myself fundamentally female whilst remaining in a 
male body was not psychologically tenable, long-term. Counselling dealt well 
with other mental health concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/05/transgender-journey-depression>
, but did not quell my bodily issues – conversely, it brought them to the fore.

Just as importantly, I have found that everyone I care about has provided 
strong support, and as a consequence, no important ties have been cut. Very few 
transsexual people are so lucky, for whatever reason, and some who later regret 
transition do so because parents, children, partners or colleagues remain 
unable to accept their identities, and the pain of this rejection ultimately 
overshadows the positive emotions felt on coming out. (This long, sad story 
about LA Times writer Mike Penner/Christine Daniels 
<http://www.laweekly.com/2010-08-19/news/mike-penner-christine-daniels-a-tragic-love-story/>
 illustrates this point.)

Personally, I've not known anyone to detransition: this is not to deny that 
there are people who genuinely regret transition and particularly surgery 
purely because they've ended up with a body that wasn't right for them, but 
instances do seem rare – partly because the pathway allows people to opt out at 
any point, and some remain onhormones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/12/transgender-health-and-wellbeing>
 before surgery for much longer than strictly necessary whilst they consider 
their options.

It's hard to find any definitive study on how many transsexual people regret 
surgery (who is asked, and why?), butthis report from 2009 
<http://www.translondon.org.uk/documents/The%20Failure%20of%20Gender%20Dysphoria%20Treatment%20-%20Abridged.pdf>
 quotes more than one survey which found satisfaction rates to be over 95%, and 
points out that some of that small minority regretted poor outcomes rather than 
the surgery per se. It's worth remembering that people who regret transition 
are more likely to speak publicly about this than those who do not. They 
present more of a story to media outlets looking for 'unusual' subjects - 
especially if those outlets have their own agenda - than either satisfied 
transsexual people, or those who did not pursue transition and wish they had.

The transitional pathway still relies heavily on psychiatry, which, for all 
its advances over the years, is not an exact science, but no other 'cure' had 
been found for genuine and professionally verified cases of gender dysphoria 
since its first treatment during the 1930s. For the majority of transsexual 
people, the current solution, for all its imperfections, remains the best one, 
and as the medical services continue to improve their understanding of the 
people who present to them, cases of regret should become even rarer.
 