
Amber Rudd to introduce asbo-style bans for stalkers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/amber-rudd-stalking-prevention-orders-stalkers>
About five years after the first emails arrived, the death threats started. 
When Sarah first began receiving messages from a man expressing a romantic 
interest, she shrugged them off. “I didn’t realise for some time that I had a 
stalker,” she says. They seemed confused and clumsy; strange, but nothing much 
to worry about. Later, when they became threatening – the man stalking her said 
he would attack her, or kill her – she went to the police. Even then, the 
police said it wasn’t very significant and not to worry about it. She was 
reassured at first, until she began to suspect that wasn’t the best advice. “I 
realised from the content of some of the messages that he was referring to real 
events in my life and that, according to him, we had met on one or two 
occasions. I don’t recall ever meeting him. I was alarmed – he wasn’t just a 
random person on the internet. Or he was, but he had taken a great deal of 
trouble to find out information about me. It was at that stage that I became 
really quite frightened that he might carry out one of these threats.”

She kept contacting the police, including making one statement at 4am “when I 
had received a number of threats and I couldn’t take it any more, and thought I 
would have to go and sleep at the police station”. Still nothing was done about 
it. “Eventually I found a very motivated police officer, who hadn’t had much 
training in this, but she made it her business to make something happen. With 
her support, I did eventually get somewhere, but I still had to do all of the 
preparation myself. I had started a long process of educating myself and 
educating the police. I had to learn everything myself.” The victim log she put 
together would detail how at one point she was receiving up to 10 emails a day.

Thinking back to when it started, Sarah says that if she had known more about 
stalking then, she would have gone to the police much earlier and pushed them 
to take it seriously. “I think it’s normal for people to think it doesn’t mean 
anything, or it will go away, but in my case it reached a point where it was 
unbearable. The earlier it can be stopped, the better.”

This week, the home secretary, Amber Rudd, announced plans for new Stalking 
Protection Orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/amber-rudd-stalking-prevention-orders-stalkers>
, which would hopefully address this, and at an early stage. It would allow 
courts to ban stalkers from contacting their victims, even if they hadn’t been 
charged or convicted.

It has largely been welcomed by anti-stalking campaigners. “Anything that is 
another tool to deal with a stalker is great news,” says Jane Harvey,campaigns 
director of Network for Surviving Stalking <https://www.scaredofsomeone.org/>. 
“But we need to get some of the basic building blocks in place. It takes people 
a long time to recognise what’s happening to them as stalking, so there’s 
under-reporting, and then at an early stage of a case, things can go wrong – a 
police officer hasn’t had training in stalking and the case is dismissed, or 
another element, such as criminal damage, will be seized upon instead of seeing 
the wider picture.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwill-new-stalking-prevention-orders-help-women-and-men-living-in-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34a0f3c33ed4b5b345b9707a5d723461c93a75b8%2F49_182_2485_1492%2F2485.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20could%20be%20any%20of%20these%20men'%3A%20how%20we%20learned%20to%20take%20stalking%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwill-new-stalking-prevention-orders-help-women-and-men-living-in-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20could%20be%20any%20of%20these%20men%27%3A%20how%20we%20learned%20to%20take%20stalking%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwill-new-stalking-prevention-orders-help-women-and-men-living-in-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34a0f3c33ed4b5b345b9707a5d723461c93a75b8%2F49_182_2485_1492%2F2485.jpg>
 Anti-stalking charities have broadly welcomed the new powers introduced by 
home secretary Amber Rudd, pictured at the Suzy Lamplugh Trust this week. 
Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Catherine Skinner, chief executive of the charity Paladin, 
<http://paladinservice.co.uk/> says: “You still hear that [police officers and 
others in the criminal justice system] don’t see the risks; they don’t see how 
the behaviour of the perpetrator can not just psychologically affect the victim 
– we see issues of suicidal ideation from our clients. But also there could be 
threats to kill, a history of violence, and things that could put victims at 
high risk.”

Research by the Suzy Lamplugh Trust <http://www.suzylamplugh.org/> has found 
that one in five women and one in 12 men will experience stalking. There have 
been several high-profile cases recently – a man was jailed in September for
stalking the broadcaster Emily Maitlis for 25 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/emily-maitlis-stalker-edward-vines-jailed-for-three-years>
; in June, a man whostalked the singer Lily Allen for seven years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/16/lily-allen-stalked-singer-police>
, breaking into her house and entering her bedroom, was detained indefinitely 
under the Mental Health Act.

Lily Allen effect as more stalking victims come forward for help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/23/lily-allen-story-pursuades-stalking-crime-victims-to-come-forward>
It is largely an unreported crime. The Suzy Lamplugh Trust estimates that in 
England and Wales, more than 1.1 million people are stalked each year, but 
police recorded 4,156 stalking crimes in the year to June, and just 1,102 cases 
were prosecuted. The proposed new protection orders are “a good thing,” says 
Victoria Charleston, policy and campaigns officer of the trust. “Where we are 
cautious is if the police are responsible for applying for these orders. If 
they’re not recognising stalking at the moment, are we clear that they are 
going to think about using them? We hope that there will be further training 
for police.”

It’s not a typical crime, Charleston says. “It’s a pattern of behaviour. It 
can be very small to begin with, before it escalates.” It is also a fairly new 
area for many health and criminal justice professionals. “It wasn’t really 
recognised until the 1980s, and the current anti-stalking legislation didn’t 
come in until 2012 [in England and Wales],” she adds. In October, Alex Chalk
launched a private members’ bill to increase the maximum sentencing of five 
years <http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/stalkingsentencing.html>. 
One of his constituents, Dr Eleanor Aston, a GP, had been targeted for seven 
years by a man who continued to stalk her even after serving a prison sentence 
for it.

Ruth, who lives in north Wales with her partner and daughter, has experienced 
stalking by a neighbour for the past five years. He would watch from his 
doorstep every time she left the house or came home. After about six months, 
when Ruth was returning to work after maternity leave, he would follow her to 
work in his car. Around six months after that, he started following her partner 
as well. “On the days when he didn’t, it still made me nervous because I didn’t 
know where he was,” she says. “I didn’t know if he would turn up somewhere 
else.” The police have been repeatedly involved, but Ruth feels there has been 
little support. “I’ve had anxiety and panic attacks. It’s caused a lot of 
stress between me and my partner. I feel awful for my daughter, who has had to 
grow up with visits from the police, and us watching over our shoulders.”

This year, research by the Suzy Lamplugh Trust found that 36% of stalking 
cases included online behaviours. For Emily, the man who stalked her was not 
someone she had met, but someone who became fixated on her and her family 
online. He found out her family’s email addresses and bombarded them with 
emails about her. “We reported it to the police and they said: ‘Just keep an 
eye on it and see what happens.’” He went quiet for a while, then started up 
again, trying to follow their various social media accounts. Shortly after 
this, he turned up at her parents’ house and tried to get in; he was arrested, 
and is awaiting sentencing. “It has been absolutely horrific,” Emily says. “I 
didn’t feel safe anywhere. I still check under my bed, in my cupboard. I spent 
£1,500 getting new locks put on my house. On the street, I don’t make eye 
contact with men. You lose all sense of faith in people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwill-new-stalking-prevention-orders-help-women-and-men-living-in-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d68a1e3011a51e8488350ea79686d21d437e81e%2F0_0_3470_5367%2F3470.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20could%20be%20any%20of%20these%20men'%3A%20how%20we%20learned%20to%20take%20stalking%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwill-new-stalking-prevention-orders-help-women-and-men-living-in-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20could%20be%20any%20of%20these%20men%27%3A%20how%20we%20learned%20to%20take%20stalking%20seriously&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fwill-new-stalking-prevention-orders-help-women-and-men-living-in-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d68a1e3011a51e8488350ea79686d21d437e81e%2F0_0_3470_5367%2F3470.jpg>
 Amy, who has been stalked for four years, said she would keep her curtains 
closed in summer in case her stalker was watching her. Photograph: Thomas 
Fricke/Getty Images/First Light 
Something similar happened to Beth, an actor and writer, who was stalked for 
several months in 2014 by a man who followed her on Twitter. She noticed him 
“liking” or replying to every tweet she wrote, and he would write about her on 
his own account. Eventually she blocked him and complained to Twitter several 
times. “But he would often delete his tweets, so Twitter would say they weren’t 
violent or harmful, and they couldn’t do anything about them. It was often a 
robotic reply. It wasn’t like they’d actually researched it and checked out 
what was going on. They did nothing.”

He started contacting her friends, and a few months later, he turned up on her 
doorstep. “It was horrific. When I started getting a bit worried about it, I 
used to picture in my head what I would do if I saw him. You think of the 
worst-case scenario, so when he turned up I wasn’t expecting it – but I also 
sort of was.” She screamed, slammed the door and called the police. When they 
arrived, they found him still sitting on her doorstep, tweeting about her. 
Later, looking at his account, she saw that the man – who lived several hundred 
miles away – had spent the week walking around her area, looking in pubs and 
cafes for her.

Amy has been stalked by a man for the last four years – an acquaintance from 
several years ago who developed a fixation with her. “It has gone from unwanted 
text messages and phone calls to hand-delivered letters and gifts,” she says. 
“They are all of a very strange nature. He’s delusional and has mentioned God 
having a plan for us to be together.” The first couple of times she went to the 
police about it, they talked her out of making a complaint, saying they would 
just have a word with the man. Later, he was charged with harassment without 
violence (rather than stalking), and after it went to court, he was given a 
restraining order, which he ignored. Even though he had breached the order, she 
says the police were dismissive of her – it was only after she got in touch with
the National Stalking Helpline 
<http://www.suzylamplugh.org/Pages/Category/national-stalking-helpline>, who 
contacted the police on her behalf, that they followed it up. “Before, they 
would say things like ‘chances are you won’t hear from him again’. But it was 
obvious I would.”

The experience has had a huge effect on her life. In the summer, she says she 
was staying at home all day with the curtains closed because she was worried he 
would walk past the window and see her. “As soon as I walk in the door, I check 
for any letters. I feel really tense. Every time he is punished with a 
restraining order or community service hours, I don’t completely relax because 
the pattern is that it will start again at some point. The thing I would really 
like is for the mental health aspect to be recognised, because I think that is 
the root cause of the problem with him. People say [we should] make the 
stalking laws stricter, but it seems a shame to put someone into prison when it 
could be dealt with as a mental health issue. I would feel more reassured if he 
was being treated than if he was just going into prison and coming out again.”

Frank Farnham, consultant forensic psychiatrist at Barnet, Enfield and 
Haringey Mental Health NHS Trust, and a specialist in stalking behaviours, also 
favours treatment over custodial sentences for many offenders – not least 
because it is more likely to reduce reoffending, and is far cheaper. But one of 
the problems with the new stalking prevention order model, he says, is that 
requiring mental health treatment as part of the order might be too optimistic 
– if the offender doesn’t give consent, it can only be done under the Mental
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Act. But he does like the 
idea of requiring assessments. Stalking behaviours can look similar, but the 
motivations can be very different.

It is widely accepted there are five categories of stalker. The largest – 
thought to be somewhere between a third and a half – is the “rejected” stalker: 
someone, usually a man, upset by the end of a relationship who harasses his 
ex-partner. “That group are not usually mentally ill, but they might have 
personality problems – they can be quite grandiose, narcissistic. If you take 
that group away, there are very high rates of mental illness in [the other] 
groups.”

Intimacy seekers are “deluded” people who believe they are in a relationship 
with their victim, or could be. “The problem with that group is that if you 
believe you are on a mission from God, or convinced you’re destined to be 
[together], simply imposing an order isn’t going to stop you from doing it.” A 
third group – “incompetent suitors” – are not deluded but their behaviour may 
be due to a learning disability, and they don’t realise it is frightening or 
inappropriate. The “resentful” stalker is someone who harasses a person they 
believe is to blame for something that has happened to them – it is not 
uncommon for MPs, councillors and GPs to be stalked like this. “Some of those 
people are mentally ill – their paranoia is so severe that they are deluded. 
But underpinning all of this is a process where [there should be a] good 
assessment, to spot the people who are mentally ill and give them treatment.” 
(A fifth group, mercifully small, are “predatory” stalkers, whose victims are 
unaware they are being stalked; the stalking can be a prelude to a sexual 
attack.)

“Even if you do identify someone who is unwell, with the current state of 
mental health services, how do you get them into treatment?” asks Farnham, who 
used to treat people convicted of stalking until his funding was cut. He, along 
with the Suzy Lamplugh Trust and others, are trying to get a pilot programme 
going with the police service to look at intervention treatment – to treat 
stalking behaviour before it becomes dangerously entrenched – but they are yet 
to receive funding.

Stalking victims backed in challenge to ‘disturbing’ lenient court sentences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/15/stalking-victims-challenge-lenient-sentences-emily-maitlis>
For the victims who have to endure stalking for years, the effects are 
profound. Sarah’s relationship with her partner broke down because of the 
stress it caused them; he felt worried about her, but also worried for his own 
safety. “There were times when [the man who was stalking her] would say he was 
going to come and kill me. Part of my rational brain said, ‘Well, he hasn’t up 
until now,’ but the other part thought: ‘Where do I go? To the police station? 
Where is he and what does he know? Should I move?’ It makes you hypervigilant. 
I would leave the gym, look around and think: ‘I just don’t know who it is. It 
could be any of those men.’ In my career I should probably be using the 
internet a lot more to publicise the work I do, and I don’t do that. I used to 
be a very sociable person but I entirely stopped socialising at one point.”

The man who has stalked her for 10 years eventually pleaded guilty and is 
awaiting sentencing. She isn’t wholly optimistic that her ordeal is over. “The 
truth is you never know.”
 