
Alanis Morissette <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alanis-morissette> 
performed a reboot of her 1995 hit Ironic on The Late Late Show on Monday, with 
Snapchat, iPhones, vaping and Facebook incorporated into her list of modern day 
ailments.

“It’s like swiping left on your future soulmate,” the Canadian musician sang 
in a televised duet with host James Corden, the pair dressed in similar blue 
sweaters, wearing red beanies that paid homage to the song’soriginal video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jne9t8sHpUc>.

Lyrics included “an old friend sends you a Facebook request and you only find 
out they’re racist after you accept” and “it’s like they announce a new iPhone 
the day after you buy it”.

Web companies and technology were the main source of Morisette’s present-day 
peeves, singing about the trials and tribulations of using Netflix, Amazon, 
Twitter, Uber and “a Snapchat that you wish you had saved”.

Morissette also took a jab at herself with the line: “It’s singing ironic but 
there are no ironies”, addressing along-standing gripe 
<http://www.isitironic.com/alanis-morissette.htm> that the original song does 
not actually illustrate ironic situations.

She also addressed the dearth of female television hosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/30/daily-show-trevor-noah-late-night-diversity-comedy-central>
 with “It’s ten thousand male late-night hosts when all you want is just one 
woman, seriously.”

Alanis Morissette: 'I still have PTSD from the Jagged Little Pill era. It was 
a profound violation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/16/alanis-morissette-profound-violation>
Ironic was the third single of her third studio album, Jagged Little Pill, 
which this year celebrated its 20-year anniversary. It sold 30m copies 
worldwide, and made Morisette one of the fastest-selling female artists of the 
90s.


In an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/16/alanis-morissette-profound-violation>
 she revealed mixed feelings about that time of her life: “Fame became a great 
tool. But I still have PTSD from the Jagged Little Pill era. It was a profound 
violation.

“It felt like every millisecond I was attempting to set a boundary and say no 
and people were breaking into my hotel rooms and going through my suitcase and 
pulling my hair and jumping on my car.”

When asked if she was tired of people saying there was nothing ironic about 
Ironic, she said people must be “very at odds” with the idea of being stupid.

“I mean, malapropisms; big fucking deal. It’s kind of like in traffic when 
you’re yelling at someone for cutting you off and you’re cutting someone off, 
too.”
 