
Recently, while walking to the library, a fellow student loudly shouted “look 
at her hair!” as I passed by. When you have albinism – like me – university can 
be a challenge.


The condition  affects one in 17,000 people in the UK 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/albinism/Pages/introduction.aspx>, according to 
NHS statistics. I have type 1oculocutaneous albinism 
<http://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/oculocutaneous-albinism/>, which means I 
have no pigment in my hair, skin, and eyes. It also affects my eyesight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Falbinism-awareness-students-university-abuse-stigma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0196e8d2a92b8e6086769348f3b8d2278ddd548c%2F0_28_3000_3751%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Look%20at%20her%20hair'%20%E2%80%93%20I%20wish%20albinism%20didn't%20make%20people%20stare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Falbinism-awareness-students-university-abuse-stigma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Look%20at%20her%20hair%27%20%E2%80%93%20I%20wish%20albinism%20didn%27t%20make%20people%20stare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Falbinism-awareness-students-university-abuse-stigma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0196e8d2a92b8e6086769348f3b8d2278ddd548c%2F0_28_3000_3751%2F3000.jpg>
 Ellen Renton 
At university I often meet people who know very little about the condition. 
Many ask bluntly how I managed to dye my hair white and why my eyes move from 
side to side (a symptom of the condition called nystagmus). Others have 
ill-informed ideas shaped by myths and media misrepresentations and so ask me 
why my eyes aren’t red.

But instead of abuse, we need support and greater awareness at university. My 
eyes grow sore and tired from reading all the books required for my English 
literature degree. I also find it hard to contribute to a tutorial discussion 
when I can’t see the faces of my classmates. However, I learned to adapt my 
studying habits; I use magnification technology and ask for help from the 
university’s disability service when I need it.

Other aspects of university life are harder. I moved into a flat in a new 
city, and even seemingly simple tasks became arduous during those first months.


Cooking was complicated by illegible sell-by dates and cooker dials. I also 
had to search hard for quiet places to cross roads – all of which was difficult 
because I couldn’t read street signs or see traffic coming in my direction.

Like everyone else, I am keen to make the most of social opportunities at 
university, but I have sometimes struggled. Many students would cite fresher’s 
week as a highlight of their time at university, but the barrage of faces, 
flashing lights, and slurred, insensitive questions about my condition gave me 
a different experience.


This problem isn’t specific to me. “It’s a student experience devised with the 
able-bodied in mind and so a lot of the events are inaccessible to me,” 
explains Eva Doherty Roe, a second-year French and film student at the 
University of Glasgow, who also has albinism. “It’s also really uncomfortable 
to have to explain a visual impairment and how it affects you within the first 
half hour of meeting someone.”


The United Nations has declared that the 13 June is International Albinism 
Awareness Day <http://www.un.org/en/events/albinismday/> to promote global 
education about the condition and reduce the level of stigma surrounding it. 
This is necessary because people with albinism face discrimination in many 
forms: from “evil albino” characters in Hollywood films toritual attacks 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=44825#.V157GtfKDIo> on people 
with albinism around the world.

It wasn’t until I became a student that I was struck by the enormity of the 
task faced by albinism rights campaigners and the importance of global 
awareness. I grew up fielding rude comments and stares, but I didn’t expect to 
have to deal with them every day at university, on top of the challenges of my 
physical symptoms.

The slogan for this year’s awareness day is “celebrate diversity, promote 
inclusion, protect our rights,” and I believe that as places of learning and 
cultural richness, universities are as good a place as any for the shift in 
attitude towards people with albinism to begin.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 