
Another hopeful newspaper launch has come to grief. The title, called 24 - The 
North’s National, will cease publication from tomorrow after just five weeks.

Its publisher, CN group, is throwing in the towel  
<https://m.facebook.com/notes/24-the-norths-national/cn-group-announces-final-issue-of-24/520182524847679>
because it couldn’t find an audience. “We were proud of the design and content 
and had encouraging feedback and buy-in from advertisers,” said CN’s editorial 
director, David Helliwell, “but unfortunately copy sales are just not high 
enough to justify continuing daily publication.”

He went on to talk about it having “always” been “a calculated risk” to test 
whether there was a gap in the market “beside the big beasts of the daily 
market.”

There is something to be said for his honesty in saying: “We launched quickly, 
failed quickly and learned an awful lot along the way.”

But I wonder if he, or his colleagues, really did take the lesson to heart 
because he added: “It hasn’t diminished our appetite for trying new 
publications, be they print or digital.”

The Monday-to-Friday tabloid, with a 40p cover price, was launched on 20 June 
by the Cumbria-based CN group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/20/newspaper-north-24-launches> to 
appeal to people across a swathe of the north west region,running south from 
the Scottish border to Preston, Lancashire. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jun/02/north-west-region-to-get-a-new-paid-for-daily-newspaper>

Most of the editorial content came from the Press Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/press-association>, which was enthusiastic 
about the paper’s possibilities.

Helliwell stressed that the closure “in no way reflects on the dedicated 
efforts of the small editorial team who produced 24 on a daily basis to a high 
standard.” No jobs will be lost.

So, like Trinity Mirror’s ill-fated The New Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/may/05/why-the-new-day-didnt-work-and-had-no-hope-of-working>
, the experiment hasn’t worked, and for similar reasons. First, it relied too 
heavily on optimistic market research.

Will publishers never learn how flawed it is to rely on such research? Go into 
any street anywhere and ask people if they would like a new newspaper and the 
majority will say yes. Then ask them if they will buy it, and again they’ll say 
yes. The reality, however, is that they don’t.

Second, it was aimed at people supposedly dissatisfied with the service they 
were receiving from major national titles. Either they were not buying them or 
not enjoying them. But this was anything but a good basis on which to sell them 
a replacement. Basically, the CN group was relying on a hunch.*

Third, it was billed as a “national” paper selling to a “region” that doesn’t 
exist. The target circulation area made little sense because there are no 
community links between Dumfries and Lancaster, or Carlisle and Preston.

It was, for most of the people of Cumbria and Lancashire, not to mention 
Galloway, just another remote title with news they either didn’t want or need.

Fourth, although more professional in its appearance than The New Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-day> and with more up-to-date news, it 
still looked more like a magazine than a newspaper.

Fifth, and this should be blindingly obvious, both the future and the present 
is digital. Newsprint launches at this point in media history are never going 
to cut the mustard.

I know, I know. The New European, Archant’s innovative attempt to build sales 
among an anti-Brexit audience, is defying the trend. It hasbeaten its 
circulation targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/brexit-paper-new-european-new-day-profit>
, and has announced that it willcontinue publishing beyond its four-week trial 
period <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/27/the-new-european-sales>.

But it is more of a political pamphlet than a newspaper. It is not trying, as 
24 and The New Day did, to appeal to as wide an audience as possible for 
eternity.

It is specific in its intentions and Archant’s chief content officer, Matt 
Kelly, is realistic enough to know that it will be short-lived. As he said: “We 
will continue to publish into the zeitgeist until that moment passes.”

I doubt that the CN group has lost much money with 24. And there will be 
people who believe they deserve praise for trying. Without wishing to be overly 
harsh, I think they would have done better to concentrate on digital 
experimentation. Perhaps that’s the real lesson they have learned.

*A reference to PA was deleted from this sentence. The agency was linked to 
the project only as a supplier of content. 
 