
Ángel Di María is on the brink of completing a £44.3m move to Paris 
Saint-Germain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> after 
Manchester United opted to cut their losses on the Argentina winger. The 
27-year-old was due to arrive in Doha from South America on Sunday for talks 
with PSG officials before a medical in Qatar, where the French club’s owners 
are based.

Louis van Gaal tells Manchester United board to sell David de Gea – reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/01/louis-van-gaal-david-de-gea-manchester-united-real-madrid>
Providing all proceeds as smoothly as expected, Di María, who can also operate 
in a more central attacking midfield capacity, will close a disappointing 
chapter in his career by flying on to Paris and signing for the French 
champions, possibly as early as Monday night.

It is only a year since he arrived at Old Trafford from Real Madrid for a 
British record £59.7m fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/25/manchester-united-angel-di-maria-transfer-real-madrid>
 but, after a promising start to life with Louis van Gaal’s team, his form 
deserted him and a player increasingly resembling an extremely expensive misfit 
started only one of United’s final 10 games of last season. After helping Real 
Madrid win the Champions League in 2014 it represented quite a come down.

Van Gaal hopes to replace Di María quickly, and preferably with Pedro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/17/manchester-united-pedro-22m-barcelona-release-clause>
, the Barcelona forward who became disillusioned with life on the substitutes’ 
bench at Camp Nou last term. Should Pedro complete this mooted switch, it is 
hoped he will enjoy the city more than Di María, whose game seemed badly 
affected byan attempted burglary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-raid-home>
 at his former home in Cheshire in January.

Despite subsequently moving to a city centre apartment, the winger and his 
family never seemed to settle properly in the north-west and, after initial 
protestations to the contrary, it became clear that a move to Paris held 
considerable appeal. A reported £170,000-a-week post-tax salary on offer in 
France hardly diminished the switch’s attraction.

After representing Argentina in the Copa América in Chile this summer, Di 
María had been scheduled to join up with Van Gaal’s squad as United began the 
second leg of their pre-season tour of the United States late last month. When 
he failed to appear and Van Gaal acknowledged “I don’t know where he is” an 
imminent exit seemed inevitable.

Then, in the wake of United’s 2-0 defeat to PSG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/29/manchester-united-psg-david-de-gea>
 in Chicago last Thursday, Laurent Blanc revealed the two clubs were close to 
agreeing a deal for the one time Benfica creator. “Manchester United and PSG 
are two big clubs and negotiations can be difficult but we are close to the 
end,” the PSG coach said.
 