
Ángel Di María has criticised his treatment by Louis van Gaal at Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and said he 
left for Paris St-Germain to enjoy his football more and win trophies.

The Argentinian spent last season at Old Trafford under Van Gaal and has 
accused the manager of asking him to change position so often that it was 
impossible for him to settle.

Luke Shaw unlikely to play again this season, says Louis van Gaal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/01/luke-shaw-injury-louis-van-gaal-manchester-united>
“It’s not nice to say certain things but it’s more that they didn’t let me 
settle properly than I couldn’t settle,” Di Maríatold the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/35944285>. “I left and that team are still 
playing the same way. Out of the European competitions, far from being 
champions of the Premier League.

“I don’t think it was my fault or the fault of my team-mates. Every time I was 
given the opportunity, I did all I could but it didn’t work out as I hoped. So 
I decided to leave, not only to be happy but to win things. I started a game in 
one position then the next game in another. I scored goals playing in one 
position, then suddenly the next game I was picked to play in a different 
position.”

Di María has won the French league at the first attempt with PSG and the club 
remains in the Champions League, with the first leg of the quarter-final 
against Manchester City taking place in Paris on Wednesday. He said his 
treatment there by Laurent Blanc has been in stark contrast to his experience 
under Van Gaal.

“It’s up to the manager to decide where and how every player should play, but 
I think that the player should be comfortable in that position and adapt to 
it,” he said. “That is what I’m doing here and I’m very thankful to the manager 
for it.

“From the beginning he was clear where he wanted to play me and has never 
changed his mind. He gave me total freedom to move where I need to move. I’m 
very happy here and it wasn’t the case over there.”
 