
A few scornful eyebrows will have been raised this week when Marcos Rojo 
announced that Ángel Di María is the most talented player in the Manchester 
United squad. Allowing for Rojo’s understandable bias towards his fellow 
Argentinian, I’m inclined to agree with him – even though there is a 
possibility that the wingermight not be alongside Rojo in a United shirt when 
next season starts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/24/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-want-to-stay>
.

Many of Di María’s long-term admirers regretted his failure to confirm the 
good impression made by a bright start to his Old Trafford career. His 
resurgence in the Copa América, when his two goalsagainst Paraguay on Tuesday 
<https://composer.gutools.co.uk/content/55967a39e4b0e33337f39f02> helped 
Argentina to Saturday’s final against Chile in Santiago, will have felt like a 
vindication.

This was a glittering return to form. Everything Di María did at his best, he 
was doing again. Once more he was looking like a player capable of seizing a 
big occasion and making the difference.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925845197%2F300883fd-3830-4d0b-958f-1334e9d2cb73-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925845197%2F300883fd-3830-4d0b-958f-1334e9d2cb73-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Di María is unveiled by United manager Louis van Gaal Photograph: Steve 
Parkin/AFP/Getty Images 
In Beijing, seven years ago this week, I watched him score the only goal of 
the Olympic football final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/23/olympics2008.argentina> between 
Argentina and Nigeria, at the age of 20. Thirteen minutes into the second half 
he sprinted on to a pass stroked behind the full-back by Lionel Messi and, in 
front of a crowd of 89,102 in the Bird’s Nest, chipped the ball calmly over 
Ambruse Vanzekin, the west African side’s goalkeeper, presenting victory to 
Diego Maradona’s team.

Arsenal would have signed Ángel Di María as a teenager but for work permit flaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/22/arsenal-angel-di-maria-work-permit>
Di María was a Benfica player then, having moved to Portugal a year earlier 
from Rosario Central, his hometown club, for a fee of €6m. Two years after the 
Olympic triumph he was on his way to Real Madrid. This time €25m changed hands, 
but over the next four seasons at the Bernabéu no one was ever given reason to 
think that the sum represented poor value. Even when he got himself sent off in 
the 31st minute of extra time in the final of the Copa del Rey against 
Barcelona in his first year, he had already provided the cross from which 
Cristiano Ronaldo scored the winner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925979484%2Fef5aa9a4-2e39-400c-b8f6-dfd8ad4b4d91-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925979484%2Fef5aa9a4-2e39-400c-b8f6-dfd8ad4b4d91-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Di María was named man of the match in the 2013-14 Champions League final. 
Photograph: Jasper Juinen/Getty Images 
After a difficult start to his second season, he had fully re-established 
himself by the time the team won La Liga. In his fourth season in Madrid, after 
Carlo Ancelotti had replaced José Mourinho, he topped the league’s table of 
assists and wasnamed man of the match in the Champions League final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/11/atletico-madrid-real-madrid-la-liga>
, when Real beat Atlético Madrid 4-1. It was his dribble and shot in the 20th 
minute of extra time that provoked the rebound headed home by Gareth Bale to 
give Real a 2-1 lead.

These extra-time interventions are no coincidence. Among Di María’s virtues is 
a refusal to give up. He may not be the most elegant of players, or the most 
efficient in terms of statistics, and his relatively unphotogenic angularity 
may even have been one of the reasons why Florentino Pérezdecided to replace him
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/22/james-rodriguez-signs-real-madrid-monaco>
 with the baby-faced James Rodríguez last summer – the president’s most 
misguided decision since the offloading of Claude Makelele in 2003. But Di 
María knows that, as long as the game is in the balance, it’s never too late to 
strike a decisive blow, and his athleticism gives him the capacity to act on 
that belief.

The quintessential Di María moment arrived in São Paulo during the 2014 World 
Cup finals, when Argentinastruggled to beat Switzerland in the round of 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/01/argentina-switzerland-world-cup-2014-last-16-match-report>
. In a notably poor match, a statistic showed that he had lost possession no 
fewer than 51 times for Alejandro Sabella’s side when, in the last 10 minutes 
of extra time and with Argentina starting to despair, he suddenly hit a couple 
of fierce long-range shots, the first tipped over and the second deflected away 
from goal. And then, in the 117th minute, he swooped in from the right to 
accept Messi’s pass and strike the sweetest of first-time shots with his left 
foot inside the far post.

Football transfer rumours: Angel Di María to PSG for £45m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/30/football-transfer-rumours>  <>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925747650%2F6c9849f3-ac42-4b49-a0e0-e15722fd60b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925747650%2F6c9849f3-ac42-4b49-a0e0-e15722fd60b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Di María endured a difficult first season at Manchester United Photograph: 
Matt West/BPI/Rex 
How many head coaches would have allowed a player who had conceded possession 
more than 50 times to stay on the pitch for the whole two hours of such a vital 
contest? It is not a statistic that would impress most managers in the Premier 
League. But Sabella trusted him and received the reward. Sadly, a torn thigh 
muscle in the quarter-final against Belgium – after helping to create Gonzalo 
Higuaín’s decisive goal – cost Di María his place first in the semi-final and 
then in the final against Germany, a match settled by a single late goal, in 
which his presence could well have been decisive.

Ángel di María seems an uninterested bystander at Manchester United | Michael 
Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/mar/10/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-arsenal>
Several reasons have been advanced for his poor season in England following 
his £59.7m transfer to United, which began with the club’s player of the month 
award for September but was interrupted by a hamstring injury in November and 
ended with only one start in the last eight league fixtures. There was the 
distress caused by the need to move his wife and 22‑month‑old daughter into a 
Manchester hotel in February after thugs wielding metal poles tried to break 
into his homewhile the family were having dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-raid-home>
, only hours after he had performed well in a home win over Leicester City. A 
month later he grabbed the referee’s shirt after being booked in an FA Cup 
sixth-round match against Arsenal and was sent off. It seemed increasingly 
likely, too, that he did not really fit into the patterns of play adopted by 
Louis van Gaal.

But in Concepción on Tuesday he drew the foul that allowed Lionel Messi to 
guide in the free-kick from which Rojo gaveArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> the lead against Paraguay. In 
the second half he moved on to Javier Pastore’s pass to make it 3-1 with a 
close-range shot angled across the goalkeeper. Argentina’s fourth goal came 
when he clipped home the loose ball after Pastore’s shot had been blocked. His 
precise cross laid on the fifth, scored by the head of Sergio Agüero.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925601069%2F62257260-cc8a-475e-8ae2-19097b2e39a3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%20is%20Manchester%20United%E2%80%99s%20glorious%20nonconformist%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-argentina-copa-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435925601069%2F62257260-cc8a-475e-8ae2-19097b2e39a3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Di María celebrates after scoring against Paraguay Photograph: Yuri 
Cortez/AFP/Getty Images 
He had nothing to do with the second or the sixth goals, and Messi gave the 
match its outstanding individual performance. But Argentina’s No 7 had used the 
90 minutes to rebuild a reputation badly damaged, at least in English eyes, by 
his difficult first season in the Premier League.

When he feels trusted, as he was by Maradona, Mourinho, Ancelotti and Sabella, 
Di María is the sort of player who can undermine the obsession with 
number-crunching that threatens to asphyxiate sport. Wherever he plays next 
season, whether at Old Trafford or the Parc des Princes, it would be good to 
see him striking further blows for individual expression in an increasingly 
conformist football world.
 