
Ángel Di María <https://www.theguardian.com/football/angel-di-maria> said he 
hoped his family would find happiness in France after sealing his move to Paris 
St-Germain.

The 27-year-old completed his £44.3m transfer to the Ligue 1 champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/06/angel-di-maria-joins-psg-manchester-united>
 less than 12 months afterjoining Manchester United from Real Madrid for £59.7m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/25/manchester-united-angel-di-maria-transfer-real-madrid>
.

Di María’s United career started well but dipped quickly and he started only 
one of the final 10 games of last season, while his family were unsettled by an 
attempted burglary at their Cheshire home in February.

“Things did not turn out well for me at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> for many reasons but 
that is the past,” the midfielder said.

Ángel Di María: the reluctant Manchester United player who ended up a costly 
mistake | Jamie Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/06/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain>
“I have been in Paris for two days and I am delighted because I know my wife 
and my daughter will be happy here.”

As recently as June Di María claimed he wanted to stay at United but at his 
unveiling in Paris he conceded he wanted out of the club.

“This is not only my decision,” the player said. “They also wanted to sell me. 
It is a shared decision between the three parties, if we include PSG.

“PSG have been following me for several years. I am very proud to now be able 
to play for this great club, alongside such great players.”

Di María is the latest in a long line of South American signings made by PSG 
since their takeover by a group of wealthy Qataris four years ago.

The five-times French champions have signed David Luiz, Lucas Moura, Javier 
Pastore, Edinson Cavani, Ezequiel Lavezzi and Thiago Silva in an attempt to be 
genuine contenders for the Champions League.

PSG beat Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/11/chelsea-psg-champions-league-match-report>
 to reach the quarter-finals last season and Di María hopes his new team can go 
all the way this season.

“The club has a very important ambition: to win the Champions League. And 
that’s also my ambition,” said Di María, whowon the trophy with Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/24/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league>
 two seasons ago.

“I will try to bring that little bit extra to help the team past the 
quarter-finals of the Champions League. I am delighted to come here to this 
city, to France and represent such an important shirt.”

Di María will have to wait up to three weeks to make his debut for the club as 
he is still recovering from a hamstring injury he suffered during the Copa 
América.
 