
Angel Di María seemed to want to leave Manchester United from the moment he 
arrived. After completing the move last August theopen letter he wrote to Real 
Madrid fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/27/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-real-madrid-letter>
 read like a heartfeltadios and a reluctant hello to Old Trafford.

The way the Argentinian told it, he had been bombed out of the club he had 
just helped to thedécima Champions League triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/24/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league>
 in May. The honesty was admirable but United were made to sound a decidedly 
second choice.

Manchester United confirm sale of Ángel Di María to PSG for £44.3m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/06/angel-di-maria-joins-psg-manchester-united>
“Unfortunately, I have to go but I want to make clear that this was never my 
desire,” wrote Di María. “My cycle at Real Madrid has come to an end. It’s 
impossible to capture everything I’ve experienced here in a few lines but I 
hope this letter communicates what I feel at the moment. There are many things 
that I value and many of them have nothing to do with my salary. I hope to find 
them atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, one of the biggest 
clubs in the world.”

For his £59.7m fee and rewarding salary United might have expected more 
discretion from the man they had just made British football’s most expensive 
player. This start was to prove the augury suggested. Di María never quite 
settled in Manchester. What he wanted to find at United – stability, a pivotal 
role in the XI, a manager who trusted him implicitly – was not there.

There was a culture shock, no doubt. Just after he joined, Louis van Gaal’s 
team werehumiliated 4-0 at MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/26/mk-dons-manchester-united-capital-one-cup>
 in a Capital One Cup tie. That side featured some junior players but whenDi 
María’s debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/aug/30/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-debut-burnley>
 came against Burnley four days later, the stuttering start to the season 
continued with a 0-0 draw.

Di María starred, though. The display at Turf Moor on a sunny August afternoon 
was one of zest, pace and creation: all the qualities Van Gaal hoped for. When 
United finally won a match under the manager next time out, Di María was again 
the bright light. The4-0 hammering of QPR <> featured a goal on home debut and 
a performance that suggested United might fly if he could replicate it on most 
game days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438000593460%2F7815d55f-6566-4108-bb28-0a4f1b5ec3e6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%3A%20the%20reluctant%20Manchester%20United%20player%20who%20ended%20up%20a%20costly%20mistake%20%7C%20Jamie%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%3A%20the%20reluctant%20Manchester%20United%20player%20who%20ended%20up%20a%20costly%20mistake%20%7C%20Jamie%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438000593460%2F7815d55f-6566-4108-bb28-0a4f1b5ec3e6-1020x612.jpeg>
 Ángel Di María’s red card for pushing the referee, Michael Oliver, which 
earned him a second booking, was the low point of his Manchester United career. 
Photograph: Matt West/BPI/Rex 
This was to be his big failure – his inconsistency. A brittle personality, he 
would see his confidence yo-yo and performances were affected. He was not aided 
by Van Gaal, though. Almost immediately the Dutchman seemed to mistrust him. 
This was odd because unlike, say, Luke Shaw and Ander Herrera, two other summer 
arrivals, Van Gaal had actively identified and recruited Di María. He was the 
marquee signing the manager stated was in that elite band of players just below 
Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo. Yet he became the player Van Gaal talked up 
before securing him and often talked down once at United.

The complaints centred on Di María’s penchant for dribbling into trouble and 
the fitful contributions. Manifestation of this faith-deficit came in Van Gaal 
replacing him during games, or playing him out of position. In his sole season 
at the club there were shifts in central midfield, in attack alongside Wayne 
Rooney, and out wide, Di María’s favoured berth.

The troubles away from the pitch were crystallised in the terrifying attempted 
burglary at his rented Cheshire home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-raid-home>
 in February. The intruders used scaffold poles to try to break in. Di María 
and his family were inside at the time. They moved out but the ordeal was not 
easily shaken off.

Di María’s nadir came during Arsenal’s 2-1 victory over United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/09/manchester-united-arsenal-fa-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
 at Old Trafford on 9 March. He decided to push the referee, Michael Oliver, 
and was shown a second yellow card in the FA Cup tie. Van Gaal was angry. 
“Ángel Di María knows that he doesn’t have to touch the referee,” he said. “So 
that is not so smart of him but to control emotion is not so easy in such a 
match. I have mentioned it also before the match because I know that these kind 
of matches a red card is easy. He knows that he doesn’t have to touch the 
referee. He knows that. Every player knows that.”

Di María struggled to return to the XI following the one-game suspension as 
United found their most scintillating football under Van Gaal. The manager had 
finally discovered his best team and Di María was not in it.Tottenham were 
dispatched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/15/manchester-united-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 3-0 in breathtaking fashion at Old Trafford, the match Di María was forced to 
sit out. ThenLiverpool (2-1) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/22/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
,Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/04/manchester-united-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
 (3-1) andManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/12/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 (4-2) were beaten soundly, with Di María only a replacement.For the trip to 
Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/18/chelsea-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 that followed the derby victory Van Gaal again did not start the player.

The pattern continued until the season’s final day and the goalless draw at 
Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/24/hull-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 on 24 May. This was more than two months after the Arsenal match. Van Gaal had 
chosen nine sides in that period and failed to include Di María each time. When 
the manager finally did so on the 10th occasion, the miserable run continued as 
the Argentinian was replaced after 23 minutes due to a knock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438000740765%2F83fd3895-d439-460d-9948-43bddd1acff4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%3A%20the%20reluctant%20Manchester%20United%20player%20who%20ended%20up%20a%20costly%20mistake%20%7C%20Jamie%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%3A%20the%20reluctant%20Manchester%20United%20player%20who%20ended%20up%20a%20costly%20mistake%20%7C%20Jamie%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fangel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F27%2F1438000740765%2F83fd3895-d439-460d-9948-43bddd1acff4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Louis van Gaal actively recruited Ángel Di María. He talked up the Argentinian 
before signing him but often talked him down after that. Photograph: Peter 
Powell/EPA 
Now he has departed for PSG as a white elephant. There were four goals and 
only 24 starts. One of those finishes was in the 2-0 FA Cupvictory at Yeovil 
Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/04/yeovil-town-manchester-united-fa-cup-match-report>
 on 4 January, the only time Di María scored in 2015 for United. His previous 
goal – his third and last in the Premier League – wasagainst Everton on 5 
October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/05/manchester-united-everton-premier-league-match-report>
, three months before.

After scoring against Roberto Martínez’s team, in the next game he was 
replaced at West Bromwich Albion during a 2-2 draw that also had Radamel Falcao 
dropped from the XI. Falcao had scored too against Everton, the decisive strike 
in a 2-1 victory.

On arrival the pair were billed as United’s galácticos. Yet each ended their 
spell as an expensive mistake, Falcao havingcost a total £16m for his 
season-long loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/02/radamel-falcao-joins-manchester-united-loan>
 from Monaco.

If Van Gaal had not led United back into the Champions League his failure to 
draw the best from Di María would have been more closely scrutinised. The sense 
is the former Real man was never given the best chance to show his best. 
Ensuring any player can do so is high on a manager’s job description.

Van Gaal wanted Di María to stay, apparently. Yet two summers ago Rooney was 
told he would not be going under any circumstance when David Moyes was in 
charge. So there may be a question regarding how hard Van Gaal attempted to 
keep the Argentinian.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic is clear that Di María can help PSG win the Champions League
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/26/zlatan-ibrahimovic-angel-di-maria-psg-champions-league-manchester-united>
, just as he turned the 2014 final for Real. If this occurs, Van Gaal and 
United fans may regret his leaving.
 