
Ángel Di María failed to take his seat on a plane to join Manchester United’s 
pre-season tour of the United States, throwing further doubt on his future at 
the club, with the forward potentiallyon the verge of a move to Paris 
Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-saint-germain>
.

Di María was expected to join United’s tour party in San Jose along with 
Marcos Rojo; the two Argentinians had been resting following their 
participation in the Copa América.

Manchester United 3-1 Barcelona | match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/25/manchester-united-barcelona-match-report-wayne-rooney>
While, according to Louis van Gaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal>, Rojo was not on the 
flight because of an issue with his travel documents, the manager was unsure 
why Di María had failed to board the plane. “Di Maria and Rojo are not on the 
plane. He [Rojo] has passport issues, but for Di María, I don’t know why.”

“[Javier] Hernández is here,” added Van Gaal of the Mexican who was injured 
during the Gold Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/03/javier-hernandez-manchester-united-collarbone-injury>
.

Reports in France have claimed Di María will undergo a medical in New York on 
Monday. What seems clear is that the player who cost £57.9m 12 months ago is 
unlikely to remain at United when the transfer window closes.

PSG coach Laurent Blanc said: “There is a good possibility [he could sign] but 
there is nothing official. There is an anticipation he is going to come to the 
US but as to which jersey he is going to wear, we don’t know yet.

“If he does make a change hopefully it will be for Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain>. Right now we have to 
wait because there are two big clubs out there in discussion.

“Of course PSG is out looking in terms of recruiting an offensive player, 
whether it is Di Maria or somebody else. Of course a coach would like to see 
somebody like him but there is nothing official at this moment.”

David de Gea is another United player whose future is in the balance. Van Gaal 
said of the Real Madrid target: “Of course, I do hope that De Gea will stay, 
but in this world of football, you never know.”
 