
Ángel Di María has apologised to Manchester United supporters for his 
unsuccessful spell at Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/06/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain>
 in an open letter, suggesting that factors beyond his control contributed to 
his struggles.

The Argentinian winger joined Paris Saint-Germain for £44.3m  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/06/angel-di-maria-joins-psg-manchester-united>
on Thursday, less than a year after signing for United in a £59.7m transfer 
from Real Madrid. After a promising beginning to life in the Premier League, 
scoring three times in his first five games, his form tailed off dramatically 
and by the end of the 2014-15 season he was being used from the substitutes’ 
bench.

“I’m aware things didn’t work as we all expected and believe me, I feel really 
sorry about it,”Di María wrote <http://www.twitlonger.com/show/n_1sn7cjq>. 
“However in the career of a football player sometimes the unexpected and 
unwanted may happen. I can guarantee you it was not for trying. I did my best 
but football is not like maths: often a lot of things out of our control affect 
the way we feel and the way things turn out. I am sorry it did not work out as 
I would have wished in this amazing huge club.”

Ángel Di María: the reluctant Manchester United player who ended up a costly 
mistake | Jamie Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/aug/06/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-st-germain>
Di María went on to thank the club and its fans for their support, pledging 
never to forget his short spell in Manchester. “I want to give special thanks 
to all the directors and management of Manchester United as well as to every 
member of the staff and colleagues as they gave me all their support,” he 
wrote. “Also a special mention to all the fans who always trusted me and showed 
me their respect and love. Now is time to move to PSG but the Glorious
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> Club 
will be forever in my memory!”

The 27-year-old’s transfer to Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> made him the most 
expensive player in history when accumulated fees are taken into account. His 
moves from CA Rosario Central to Benfica, Benfica to Real Madrid, Real Madrid 
to Manchester United and Manchester United to PSG have totalled £126m, 
eclipsing the £119m fetched by Zlatan Ibrahimovic.
 