
Although I'd chosen the cheaper option of transitioning on the NHS 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Gender-dysphoria/Pages/Treatment.aspx>, failure 
to maintain a full-time job could still stop me in my tracks. Appointments at 
my nearestGender Identity Clinic 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/services/g/gender_identity.html> (GIC) would be free, 
as would surgery (withhormones 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hormone_replacement_therapy_%28male-to-female%29> 
incurring aprescription charge <http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/ 
Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_116366>
), but there were stillessential physical processes 
<http://www.tsroadmap.com/physical/hair/index.html> that would be expensive, 
and I was already spending heavily on a new wardrobe that might allow meto pass 
convincingly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman>. My 
main concern, though, regarded the pathway itself: specifically, the GIC demand 
that the 'real life experience 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:tLAUNuWZ92sJ:www.gendertrust.org.uk/n2/docs/+gt_is07.pdf+full+time+employment+Gender+Identity+Clinic&hl=en&gl=uk>
' includes full- or part-time employment, voluntary work or study. (This, 
incidentally, is why transsexual people often work in charity shops.) Unable to 
sustain myself in voluntary work or further education, it became doubly 
important to remain employed - preferably somewhere I'd feel comfortable.

Work was the last place I began presenting as female 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>, as I 
was temping and wasn't certain I'd get another contract. I wanted to stay, as I 
knew I was in an incredibly fortunate position, working for a public sector 
organisation that would respect theSex Discrimination Act 
<http://www.pfc.org.uk/node/295>, which stops employers discriminating against 
transsexual people. The presence of another trans woman in the office seemed to 
confirm this.

I consulted the HR manager and the equality and diversity manager, who assured 
me that most employees would be supportive, and that I shouldn't let my plans 
stop me from trying to secure another position (the days of transsexual people 
being urged to find a new job before changing their gender presentation are, 
thankfully, past). There was a similar position to mine going. I spoke to the 
relevant manager, who calmly talked me through everything. "There aren't many 
men on my team," she told me, apologetically. "Well, it's funny you should say 
that ..."

So I changed role, returning on Monday as Juliet. I'd emailed everyone I'd 
worked with, and my new boss had informed her team, but not everyone else knew. 
At least one person did a double take on seeing me. I'd assumed the matter 
might have been the subject of office gossip, but perhaps I'd overestimated the 
newsworthiness of my actions. Once I'd talked them through my situation, my 
colleagues were sympathetic, stating their intentions to use my new name (and 
the right pronouns) and to respect my decision.

Briefly, I thought I might almost have been too fortunate: working in 
healthcare, several colleagues asked if they could discuss the process with me. 
Not yet, I told them: I'd spoken of little else for weeks and wanted to talk 
about anything else. Then I got over myself - most transsexuals would love to 
have such an easy time at work. (And anyway, talking about football seemed less 
appealing when the one man on our team printed outthe weekend's most notable 
result 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2009/aug/08/norwich-capitulate-to-colchester>
 and stuck it to my monitor.) I noted the contrast with my horrendous previous 
job with an assurance firm, where conspiratorial comments had been made about a 
transsexual woman on our floor.

Now I noticed that people seemed keener to talk to me than before, and not 
just about medical matters. I put this down to the sense of liberation I felt 
being reflected in my body language, and soon I felt completely at ease with my 
co-workers.

My main problem was telephone conversation. In person, people saw how I 
presented and addressed me accordingly; email was pleasingly genderless. On the 
phone, though, people calling for Juliet (or called by me) often expressed 
their difficulties with hearing a female name and a male voice. In my quieter 
moments I began looking atvoice therapy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voice_therapy_%28transgender%29> options, keen to 
make my communication less stressful.

That became less pressing, though, when my contract expired without me having 
lined up another. So I dug out somemid-80s indie classics 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ I_am_a_Wallet> to accompany my visits to the job 
centre, fretting about where I might end up. The staff treated me fairly but 
couldn't find me work, and interviews for other temp jobs proved fruitless. I 
wondered how much this owed to my gender: the aforementioned Sex Discrimination 
Act might protect people in work, but does little to prevent employers from 
passing over transsexual people, as long as this is not their stated reason.

Nor is it impossible for transgendered people to be bullied out of jobs, or be 
made to feel that they (particularly the way they present themselves) are the 
problem, upsetting the balance of their workplaces. Althoughthe law allows 
recourse <http://www.tes.co.uk/article.aspx?storycode=356747> against this, 
it's unsurprising that some people feel too worn down, especially when such 
discrimination extends to spacesas intimate as the bathroom 
<http://www.eortrial.co.uk/default.aspx?id=1029258>. Perhaps this is why, 
according to aCount Me In Too <http://www.countmeintoo.co.uk/> survey, 26% of 
trans people in Brighton and Hove are unemployed (with a further 60% earning 
less than Â£10,000 per year), despite the efforts of theGender Trust 
<http://www.patient.co.uk/support/Gender-Trust.htm> and Place at the Table to 
help transsexual people at work and educate their employers.

Given these difficulties, as well as the fetishisation of the pre-operative 
male-to-female body 
<http://old.disinfo.com/archive/pages/dossier/id791/pg1/index.html>, it's 
unsurprising that many transsexual people have found themselves in sex work - 
one of the few vocations where supply and demand operates to our financial 
advantage. Invited to return to the same office after six weeks of signing on, 
when another temporary position came up, I never had to consider this, but 
plenty of transsexual women do - including some of my friends - and, for some,
the consequences are grave <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10237293>. 

So I was back in employment: another sphere in which the parameters are 
radically different for trans people. To me, anyway, feeling accepted in my 
environment came above all the other things that many people want from work - a 
higher salary, a career ladder and so on. I determined that I would never again 
take a welcoming workplace for granted, whatever the pay, whatever the 
opportunities, and just felt thankful to feel economically - and socially - 
secure.
 