
A statue of Mahatma Gandhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahatma-gandhi> 
will be removed from a university campus in Ghana after professors launched a 
petition claiming the revered Indian independence leader and thinker was racist.


The statue of Gandhi was unveiled in June at the University of Ghana campus in 
Accra by Pranab Mukherjee, the president ofIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, as a symbol of close ties between 
the two countries.

But in September a group of professors started a petition calling for the 
removal of the statue, saying Gandhi was racist and that the university should 
put African heroes and heroines “first and foremost”.

Petition calls for Gandhi statue to be removed from Ghana University
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/petition-calls-for-gandhi-statue-to-be-removed-from-ghana-university>
The petition states “it is better to stand up for our dignity than to kowtow 
to the wishes of a burgeoning Eurasian super power”, and quotes passages 
written by Gandhi which say Indians are “infinitely superior” to black Africans.

More than 1,000 people signed the petition, which claimed that not only was 
Gandhi racist towards black South Africans when he lived inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> as a young man, but that he 
campaigned for the maintenance of India’s caste system, an ancient social 
hierarchy that still defines the status in that country of hundreds of millions 
of people.

Ghana’s foreign ministry said it had followed the controversy with “deep 
concern” and wanted to relocate the statue.

“The government would therefore want to relocate the statue from the 
University ofGhana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana> to ensure its 
safety and to avoid the controversy.” it said. “While acknowledging that, human 
as he was, Mahatma Gandhi may have had his flaws, we must remember that people 
evolve.”

Cheers and protests as University of Cape Town removes Cecil Rhodes statue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/09/university-cape-town-removes-statue-cecil-rhodes-celebration-afrikaner-protest>
Statues on university campuses have recently prompted bitter arguments in 
Africa as students wrestle with the legacy of colonialism and history of racism 
on the continent. Last year students in South Africa successfully campaigned 
for the removal, from the University of Cape Town campus, of astatue of Cecil 
Rhodes 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2015-04-09-rhodes-statue-to-be-removed-after-uct-council-decision>
, a notoriously racist mining magnate who died in 1902.

Gandhi, who lived in South Africa 
<http://www.sahistory.org.za/people/mohandas-karamchand-gandhi> for 21 years, 
has long been a more controversial figure, both in his homeland and elsewhere, 
than many admirers around the world are aware. A hero for his role in the 
movement that won independence for India from Britain, Gandhi’s vision of 
non-violent protest inspired rebels and revolutionaries around the world. His 
thinking was a key influence on leaders of the African National Congress and 
others engaged in the struggle against apartheid, and his tolerance for all 
faiths in his homeland led to his assassination by a Hindu fanatic in 1948. But 
his more conservative views, and early apparent racism, still anger some.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fghana-academics-petition-removal-mahatma-gandhi-statue-african-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8433afab57854b402fde14dc7c430b31263d480%2F0_0_2428_1764%2F2428.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Racist'%20Gandhi%20statue%20banished%20from%20Ghana%20university%20campus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fghana-academics-petition-removal-mahatma-gandhi-statue-african-heroes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Racist%27%20Gandhi%20statue%20banished%20from%20Ghana%20university%20campus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fghana-academics-petition-removal-mahatma-gandhi-statue-african-heroes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8433afab57854b402fde14dc7c430b31263d480%2F0_0_2428_1764%2F2428.jpg>
 Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (centre), also known as Mahatma (Great soul) 
speaking during a meeting of the All-India Congress in Bombay (now Mumbai) in 
1942. Photograph: AFP/Getty 
Opponents of the statue in Ghana quoted several of Gandhi’s early writings in 
which he referred to black South Africans as “kaffirs” – a highly offensive 
racist slur – and complained that the South African government wanted to “drag 
down” Indians to the same level as people he called “half-heathen natives”.

Arundhati Roy accuses Mahatma Gandhi of discrimination
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/18/arundhati-roy-accuses-mahatma-gandhi-discrimination>
One Gandhi quote was: “Ours is one continual struggle against a degradation 
sought to be inflicted upon us by the Europeans, who desire to degrade us to 
the level of the raw kaffir whose occupation is hunting, and whose sole 
ambition is to collect a certain number of cattle to buy a wife with and then 
pass his life in indolence and nakedness.”

A statue of Gandhi in the centre of Johannesburg not far from the office where 
he worked as a lawyer,triggered a similar row in 2003.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/oct/17/southafrica.india>

Gandhi has also been frequently criticised in his homeland. In 2014 the 
novelistArundhati Roy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> accused 
him of perpetuating a discriminatory caste system.

Prof Mridula Mukherjee, <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/18/arundhati-roy-accuses-mahatma-gandhi-discrimination>
 an expert in modern Indian history at Jawaharlal University, in Delhi, said at 
the time that Roy’s criticism was misplaced. “Gandhi devoted much of his life 
to fighting caste prejudice. He was a reformer not a revivalist within the 
Hindu religion. His effort was in keeping with his philosophy of nonviolence 
and bringing social transformation without creating hatred.”
 