
I was going to be an actor. I was studying English and drama at Bristol, but I 
got ill one summer and had to pull out of a couple of plays. So I started 
writing instead. I wrote a play and directed it at the university and really 
got the bugbear. I left in 1982 and four years later I was a script editor at 
the BBC and I co-devised Casualty.

I continually wrote plays, because they're the only means by which you can get 
any work. But I wasn't earning any money. Somebody told me the BBC were 
advertising for script editors, so I went for it. That was my way in to 
television. I became a trainee script editor, working on a show calledJuliet 
Bravo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juliet_Bravo>. That gave me a lead into 
knowing what the BBC were looking for and then Casualty was the next step.

It was relatively quick for me. We were able to explore writing in a very 
hands-on way then. There wasn't the great machinery of script editors and 
storyline editors that there are now â€“ we were left much more to our own 
devices.

I'm quite sure that opportunities do still exist, but they're different 
nowadays. For example, there are opportunities writing for games. Without 
generalising too much, I would say that the opportunities are more limited. 
There's less money around and fewer shows being made. When I started, the BBC 
made everything that it showed. Now an awful lot of it is brought in by 
independent producers. So it's a very different world out there. One of the 
things I'm doing is curating aseries of lectures for BAFTA and the BFI 
<http://www.bafta.org/film/news-and-events/screenwriters-lecture-series-2013,3885,BA.html>
, which is there to inspire young writers by listening to the stories of those 
who have reached the very highest levels.

People can get stuck in a loop with internships, where the enthusiasm and 
ambition is exploited by people who aren't really paying them and aren't 
intending to employ them. That strikes me as a very unfair and unjust process. 
I was a trainee script editor, but I was paid a proper wage even then and the 
intention was to have a job at the end of it. That said, you do have to accept 
that writing is very self-motivated.

You have to be geekily obsessed with film, television and drama in general. 
You have to love the idea of absorbing enormous amounts of that kind of drama. 
And having absorbed enormous amounts, you then have to have a slightly 
obsessive desire to keep writing. Most of the writers who speak at our lecture 
series share a need to write. Unless there's that slightly obsessive compulsive 
part of you that makes you want to write, I think starting out is very 
difficult. You have to just keep picking yourself up and carrying on.

It's not romantic. It's sometimes very exciting and sometimes very upsetting. 
But most of the time, it's just work. Everybody would love to say they've 
written a screenplay, but the actual business of writing is quite tough and 
requires self discipline.

It's immensely collaborative. Unless you're prepared for what's involved with 
that, then don't do it. It means you have very bruising and challenging 
encounters with people who will forensically examine all your work. Film and 
television is very expensive to make, so everyone want to make sure it's good. 
You're likely to get notes from anywhere between five and 20 people. It 
requires a huge amount of intellectual and emotional rigour. You really do have 
to learn to accept being exposed to very detailed criticism, wrong or right.

Networking is important up to a point. But what's far more important is to 
watch films, read screenplays and write.

There are some very good courses available at film schools, but only a very 
tiny number of people are lucky enough to get on them. If you have a talent, 
that will eventually be expressed. Having said that, there are things you can 
learn about screenwriting, to do with structure and the storytelling process. 
But most of that can be done from watching films intelligently and reading 
screenplays. For me, that's the best apprenticeship.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 