
A Halloween asteroid is due to scream past the Earth on the last day of the 
month, missing the planet by just 300,000 miles – frighteningly close by 
astronomical standards.

But scientists say there is no need to be scared, even on Halloween. The space 
rock, travelling at around 22 miles per second, will remain further away than 
the moon.

‘Spooky’: the 1,300ft-wide asteroid to hurtle close to Earth on Halloween
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/23/spooky-tb145-asteroid-close-to-earth-halloween>
There is no chance of the asteroid hitting the Earth for the next 100 years at 
least, and it is not included in the EuropeanSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Agency’s (ESA) official list of 
potentially threatening NEOs (near earth objects).

The asteroid, nicknamed “the Great Pumpkin” and “Spooky” but technically known 
as TB145, is an estimated 1,300ft wide – 20 times bigger than the meteorite that
tore across the Russian sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/nov/06/chelyabinsk-meteor-russia> and 
exploded over Chelyabinsk in 2013, shattering windows with shock waves and 
debris thatinjured more than a thousand people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/15/hundreds-injured-meteorite-russian-city-chelyabinsk>
.

Dr Detlef Koschny, who heads the agency’s NEO tracking team said asteroid 
emphasised the need for vigilance: “The fact that such a large near-Earth 
object, capable of doing significant damage if it were to strike our planet, 
was discovered only 21 days before closest approach demonstrates the necessity 
for keeping daily watch of the night sky.”

TB145 was spotted by astronomers in Hawaii on 10 October. It is due to fly 
past Earth at around 5pm UK time, on 31 October.

Very little is known about the object, other than what scientists have been 
able to infer from observations made so far.

Dr Marco Micheli, an astronomer from ESA’s NEO Co-ordination Centre in Italy, 
said: “The diameter of about 400 metres has a large uncertainty, as is usual in 
cases of any object for which we do not yet know details, such as its 
composition.”

More accurate information will be obtained once the object has been tracked by 
radar, he added.

Scientists estimate there to be around 5,000 NEOs of similar size hurtling 
through Earth’s region of the solar system, a significant number of which have 
not yet been discovered.

To watch out for them, ESA is developing automated “fly-eye” telescope 
technology which should be ready for testing at the end of next year.

“Objects of this size are often spotted by automated surveys,” said Dr 
Koschny. “The only difference is that, being so large, they are often found 
when they are quite far away, out to 2.5 times the sun-Earth distance, and not 
just before a close approach, as in this case.”
 