
Rightly or wrongly, two words strike fear into the transsexual community: 
Charing Cross. The BBC's groundbreaking trilogy of films,A Change of Sex 
<http://ftvdb.bfi.org.uk/sift/series/6193>, first screened in 1980, seriously 
damaged the Gender Identity Clinic's reputation, demonstrating (asthis site 
<http://www.transgenderzone.com/features/timeline.htm> puts it) the "arrogance" 
of the psychiatrists working withJulia Grant 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/we-used-to-be-brother-and-sister-now-were-women-together-1109914.html>
, at a time when certain 'feminists' were launchingsearing attacks 
<http://birdofparadox.wordpress.com/2009/02/15/the-transsexual-empire/> not 
just on male-to-female transsexuals but also those providing their services. 
Thirty years later, the clinic - now under the auspices ofWest London Mental 
Health Trust <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/West_London_Mental_Health_NHS_Trust> 
but still widely known as 'Charing Cross' - struggles to shake a reputation for 
being cold and overly demanding. This is not always diminished by the 
experiences postedonline 
<http://podcast.plain-sense.co.uk/2009/03/29/half-an-hour-with-dr-stuart-lorimer/>
 by patients, some of whom have reservations about gender services being '
pathologised 
<http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/content~content=a910819736~db=all~jumptype=rss>
' under mental health (rather than being treated as anendocrine issue 
<http://jcem.endojournals.org/cgi/content/full/88/8/3467>).

Gender dysphoria is currently classified as a 'mental illness' by the World 
Health Organisation <http://www.who.int/en/>, despite growing pressure 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2009/12/29/hiv-experts-call-for-declassification-of-transgenderism-as-mental-illness/>
 to revise this. As for 'Charing Cross', a clinic staffed by clinicians will 
always feel clinical, and there's a detached, paternalistic streak running 
through the NHS that reaches far beyond its gender services. The long waits for 
appointments, too, are not exclusive to theGender Identity Clinic 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/services/g/gender_identity.html>, frustrating as they 
are. During my initial assessment in Hove, the psychiatrist suggested that he'd 
have no problem referring me, but asked that I return in two months for a 
follow-up interview before doing so. My second interview lasted ten minutes: 
nothing had changed, and the psychiatrist wrote to the clinic co-ordinator to 
request they 'offer an assessment' to me.

A week later, a letter from the clinic arrives – addressed to my male name, as 
they refuse to use 'Juliet' until they've seen my deed poll. Due to the high 
number of non-attendees, I'm asked to confirm my willingness to attend. I'm 
also asked to bring along the enclosed checklist on attending: aiming to manage 
my expectations, it tells me that a re-referral will be needed if I miss this 
appointment, and that hormones may be prescribed after the second consultation.

Finally, a date for my appointment: I must wait seven months. A few days 
later, a second letter arrives, postponing it a further ten days. After getting 
my psychiatric referral far quicker than expected, it was disappointing, but at 
least gave me time to chat to friends who'd recently been through the clinic.

They cut through the myths: most of the horror stories about 'Charing Cross' 
are propagated by people who've never been, they told me, and if you arrive 
prepared to work with the clinicians, you shouldn't have many problems. Part of 
the friction, they said, resulted from the fact that for us, 'Charing Cross' 
represents the beginning of the end of transition, whereas for them it just 
represents the beginning. I had plenty going for me, they said, being in
full-time employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
, havingchanged my name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/11/become-a-woman-juliet> 
and begun living'in role' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>. One 
friend advised me to downplay the depression I'd experienced intermittently 
throughout my life, but otherwise, I had everything in place.

People told me I wouldn't even notice the months passing: I did, but decided 
to see where things would settle after announcing my transition had thrown my 
life up in the air. I tried not to focus on the wait, or form expectations of 
my appointment. When it finally came around, I travelled with a close friend 
for support. After a nervous journey, we found a small sign for West London 
Mental Health Trust near Sainsbury's Local on Hammersmith's Fulham Palace Road. 
We pressed the buzzer and went up to reception. I was struck by how normal the 
clinic felt – much like my GP surgery. I sat and waited, thumbing through the 
magazines and the pamphlets promoting the independent onlineCharing Cross GIC 
User Support Group <http://uk.groups.yahoo.com/group/CX_Gender_Identity_Clinic/>
.

Finally, I entered room seven: my first contact with any gender-specialist 
clinician. Dr Davies began an hour-long interview with questions very similar 
to those asked at Hove Polyclinic: my family history, when I first realised I 
was transgendered, my sexuality (and any sexual element to my cross-dressing), 
my psychiatric history, how long I'd been living as female and how this had 
affected my wider life – the kind of things I get asked all the time.

And that was it. No questions about how I presented as female, or any comments 
on my clothing, contradicting the long-standing criticism that Gender Identity 
Clinics attempt to bludgeon their patients into conforming to conservative 
gender roles. This was about becoming female in body: my gender presentation 
was my choice alone.

Dr Davies told me that my second appointment will only need thirty minutes as 
I'm comparatively close to a hormone prescription – which, above all else at 
this point, is what I want from the clinic. The receptionist told me they don't 
have a slot for my next appointment for seven months. On realising I don't need 
an hour, this falls to five. She prints a letter, still declining to address it 
to 'Juliet' as they can't find the deed poll I sent. Disappointed, I headed to 
the nearby hospital for a blood test: the clinic will analyse the results to 
decide which hormones they should offer when they finally prescribe, as well as 
picking up any underlying health problems.

Then I went home, quietly surprised at how low-key and uneventful it felt. To 
me, it seemed as though my initial sense that the appointments would be the 
defining moments of my transition was somewhat misguided. Yes, they are the 
gatekeepers of my physical transition, but their main role, seemingly, will be 
to help me navigate the social and psychological (and, later, hormonal) changes 
that I encounter along the way. Also, as their official name suggests, they 
will monitor any mental health matters related to my gender issues. This – like 
'Charing Cross' – is something to which I shall return.
 