
Theatre is on an accessibility drive – and rightly so. The Arts Council’s 
mission statement 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/about-us/our-mission-and-strategy> – “Great art 
for everyone” – requires as much, and disabled access falls squarely within its 
remit. Legislation has made most theatres wheelchair-accessible, and hearing 
loops and captioned performances have opened up the art form to deaf audiences. 
There is, however, much more to be done.

As many as one in 100 people in Britain are on the spectrum. For people with 
autism, theatre can present a number of problems. It is a visceral, 
experiential and unpredictable art form, watched in a social setting in an 
unfamiliar place with a specific, often unspoken, etiquette. This means the 
opposite is also true: austistic people can seem like a problem for theatre. 
Their behaviour, everything from involuntary noises to overexcitement, can 
become disruptive for other theatregoers.

Sarah Ziegel has four sons, all of whom have autism. The family go to the 
theatre “occasionally”, but have attracted more than their fair share of “tuts 
and glares”. Theatre tickets priced as they are, family outings are not cheap, 
and just picking the wrong show – or, by chance, the wrong night – can prove 
costly. The Ziegels aborted a recent trip toThe Railway Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/16/railway-children-play-steam-train-kings-cross-mike-kenny-theatre>
 after their youngest, aged seven, refused to go into the theatre. The others 
left at the interval. “We have to pick things that are accessible to them from 
a cognitive point of view; things that are visual and don’t need you to follow 
a narrative.”


However, theatre is increasingly catering for autistic audiences through 
special “relaxed” or “autism-friendly” performances - including the The Railway 
Children itself. There is some debate over the terminology: Britain prefers the 
euphemistic; the US tends towards the medical. Once the preserve of a few 
pioneering organisations – in particular thePolka <http://www.polkatheatre.com/>
 and theUnicorn <https://www.unicorntheatre.com/> children’s theatres in London 
– relaxed performances are percolating through British theatre, from panto 
season to major subsidised theatres, such as the National and the Royal 
Shakespeare Company (RSC), all the way to the West End. In fact, surprisingly, 
the commercial sector has led the way, withshows such as Matilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/25/matilda-review>, The Lion King 
<http://www.lionkingautismfriendly.co.uk/> and Wicked 
<http://www.wickedthemusical.co.uk/AutismFriendly/> offering annual relaxed 
performances.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fthe-atmosphere-was-electric-opening-up-theatre-to-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2101d5d33f4a07c58e8459ac3cf10628d3df3624%2F0_509_5286_3173%2F5286.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20atmosphere%20was%20electric'%20%E2%80%93%20opening%20up%20theatre%20to%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fthe-atmosphere-was-electric-opening-up-theatre-to-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20atmosphere%20was%20electric%27%20%E2%80%93%20opening%20up%20theatre%20to%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fthe-atmosphere-was-electric-opening-up-theatre-to-autistic-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2101d5d33f4a07c58e8459ac3cf10628d3df3624%2F0_509_5286_3173%2F5286.jpg>
 The RSC puts on annual relaxed performances of the musical Matilda. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Relaxed performances differ in a number of ways. The show itself is adjusted 
for its audience: lighting states softened, loud noises lowered. It’s not 
simply a matter of reducing levels, but of addressing specific issues, based on 
a specialist’s suggestions. An actor speaking before entering can be confusing, 
as can surround-sound speakers. The process requires planning and rehearsal, 
and the aim is to leave as much as possible intact, says Ros Hayes, head of 
access at the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, and 
“not to change the content”. Without having seen the usual show, audiences 
shouldn’t notice a difference.

The real changes happen in the auditorium. Relaxed performances never play to 
capacity, since large crowds can be an issue, and up to half of seats go 
unsold. House lights stay on throughout, with audiences free to come and go as 
they please. Outside, designated “chill-out” zones allow for time out, with 
video feeds and related activities provided to maintain contact with the play 
or its imaginative world.

Autism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> is not uniform. Different 
individuals have different needs, cognitive abilities and flashpoints. 
“Research into who is coming is really important,” says Hayes. Shows must adapt 
not only to an abstract audience, but also to the individuals in the room. To 
this end, box-office staff and ushers are provided with specialist training, 
and a separate booking line helps individuals find the seat to suit them.


Audiences are sent visual storyboards in advance: one for the child, another 
for carers or parents. These explain the theatre’s layout and the theatrical 
event, and familiarise the audience with the story. “One of the things about 
children with autism,” says Jacqui O’Hanlon, the RSC’s head of education, “is 
that the more prepared they are and the more they know about what they’re going 
to encounter, the better.”


'Relaxed' theatre performances will let autistic children enjoy hit shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jun/16/relaxed-theatre-autistic-children>
All this has allowed a new audience access to the theatre, but it has also 
enabled families to attend. “Just knowing that no one is going to judge you or 
tell you off if your child does shout out or laugh inappropriately is 
fantastic,” says Ziegel. Theatre is a social art form but, for those affected 
by autism, that’s a big part of the problem – relaxed performances remove the 
social anxiety.

In fact, these performances often increase the social element. The cast will 
often greet audience members in character post-show – “That was lovely,” says 
Ziegel – and members of the audience are often vocal and expressive. For actor 
Jonathan Slinger, an RSC stalwart currently playing Willy Wonka in the West 
End, the relaxed performance ofCharlie and the Chocolate Factory 
<http://www.charlieandthechocolatefactory.com/london.php> was a revelation. “To 
this day, in terms of responsiveness to the show, it was the best we’ve done. 
The atmosphere was electric. When Charlie found the golden ticket, the place 
went wild. It was like being in a football match.”


 It wasn’t until 2013, and an industry-wide initiative led by the Society of 
London Theatre and Theatre UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jun/16/relaxed-theatre-autistic-children>
, that relaxed performances started becoming widespread – two years after the 
first such performance on Broadway. However, as Heather Wildsmith of the
National Autistic Society <http://www.autism.org.uk/> says: “There’s definitely 
momentum. It has grown so much in that time.”

That’s partly a case of initiating relaxed performances. Once the skills are 
in place, they’re in place for good. Partly, it’s case of growing an audience. 
Having initially targeted special educational needs schools, the scope has 
widened to include families and adults with autism. Collaboration is crucial. 
In the West Midlands, several theatres including the RSC are promoting one 
another’s relaxed performances to their audiences. “They’re just part of the 
theatregoing ecology now,” says O’Hanlon.

And that’s the key: ensuring that relaxed performances become standard 
practice, just as captioned performances have. “We’re talking about a cultural 
change,” says Wildsmith, “so that there’s a whole audience to tap into. It’s 
just getting the word out more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fthe-atmosphere-was-electric-opening-up-theatre-to-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0da73b3caf1a62027dac6da33b84d7a84d643001%2F0_410_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20atmosphere%20was%20electric'%20%E2%80%93%20opening%20up%20theatre%20to%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fthe-atmosphere-was-electric-opening-up-theatre-to-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20atmosphere%20was%20electric%27%20%E2%80%93%20opening%20up%20theatre%20to%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fthe-atmosphere-was-electric-opening-up-theatre-to-autistic-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0da73b3caf1a62027dac6da33b84d7a84d643001%2F0_410_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
 Charlie And the Chocolate Factory: one of several shows that has been tweaked 
for autistic people. Photograph: Helen Maybanks/AP 
Upcoming relaxed performances in London

Matilda <http://uk.matildathemusical.com/>: Cambridge Theatre, 12 June 2016


Railway Children, <https://www.railwaychildrenlondon.com/ticket-info/access> 
Kings Cross, 22 June 2016

A Midsummer Night’s Dream 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/a-midsummer-nights-dream/about-the-play>: Royal 
Shakespeare Theatre, 14 July 2016

Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland <http://www.aliceopera.com/>: Opera Holland 
Park, 16 August 2016
 