

At an internet cafe in Coca, a city near the Ecuadorian Amazon, Felipe Googles 
Huaorani <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huaorani_people>, the name of his tribe, 
and scrolls through the images. “It makes me a little sad,” he says. “People 
come and take photos and sell them in cities and don’t give anything to us”.

He pointed to a photo of a Huaorani boy talking to a white-haired white man 
with a camera. “That’s my son,” he said. But when I asked who the white man is, 
he said he didn’t know.

“Who took the picture?” I asked.

“I don’t know,” he said. “That’s the problem.”

Two days later, in the Huaorani village of Quehueri-Ono, I watched a group of 
American tourists photograph an elderly man named Dabo who, having lost the use 
of his legs to polio, lay on a mattress in the middle of his longhouse.

His home, built from palm leaves and tree trunks, had a traditional fire in 
one corner tended by his wife, Weba. Children, teenagers and adults drift in 
and out. The English-speaking guide points out Weba’s balsa wood ear expansions 
to the tourists and then says, “Notice how deformed her feet are,” indicating 
her elongated, separated toes, which allow her to climb trees and trek through 
the forest.

The tourists snap photos. They photograph Dabo on his mattress. They 
photograph the children and show the photos to the children, who delight in 
swiping their fingers across the smartphone screens. One tourist coos, “Smile!” 
at a three-year-old, then coos the exact same “Smile!” to Dabo. She holds his 
arm in hers, and he weakly raises his head and nods. “Bless you,” she says.

Weba tells the tourists that she had hurt herself falling that day and holds 
up her injured foot to show them. She speaks through two translators: the 
Huaorani guide, Bai, translates Weba’s words from Huao Terero, the Huao 
language, into Spanish; the other, an Ecuadorian naturalist guide, translates 
Bai’s words from Spanish into English. The naturalist guide says that the 
tourists are lucky, sometimes Weba doesn’t want to talk. He gives her a machete 
and a bag of food. “She says thank you, now we will eat well tonight,” he tells 
the tourists. At the end of the visit, Weba gives each tourist a Huaorani name. 
The naturalist guide tells them, “She says now you are part of the Huaorani 
family, like brothers.” The tourists, thrilled, pose for photos with Weba.

“I feel blessed,” says a middle-aged woman, “she just makes you smile.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fecotourism-amazon-shortchanges-locals-ecuador%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426086747596%2F972dcb04-0e84-4aae-9b99-1fc118ec5ba4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20come%2C%20they%20photograph%20us%2C%20but%20they%20don%E2%80%99t%20help'%3A%20why%20ecotourism%20in%20the%20Amazon%20shortchanges%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fecotourism-amazon-shortchanges-locals-ecuador%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20come%2C%20they%20photograph%20us%2C%20but%20they%20don%E2%80%99t%20help%27%3A%20why%20ecotourism%20in%20the%20Amazon%20shortchanges%20the%20locals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fecotourism-amazon-shortchanges-locals-ecuador%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426086747596%2F972dcb04-0e84-4aae-9b99-1fc118ec5ba4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nenekoa, a polio survivor, says it takes him six days to make a miniature 
blowgun and arrows, which he sells for $20. Photograph: Megan Alpert 
After the tourists leave, I ask Weba, through Felipe, what she thought of 
them. Felipe tells me, “She says they come, but they don’t help.” And byhelp 
they meangive money.

The complaint that the tourists don’t give money is something I had been 
hearing a lot. I had heard it the night before at Felipe’s house, as we lay in 
hammocks around a dying fire. Tourists had come to Felipe’s village a few days 
earlier, and Felipe and his family had painted their faces with achiote and 
shown them a traditional song and dance. “Those tourists left very happy,” 
Felipe told me, but they didn’t leave much money – maybe a tip of $5-10. He 
thinks they should pay $20 per person.

I heard the complaint again in Quehueri-Ono, where villagers sat behind school 
desks covered with handmade crafts for sale. Nenekoa, another polio survivor, 
who uses a wheelchair with broken brakes, told me that it takes him six days to 
make a miniature blowgun and arrows, which he sells for $20 each. The tourists 
come, he said, but they only buy one small thing each. The day I visited, there 
were at least 20 Huaorani hoping to sell handicrafts. There were eight 
tourists. As Nenekoa described the polio outbreak during an evangelical mission 
that had cost him the use of his legs, the women selling crafts began to dance 
with the tourists. They put their hands on each other’s shoulders and moved 
forward and back as they sang. Both the Huaorani and the tourists were smiling. 
Nenekoa told me, through Felipe, “They dance so that the tourists will pay, but 
they don’t pay.”

When I asked Felipe where the tourists come from, he was vague, but by the 
time we got to Dabo and Weba’s house, it became clear that they were guests of
Huaorani Ecolodge <http://www.huaorani.com/>, which is run by Tropic Journeys 
in Nature, an award-winning ecotourism company based in Quito. Eweme, a 
middle-aged Huaorani man who has worked for Huaorani Ecolodge as a guide, told 
me he gets paid $20 per day, but the Huaorani who sing, dance, open their homes 
and sell crafts are not paid.

Several Huaorani said they believe the guides tell the tourists not to give 
money, or to pay less for handicrafts. In Huaorani Ecolodge’s “explorer’s 
guide,” which is sent to the tourists before their arrival, tourists are 
encouraged to tip the “naturalist guides” $15 per day and the “staff” $10 per 
day. The naturalist guide is an Ecuadorian guide who speaks English and studied 
tourism at university. The Huaorani guide, who several tourists said seemed to 
know more about the forest than the naturalist, is not mentioned in the 
explorer’s guide, though is perhaps included in “staff”. Tourists are told that 
they should put a total tip for all the staff members into an envelope, which 
the Lodge manager distributes to the community. Naturalist guides, on the other 
hand, are tipped directly.

If the tourists want to further support the community, they are encouraged to 
give school supplies or donate to Tropic’s Waponi initiative, which their 
website describes as a “business incubator aimed at providing small 
community-based tourism initiatives inEcuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> and Peru with the market access and 
skills to compete and thrive”.

One visitor who travelled with Huoarani Ecolodge in 2013 did not think that 
the Huaorani wanted tips for cultural demonstrations. “It wasn’t like a bellhop 
in a hotel or anything,” he said, though they did want people to buy crafts. He 
tipped the suggested $10 per day directly to each Huaorani who worked at the 
Lodge during his stay (a total of about $50 per person, or $200), and had 
gotten the sense that the Huaorani were surprised and pleased that he did so.

Towards the end of my conversation with Eweme, I asked the question that had 
been bothering me all day: since the business cannot operate without the 
Huaorani’s knowledge of the rainforest, without their dances and basket-weaving 
and blowgun demonstrations, why not just tell Huaorani Ecolodge that they won’t 
participate until conditions are changed and the money is distributed more 
evenly? Eweme is vague in his answer, and I can’t see him or his fellow guides 
organising against the company.

The thing is, the Huaorani are already involved in decisions regarding the 
management of the Lodge. When I visited him at his office, Jascivan Carvalho, 
the general manager of Tropic, told me how in 1994, the Huaorani of 
Quehueri-Ono had asked the company for help “so that tourism could be used as a 
tool for conservation and a strategy for recuperating and strengthening their 
culture”.

Tropic has given the people of Quehueri-Ono and the surrounding communities an 
alternative to oil development, which has truly devastated both the rainforest 
and Huaorani culture. It also helps educate tourists about the damage that oil 
operations have done.

“The communities are part of the business plan and are owners of the business. 
They are not resources for the business,” Carvalho said. He added that the 
Huaorani who work for the Lodge are involved in decisions about daily 
operations. In addition, each year they assemble the five participating 
communities to discuss how the business is going, make a plan for the year and 
decide what to do with the yearly profits. “One of the beautiful things that 
has happened in this process is that the Huaorani have opted to keep the 
profits in the business,” Carvalho said. These assemblies also set the pay rate 
for the Lodge’s staff.

After paying $700-$900 in fees, plus transportation costs and tips, travellers 
may wonder how there is still so much need in Quehueri-Ono and the surrounding 
communities: why there is no electricity in Apaika, for instance, or why the 
brakes on Nenekoa’s wheelchair do not work. Carvalho would not answer questions 
about the Lodge’s yearly profits, but he said that Huoarani Ecolodge sees 350 
visitors per year, a number that is growing. The five communities that 
participate have a total population of about 350 people. That means that for 
each Huaorani in the area, the business brings in $700-900 per year minus costs 
which, based on the cost of my own trip to the area, likely reduce that amount 
to $300-$600.

Not that the money is distributed to individuals. Carvalho points out that 
their decision to reinvest profits into the business is one that they make in 
hopes of attracting more tourists and therefore more work – which is how elders 
like Dabo and Weba end up earning no or little cash from spending a few hours 
with American tourists. Yet, the need in the communities is so great that it is 
easy to see how tipping for cultural demonstrations and home visits could lead 
to further problems.

One of the great ironies that the Huaorani live with is that while Felipe and 
Eweme’s grandfathers defended the forest by spearing invaders, their 
grandchildren see bringing more foreigners in as a necessity to their survival. 
They live in a forest that has been fractured by oil roads and polluted by oil 
operations. Their elders’ bodies still bear the damage done by the 
evangelicals. The Huaorani have never been fairly compensated for the pollution 
caused by oil companies, or the relentless push of missionaries. If they had 
been, ecotourism would not be necessary.

Both Eweme and Felipe want their children to learn English. They want to find 
a way to cut out the middlemen, the naturalist guides, who they are keenly 
aware earn more in tips than the Huaorani. Felipe wants to start an exchange 
program to have Huaorani youth study English in the US and American youth come 
to his village to learn about the rainforest. He sees the inability of the 
Huaorani to read and write documents as part of why they have lost so much. “We 
can’t defend with spears anymore,” he told me, “now we need to defend with pens 
and notebooks.” Felipe’s ultimate goal is to start his own tourist business and 
use it to fund an education program to prevent Huaorani youth from losing their 
culture and knowledge of the rainforest – a real danger now that Huaorani have 
been forcibly exposed to what they refer to as “the Occidental world”.

Angela Drake, whose husband works at the US embassy in Ecuador, travelled with 
Huaorani Ecolodge last summer. She told me she was concerned after she visited 
Dabo and Weba’s house about the living conditions of the elders. “I began to 
question whether we were helping or hurting the Huaorani, but in the end it’s 
probably preferable to having oil companies develop their land for oil.” 
Despite her reservations, Drake worried about potentially discouraging other 
families from traveling with Huaorani Ecolodge. “It was the trip of a 
lifetime,” Drake said and added that meeting Dabo and Weba “was probably a more 
honest cultural exchange” than any other her family has experienced.

Since meeting Felipe during her trip, Drake is now working with him on 
applying for a grant to bring solar panels to his village, Apaika. A few weeks 
ago, Felipe travelled to Quito for two days to meet with university students 
who he hopes to collaborate with on bringing students to Apaika. He wanted to 
stay in Quito longer, but he didn’t have the cash.
 