
It sounds like satire but Hugh Aldersey-Williams’s account of the day he was 
dispatched by his publisher to a “branding workshop” is all too terrifyingly 
real. The author ofPeriodic Tales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/23/disappearing-spoon-periodic-tales-review>
,Anatomies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/28/anatomies-hugh-aldersey-williams-review>
 andThe Adventures of Sir Thomas Browne in the 21st Century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/21/the-adventures-of-sir-thomas-browne-in-the-21st-century-hugh-aldersey-williams-review>
, one of the more interesting writers to labour under what he calls the “nasty 
label” of popular science, spent a day brainstorming his brand. He was, he 
says, less polite about the value of the exercise than his six fellow authors. 
“Unpredictability is my brand characteristic,” he says. “Am I a science writer? 
Are we forever stuck that way or are we allowed to write about other things? 
I’m interested in architecture and modern music and difficult things like that 
... I’ve got lots of hare-brained ideas, none of which my agent likes.”

We are strolling along Norfolk’s rapidly eroding cliffs of Happisburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/apr/19/last-man-eroding-clifftop> 
(pronounced Haze-brrr, appropriate on a chilly day) because it seems like a 
good spot to talk to him aboutTide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/05/tide-greatest-force-on-earth-hugh-aldersey-williams>
, his new exploration of “this huge and rather mysterious physical phenomena”. 
There is something “rather curious and unaddressed” about our understanding of 
the tides, he says, which does not reflect “the fact that we all spend ages on 
the beach staring at the sea in a rather gormless way”. Some of the largest 
tides in the world ebb and flow on the shores of Britain, but the British are 
particularly inept at handling them, andTide offers a fascinating short history 
of the tide’s role in military defeats. “It’s quite embarrassing when you tot 
them up,” he says. “You could do an article – 10 Times Britain was Disgraced by 
the Tide.”

Aldersey-Williams begins Tide by staring at the sea in a more reflective 
fashion, watching the 13-hour cycle of a tide on the Norfolk coast close to his 
home. “It was a good way to naively ask myself the questions I wanted to 
answer,” he says. “If you’re watching something you’re told regularly comes and 
goes it surprises you when it doesn’t possess an even rhythm like breathing. It 
sits there and then thinks, ‘Christ, I’d better go out.’ It can seem that the 
tide is way behind schedule but it isn’t, it runs in this jagged rhythm.” His 
account of this mathematically predictable and yet strangely unpredictable 
cycle is a vivid passage of writing but he fretted that tide-watching was a 
slightly down-tempo opening to a book. “I had an elaborate paragraph explaining 
that what you’re about to read is not like watching paint dry or grass grow,” 
he says drily, “but I was advised to cut that out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fhugh-aldersey-williams-interview-tide-science-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F132bdbc59dd131f24cf3e26e2244fac4545fda21%2F0_222_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%20point%20being%20subtle%20about%20science.%20You%20have%20to%20bang%20them%20over%20the%20head%20with%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fhugh-aldersey-williams-interview-tide-science-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20no%20point%20being%20subtle%20about%20science.%20You%20have%20to%20bang%20them%20over%20the%20head%20with%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fhugh-aldersey-williams-interview-tide-science-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F132bdbc59dd131f24cf3e26e2244fac4545fda21%2F0_222_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Happisburgh beach and eroding cliffs on the Norfolk coast Photograph: Helen 
Hotson/Alamy 
His tide-watching is typical of the style he developed with Periodic Tales and 
Anatomies, in which he conducts his own small experiments or visits places 
associated with scientific endeavour, weaving explication from an eclectic and 
often tangential range of sources that span both science and art. “There was no 
chemistry in thePeriodic Tales although it fooled people that it belonged to 
the genre of popular science. If people think they learned about chemistry from 
reading it, they also learned about history and art and geography and all sorts 
of bizarre things.” Similarly,Anatomies, he says, “only took off for me when I 
went to anatomy drawing classes.” What’s his drawing like? “Rubbish.”

Tide contains an impressive breadth of reading and range of stories that 
Aldersey-Williams found, he says, by asking friends and editors.Thomas Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy> supplies one of the best pieces 
of writing about the sea. A member of Aldersey-Williams’s sailing club gave him 
a particularly grim discovery forTide: Frederick II, the far-sighted 
13th-century Holy Roman emperor (and king of Sicily), conducted a series of 
barbaric experiments, such as raising babies without permitting them to hear 
speech to discover humankind’s “original” language (the babies apparently died 
before the emperor was enlightened). Frederick’s contribution to our 
understanding of tides came when he instructed a fine swimmer to repeatedly 
dive into the Strait of Messina to discover what caused its famous whirlpool. 
This also didn’t end well. “They weren’t well designed and they weren’t humane 
but they were scientific experiments. I don’t think we could call them anything 
else,” says Aldersey-Williams.

The power and glory of tides – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2016/may/31/the-power-and-glory-of-tides-in-pictures>
The sailing club and double-barrelled surname make Aldersey-Williams sound 
posh: but his “club” has no clubhouse and is mostly locals who race identical 
“cockles”, 15ft sailing boats based on the traditional Norfolk fishing boat. He 
escaped to Norfolk at the turn of the century during a career crisis. His 
writing career had begun brightly with a popular science book about a recently 
discovered molecule,buckminsterfullerene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/05/sir-harry-kroto-obituary> 
(named after American futurologist,Buckminster Fuller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/jul/04/buckminster-fuller-architecture-design>
). Pursuing his interest in architecture and design, he became the New 
Statesman’s design critic and curated exhibitions that often sought to bridge 
the divide between the arts and the sciences. But then two books he was 
researching were cancelled, he lost his agent and considered himself “pretty 
washed-up publishing-wise”.

Removing himself to Norfolk, he self-published a book using a local print 
works: watching your book come off the presses is, he remarks, a thrill denied 
conventionally published authors. And his journey back from this wilderness 
began when a friend, Simon Briscoe, asked him to collaborate onPanicology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/22/society2>, a study for Penguin 
of modern media scares. “Once you’ve got a book published by Penguin you can 
suddenly find an agent again,” says Aldersey-Williams.

This is a vintage year for him, with the well-received Tide following the 
paperback of his critically acclaimedThe Adventures of Sir Thomas Browne in the 
21st Century. The book was the result of his 20-year obsession with Browne 
<http://www.literarynorfolk.co.uk/Norwich/sir_thomas_browne.htm>, a great 17th 
century polymath (physician, scientist, philosopher and naturalist) who inspired
Virginia Woolf <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>, Jorge Luis 
Borges <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jorgeluisborges> and WG Sebald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald>. Aldersey-Williams may have 
developed a passion for this elusive figure because, as well as sharing an 
adopted homeland, he and Browne have similar aims, methodologies and a 
curiosity so insatiable that it makes most of us look like well-fed automatons.

I’m impressed, for instance, that Aldersey-Williams has spotted the unusual 
preponderance of pubs named after ostriches in Norfolk – and he finds out the 
cause (Sir Edward Coke, Norfolk-born attorney general of Elizabeth I, adopted 
the emblem of an ostrich with a horseshoe in its beak, the bird reputedly able 
to digest iron; Browne’s son Edward later acquired an ostrich and Browne 
thought Edward should test the bird’s iron-digesting abilities). I’d also never 
noticed that wheeled office chairs have five legs. Weighing up stability, cost 
and elegance, “the world has decided the answer is five’, says 
Aldersey-Williams. Five is an interesting number, and Browne explored the 
preponderance of the quincunx – a pattern like the dots showing “5” on a dice – 
in his discourseThe Garden of Cyrus (1658). Browne spots this pentagonal 
symmetry in catkins, pine cones and the planting of orchards; Aldersey-Williams 
notices it on car wheel trims. “You sense that Browne could have written that 
essay about any number. His sense of play and his joy of language makes it all 
a bit of a wild goose chase.”

Anatomies: The Human Body, Its Parts and the Stories They Tell by Hugh 
Aldersey-Williams – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/28/anatomies-hugh-aldersey-williams-review>
Today Browne mostly lives on in words: he was one of the most prolific 
word-coiners of his day and we owe him “medical”, “precarious”, “insecurity” 
and “hallucination”, all of which helped us speak with new precision about the 
boundary between the real and the imagined. Aldersey-Williams’s favourite? “In 
terms of reflecting what Browne’s about, ‘incontrovertible’ comes close.” He is 
also particularly fond of “fritiniency” – the shrill, scratchy noise of insects 
such as cicadas.

But the “tongue-rolling sensuousness” of Browne’s writing, he feels, distracts 
from his contribution to science. Francis Bacon is usually credited with being 
the father of the scientific method “but the likelihood is that Browne did more 
experiments,” he says. Browne constantly tested beliefs and propositions: he 
disproved the popular idea that a dead kingfisher makes a good weather vane by 
procuring two and hanging them from untwisted silk. Such “science” is easier to 
write about than contemporary experiments, which “get too complicated”, and, 
thinks Aldersey-Williams, are better explained via infographics than narrative 
non-fiction.

“I like pre-science science,” he says, and he discovers a lot among a rollcall 
of great thinkers, fromAristotle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/may/09/1> to Thomas Aquinas, who 
have slowly unravelled the astronomical problem posed by the tide.Galileo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/galileo> failed to connect tides to the 
moon but Aldersey-Williams forgives him because he was looking for something 
else. He’s impressed by Bede, who makes more of this link. “He did what we 
would now call scientific observations, and seemed to encourage others to make 
them as well, and gathered them. I don’t know how much evidence there is of his 
process but whatever data he was able to assemble he looked at fairly 
intelligently.”

The Adventures of Sir Thomas Browne in the 21st Century by Hugh 
Aldersey-Williams – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/21/the-adventures-of-sir-thomas-browne-in-the-21st-century-hugh-aldersey-williams-review>
Tide and Sir Thomas Browne intersect briefly. Browne was particularly keen on 
debunking myths and one legend he sought to disprove was that Aristotle was so 
perplexed by the riddle of tidal currents of the Euripus Strait, in Greece, 
that he threw himself in the churning waters. Browne couldn’t bear his hero 
killing himself and Aldersey-Williams sorts it out. The myth-debunker who is 
most similar to Browne today isBen Goldacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bengoldacre>, he claims. This comparison 
is not entirely flattering. Three of Browne’s great qualities were his 
good-humoured tolerance, his willingness to equivocate and acceptance that he 
doesn’t have all the answers; Aldersey-Williams is convinced that Browne today 
would be a less strident, less polarising voice than many contemporary science 
writers: “To listen to scientists and their apologists talk in the media, it’s 
all about, ‘We know this or that and we’re trying to tell you.’ Very little 
time is spent saying, ‘We don’t know what 96% of the matter in the universe 
is.’ If they’d shut up, and stopped being so certain about themselves all the 
time, and described with some humility their project, I’d be more sympathetic.”

In examining the tolerance paradox – how do you tolerate the intolerant? – 
Aldersey-Williams practises what he preaches, and offers a nuanced critique of 
popular science. “I didn’t want to write one of those big fat polemical books 
that list what’s wrong with our time now –Steven Pinker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/steven-pinker>-type things – but I did 
want to gently deflate some of the apparent certainties of the scientific 
position,” he says. “Someone likeRichard Dawkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins> is baffling because his mind has 
to work better than his polemics – he has to have more self-awareness. There is 
this scientific idea that ‘my words mean what I say they mean’ but Dawkins is a 
skilled rhetorician and he knows that things have double meanings and 
rhetorical effect while claiming to be utterly transparent.”

While The Adventures of Sir Thomas Browne in the 21st Century was much 
praised, Aldersey-Williams now feels its message was missed by readers of 
popular science. “There’s no point in making ultra-subtle points about how 
science is done,” he says. “You have to bang them over the head with it. They 
want scientific facts and they want science explained to them, which I’m less 
and less interested in.”

• To order Tide for £15.19 (RRP £18.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407107/s/tide/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 