
Fast-food workers from Birmingham, Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, are suing their state 
legislature after it passed a law that put a stop to their expected pay raise.

Nine months ago, the workers scored a major victory as Birmingham became the 
first city in the deep south to pass a law enacting a higher minimum wage. At 
the time, the city council agreed to increase the local minimum wage from $7.25 
to $8.50 by July 2016 and to $10.10 by July 2017. The victory was short-lived 
as the state legislature passed a law earlier this year, prohibiting cities 
from increasing their local minimum wage, voiding Birmingham’s ordinance.

On Thursday, Birmingham fast food workers, Alabama’s chapter of the National 
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and the Greater 
Birmingham Ministries filed a federal civil rights lawsuit arguing that HB-174, 
passed two months ago, is tainted “with racial animus”. Most of the Birmingham 
workers who would have received a pay hike in July were African American, 
according to Richard Rouco, one of the lawyers representing the plaintiffs.

Alabama passes law banning cities and towns from increasing minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/26/alabama-passes-law-banning-minimum-wage-increase>
“Despite working hard for the same restaurant for three years, I’ve only 
gotten one 25-cent raise,” said Marnika Lewis, 23, one of the plaintiffs in the 
case. She works at Moe’s restaurant, earning $7.75 an hour. “I can’t afford to 
feed my son or heat my home on the $270 I’m paid each week, so I have to rely 
on public assistance just to scrape by. If the legislature and governor hadn’t 
illegally stolen my raise, I would have had money to pay for my son’s child 
care.”

Another plaintiff in the lawsuit is Antoin Adams, 23, who works at Hardee’s 
and earns $7.25 an hour.

Since Alabama has no state minimum wage, it uses the federal minimum wage that 
has been stuck at $7.25 since July 2009. Americans earning $7.25 an hour who 
work full time – 40 hours a week, 52 weeks a year – make just a little more 
than $15,000 a year.

Adams said he earns little more than $10,000 a year, before taxes. At the 
moment, he cannot afford to get his car fixed and often has to decide between 
spending money on food or treating his chronic asthma conditions.

“I want to go to college, but on $7.25 saving up is impossible. I’d love to be 
a computer technician, and a raise to $10.10 sure would have helped me along 
that path,” he said. “The state stole my raise.”

US deputy labor secretary: 'We still need to raise the federal minimum wage'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/01/federal-minimum-wage-labor-department-new-york-california>
In the wake of congressional inaction on wages, the Obama administration has 
come out in support of states and cities raising their minimum wage.

“Since the president called for an increase in minimum wage in the State of 
the Union 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/13/state-of-the-union-obama-congress>
, 18 states have raised their minimum wage so we are very encouraged by what is 
happening,” US deputy labor secretary Chris Lu pointed out in April. “Not only 
states, but cities as well have taken the lead on this action.”

Most recently, both California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/28/california-minimum-wage-fight-for-fifteen-jerry-brown>
 andNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/14/fight-for-15-protests-fair-minimum-wage>
 passed laws that would see their minimum wages go up to $15 an hour by 2022. 
Although Obama had praised the two states for their efforts to raise wages, 
publicly he has yet to endorse a $15 federal minimum wage. Instead, he has 
thrown his support behind a proposal introduced by congressional Democrats, 
which would raise the federal minimum wage to $12 an hour by 2020.

Former secretary of state Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/17/hillary-clinton-minimum-wage-cities-states-small-businesses>
 has also publicly declared her support for raising the federal minimum wage to 
$12 an hour even as her rival for the democratic presidential nomination Bernie 
Sanders threwhis support behind a $15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/oct/13/bernie-sanders-federal-minimum-wage-15-per-hour-video>
 minimum wage.

Most recently, however, Clinton has implied that she would not be opposed to a 
nationwide $15 minimum wage if there was a widespread support.

“I hope the rest of the country will catch up with New York and California,” 
she said while speaking on a panel on equal pay earlier this month. Increasing 
the federal minimum wage would benefit women as they account for two-thirds of 
minimum wage workers, she said.

Calling for equal pay, Hillary Clinton shares little about her own experience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/hillary-clinton-equal-pay-day-minimum-wage-gender-gap>
According to Rouco, the plaintiffs’ lawyer, if Birmingham were allowed to 
raise its minimum wage to $10.10 an hour, it would result in a raise for more 
than 40,000 workers, most of whom are African American. About 74% of 
Birmingham’s residents are black and almost third of them live in poverty.

The state’s attempt to block a minimum wage increase in Birmingham is also an 
insult, local leaders and officials said.

“It’s really a slap in the face,” said Scott Douglas, executive director of 
Greater Birmingham Ministries. “And the reasons they gave for doing it? Like: 
‘Oh, Alabama needs a unified minimum wage. We can’t have patchwork minimum 
wages’. When they are not lifting a finger to raise any wages across the state? 
It was like somebody slaps you and then winks. It was that kind of an insult.”

Rouco said they are “firmly optimistic” about the outcomes of the lawsuit, 
adding that the firm is not in the habit of filing lawsuits they don’t expect 
to win. The aim of the suit is to get a verdict saying that the state law 
banning cities and towns from increasing their minimum wages cannot be 
enforced. In the case of such a verdict, he said, the Birmingham new minimum 
wage would go into effect immediately.
 