
Young ears are ready for anything, and it is chance what first reaches them. 
The first music, like the first books that your heart opens up to, will always 
remain with you. Can have been and still are like that to me. No other band 
ever delighted me so completely while extending the parameters of what rock 
music could be; for me and others. I measure out my life as I discovered each 
album and as Holger, Jaki and Irmin's solo albums were also released. I'm still 
both an unbearably boring uberfan who has memorised the itinerary and dates of 
1970s European tours (which the guys have long forgotten) and a lucky friend of 
band members, giving me a private insight into this whole Can mythology that 
has lived up to my love of the music. I foolishly dream of writing the 
definitive and scholarly biography of the band, in six volumes. I never will. 
We should not theorise about Can, just listen to the albums - and now we have 
the complete and beautifully remastered chance. This is the music of the whole 
earth singing.

A relative latecomer to rock music, I grew up with Can's vinyl records from 
1980 onwards. In those days, Can records could only be bought - sporadically 
and expensively - at my first port of call in Glasgow or Edinburgh: the Virgin 
Megastore. Sometimes, copies were the original United Artists pressings from 
the 1970s. Or you could get the emerging Spoon Records pressings by specialist 
mail order if you lived in the Highlands.

A small Scottish town full of heavy metal fans could seem very unexotic during 
winter days as a 15-year-old. My growing collection included records (all with 
great cover art) such as Miles Davis's Agharta or Weather Report's Tale 
Spinnin', and they were for me the very definition of exoticism. They seemed to 
derive from another sunny planet and I - in an adolescent way - saw them as a 
rebellion against everything that surrounded me; especially heavy metal music, 
which was essentially the folk music of my culture. I held those other album 
covers up close to my face, like a girl looking in a mirror.

The first Can record I bought was a beautiful-looking blue album. The cover 
showed a giant spanner, erect in the stratosphere, turning a shiny metallic 
octagonal sky-nut, shaped into the single word: CAN. I recall it was initially 
the names that jumped out at me: Holger Czukay, a Rosko Gee on bass, an Irmin 
Schmidt on keyboards, a Jaki Liebezeit on drums, a - wow! - Reebop Kwaku Baah 
on percussion. These names excited me. I moved them around my mouth. As Holger 
himself would later exclaim when he saw his first Technicolor Hollywood movie 
in postwar Germany: "This is all more than Jesus allows!"

I will never forget listening to that album for the first time back in the old 
village: an airy clean, modernist sheen to its sound. Aspectacle had a 
lithesome bass and incredibly tight Jaki Liebezeit drum lock. Safe sounded 
ominous and threatening to my young ears with its roaming-fog banks of 
keyboards. In fact it sounded a lot like this great new band I'd been hearing 
on the John Peel show, called Joy Division. Safe's lyrics warned: "This is a 
replay message to all those who try their best to make, like ... everything 
easy and aren't sure either which is the right way."

All Gates Open had swells of uprising keyboards that periodically overpowered 
the song above a steady drum pulse and a strange structure. A chorus always was 
a debatable concept with Can.

I remember sitting in a Dublin hotel bar, first meeting Can guitarist Michael 
Karoli, both of us wired. He'd just played a storming concert with his new band 
Sofortkontackt. Micky had a way of letting his jacket still hang on his 
shoulders no matter what, and he wore orange sunglasses. He spoke so many 
languages I had brought him almost every bloody translation of my three or four 
novels. He looked momentarily worried at the stack on the table. "You've 
written a lot of books for a younger guy," he drawled. It was like the 
journalist Nick Kent's Keith Richards story: if he threw up on my jacket I 
wouldn't have washed it off either. I asked Micky if he was singing about 
infinite possibilities on All Gates Open. "No. I was singing about all the 
[noise] gates on each microphone in the studio being open."

In London once we talked about how, live in the earlier 1970s, Can were 
cooking like no band on earth. Micky whispered how exhilarating it was to be in 
the middle of all that frightening sound with a sense of self-amazement himself 
at what was happening on stage. I have some rare live tapes, in some ways 
better than the famous albums. Can were knocking out these improvisations 
weekly at their studio near Cologne all through this period and like a great, 
undiscovered Ring Cycle ignored by the world, hundreds of hours still remain, 
decaying on magnetic tape! My heaven would be among those tapes.

I was a great walker in my youth, striding outlandish distances along the back 
roads below perishing mountains. It is no exaggeration to state my first novel, 
Morvern Callar, would never have been conceived if it was not for Holger 
Czukay's solo album Movies, Can's Saw Delight and Ege Bamyasi and my Sony 
Walkman. For the whole of a summer I walked those back roads - the unknown 
glens. Even now when I listen to these re-mastered albums I am overwhelmed by 
the epiphany of an Indian summer - the slightly fetid but earthen smell of 
lichen and log decay among shady waterfalls. A pure Arcadia I associate with 
Can.

It's easy to forget what an invention the Walkman was in the early 1980s. 
Before, we used to carry big Grundig tape recorders wrapped in carrier bags 
against the rain, right up into the hills. You had to carry spare batteries. 
With the Walkman, suddenly I was wired directly into Can, timing physical 
reactions to tracks. Jumping a mountain stream along with a drum break. Music 
that had been communal was suddenly solitary, secret and subjective - which 
suited me fine.

On the 1977 album Saw Delight, Holger Czukay no longer played technically 
remarkable bass. Rosko Gee earthed the groove and the music sat down. Live, 
they actually started to sound like the album tracks - the completely spaced 
out, exploratory improvisations of the earlier 1970s were almost gone and the 
band became amazingly sunny and subtle. Holger was now the band's world DJ with 
his "magic table", mixing in tapes of ethnic music or picking up local radio 
stations - even telephoning random people or the speaking clock and mixing it 
through the PA onstage as the band played. I always thought this unfashionable 
Can period quite remarkable: a mix of funk, Rosko's soulful vocals, world music 
and avant garde. It was all completely lost among the phlegmatic punk 
revolution.

Today, still, Can's music remains for me that cornerstone of a creed, daily 
reminding me what adventure and constantly pushing the form of any art might 
just achieve. If you are into music you cannot get past them. Can is sometimes 
daunting and awe-inspiring, but much more often it is simply beautiful.

Â· The 30th anniversary release of I Want More alongside remastered CD editions 
of Flow Motion, Saw Delight, Can, Delay 1968 and Rite Time are out now on The 
Grey Area of Mute/Spoon. Alan Warner's latest novel, The Worms Can Carry Me to 
Heaven, is published by Cape
 