
I just need space. That is what you hear when someone is about to break your 
heart – or when you’re talking to a choreographer. There is not much we can do 
without it. We dream about it. When I lived in London I moved into a small 
basement flat and, on my first night there, I dreamed that I discovered an 
enormous room hidden in a kitchen cupboard. It was huge, empty and had a smooth 
wooden floor. I checked the cupboard when I woke.

There was no hidden room. But there were two children in the flat: they were 
mine and for their sake I also craved space. So my partner and I started 
looking outside London. We imagined a village with a barely used church hall 
and a yearning for experimental dance theatre. But before we found that 
village, we found a co-housing community calledLaughton Lodge 
<http://www.laughtonlodge.org/>. I don’t think they were missing experimental 
dance, particularly, but they had a wonderful communal space, amazing gardens 
and a house for sale. We bought it.

How the nation's theatre reinvented itself | Lyn Gardner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/mar/09/nations-theatre-reinvented-bac>
The site was an old mental hospital. The house we live in is part of what 
would have been the wards. The place where I rehearse is in a separate building 
that would have been the dining room. It is nicer than it sounds. The building 
was probably built to last 10 years about 50 years ago.

From the dining room/studio I can see a huge oak, two pigs, three horses, some 
chickens, too many rabbits and, in the distance, the South Downs. The first 
piece I made when I moved here was called It Needs Horses. It owes a debt to 
the majestic horses and our not altogether successful physical imitations of 
them. More recently, I made a piece withLucy Kirkwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/14/lucy-kirkwood-ben-duke-like-rabbits>
 calledLike Rabbits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/14/like-rabbits-virginia-woolf-louise-tanoto-ben-duke>
, inspired by them, their reproductive habits and a short story byVirginia Woolf
 <https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/w/woolf/virginia/w91h/chapter9.html>. She 
spent time here, not in the hospital but nearby atCharleston 
<http://www.charleston.org.uk/> house. I am currently working on a solo version 
ofParadise Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2008/dec/09/pullman-milton>. I am 
playing God. I haven’t seen him around here any more than I did in London, but 
such a self-obsessed bit of casting is easier down here where there are far 
fewer people to tell me it is a stupid idea. If it doesn’t work out, I will 
turn to the pigs for inspiration.

I still carry my neuroses with me into this more spacious place and I think 
that is what drives me to make work

I worried that the countryside might make me content. That I needed the edge 
of the city. That this much green and calm would make me realise what a 
pointless thing it is I do and that I’d want, instead, to become a shepherd. It 
hasn’t happened yet. I still carry my neuroses with me into this more spacious 
place and I think that is what drives me to make work. I feel that here I am 
better able to wrestle with those neuroses and put my energy into giving them a 
dancing form. I do not have to travel far; further than falling out of bed, but 
not as far as Shepherd’s Bush to Mile End. I do not have to pay as much; more 
than free but less than £30 per hour. And I no longer have to fight for and 
then defend my space.

I am still a pretend country person, though. I am often on the train to 
London. I do not feel that my work is of much relevance to the wider rural 
community that I live within but am not really part of. I’m like a Dorset 
microbrewery that sells all its beer at Borough market in London. My support is 
mainly from London-based organisations and the company perform mainly in London 
and less frequently, in Brighton.

What does the idea of “A Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/a-nations-theatre>” mean? Maybe 
creating more artistic communities in rural locations is part of it. And also 
creating exchange between local artists and residents. I could do that here. It 
could be a hub, a centre of artistic activity, a thriving business. It sounds 
good. It also sounds busy. I can see the space filling up with people. Too many 
people. And as they arrive, I’ll be fighting the urge to start searching for 
hidden rooms in the cupboards.

 * Paradise Lost (lies unopened beside me) is at Battersea Arts Centre 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/35903/see_whats_on/whats_on/shows/paradise_lost_lies_unopened_beside_me>
 on 26 and 27 May as part of an exchange of shows with The Place
 