
Ann Kitchen never imagined the repercussions of her decision to regulate Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, the ride-hailing behemoth with a 
valuation of $62.5bn and – she now knows – a reputation for taking no prisoners.

The 61-year-old Austin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> 
councilwoman had the temerity to propose that Uber and its rival, Lyft, be 
subject to the same rules that apply to other companies offering transport in 
the Texan state capital.

Kitchen, who represents the 80,000 people of district 5 in South Austin and 
was a barely-known local political figure in the city, now finds herself the 
target of a sophisticated, well-funded, and highly-personalized political 
operation.


She is facing a recall election campaign, the rare procedure through which 
elected officials can be booted from office. If it succeeds, she will be the 
first city official to be recalled in the city’s history.

“It’s brutal, and I don’t understand it,” she said. “I want to work with Uber. 
I’m not trying to ban them.”

Kitchen, who used to work as a social worker, does not fit a stereotype of a 
ragged, political bruiser.

During a recent interview at her City Hall office decorated with her mother’s 
paintings, she arrived in a blazer, wearing a city seal as a necklace. “A pin 
is fine but what woman doesn’t love a necklace?” she said, in a faint Texan 
drawl.

A longtime advocate for affordable housing and expanded medical coverage, she 
had been an expert in transport issues, never taken an Uber ride, and never 
thought much about the service. That changed in January 2015, when Austin’s 
newly-elected city council convened, and its mayor, Steve Adler, assigned 
Kitchen to chair the mobility committee, a team with jurisdiction over 
transport in the state capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd79f786ae30da8ca37a4cf959b463286f04d65ef%2F0_0_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We're%20just%20getting%20started'%3A%20inside%20Austin's%20contentious%20clash%20with%20Uber%20and%20Lyft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27re%20just%20getting%20started%27%3A%20inside%20Austin%27s%20contentious%20clash%20with%20Uber%20and%20Lyft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd79f786ae30da8ca37a4cf959b463286f04d65ef%2F0_0_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Kitchen holds up the seal of Austin that she wears around her neck every day: 
‘I want to work with Uber. I’m not trying to ban them.’ Photograph: Lizzie Chen 
for the Guardian 
Kitchen and her committee drew up a spreadsheet. It contained all of the 
city’s private transportation services, from common taxis to the pedal-powered 
rickshaws or bike taxis (also known as pedicabs) to the quaint, horse-drawn 
carriages beloved by tourists.

They all had to abide by the same ordinances: drivers were fingerprinted, 
vehicles were required to pull over to the side of the road to pick-up 
passengers, and companies had to be identified with some form of official 
marker. To Kitchen, it seemed logical that Uber andLyft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lyft> would be subject to the same 
rules in the name of passenger safety.

“We had an unfortunate incident – a young woman coming out of one of our 
festivals called an Uber driver and got in the wrong car, and she was sexually 
assaulted, so we want to prevent that,” she said.

Kitchen was conscious that these rules should not be too burdensome. The 
official marker for transport providers, she said, could be rudimentary. “Just 
a sticker would be enough identification,” Kitchen said.

She drew up regulations to ensure the rules would be fairly applied across all 
transport providers. She had the backing of the mayor, the committee, and other 
council members.

“We thought we were done at that point,” Kitchen said, laughing.

Things get personal

Few of the technology enthusiasts streaming into Austin on Thursday for the 
annualSouth by Southwest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/08/sxsw-south-by-southwest-insiders-guide-2016>
 (SXSW) festival will have heard of Kitchen – or the controversy she has stoked 
in the liberal Texan enclave.

Uber users who logged onto the app in Austin were informed there was an option 
called 'Kitchen’s Horse and Buggy'

Had the SXSW <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> hordes arrived in the 
city back in November, when Kitchen and her team’s regulation was working its 
way through the city’s bureaucracy, they would have found it hard to escape the 
local politician’s name.

In a remarkable example of the lengths Uber is willing to go in order to crush 
its political opponents – however small – the company redesigned its app to 
broadcast a stinging piece of political sloganeering against the councilwoman.

One day in early November, Uber users who logged onto the app in Austin were 
informed that, in addition to a fleet of on-demand Priuses and Chevrolets 
available at the tap of a button, there was also an option called “Kitchen’s 
Horse and Buggy”.

For a flat rate of $50, they could order the city’s most antiquated form of 
transport, the horse-drawn carriages, named after Uber’s political opponent.

The point of the not-so-subtle gimmick was hammered home in a press release 
from Uber’sTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> division.

“Austinites looking to Uber around town today will get a glimpse of what life 
could be like if the Austin City Council adopts Council Member Ann Kitchen’s 
ridesharing regulations,” it said, claiming the rules would prevent the company 
from operating in the city. “Council Member Kitchen’s plan would impose 19th 
century regulations on 21st Century technology.”

This was not the first time Uber had used its app to attack a political 
opponent.

Months earlier, when New York’s Mayor Bill de Blasio floated the possibility 
of restricting Uber’s expansion, the company’s enormous (and ultimately 
successful) lobbying effort included a similar tweak to its app, offering users 
a “de Blasio Uber” option, with a 25 minute wait time.

But that was de Blasio, mayor of America’s largest city. The “Kitchen’s Horse 
and Buggy” option offered to Austin users was an attack on the low-profile city 
representative of one corner of Austin. “At first it was funny. It was just 
ludicrous,” Kitchen recalled. “Then it wasn’t.”

She added: “These guys out in Silicon Valley like to consider themselves 
disrupters, but they’re just another version of what we’ve had before: big 
business [types] who think they can write their own laws.”

For its part, Uber defended targeting Kitchen. “Ann is the chair of the 
mobility committee that introduced this ordinance,” Uber spokesperson Jennifer 
Mullin said. “If you’ve seen the regulations, you see they’re clearly written 
for the incumbent industry.”

In December, a month after Uber’s redesigned app was rolled out in Austin, 
Kitchen’s regulations were finally approved. It was a significant victory for 
the councilwoman, but it was short-lived.

Uber and Lyft swiftly created and funded 
<http://www.bizjournals.com/austin/news/2016/01/21/ridesharing-works-petition-had-financial-help-from.html>
 a political action committee, or PAC, calledRideSharing Works 
<http://ridesharingworks.com/> to overturn Austin’s new ride-sharing 
regulations. The aim was to secure enough signatures to win a special 
referendum to put the council’s regulations to a city-wide vote, and then 
defeat Kitchen’s plan.

“Look, it’s the state capital of the second most populous state in the union,” 
a Lyft spokesman who works for RideSharing Works, Reed Galen, added. “It’s an 
important city for us.”

Uber gave $18,111 in in-kind contributions and pledged $10,000 to help pay for 
a fleet of canvassers to collect signatures on the street. Lyft gave $8,730 
in-kind and also pledged $10,000. Within three weeks, the campaign claims it 
garnered65,000 signatures 
<http://kxan.com/2016/01/19/ridesharing-petition-garners-more-than-65000-signatures/>
 (triple the number they needed).

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837a7fcbf6ef4e4b32f45f3ef5d36dd2fee9a202%2F0_48_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We're%20just%20getting%20started'%3A%20inside%20Austin's%20contentious%20clash%20with%20Uber%20and%20Lyft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27re%20just%20getting%20started%27%3A%20inside%20Austin%27s%20contentious%20clash%20with%20Uber%20and%20Lyft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837a7fcbf6ef4e4b32f45f3ef5d36dd2fee9a202%2F0_48_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Uber employees in Austin, Texas. ‘Regulations are clearly written for the 
incumbent industry,’ says a company spokesperson. Photograph: Uber Newsroom 


An attempt at compromise

From city hall, it was clear that while Kitchen had won a battle by getting 
the legislation passed, but she was on course to lose the wider war, 
potentially at great personal cost. The combined force of Uber, Lyft, and a 
slew of PACs was, most observers agreed, likely going to overturn the city’s 
regulations in the citywide referendum in May.

In what looked like an attempt to salvage a compromise, Adler, the mayor, 
tried to introduce a voluntary scheme under which Uber and Lyft drivers would 
be incentivized, rather than compelled, to submit their fingerprints.

Adler and Kitchen argue fingerprinting is a key issue because it enables the 
city’s most robust background check, which cross references against FBI 
records. They believe a slew of serious sexual assaults by on-demand drivers in 
Austin underscore the need to improve screening.

And there is precedent. In a rare example of city authorities laying down the 
law for ride-hailing companies, Houston successfully implemented 
finger-printing background checks after an Uber user was raped by a driver in 
the city. Uberbegrudgingly 
<https://www.texastribune.org/2015/10/07/background-checks-center-city-fights-uber/>
 relented to the new rules, whereas Lyft abandoned the city in protest.

Under Adler’s new plan, sharing economy service providers – initially Uber and 
Lyft drivers, but potentially Airbnb hosts too – would earn “badges” if they 
submitted to fingerprinting background checks, entitling them to special 
privileges.

It was intended as a business-friendly fix. Uber and Lyft drivers, Adler said, 
would get access to lucrative pick-up points if they submitted to the enhanced 
vetting procedures, paid for by the city. The mayor’s scheme, dubbedThumbs up! 
<http://www.thumbsupatx.org/>, won the backing of the city council in January.

But it is toothless without the support of Uber and Lyft, both of which remain 
opposed to the arrangement, arguing it would create a two-tier system of 
drivers and discriminate against those who do not submit to the time-consuming 
process of background checks.

That means Kitchen’s regulations for universal, compulsory checks, and parity 
for all of the city’s private transport providers will (by most accounts) be 
defeated in May.

Then came the recall effort

But the councilwoman is not just expected to lose her regulations. She could 
lose her job, too. Neither Uber nor Lyft appear directly responsible for the 
effort to recall Kitchen.

But the attack on the councilwoman, stoked by Uber and its “Kitchen’s Horse 
and Buggy” initiative, has put her in the crosshairs of allied political 
operations that now want to see her removed from post. And Uber did not dispute 
that it precipitated the recall movement.

Mullin, the Uber spokesperson, did not dispute the assertion that the company 
galvanized the effort that has now led to moves to oust Kitchen. “A lot of 
people in Austin use Uber,” she said.

Few doubt that Kania and Moreland will trigger the recall election, probably 
in time for a vote in November

“Since when can’t adults decide how they’d like to travel?” said Justin Arman, 
executive director of conservative PACTexans for Accountable Government 
<http://www.tagtexas.org/>, who is helping organize against Kitchen, whom he 
called “a threat to the social and economic freedoms that create local 
prosperity”.

“These regulations really infantilize the good people of Austin,” he added. 
“There’s no such thing as zero risk, and according to Kitchen’s logic, everyone 
should be fingerprinted – and hey, why not even chipped? – before leaving the 
house.”

The recall effort has been coordinated by another right-wing PAC, Austin4All, 
which seeks to defend the corporate interests of ride-sharing apps.

It is led by Rachel Kania, 28, and Tori Moreland, 25, who raised $46,000 for 
the Kitchen recall campaign, close to half of it from Joe Liemandt, billionaire 
CEO of the software firm Trilogy.

The pair quickly secured 7,000 signatures, exceeding the tally needed to 
instigate recall procedures against Kitchen.

The city has hit back, saying the signatures are invalid on a technicality. 
But few doubt that Kania and Moreland will, in the end, trigger the recall 
election, probably in time for a vote in November.

Local media describes Kania and Moreland as a mysterious pair who are hard to 
reach. (One enterprising reporter from the Austin Monitor was denied entry at 
their launch event but got into a nearby buildingso he could take photos from 
above 
<http://www.austinmonitor.com/stories/2016/02/austin4all-kicks-offs-its-ongoing-petition-drive/>
.)

Both are experienced Republican operatives. Kania is a former senior field and 
tech strategist for the Kentucky senator Rand Paul’s presidential campaign. 
Moreland worked for a consulting firm doing data analytics for Ted Cruz’s 
campaign for the White House.

Over margaritas at an outdoor Austin bar, Kania and Moreland told the Guardian 
that they tended not to speak to reporters because they had a singular focus. 
“Getting at the root of the problem,” Moreland said. “Ann Kitchen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff33e9b74d7f311309c0efde3c8d2f0801bf0895c%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We're%20just%20getting%20started'%3A%20inside%20Austin's%20contentious%20clash%20with%20Uber%20and%20Lyft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27re%20just%20getting%20started%27%3A%20inside%20Austin%27s%20contentious%20clash%20with%20Uber%20and%20Lyft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fuber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff33e9b74d7f311309c0efde3c8d2f0801bf0895c%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Rachel Kania and Tori Moreland, co-directors of the PAC Austin4All: ‘We’re 
getting at the root of the problem.’ Photograph: Lizzie Chen for the Guardian 
Katia added: “Ann’s the definition of a really well entrenched politician 
who’s been bought by special interest. She’s self serving. There’s something 
bigger at play here.”

As evidence, Kania pointed to the $4,000 worth of campaign contributions 
<http://www.austintexas.gov/edims/document.cfm?id=220211> Kitchen has received 
from taxi drivers and lobbyists. “She’s absolutely corrupt,” she said.

They insisted that their political campaigning against Kitchen was separate 
from the anti-regulation efforts funded by the Uber and Lyft funded PAC, even 
if their causes were aligned. The fact that some canvassers happened to be 
doubling-up and collecting signatures for both initiatives at the same time was 
serendipitous, they added, but “not coordinated”.

Kania and Moreland were undeterred by the possibility the signatures they 
collected demanding for the recall election may be invalid, which may require 
they fund a second round of canvassing. “They think we’re going to give up or 
something,” Kania said. “We’re just getting started.”
 