
December brings not only the countdown to Christmas, but a nerve-wracking time 
for the students invited to interview for a place to study law at Oxbridge and 
several other universities. So if you are one of the chosen few, how can you 
give yourself the best chance of winning a place? Four law tutors provide an 
idea of what to expect and tips for making the most of the opportunity.

The process

The form of the interviews vary across institutions, but the general approach 
is the same. At Oxford, explains Rebecca Williams, a law fellow at Pembroke 
College, students are interviewed two or three times over a couple of days by 
separate panels, each made up of two or three law tutors. Interviews will often 
take the form of mini-tutorial. Beforehand, students are given a passage of 
text, which may be part of a judgment, with any legal jargon removed, and asked 
to discuss it.

The format for the interviews at Cambridge follow a similar pattern. 
Candidates have two interviews conducted by different law fellows, explains 
Claire Fenton-Glynn, fellow and law lecturer at Jesus College. One will involve 
the student being asked about an extract of a legal text that they have been 
given in advance, and the other is more “free form”, in which students are 
asked to consider scenarios.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwere-looking-for-raw-intelligence-law-tutors-share-oxbridge-interview-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb65512259045c0d0d02255cfb1ed968b316ebd8e%2F0_134_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We're%20looking%20for%20raw%20intelligence'%3A%20law%20tutors%20share%20Oxbridge%20interview%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwere-looking-for-raw-intelligence-law-tutors-share-oxbridge-interview-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%27re%20looking%20for%20raw%20intelligence%27%3A%20law%20tutors%20share%20Oxbridge%20interview%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwere-looking-for-raw-intelligence-law-tutors-share-oxbridge-interview-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb65512259045c0d0d02255cfb1ed968b316ebd8e%2F0_134_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 If no one could see you and if no one would find out, would you walk on the 
grass?
 Photograph: Alamy 
For instance, students last year were asked a question about the “Keep off the 
lawn” signs that are a common sight on the college grounds: “If no one could 
see you and if no one would find out, would you walk on the grass?”

To test their responses, students were asked to consider whether they would 
walk on the grass if they were late for their interview, or if they saw a 
person choking on the other side of it. If they said they would walk on the 
grass, they might then have been asked what gave them the right to break the 
rules, and whether all rules could be broken.

Tutors stress that no legal knowledge is required or expected of those being 
interviewed. They are not interested in whether the students give the right 
answer – there may not even be right answers. They are really looking at a 
student’s comprehension skills and their ability to take in information, 
analyse it, and think critically, says Fenton-Glynn.

What is being assessed, says Williams, is “raw intelligence”, and the ability 
to cope with the course. “We are testing their logical reasoning and want to 
see how they think and how their brains work.”

Aspiring lawyers: your most common questions answered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/06/aspiring-lawyers-your-most-common-questions-answered>
 The fundamental skill they are looking for, says Sam Lucy, director of 
admissions for the Cambridge colleges, is “precision of thinking” – most other 
things, she says, can be taught. She wants to see if students can pick up on 
the subtleties and ambiguities of language that shows they recognise matters 
can be interpreted in different ways. “It’s about have a sensitivity to 
language with almost a mathematical bent.”

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students>, she adds, are not 
there to defend a particular position and should not feel bound to stick to one 
line of argument, particularly if they feel they have gone down the wrong path. 
Tutors will give hints for students to change their minds and want to see if 
they can pick up on them. Sticking doggedly to a position, warns Thomas Krebs, 
law tutor at Brasenose College, Oxford, may indicate that a student is not open 
to being taught. He says it is a fault typically seen in students from some 
independent schools, who have often been told to stick to their guns. “We want 
to see if you are flexible and can be taught.”

Preparation

Given the format and subject matter of the interviews, there is little that 
students can do to prepare – at least practically. The best thing to do, says 
Fenton-Glynn, is to read widely – and not necessarily legal texts, but 
newspapers and blogs.

She recommends the HE+ website <http://www.myheplus.com/>, which allows 
students to explore law, giving guided activities, questions, videos and 
further reading.

Five myths about studying law, debunked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/17/five-myths-about-studying-law-debunked>
And candidates should not get hung up on what to wear. Whether you wear your 
school uniform, a suit or jeans and a T-shirt, the important thing, says 
Williams, is to wear something you feel comfortable in and that enables you to 
perform at your best. Fenton-Glynn agrees: “You are not assessed on your 
appearance. We’re looking for the best students, it’s as simple as that.”

Admissions tutors’ tips

 * “The key message is to be yourself. Come in and let us know who you are, 
and don’t worry about getting things wrong.”

 * “Read and re-read the passage that you are given and then think before you 
speak.”

 * “Come ready to engage and listen carefully to what is being asked.”

 * “Most importantly, try not to get so nervous that you stop thinking 
straight. The interview is only part of the selection process, so it is not the 
case that everything rides on it.” 
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 