
Rotimi Fawole was a football-mad teenager when the Atlanta Olympics began in 
the summer of 1996. Crouched around the family TV, he remembers a summer of 
sitting up late to watch his team compete.

Like most fans, Fawole wasn’t expecting the Dream Team, as the U-23 squad had 
been hopefully christened, to go far. They had lost a pre-tournament friendly 
to Togo and Nigerian coach Willy Bazuaye had been sacked at the last minute and 
replaced by Dutchman Jo Bonfrere.

So when the team beat Argentina 3-2 in a dramatic final 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U6JN1AvxcSE>, in the early hours of the 
morning local time, Nigeria erupted . “The national broadcasting corporation 
allowed random people enter the studio to give shout-outs. It was mad. It was 
incredible. It was a sweet, sweet feeling,” he remembers.

Memories of the historic triumph have been made all the more poignant as news 
broke on Wednesday that this year’s Olympic hopefuls are currently stranded in 
Atlanta – home to their win exactly 20 years ago – due to unpaid flight bills.

Unpaid flight bill grounds Nigeria’s Olympic footballers in Atlanta
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/nigeria-olympic-football-team-stuck-atlanta-unpaid-flight-bill>
With less than 36 hours before their opening match of the men’s football 
tournament, Samson Siasia’s squad were said to be stuck as the charter airline 
hired to fly them on the last leg of their journey refused to leave until they 
had been paid.

One of the frustrated players told the BBC: “We’ve been told to get ready to 
fly out in few hours but that’s been the story since last week.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU6JN1AvxcSE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU6JN1AvxcSE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU6JN1AvxcSE&media=>
 The 1996 final against Argentina. 
A ‘sweet feeling’

The 1996 triumph came during a tumultuous year for Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>. Under a military dictatorship led 
by Sani Abacha, the national team had been forced to boycott the African Cup of 
Nations in South Africa a few months earlier due to the hosts’ criticism of the 
hanging of the activist Ken Saro-Wiwa in the Niger Delta.


To date, the win remains its biggest victory at an international level – one 
that despite the widespread football fever felt across Nigeria, the country’s 
teams have never been able to reproduce.

The team initially qualified as runners-up in their group, winning the first 
two games against Hungary and Japan, but losing to pre-tournament favourites, 
Brazil.

Back in 1996, Abiola Kazeem was at college. Now a popular Lagos-based sports 
journalist, he remembers the excitement when the team made it to the semi-final 
to face Brazil once again.

“We started the competition on a decent note but Brazil came to the tournament 
with a squad stronger than the one that won USA 1994 World Cup. So we lost all 
hope in the semi-final, especially as we quickly went 3-1 down,” he recalls. 
But in an astounding comeback, the team equalised, and then won. Marshalled by 
captain Nwankwo Kanu, support for the team surged. “We earned the world’s 
respect,” Kazeem says. “We stopped being underdogs and became favourites to win 
the trophy.”

The agonising final against Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> also began with the Nigeria 
team consigned to the back foot after a Claudio Lopez goal in the third minute 
and a Hernan Crespo penalty in the 50th. It seemed as though their opponents 
were racing to an early victory, but goals by Daniel Amokachi and Emmanuel 
Amuneke in the 74th and 90th minutes turned the tide in favour of the underdogs.

Joseph Dosu, the team’s goalkeeper at the tournament, remembers the glory of 
that night. “It was fun. We were chatting and dancing and singing all night 
long after we left the pitch. We had done something that no other African team 
had done, so we couldn’t sleep.”

Back in Nigeria, all-night parties took over streets across the country, with 
bars running out of beer and leaving their generators on till dawn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Folympics-football-1996-nigeria-argentina-rio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aa14bd44f4ac006047659757f6dae59f6377db6%2F0_295_2830_1698%2F2830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20ran%20out%20of%20beer'%3A%20the%20night%20Nigeria%20won%20Olympic%20football%20gold%20against%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Folympics-football-1996-nigeria-argentina-rio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20ran%20out%20of%20beer%27%3A%20the%20night%20Nigeria%20won%20Olympic%20football%20gold%20against%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Folympics-football-1996-nigeria-argentina-rio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1aa14bd44f4ac006047659757f6dae59f6377db6%2F0_295_2830_1698%2F2830.jpg>
 Emmanuel Amuneke kisses his gold medal in Atlanta. Photograph: BTS 
National heroes

Upon their return home, the triumphant players were each given a luxury 
apartment together with a plot of land in a new development in an undeveloped 
area of Lagos and a lump sum of 1m naira (£236,000) each, says Dosu. “The 
federal government [also] gave all of us the national honour of the Member of 
the Order of the Nigeria.”

But the success was short-lived. Four years after their momentous win, at 
Sydney in 2000, the Nigeria team exited the competition in the quarter-finals.

What looked like a great African breakthrough on the world stage – which 
started with Zambia’s “sparkle” at the 1988 Olympics and Cameroon’s great 
performances at the World Cup in 1990 and Sydney in 2000 – proved to be 
illusory.

It gave the world a glimpse of what Africa can truly achieve on a world stage
Oluwashina Okeleji 
Kazeem has a theory for why. “Success is usually accidental in Nigeria and 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>,” he says. “Abroad, there’s 
some level of organisation and structure to the game but here, there’s no 
strategy or blueprint – it’s all down to talent. African sports teams succeed 
in spite of chaos.”


Star goalkeeper Dosu was forced to retire soon after the Atlanta win, at the 
age of 23, due to injuries from a car accident, and is now a Fifa-licensed 
agent running a football academy in Lagos.

 Midfielders Austin Okocha and Victor Ikpeba have moved into football 
administration. Ikpeba is also a football pundit on TV, as is Sunday Oliseh, 
another first-team midfielder who went on to play for Juventus and coached the 
Super Eagles national team in 2015-16.

Kanu, who went on to become an Arsenal hero and was named the 1996 African 
Footballer of the Year for his role in the Atlanta win, is one of the most 
decorated African footballers of all time. He is now an international 
businessman and Unicef goodwill ambassador.

But 20 years on, the players lament that national football isn’t doing better. 
The current U-23 team face myriad problems, hampering their chances of winning 
a second Olympic gold.

Oluwashina Okeleji, a sports journalist for the BBC, says scarce funding and 
poor training facilities make it unlikely the team will go far in Rio. “They 
are running on empty tank [there is] no money to keep the boys motivated, 
afford them decent accommodation or pay their allowances and bonuses. Throw in 
the fact that English clubs are not willing to release [Kelechi] Iheanacho, 
[Alex] Iwobi and Mikel [Obi] for the event, and I don’t think they have a 
strong squad.”

Local newspapers recently reported that the team was stranded in its Atlanta 
camp due to financial problems. Other athletes have resorted to starting 
crowdfunding campaigns after the Ministry of Sports emailed the national team 
informing them they had to pay for their own flights to Rio.

But despite the setbacks, the memory of Atlanta still fuels hope for Nigeria’s 
Olympic fans. “It’s two decades yet the memory of that final with Amuneke 
scoring the winner is still fresh. It gave the world a glimpse of what Africa 
can truly achieve on a world stage,” says Okeleji.
 