
Over the next two weeks 2,200 bands and 30,000 music professionals will 
descend upon downtownAustin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> for 
South by Southwest’s music festival. South by Southwest (AKA SXSW or South by) 
began in 1987 with a simple yet bold goal: bring New York and LA’s music 
industries to central Texas. In its first year, organizers hosted four times 
the participants they planned for, an initial success that foreshadowed the 
festival’s steady growth curve. SXSW now hosts music, film, and interactive 
events and has become a key component of Austin’s transformation into an 
internationally recognized music city.

Austin’s locals famously grumble over SXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw>, as visitors bloat the sidewalks and 
strain its facilities. It’s not uncommon to see residents sporting T-shirts 
that say “SXSUX” and “Welcome to Austin, don’t move here.” Despite the 
backlash, however, the festival continues to grow; it has become a critical 
source of income for the city. Last year’s event, for example, pumped $317.2m 
into the economy, according to the organization’s impact report.

Residents protest these changes: the cost of living in Austin has skyrocketed, 
exiling some artists and musicians from the city they helped create, and 
leaving critics concerned over the pressures felt by lower income residents. If 
not the direct cause, SXSW becomes a focal point for this growing unease about 
the city’s changing socio-economic landscape.

The cost of living in Austin has skyrocketed, exiling some artists and 
musicians from the city they helped create

And yet, in an age when cities across the country are tightening budgets and 
facing steep competition for tourist dollars, festivals like SXSW – and their 
consequences – may be taking the place of other cultural institutions like 
museums and performing arts facilities: they are a guaranteed source of income, 
requiring minimal public investment and maximum symbolic impact. A University 
of Chicago study on culture and arts infrastructure, Set In Stone, finds that 
cities have overinvested in arts facilities exceeding proposed budgets and 
underestimating local interest. Austin – with SXSW, Austin City Limits 
festival, and Fun Fun Fun Fest as well as its new Formula 1 racing event – has 
been extraordinarily successful at developing events-based culture, and 
international urban stakeholders are looking to centralTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> for the reasons why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385ed00d1ed8231f18479c35e6cbf7fdaf67d79b%2F0_0_3600_2451%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Austin%2C%20don't%20move%20here'%3A%20why%20local%20backlash%20won't%20stop%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Austin%2C%20don%27t%20move%20here%27%3A%20why%20local%20backlash%20won%27t%20stop%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F385ed00d1ed8231f18479c35e6cbf7fdaf67d79b%2F0_0_3600_2451%2F3600.jpg>
 Outside Austin’s Paramount theater, during the red carpet on day one of SXSW 
2016. Photograph: Larry W. Smith/EPA 
Back in 2007, at Austin’s famous Mohawk club, I was taught a lesson about how 
the city’s particular brand of place-making worked when then-mayor Will Wynn 
jumped on the stage. Speaking to the crowd, Wynn swiftly compared Austin’s 
cultural offerings with those of other major cities: “People ask me when we’ll 
get a major sports franchise, and I tell them, ‘Live music should be our sports 
franchise!’” He went on, listing three things Austin needed to keep true to its 
official motto as the “live music capital of the world”: a walkable nexus of 
venues, a supported community of musicians, and engaged audiences.

In his off-the-cuff cultural benediction, Wynn provided a partial blueprint 
for Austin’s success: a concentration of cultural amenities, a deep pool of 
talent and a local and visiting populace eager to participate in a scene.

After his visit to the Mohawk, Wynn told me that city stakeholders rolled 
their collective eyes at the idea of culture leading the way. Slowly, however, 
the city nurtured its cultural assets, allowing for a density of downtown 
cultural amenities to develop. Venues in the central business district, 
including the Mohawk, provided a focal point for college crowds, other 
countercultural types, and tourists. SXSW serves as a sort of metric for that 
change: as Austin’s downtown scene grew, it lent SXSW the venues and spaces it 
needed to grow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a77062b63f821d6cb79f213eeaf7ce168c937f%2F0_122_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Austin%2C%20don't%20move%20here'%3A%20why%20local%20backlash%20won't%20stop%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Austin%2C%20don%27t%20move%20here%27%3A%20why%20local%20backlash%20won%27t%20stop%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a77062b63f821d6cb79f213eeaf7ce168c937f%2F0_122_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Downtown Austin, during SXSW 2016. Last year’s festival brought $317.2m into 
the economy. Photograph: Larry W. Smith/EPA 
There are direct and indirect costs and benefits to Wynn’s strategy. While 
Austin’s downtown has seen robust growth, its inner core has gentrified, 
homeownership has risen well above the city’s median income, and the city’s 
poor have moved to Austin’s outer ring.

Downtown condo, hotel and residential growth has boomed. When I returned to 
the Mohawk two years later, for example, I saw that the onetime dirt lot across 
the street had transformed into a 120-unit luxury apartment complex called The 
Beverly.

At the same time, musicians and other creatives feel they have become victims 
of the successes they played a part in. Musicians and venue owners claim they 
aren’t seeing the benefits of Austin’s boom. In 2011, the owner of Emo’s and 
co-owner of Antone’s – two downtown Austin standbys – felt the pressures of 
these changes, evoking the gentrification of New York’s East Village to claim 
his venues were priced out of the downtown core, telling Billboard: “We were 
going the way of CBGB.” Perhaps more vitally, Austin’s downtown has grown, but 
it has also become richer, and whiter. A team of sociologists from the 
University of Texas at Austin have tracked the multiple effects of these 
economic changes for those on the bottom of the socio-economic ladder in 
Invisible in Austin: Life and Labor in an American City.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F158ce4fb7a58143f7f464aa9d203d7673e9dc242%2F41_0_3524_2116%2F3524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Austin%2C%20don't%20move%20here'%3A%20why%20local%20backlash%20won't%20stop%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Austin%2C%20don%27t%20move%20here%27%3A%20why%20local%20backlash%20won%27t%20stop%20SXSW&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fsouth-by-southwest-austin-residents-backlash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F158ce4fb7a58143f7f464aa9d203d7673e9dc242%2F41_0_3524_2116%2F3524.jpg>
 At SXSW, a band plays in a bar on sixth street. Some say the gentrification of 
Austin’s downtown evokes that of New York’s East Village. Photograph: Larry W. 
Smith/EPA 
When I returned to the Mohawk two years later, I saw the onetime dirt lot had 
transformed into a 120-unit luxury complex

Austin is the model of a Music City. As the mayors of cities like Phoenix, 
Portland, and Kansas City leave SXSW after their“secret” meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/13/sxsw-us-mayors-tech-jobs-money>
 on Stem-fueled (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math ) economic 
development, they should learn from Austin’s events-based cultural policy as 
well. Festivals can be the foundation of a low risk urban cultural policy with 
long-term rewards, including promoting arts education, developing local media, 
stimulating tourism development and crystallizing a city identity. But these 
urban cultural policies need to be held to a high standard. They must attract 
capital to a city while also maintaining an economic and symbolic 
responsibility to its local communities.

As the 29th SXSW kicks off this week, the Music City will be on full display, 
hitting both high notes and low.Festivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/festivals> will increasingly be a part of 
our city culture. Just as the first SXSW was designed to be a showpiece for 
Austin talent, these large-scale events can and should maintain that commitment 
to their localities.
 