
For a while in the 1990s, Anthony Neilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyneilson> was one of the most reliably 
controversial writers in British theatre. He came to prominence in 1993 with a 
play called Penetrator, about a couple of spliffhead wasters confronted by an 
Awol squaddie threatening anal assault with an 18in bayonet. Two years later, 
The Night Before Christmas had Santa Claus sodomising the Christmas fairy. In 
1997 he achieved his most celebrated stage production with The Censor, a 
mind-boggling work about a pornographer and a film censor, which climaxed in a 
moment of transcendent coprophilia.

But Neilson's latest play, Edward Gant's Amazing Feats of Loneliness, is an 
altogether more chaste affair. "It's a black comedy based round the idea of a 
19th-century travelling show," explains Neilson, a 35-year-old from Edinburgh 
who trained as an actor at the Welsh College of Music and Drama in Cardiff. 
"It's a series of adult fairy tales. One's about a man who is consumed with 
grief who goes to Tibet for trepanatory surgery; another's about a woman who 
has terrible acne, which turns out to be pearls. The core idea is treating 
loneliness and pain in a magic realist way."

Good old-fashioned prurience has always been one of the great pleasures in 
Neilson's work. But he has never stopped there. "To me, sex is a language and 
people are at their most transparent doing it," he says. "The defecation in The 
Censor wasn't to shock, but to do the opposite. It was the most lyrical moment. 
People didn't know how to respond, so it opened up a gap and became more 
interactive. Some people expected more cerebral debate, but The Censor was a 
love story. I wanted to break down intellectual barriers."

All the same, it's not just Neilson's content that is "out there"; his methods 
too are, in his own words, "odd". His "shows", as he likes to call them, are 
all devised and written up on the hoof. Edward Gant was finished just eight 
days before the opening night.

"Casting," he says, "has to be with people who don't need the security blanket 
of a script and who you're going to have an all right time with. It's difficult 
to do outside a pub theatre and I can't afford that any more - which is why I 
haven't done much since The Censor." It is, therefore, a process that requires 
the faith of producers who will leave him be. Now he's getting that faith and 
funding from Simon Stokes, artistic director of Plymouth's Drum Studio.

Another outfit showing that same faith is Lisa Goldman and Emma Schad's 
new-writing company, The Red Room. This was the group that first commissioned 
The Night Before Christmas and The Censor, and it has got behind him for his 
next show, Stitching. Neilson describes it as more like The Censor, with the 
emphasis firmly back on sexuality. It's about a couple who are breaking up, and 
pre-publicity bills it as "his most intimate and explicit work to date".

Neilson doesn't consider himself a pure writer: "I don't have a burning 
ambition to be regarded as a great playwright. Sitting there staring at your 
own brain for hours on end is not a process I hugely enjoy. A real problem with 
a lot of theatre is that they write the life out of plays. Theatre being live 
is not an inconvenience to me - it's to be embraced. Without that raw element 
it feels dead and stagnant. Plays I've written drafts and drafts of may be more 
technically skilful, but they are not better shows."

This doesn't mean that Neilson has finished with scripted theatre. The Royal 
Court has commissioned a play called The Lying Kind - a farce about two 
policeman who have to inform an old couple that their daughter has been killed 
on the motorway.

He is also hoping to get back into film-making after the disappointment of The 
Debt Collector, which Neilson wrote and directed after The Censor. This 
satirical look at the myth of the Scottish hard man, starring Billy Connolly, 
was both funny and harrowing - but couldn't find an American distributor. 
Afterwards, he says, the Channel 4 producers would not speak to him. "I just 
haven't made people enough money," he reflects, "because what I do best is a 
bit odd."

Now he is developing a couple of psychological horror stories. He even hopes 
to make The Censor into a movie, but confesses that there are "a few problems". 
The good news for theatregoers is that he remains committed to his more 
outrageous ideas - ideas that film financiers seldom want to prod with a 
bargepole.

Â· Edward Gant's Amazing Feats of Loneliness is at the Drum Theatre, Plymouth 
(01752 267222), until May 25.
 