
Living 'as a woman' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman> was just 
a starting point. As soon as I entered the NHS pathway and began thereal life 
experience <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_life_experience> I had to ask 
myself: "What sort of woman?"

Establishing this involved rethinking my relationship with the vague social 
construct of 'masculinity' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/26/transgender-juliet-jacques-masculinity-football>
, and separating those traits which had been a facade to help me 'pass' as male 
before transition, from those integral to my character. Simultaneously, whilst 
I knew that changing my body carried no obligation to adopt any socially 
gendered behaviours, presenting as female made it prudent to at least consider 
my ideas of 'femininity', and how 'feminine' I wished to be.

I wrote when discussing 'passing' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman> that 
gender roles are like languages, withmen expected to 'speak' (or perform)  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/29/gender-performance-stage>
their version of 'masculinity', and women 'femininity'. Those who don't talk 
like natives invariably stand out. Transsexual women weren't raised with 
femininity as their 'language' (or toexpress themselves in a 'feminine' manner) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/16/transgender> – and in a 
world that often warns those born male against any display of femininity from a 
young age, and in which those adjudged to get it wrong can beruthlessly attacked
 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/michael-rowe/what-it-says-about-us-whe_b_671373.html>
, this can be a problem.

Unlike languages, which have concrete rules, gender is often defined as much 
by what it isn't as what it is, and learned by doing. Beginning transition, I 
thought more about what it meant to be a woman, and the social inequalities 
that may come with being female-bodied, than what contemporary society deemed 
to be 'feminine'. The two were not inherently linked, and focusing too much on 
appearance and demeanour seemed to me a red herring.

In clothing, I naturally leant more towards 'femme' styles, which just meant 
that I tended to wear dresses and skirts on formal occasions more than 
trousers. Otherwise, I considered gender presentation primarily when I was told 
to – this feedback gradually changed the way I dressed and behaved. Just as my 
peers had criticised me pre-transition when they deemed my demeanour 
insufficiently masculine, so my female friends now advised me when they thought 
my clothes or conduct inappropriately 'unfeminine'.

Of course, femininity is not solely about external things – clothes, cosmetics 
or posture – but by definition, they are the most obvious manifestations of 
individual attitudes towards gender roles, and getting them conspicuously wrong 
can have real social consequences. I was fortunate enough to make my worst 
aesthetic errors in my early twenties, before I started transition, and when I 
began living as female full-time, I was cautious, doing most clothes shopping 
with friends who I knew would tell me if I fell into the trap of dressing too 
young or too old for my age, or in noticeably outmoded styles.

I was particularly wary of this because of the stereotype that persists about 
trans women (and not just in reactionary circles), criticising us for 
conforming to conservative models of femininity. Besides mentioning that it 
rests on the assumption that 'femininity' is reactionary in itself (whichJulia 
Serano <http://www.juliaserano.com/whippinggirl.html>, for example, debunks), 
it's worth considering how this functions on a practical level: many 
transsexual women are most visible when they start transitioning, becoming less 
conspicuous, and thus unnoticed by those looking for hyper-femininity in order 
to reaffirm their prejudices. Gradually they find a style that suits them amid 
a number of conflicting pressures.

When made by women, this particular attack tends to come through hostile 
generalisations <http://my.execpc.com/~dmmunson/tsc2k/StephenWhittle.htm> made 
in purely theoretical realms – I've never had such a critique expressed to me 
personally by any female I've met. Often, these writers (such as that cited 
above, from the 70s) oscillated between blaming thegender identity clinics  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/22/transgender-charing-cross>
and their patients for the way they believed transsexual women to present 
themselves. However, they are long behind the contemporary reality: in the 
past, certain GICs did make rigorous, rather conservative demands of their 
patients' gender presentations, but they've graduallymoved beyond this 
<http://beingdrusilla.wordpress.com/trans-resources/what-happens-at-charing-cross-gic/>
. (Incidentally, have you ever heard anyone, male or female, criticise a 
transsexual man for conforming to masculine stereotypes by, say, wearing jeans 
and having stubble? No? Me neither.)

In any case, these theories became academic soon after I started living as 
female: the abuse from men if I overplayed my femme appearance caused far more 
concern, coming asstreet harassment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/20/street-harassment> with 
violent undertones. The thought process behind what I initially cast as 
transphobia but soon recognised as hatred – and fear ­– of femininity was so 
transparent that I could picture it as a flowchart:
 Transgender femininity flowchart Photograph: Juliet Jacques 
Unavoidably, this also changed the way I presented, but with experience, I 
found modes of self-expression for different occasions that felt right for me. 
I won't say "I feel feminine" or "I feel like a woman" because, besides the 
nebulousness of such statements, it would put me in league withShania Twain 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZJL4UGSbeFg>, which would just be awful. 
Instead, I'll simply say that at this point, I feel perfectly happy with, and 
proud of my femme identity, having found my position on the social construct of 
femininity amid so many conflicting pressures: the same process that any other 
woman goes through, whatever conclusion she comes to – only some years later.

• Juliet Jacques's column appears fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 