
Pre-prepared meals to freeze: any advance on curry, stew, shepherd and cottage 
pies?

Roger Dash, Hampshire 

It's worth remembering that no food will improve with time in the freezer, and 
some will deteriorate. Having said that, some of the meals I make for my deli 
do freeze well. Stuffed chicken breasts and pork tenderloin fly off the shelves 
…

To make the stuffing yourself, finely dice some onions, fresh herbs, spinach, 
mushrooms, chestnuts and perhaps even add some finely chopped and sauteed 
chicken livers or lean minced pork. Try to keep the stuffing moist so it holds 
together, bind with a small amount of fresh breadcrumbs if needed. If you're 
stuffing chicken, make a pocket in the breast, fill with the stuffing, making 
sure it is completely covered by the chicken. For the tenderloin, halve it and 
then make a hole along the length of the loin with a steel or wooden spoon 
handle and widen to allow the stuffing to be pushed in.

If you'd like to freeze a sauce to go with it, you get the best results if the 
sauce has some kind of stabiliser such as cornflour or regular flour. Try 
making a light roux-based sauce with stock. Don't overthicken it, and you can 
add white wine, saffron and fresh herbs. You can finish the sauce by whisking 
in a little butter or double cream if you wish. For best results, freeze 
separately.

Meatballs are easy to make, freeze well and allow you to be adventurous with 
the spicing: use lean minced lamb with cumin, cayenne and a little paprika. 
Balance the spices with fresh parsley, mint and some lemon zest. When cooked, 
freeze individually on a tray then transfer into containers to prevent them 
sticking together.

• Sonya Kidney is a chef and the owner of Soda delicatessen, Oxfordshire
 