
When the new prime minister made her first speech in Downing Street, her 
promise to prioritise the needs of the “just managing” and the “left behind” 
were almost universally welcomed. Putting aside for a moment the reasons why we 
have so many people struggling in these categories – and who is responsible for 
their plight – her speech is at least indicative of the growing number of 
people who are now worried about the consequences of an unequal and divided 
society. Both the political left and right now claim the need to do something 
about it as a matter of urgency.

Making good on Theresa May’s pledge won’t be easy but if there is to be any 
chance of progress, education has to be part of the answer. So we should now 
expect to see, from the new education secretary, a plan that clearly spells out 
how her expanded department will play its part.

Justine Greening doesn’t need grammar schools to bring back selection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/18/justine-greening-grammar-schools-selection>
Justine Greening <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening> takes 
over a department obsessed with chasing ever higher numbers of academies and 
free schools; it sometimes seems as if every penny of departmental money and 
every ounce of political capital has been given over to converting schools from 
one legal category to another. But if ministers are serious about prioritising 
those who have been least well served, they must do some fundamental thinking 
about how they spend the department’s time and money.

I’d want to see two policy areas propelled to the top of the agenda and be 
subject to the attention and resources currently available only to the 
academisation programme: these would be 14-19 vocational and technical 
education, and adult skills.

Despite overall progress in education standards, these two areas remain the 
poor relation. We continually hover near the bottom of any international 
measurement of achievement or progress. We have a lower percentage of adults 
with technical skills; half of the adult population lack basic numeracy skills 
and one in six hasn’t reached a similar level in literacy. This is one reason 
why people end up in low-paid jobs or without work at all – people’s pay 
increases with qualifications. Some 400,000 16- to 24-year-olds are unemployed, 
yet we have a shortage of technicians.

The Sainsbury review of technical education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/08/plans-to-force-academic-or-vocational-choice-on-pupils-over-16>
, published earlier this month, proposed a radically different approach for 
those 16- to 18-year-olds who don’t follow an academic curriculum. Remember, 
these are not a forgotten few but the majority of young people in this age 
group.

Among other things, it recommends 16-year-olds choose between a vocational and 
academic route rather than trying to combine both; it suggests an end to the 
market approach to vocational qualifications, replacing it with a single 
qualification for each pathway and proposes incentivising colleges to find work 
placements for a quarter of a million 17-year-olds.

This report [pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/536046/Report_of_the_Independent_Panel_on_Technical_Education.pdf>
 has huge implications for schools, colleges, employers and most 16- to 
18-year-olds. It is contentious stuff, worthy of widespread study and intense 
debate. Had it been a report on a proposal to change just one part of the 
A-level curriculum, it would have received just that.

But the battle of ideas that should have followed the launch of the Sainsbury 
report could hardly be said to be resounding around the chattering classes or 
the radio studios.

Plans to force academic or vocational choice on pupils over 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/08/plans-to-force-academic-or-vocational-choice-on-pupils-over-16>
The same argument can be made about adult skills. This part of our education 
system is being drained of resources. Opportunities for adults to get back to 
study or update their skills are too often the first to be cut, yet these are 
the things that could help the “just managing” and “left behind” to get on and 
thrive. And it all happens with too little attention or protest.

No one is against skills and adult learning but it has never been our 
collective priority. Vocational courses are great but usually for someone 
else’s children, and although we sign up to the importance of further education 
and workplace learning, our attention and the government’s resources are drawn 
to universities and schools.

Any minister who is serious about widening opportunity must grasp this 
problem. Bringing further education and vocational skills into the same 
Whitehall department as schools and universities gives Greening a chance to do 
so. But she will really have to make it a priority and steer her particular 
ship of state in a different direction.

Do I feel optimistic that this might happen? Sadly not – but on this, I would 
be delighted to be proved wrong.
 