
“Gee, he can use the word, Jeb can,” a Confederate soldier says of his general 
in one of Barry Hannah’s stories of the American civil war. That same 
wonderment and admiration characterises many responses to Hannah’s work, which 
re-energises prose in the way that one of his favourite musicians,Jimi Hendrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jimi-hendrix>, re-energised the sound that 
could be wrung from a guitar.

In Hannah’s stories of the deep south – a territory as crazed and bloody as 
the one Flannery O’Connor described 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/06/brief-survey-short-story-flanner-oconnor>
 – violence and wild humour meet in line after unpredictable line. A 
particularly hated adversary is “overmurdered” by a battle-crazed Confederate 
soldier; a doctor enduring a crisis of confidence is “an unshucked oyster, 
hurtling on the winds, all air, gonad and gut”; inRide, Fly, Penetrate, Loiter 
<http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/41397327?uid=3738032&uid=2129&uid=2&uid=70&uid=4&sid=21104246214281>
, the one-eyed biker Maximum Ned describes receiving the gift of tongues when 
he was stabbed in the eye:

“Now I talk white, Negro, some Elizabethan, some Apache. My dark eye pierces 
and writhes and brings up odd talk in me sometimes. Under the patch, it burns 
deep for language. I will write sometimes and my bones hurt. I believe heavily 
in destiny at such moments.”

There is something of the preacher to Maximum Ned, and to many of Hannah’s 
narrators, although it is a strange church that would grant them its pulpit.

Hannah was never in the military, but was to an extent shaped by Vietnam and 
his opposition to it. The civil war, Vietnam, Desert Storm and the Iraq war all 
provide settings for his stories. The first two, in particular, are evoked as 
pits of cruelty and sudden, shocking death; in Midnight and I’m Not Famous Yet 
a soldier in Vietnam reflects: “It seemed to me my life had gone straight from 
teenage giggling to horror.” Yet even outside war zones Hannah’s world remains 
harsh, messy with rape, murder and bigotry. The society he describes is 
rupturing, as inThrough Sunset Into the Raccoon Night 
<http://markzipoli.blogspot.co.uk/2012/06/through-sunset-into-raccoon-night-one.html>
, where the narrator mentions seeing “a woman in an unknown rage drive 
repeatedly at high speed around the lot of a Sonic drive-in until she piled 
into a stone picnic table and killed herself”. Hannah wrote several 
post-apocalyptic stories, but his modern America is so chaotic and desolate it 
can be difficult, for a page or two, to tell them apart.

Hannah’s stories often describe extraordinary events: a decades-long missile 
war between America and the Middle East; an encounter betweenWilliam Burroughs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/01/william-burroughs-junky-will-self>
 and a werewolf; two fighter pilots searching for perfect last words as their 
jet crashes. Yet some of his best work features nothing more outlandish than a 
group of old men talking at the end of a jetty. Each of Hannah’s four 
collections begins with a fishing story, a patterning that lends the jetty and 
the water a special significance. “Obviously, I’m obsessed with the people on 
the pier,”Hannah told Bomb Magazine in 2001 
<http://bombmagazine.org/article/2436/barry-hannah>, describing them as 
“desperate and older and almost frantic to have a moment of clarity and some 
peace”. InWater Liars <http://gardenandgun.com/article/water-liars-barry-hannah>
, one of Hannah’s greatest achievements, that peace is disturbed when the old 
timers’ tall stories are interrupted by a newcomer who describes finding his 
daughter having sex with a stranger on the lakeshore. His interlocutors are 
disgusted: “I wouldn’t’ve told that,” one says. But the story resonates with 
the narrator, who has been obsessing over “the bodies that had trespassed” his 
wife before he met her. Hannah cracks open the men’s banter like a crab shell, 
revealing the meat of the male psyche lying beneath. Hypocritically, the 
narrator cannot bear his wife possessing a sexual history like his own:

“I dropped my beer and grew suddenly sick. Wyatt asked me what was wrong. I 
could see my wife in 1960 in the group of high schoolers she must have had. My 
jealousy went out into the stars of the night above me. I could not bear the 
roving carelessness of teenagers, their judgeless tangling of wanting and 
bodies. But I was the worst back then. In the mad days back then, I dragged the 
panties off girls I hated and talked badly about them once the sun came up.”

Water Liars is from Hannah’s debut collection, Airships (1978), which 
alongside its successor, Captain Maximus (1985), was edited byGordon Lish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/aug/29/gordon-lish-80-raymond-carver>
. It is illuminating to compare those slim, spare books – at times as 
astringent asHemingway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/15/brief-survey-short-story-ernest-hemingway>
 or evenBeckett <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/beckett> – with Bats Out 
of Hell (1993) and High Lonesome (1996), where the words form page-filling 
slabs. Hannahcredits Lish with teaching him the “music of the empty white” 
<http://gardenandgun.com/article/barry-hannahs-long-shadow>, but his own 
instincts were for maximalism: extended narratives in which incidents succeed 
one another in a manic picaresque.

At their best, like the brilliant Vietnam-era bildungsroman Testimony of 
Pilot, these long stories possess a drive and sweep that capture the changes 
and losses that accumulate over a lifetime. When they don’t succeed – and 
several don’t, particularly in the later collections – their effect is 
confusion and fatigue. By Hannah’s own account, Lish would tell him “not to 
write so damn fucking much”, but it is advice he cheerily ignored in the latter 
part of his career.

Throughout his writing life Hannah, who died in 2010, met with charges of 
racism and misogyny. Even he couldn’t mount a convincing defence against the 
latter: “I don’t think there’s true misogyny in my work,”he told one 
interviewer half-heartedly 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/5438/the-art-of-fiction-no-184-barry-hannah>
, before surrendering completely:


“Remember, I started writing in the 60s. I have changed through the decades.” 
This aspect of his work reaches its nadir with a murderous rape in the 
grotesque western horror Ride Westerly for Pusalina, a story even Hannah 
regretted: “I don’t think that really violent thing with Pusalina, which caused 
me a few attacks for misogyny, I don’t think it’s a great story. I just had 
some fun with my love of the west, thought I’d put a vampire nun in the west. 
It’s one of those ideas that comes down the pike and you just do it.”

The charge of racism is more complicated. The Ku Klux Klan is excoriated in 
stories such as Scandale d’Estime and the late storyLastward, Deputy James 
<http://www.fivechapters.com/2014/lastward-deputy-james/>, where he describes 
southerners who didn’t protest segregation as “good Germans … staying quiet 
when a heinous thing is about like Hitler”. Yet in the autobiographical Uncle 
High Lonesome, Hannah takes disquieting care to balance his uncle Pete’s racist 
language and deliberate humiliation of his black workers with an account of how 
he “healed their rifts, brought the men cartons of cigarettes. He got them 
medical treatment and extended credit even to children who had run away to 
Chicago.”

Hannah’s father was a segregationist, but the writer himself spoke of how “I 
learned early on to love black folks. We were much closer, even in the days of 
separation, because they were yardmen and maids. Whatever you say about that, 
we talked. Took care of each other.” To me, that seems togive Jim Crow an 
uncomfortably easy ride 
<http://library.duke.edu/digitalcollections/behindtheveil/>. Writing in the New 
York Review of Books in 1985 about Hannah’s frequent use of the word “nigger”,
James Wolcott concluded 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1985/jun/27/southern-discomfort/>: 
“Barry Hannah is too gifted to keep dipping his straw into the same dirty 
water.” More forgiving critics sometimes defend the racist and misogynist 
aspects of Hannah’s writing as purely ironic or satirical, or the unfortunate 
but worthwhile cost of his linguistic talent. But it is worth noting that these 
judgements come mostly from white males, for whom that price is easier to pay.

So you don’t come to Hannah for moral uplift; and you don’t come to him for 
structure or plot, either. “Plot has never interested me,” Hannah told an 
interviewer in 1997, whileJohn Updike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jan/10/biography.fiction> remarked that 
“all Mr Hannah’s narratives are discontinuous”. Somewhat like Updike, in fact, 
it is language that acts as Hannah’s hook, and with the right reader it buries 
itself deep and fast.As the writer Colin Barrett describes it 
<http://www.stingingfly.org/sample/colin-barrett-barry-hannahs-even-greenland>, 
his language is “syntactically skewed and relentlessly showy, and discharges 
joy in concussive bouts”. It is a ride, a provocation; the sound of an artist, 
to paraphrase one of his characters, “banging the walls of space and time”. 
What do you come to Barry Hannah for? You come to him for those moments when a 
drunkard paints his house instead of cleaning it; you come to wallow in the 
“petty desires” and “murky ratlike aggression” of his narrators; you come for a 
closing line like “We were both crucified by the truth”; and for declarations 
of love like “I wanted to sleep in her uterus with my foot hanging out”. 
Because like the soldier said, gee, he can really use the word.

Next: Nikolai Leskov.
 