
In The Apple in the Dark 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/838038.The_Apple_in_the_Dark>, the novel 
Clarice Lispector <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clarice_Lispector> completed in 
1956, she writes about a man "abashed in front of the white page". His task is 
"not to write down something that already existed but to create something that 
would then come to exist". This challenge is one all Lispector's work confronts 
as it cuts away, sentence by sentence, at conventional conceptions of reality. 
Again and again she and her characters – the latter often against their will – 
penetrate beyond the everyday into what she describes in one story as "stranger 
activity". Her vivid and mysterious bibliography is the fascinating record of 
this process.

In Brazil (her family, fleeing anti-Jewish pogroms, emigrated from Ukraine in 
1921 when she was still an infant), Clarice Lispector became that unusual 
combination: an avant-garde artist who is also a household name. Fame arrived 
in the 1960s, two decades after she published her first book and a decade 
before she died, aged 56, from ovarian cancer. She had no particular desire for 
fame, just as she had no particular desire to be identified as an experimental 
writer.She never understood why readers found her work opaque 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w1zwGLBpULs>, while the fact that she 
consistently attempted new things in her writing was, for her, simply necessary 
to her aim: "In painting, as in music and literature, what is called abstract 
so often seems to me the figurative of a more delicate and more difficult 
reality, less visible to the naked eye."

The difficulty is plainly discernible, the delicacy less so. "Probing the way 
in which consciousness perceives objects," one of her translators writes, 
"Lispector creates a world of exciting and terrifying perceptions." This world 
does not exclude tenderness or humour, but it is often coloured by an 
existential horror; as a reader of The Buffalo reported, "the whole story 
seemed to be made of entrails". In Love (1952), a Rio de Janeiro housewife, 
Ana, is jolted from her complacency by a glimpse from a tram of a blind man 
chewing gum, the mechanical movement of his jaw making him "appear to smile 
then suddenly stop smiling, to smile and stop smiling". Ana flees the tram and 
takes refuge in the city'sBotanical Garden 
<http://digitaljournal.com/img/6/8/7/0/1/4/i/8/4/5/o/7-JBotanico.jpg>, but the 
way she perceives the world has altered radically:
 "And suddenly, uneasily, she felt she had fallen into a trap. In the Garden a 
secret labour was being done that she was starting to perceive. On the trees 
the fruits were black, sweet as honey. On the ground there were dry seeds full 
of circumvolutions, like little rotting brains. The bench was stained with 
purple juices. The waters rustled with intense softness. The luxurious legs of 
a spider were fastened to the tree trunk. The crudity of the world was restful. 
And death was not what we thought." 
As those last lines suggest, Ana's nightmarish vision is not so easily 
characterised as nightmare alone. Lispector's relationship with religion was 
complex but she had a mystic's regard for any level of perception that 
transcended blinkered normality, no matter how dreadful the revelation. 
Epiphanies of the Joycean type are a constant throughout her shifting body of 
work, but they are unusually raw and vertiginous. In one story the narrator 
declares that she "suddenly saw the chasm of the world. What I saw was as 
anonymous as a belly split open for an intestinal operation"; elsewhere a woman 
breaks a tooth and "instead of going to the dentist, she threw herself out of 
the apartment window".Lispector's biographer Benjamin Moser 
<http://twolinespress.com/that-other-word-episode-3-may-2012-benjamin-moser> 
compares her to Kafka, in that her investigations often locate, in a spiritual 
sense, "locked doors, blocked passageways and generalised punishment". This 
moment-to-moment uncertainty makes reading her stories, in Caetano Veloso's 
description, "a dangerous adventure".

This sense of adventure applies not only to Lispector's concepts: it is 
endemic at the level of the sentence too. Paradoxes and sudden shifts lie in 
wait, and inattentive readers can rapidly lose their way. A story like The Hen 
and the Egg begins plainly enough – "In the morning I see the egg on the 
kitchen table" – but quickly spirals off into something like a prayer, a 
philosophical meditation, a language game and an absurdist monologue, flipping 
between grace, humour and unease. Moser draws a parallel between it and the 
"cubist portraits in words" attempted by Gertrude Stein. In The Fifth Story, 
another masterpiece, a woman prepares a mixture of sugar, flour and gypsum to 
kill the cockroaches that emerge in her apartment each night "like evil 
secrets" (cockroaches, a recurring symbol, appear even in Lispector's books for 
children). The story begins five times, the line "I was complaining about the 
cockroaches" becoming an embarkation point for a series of hypnotic and 
troubling explorations of death and morality.

The structure of The Fifth Story echoes Søren Kierkegaard's Fear and Trembling 
<http://www.ccel.org/k/kierkegaard/selections/trembling.htm>. In the Exordium, 
that book's opening section, Kierkegaard presents us with a man who tells 
himself the Old Testament story of Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac four times, 
each version changing the emphasis as a cubist painting might simultaneously 
present a face from multiple perspectives. The man is trying to understand the 
story, but the repetition suggests the failure of the attempt. ForZadie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/zadiesmith> this curious beginning to 
Kierkegaard's treatise is "a rehearsal: it lays out a series of rational 
explanations the better to demonstrate their poverty as explanations", and 
Lispector's narrator, too, is hunting a meaning that continues to elude her. 
When she views the "huge and brittle" dead cockroaches from her "frigid height 
as a human being", she is like a cruel god observing slaughtered innocents, her 
motives increasingly unknowable even to herself. "Using her experimental 
technique," writes K David Jackson, "Lispector has created another kind of 
labyrinth of stories, as in a hall of mirrors or a recurring dream full of the 
statues of death."

Labyrinths proliferate, both in Lispector's work and in critical responses to 
it. Her translator Giovanni Pontiero notes that "she is less interested in 
conventional plot structure than a labyrinth of perceptions".Blake Butler finds 
her sentences <http://www.vice.com/read/the-dark-logic-of-clarice-lispector> 
"wired with psychosis, fixated on some kind of understanding of the dark maze 
of every day". In the late story In Search of Dignity (1974), a woman becomes 
lost first in the endless corridors of the Maracanã stadium, and later in the 
suddenly unrecognisable streets of Rio. Lispector's fiction swarms with such 
moments of threatening intensity. The feminist theoristHélène Cixous 
<http://www.egs.edu/faculty/helene-cixous/biography/>, who took up Lispector's 
work in the 1970s as a prime example of what she calls"écriture féminine" 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89criture_f%C3%A9minine>, identifies "an 
intense worry" running through her work. In its blend of high tension and 
domestic settings (the most common Lispector character is the housewife) it 
recalls elements ofKatherine Mansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/aug/05/abriefsurveyoftheshortst9>
, whom Lispector adored, andVirginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>, whom she read only after 
reviewers noted similarities between them.

In fact Lispector was often compared with writers – Woolf, Joyce, Proust, 
Jean-Paul Sartre – whom she then went on to read for the first time. The 
critics' attempts are understandable: the more singular a writer, the more they 
try to find comparisons that ensnare the work. But read enough Lispector and 
you realise she has a habit of slipping these nets; she both is and is not a 
feminist, a postmodernist, an absurdist, a mystic. Rather than find an existing 
style that suited her project, she embarked on an individual quest to locate, 
as she put it in her first novel, "the symbol of the thing in the thing 
itself": the word that doesn't merely gesture towards something, but becomes 
it. Twenty years later, in 1962, she told an audience at the University of 
Texas that "there are some young writers who are a bit over-intellectualised. 
It seems to me that they are not inspired by, shall we say, 'the thing itself', 
but by other literature, 'the thing already literalised'." In her writing she 
was prepared to dispatch with all else – even words themselves – to get at this 
essence:
 "Since one feels obliged to write, let it be without obscuring the space 
between the lines with words … The word fishes for something that is not a 
word. And when that non-word takes the bait, something has been written. Once 
the space between the lines has been fished, the word can be thrown away with 
relief." 
Translations from the work are by Benjamin Moser, Giovanni Pontiero and Alexis 
Levitin.

Next: Jean Rhys
 