
When Gogol died in 1852 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/aug/18/nikolai-gogol-fiction>,
Ivan Turgenev <http://www.encyclopedia.com/topic/Ivan_Sergeyevich_Turgenev.aspx>
, the man whom many in Russia were calling his successor, was arrested for 
writing an obituary in praise of the great writer. In fact, the official reason 
was a pretext. Turgenev had already displeased the tsarist authorities with his 
series of sketches of rural Russian life, published in the journal the 
Contemporary between 1847 and 1851, and collected in 1852 asSketches from a 
Hunter's Album 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140445220>
.

This book, which it is claimed influenced Tsar Alexander II's decision to 
emancipate the serfs in 1861 
<http://www.historytoday.com/michael-lynch/emancipation-russian-serfs-1861-charter-freedom-or-act-betrayal>
, comprises vignettes of peasant life as observed by a landowning hunter much 
like Turgenev. Not even Gogol had presented such rounded portrayals of serfs 
before. As the translator Richard Freeborn notes, while Turgenev would go on to 
greater things in both the short story and the novel, he was quite aware of the 
book's merits. At the time of publication he wrote:
 "Much has come out pale and scrappy, much is only just hinted at, some of 
it's not right, oversalted or undercooked – but there are other notes pitched 
exactly right and not out of tune, and it is these notes that will save the 
whole book." 
Of these, perhaps the one pitched most perfectly of all is Bezhin Lea. This 
masterful story begins with a description of a July day, and close rendering of 
the natural world represent one of the deep pleasures of Turgenev's writing. As
Edmund Wilson <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/18/usa.biography> 
writes, in Turgenev "the weather is never the same; the descriptions of the 
countryside are quite concrete, and full, likeTennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson>'s, of exact observation of 
how cloud and sunlight and snow and rain, trees, flowers, insects, birds and 
wild animals, dogs, horses and cats behave, yet they are also stained by the 
mood of the person who is made to perceive them".

Returning home at the end of this glorious day the hunter becomes lost, and as 
night falls he passes through a landscape of endless fields, standing stones 
and terrifying gulfs. The mood is that of fairytale, but rather than 
supernatural beings, the hunter eventually finds only a group of boys guarding 
a drove of horses. They are gathered around a fire telling ghost stories. 
Throughout his story Turgenev, the committed realist, repeatedly balances the 
unreal, the ghostly, with the simply human, fantastical terror with everyday 
pathos and empathy. The little ring of storytellers, gathered in a small patch 
of flickering light on a vast plain, effortlessly coexists as concrete setting 
and existential symbol. At the story's end, when the narrator reports that one 
of the boys died the following year, he moves quickly to defuse any 
supernatural tension. AsFrank O'Connor notes, Turgenev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/02/classics.julianbarnes> did not 
want "the shudder of children sitting over the fire on a winter night, thinking 
of ghosts and banshees while the wind cries about the little cottage – but that 
of the grown man before the mystery of human life".

Although Turgenev did occasionally explore supernatural themes, particularly 
towards the end of his life, his greatest achievements in the short story have 
love and youth as their main themes. He was at his best when writing 
autobiographically, and two of his finest stories, the novellaFirst Love 
<http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/t/turgenev/ivan/first/complete.html> (1860) and 
Punin and Baburin 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/8871/8871-h/8871-h.htm#link2H_4_0012> (1874), 
draw deeply on his own memories. Near the end of his life, Turgenev said of 
First Love: "It is the only thing that still gives me pleasure, because it is 
life itself, it was not made up … First Love is part of my experience." This 
long and beautiful story powerfully evokes both a teenage boy's experience of 
love, and the complex sorrow of an older man looking back on his youth. The 
story unfolds over a summer when the narrator, Vladimir Petrovich, becomes one 
of a number of suitors clustered around Zinaida, whose mother is an 
impoverished princess using her daughter as bait to lure a wealthy husband. 
This story sees the first full flowering of Turgenev's ability to create and 
move between distinct, remarkably vivid characters and points of view, 
displaying whatVS Pritchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/feb/22/vspritchett> calls the 
"curious liquid gift which became eventually supreme inProust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/marcelproust>".

If this liquid sense infuses Turgenev's work as a whole, its point of origin 
is the individual phrase. Wilson writes: "Turgenev is a master of language, he 
is interested in words in a way that the other great 19th-century Russian 
novelists – with the exception of Gogol – are not."Constance Garnett 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/11/07/051107fa_fact_remnick>, whose 
translations introduced most of the great 19th-century Russians to English 
readers, considered Turgenev to be the most difficult of them to translate 
"because his style is the most beautiful". "What an amazing language!" Chekhov 
wrote when rereadingTurgenev's 1866 story The Dog 
<http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/t/turgenev/ivan/dog/>. Whether writing of ponies 
groomed until they are "sleek as cucumbers" or the "steam and glitter of an 
April thaw", the large edifices of his stories are always built brick by brick, 
with immense and detailed care. InDeath 
<http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/t/turgenev/ivan/t93s/chapter16.html>, from the 
Sketches, he describes the scene of a terrible accident:
 "We found the wretched Maxim on the ground. Ten or so peasants were gathered 
round him. We alighted from our horses. He was hardly groaning at all, though 
occasionally he opened wide his eyes, as if looking around him with surprise, 
and bit his blue lips. His chin quivered, his hair was stuck to his temples and 
his chest rose irregularly: he was clearly dying. The faint shadow of a young 
lime tree ran calmly aslant his face." 
That last detail is a master's touch, all at once visually anchoring the 
scene, conveying nature's indifference to Maxim's plight, suggesting the border 
between existence and oblivion, and underlining the solitariness of the moment 
of death as the observer notes a detail that Maxim never would. Turgenevmay not 
have written quite as often as Tolstoy about the actual moment of dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/mar/15/short-story-leo-tolstoy>
, but was perhaps equally skilled at summoning the twin currents of dread and 
banality it so often encompasses.

Turgenev is a poet of disappointment, whose rapturous descriptions of youth 
are always filtered through an older consciousness aware that it "melts away 
like wax in the sun". The stunning evocation of childhood in Punin and Baburin 
begins with the words "I am old and ill now". In an essay of 1860, Turgenev 
divides heroes into prevaricating Hamlets and mad Don Quixotes, who get things 
done. As that distinction suggests, action in his work is often troublingly 
problematic – Baburin's costly outspokenness before his masters, Harlov's fatal 
destruction of his home in Turgenev's version of King Lear,A Lear of the Steppes
 <http://www.eldritchpress.org/ist/lear.htm#lear> – while inaction proves no 
more profitable (witness the pathetic figure described inThe Diary of a 
Superfluous Man 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/574296/superfluous-man>). Yet for 
all this sorrow and anguish, which ledHenry James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/henryjames> to speak of Turgenev's 
collections as "agglomerations of gloom", his stories pulse with a life as 
vivid as any in literature. InFathers and Sons 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/search.do>, one of the great 
novels of the 19th century, Turgenev writes of a character's "quiet 
attentiveness to the broad wave of life constantly flowing in and around us". 
It's this that his work channels, a wave that carries us ineluctably to our 
end, but that also contains all the powerful, fleeting beauty of existence. As 
Vladimir Petrovich says of love, so Turgenev seems to think of life: "I 
wouldn't want it ever to be repeated, but I would have considered myself 
unfortunate if I'd never experienced it."

• Translations from the work are by Isaiah Berlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/16/isaiah-berlin-letters-modern-youth>
, Richard Freeborn, Constance Garnett and Michael R Katz.

Next: Sherwood Anderson
 