
 In 1940 a book was published in Buenos Aires that drew together a vast array 
of fantastic tales, from Petronius and Pu Songling to Edgar Allan Poe and 
Kafka. Its editors were three Argentinian bibliophiles: Silvina Ocampo, her 
husbandAdolfo Bioy Casares <http://www.ndbooks.com/author/adolfo-bioy-casares/>
, and their best friend, Jorge Luis Borges. All three were gifted creators, as 
well as aficionados, of the fantastic. The extraordinary worlds Borges created 
are famous, andBioy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/mar/19/guardianobituaries2>’s mysterious 
islands, particularly the one described in his novelThe Invention of Morel 
<http://www.nyrb.com/products/the-invention-of-morel?variant=1094932045>, are 
relatively well known. Far less trodden, however, are the forking pathways of
Silvina Ocampo <>’s fiction. 

The stories collected in The Book of Fantasy, in Daniel Balderston’s 
translation, range from ghost and horror stories to mysteries with twist 
revelations, to the more deeply and less explicably strange. Similarly, 
Ocampo’s stories – 154 of them across seven collections published between 1937 
and 1988 – describe a line that begins in 19th-century-style horror and moves 
through a phase of formal inventiveness, before entering the unique, disturbing 
fantastical atmosphere of her mature period: a world where strange events 
overwhelm mundane bourgeois reality, where motives are obscure, and where a 
great cruelty presides over life. Ocampo, by all accounts a pleasant, playful 
person, and despite possessing a gift for humour, nevertheless enjoyed her 
work’s reputation for cruelty. In 1980 she told an interviewer that her work 
had been denied Argentina’s National Prize for Literature because it was “too 
cruel”. Later in that decade, when she was working with the translator Daniel 
Balderston on her first collection in English (a language into which two-thirds 
of her stories remain untranslated), she insisted, he writes, “that we choose 
her cruelest stories”.

If Ocampo’s earlier work is more conventional than what came later, it is 
still often remarkable. The long story The Impostor is a brilliant mystery in 
which an 18-year-old student, Luis Maidana, travels to an isolated ranch to spy 
on the son of a friend of his father. The two grow close, but the narrator’s 
essential treachery adds tension to the development of their relationship, as 
does the growing sense that an unpleasant secret lies at the story’s heart; “I 
felt as if I were blind”, Luis writes in his journal: “During the day, the 
intense light, and at night, the darkness, both obscured my vision.” Like a 
painter (she studied withGiorgio de Chirico 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/artists/1106> and Fernand Léger), Ocampo 
understands the power of distortion, as when Luis notices his friend Armando’s 
bedroom: “all of the room’s angles were askew and it was far too long”, while 
at one point, playing detective in the nearest town to the ranch, he takes a 
walk that describes the quintessential Ocampo transition: a journey from 
normality into strangeness that might be the work of external or internal 
forces.


Ashamed, I slunk like a shadow through the streets of the town following that 
horrid woman. The streets seemed more twisting and ominous to me, infinite and 
at every step filthier, as if winding through a swamp.

The Impostor is, in a sense, Poe’s William Wilson stood on its head: that is, 
the doppelgänger’s side of the story. But, ingenious as it is, its epilogue 
rounds off the narrative in a way Ocampo’s later work would reject. In her 
finest collections, The Fury (1959) and The Guests (1961), she develops systems 
of reticence and mystery that prove, beyond any doubt, how willing she is to 
build the structure alone: we can supply the meaning ourselves, if we crave it. 
This is perhaps one of the reasons why she so strongly favours child narrators, 
who can report the most unusual events in a sort of moral and relational 
deadpan. “The child”, as the academic Patricia N Klingenberg writes in a study 
of Ocampo, “provides an ideal vantage from which to project the estranged 
world”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-silvina-ocampo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444314553001%2F7a8af157-6f2f-44ca-b655-da9580e44c22-1349x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brief%20survey%20of%20the%20short%20story%3A%20Silvina%20Ocampo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-silvina-ocampo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brief%20survey%20of%20the%20short%20story%3A%20Silvina%20Ocampo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-silvina-ocampo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444314553001%2F7a8af157-6f2f-44ca-b655-da9580e44c22-1349x2040.jpeg>
 Jorge Luis Borges at home in 1983. Photograph: Christopher Pillitz/Getty Images
Consider The Clock House, which takes the form of a “what I did on my 
holidays” exercise written by a schoolboy. He describes a baptism party at 
which a local watchmaker, a hunchback, is first patronised by the guests, and 
then, seemingly, violently assaulted. The narrator misses precisely what 
happens because, having got drunk at the party (he is nine), he starts throwing 
up. At the end of the story the watchmaker is missing and the contents of his 
shop have been driven away in a van. Certainly he has been humiliated, but has 
he also been hurt, or even murdered?


In The Photographs we attend another party, this time the birthday celebration 
of a paralysed 14-year-old girl. Ocampo’s embittered, gossipy narrator creates 
an unpleasant portrait of the event, during which the girl is arranged in 
various poses as a photographer commemorates the occasion:

She should stand up,” the guests said.

 An aunt objected: “And if her feet come out wrong?”

 “Don’t worry,” responded the friendly Spirito. “If her feet come out wrong, 
I’ll cut them off later.”

 The party reaches its grotesque nadir when the paralysed girl turns out not 
to be sleeping, but dead, her “head [hanging] down from her neck like a melon”. 
As the horrific discovery is made, the final, chilling image is that of some of 
the guests slipping cakes into their pockets “on the sly”.

Part of the pleasure of reading Ocampo – or rather the thrill, as some of her 
work is far from pleasurable – is never knowing what the next sentence will 
bring. As the writer Welch D Everman has observed: “What happens at any given 
point in an Ocampo story is not necessarily the result of what has come before, 
nor does it necessarily determine what will follow. Often what happens is 
simply what happens, beyond accounting, beyond explanation”.

Thus Were Their Faces by Silvina Ocampo review – dark, masterly tales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/16/thus-were-their-faces-by-silvina-ocampo-review-dark-masterly-tales>
Illogic and paradox shoot from the strange soil of her fiction, where dark, 
perturbing situations thrive: a basement-dwelling outcast who, when she is 
thirsty, drinks her own sweat; a murderous dressmaker; one woman here who bites 
off her own body parts; another there with a face in the palm of her hand; a 
housebreaker’s death-stalked encounter with a fortune-telling child; a 
gardener, arms stuck in the earth, transforming into vegetable matter; a group 
of children who gleefully lock their mothers in a room (“‘That’s better, that 
way they’ll leave us alone’”) and burn them to death.


The range of Ocampo’s invention is impressive, but she frequently returns to 
two themes. The first is the ability to see the future, which she complicates 
by making its nature uncertain: can these characters predict the future, or in 
fact will it into being? Their powers cause them anxiety, and also rob life of 
its interest. Lacking the unpredictability that Ocampo’s fiction habitually 
revels in, life becomes a drab procession. In Autobiography of Irene (1948) the 
narrator regrets that “I’ll never arrive anywhere for the first time. I 
recognise everything,” while in Magush the windows of a building show the 
narrator glimpses of his future life:


In one of the windows I saw, for my sins, the woman who later became my 
fiancée embracing my rival … Later, when I lived through these events, the 
reality seemed a little faded to me, and my fiancée perhaps less beautiful.

 After these experiences, my interest in living what was destined for me 
diminished.

If there is one story where Ocampo’s obsessions intersect, where, in 
Klingenberg’s description, “several of Ocampo’s fantastic themes, the magic 
object, the prediction of the future, the idea of transformation or 
reincarnation, as well as the theme of the double, come together”, it is inThe 
House Made of Sugar <http:// 
http://blog.longreads.com/2015/02/14/the-house-made-of-sugar/>(1959). It is a 
compact enigma of a story, one that ensnares the reader in uncertainty from the 
first. It appears to be a tale of possession: a woman called Cristina, who 
insists on living only in properties where no one has lived before, moves into 
a house she thinks is brand new, and is slowly taken over by the personality of 
its previous occupant. Her husband, who lied to her about the history of the 
house because he thinks her fears are delusional, narrates the story, and from 
its opening lines creates an opposition between his rationality and her 
irrationality. But no sooner does this voice of reason make its case, than he 
lists another set of apparently acceptable superstitions.

I tried to combat these absurd manias. I made her see that she had a broken 
mirror in her room, yet she insisted on keeping it, no matter how I insisted 
that it was better to throw broken mirrors into water on a moonlit night to get 
rid of bad luck. She was never afraid if the lamps in the house went out all of 
a sudden; despite the fact that it was definitely an omen of death, she would 
light any number of candles without thinking twice. She always left her hat on 
the bed, a mistake nobody else made.

That he neglects to acknowledge the paradox is telling. On the surface of the 
story we are given an account of the doubling of Cristina and Violeta, the 
mysterious previous resident, but hidden in plain view is another doubling: 
that of the caring husband, appalled by what is happening to his wife, and the 
same man as paranoid jailer, lying to and imprisoning his wife to, so he 
claims, protect her.

Soon he is eavesdropping on Cristina’s conversations and following her in the 
streets, and although he presents evidence of a sort that some sort of 
supernatural transference is taking place, the possibility also exists that he 
is completely delusional, and that he and Cristina have simply grown apart. 
Ocampo makes none of these doubts explicit in the text, but she invests the 
story with enough negative space and uncertainty that it makes sense to 
question the husband’s account.

Unlike her contemporaries Bioy and Borges, whose fictions tended to operate in 
their own fantastical zones, deep in the past, or in an alternate reality 
altogether, Ocampo creates recognisable domestic settings that she then infects 
with strangeness. In her world a birthday party can become a funeral, objects 
collected in dreams can be brought into the waking world, and lovers flirt by 
exchanging stories of death. Even children’s play is an occasion on which a 
darker reality can be revealed, as in The Prayer (1959), where boys’ 
play-fighting turns out to be a struggle to the death. “Then they scattered”, 
the narrator remarks. “The boys ran away. I discovered that I had watched a 
crime, a crime in the midst of what at first seemed an innocent game”.

Only, this being Ocampo, by the time the story ends we are left with the 
suspicion, impalpable but present, that the narrator is herself a murderer. 
“Every story is two stories”, Grace Paley once said, “the one on the surface 
and the one bubbling beneath. The climax is when they collide”. Ocampo, in her 
final act of cruelty, defers that climax.


 