
“It’s not that I’m worried about the future that much”, explains an ageing 
woman in Lucia Berlin’s story A New Life. “It’s my past that I can’t get rid 
of, that hits me like a big wave when I least expect it.” The waves of memory 
crash again and again in Berlin’s work as she, and a variety of narrators who 
typically share many of the details of her biography, relate episodes that 
together form a body of work that is part memoir, part auto-fiction, and part 
single, extended story cycle.

A Manual for Cleaning Women by Lucia Berlin review – an acute talent that 
deserves to be celebrated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/30/a-manual-for-cleaning-women-lucia-berlin-review-short-stories>
Berlin died in 2004, but in 2015 a little over half of her 76 stories, written 
between 1960 and the early 2000s, were republished asA Manual for Cleaning Women
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/30/a-manual-for-cleaning-women-lucia-berlin-review-short-stories>
. For most readers, a great short story writer with a substantial body of work 
simply appeared overnight; Berlin had commanded only a small readership when 
her stories originally appeared in collections in the 1980s and 90s, first 
through tiny publishers like Turtle Island, and later the somewhat larger Black 
Sparrow. The latter was also home to Charles Bukowski, who comes to mind now 
and then while reading Berlin’s conversational, confessional, very funny and 
very sad stories about addicts of one sort or another, living in a chaotic 
semi-domesticity.

Berlin’s messy, complicated life provided rich compost for stories. She had a 
peripatetic childhood, moving from mining camps in Alaska and Montana before a 
job opportunity for her father saw the family transported into Chilean high 
society. Her parents divorced, she spent time with relatives in west Texas, 
married three times, gave birth to four sons and became an alcoholic (like her 
mother and several other members of her family). She worked as a high-school 
teacher, a switchboard operator, receptionist, cleaning woman and emergency 
room nurse (“I like working in Emergency”,she writes in the perfect miniature 
My Jockey 
<http://publishersweekly.tumblr.com/post/125367216056/my-jockey-by-lucia-berlin>
, “you meet men there, anyway.”) Work is very present in her stories, as are 
the ravages of daily life. A woman in a launderette – a recurring location in 
Berlin’s fiction, and an indicator of where most of her characters find 
themselves on the social scale –looks down and thinks 
<http://www.fsgworkinprogress.com/2015/08/angels-laundromat/>: “I could see 
children and men and gardens in my hands”. The tone, worldly wise and somewhat 
regretful, is a sort of hardboiled domestic.

Berlin instinctively recoils from moments that threaten sentimentality

When writing in this mode, Berlin is at her closest to Raymond Carver. “I 
wrote like him before I ever read him,” she said in a letter. “He liked my 
work, too – we had good talk. Recognised one another immediately.” Other 
writers she shares at least a little DNA with include Grace Paley and Barry 
Hannah. Occasionally, in stories like Toda Luna, Todo Año, her beautiful, 
relentless, evocative prose echoes that of James Salter.

On a fundamental level, her closest parallel is Chekhov. His influence is 
explicit in several stories: Uncle Vanya provides the epigraph to A New Life, 
and Romance bears the acknowledgment “after Chekhov”. But his spirit is 
detectable in many more, primarily through the deeply humane attitude both 
writers adopt towards their characters. No one is wholly bad in any of 
Chekhov’s mature work, and no one is wholly bad in any of Berlin’s; not even 
the drunken, dentist grandfather who sexually abuses Berlin’s narrator and her 
sister in several of the stories. A good example of Berlin’s universal empathy 
appears in the story Mojito:

I don’t like Diane Arbus <http://photography-now.net/diane-arbus/>. When I was 
a kid in Texas there were freak shows and even then I hated the way people 
would point at the freaks and laugh at them. But I was fascinated too. I loved 
the man with no arms who typed with his toes. But it wasn’t the no arms that I 
liked. It was that he really wrote, all day. He was seriously writing 
something, liking what he was writing.

This generosity of perception is a great strength in a realist writer, and it 
gives Berlin’s characters tremendous life on the page. Even the cruel, 
alcoholic mother who appears in several stories is not a demon. “She was 
witty”, the narrator’s sister says in Mama. “You have to admit it. Like when 
she’d give panhandlers a nickel and say, ‘Excuse me, young man, but what are 
your dreams and aspirations?’ Or when a cab driver was surly she’d say, ‘You 
seem rather thoughtful and introspective today.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-lucia-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5ff62c47a2aec40b6fd114726992c5510e1474%2F0_0_1400_2100%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lucia%20Berlin%3A%20'Conversational%2C%20confessional%20snapshots%20into%20domestic%20life'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-lucia-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lucia%20Berlin%3A%20%27Conversational%2C%20confessional%20snapshots%20into%20domestic%20life%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-lucia-berlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5ff62c47a2aec40b6fd114726992c5510e1474%2F0_0_1400_2100%2F1400.jpg>
 A Manual for Cleaning Women, a collection of stories by Lucia Berlin published 
together in 2015. Photograph: Handout 
“She hated the word love”, we are told: “She said it the way people say the 
word slut”. Getting good lines needn’t equate to likeability, however, and 
empathy needn’t entail forgiveness. Regretting that they didn’t make up before 
her mother’s suicide, the younger sister says: “If only I could have been able 
to speak to her. If I had let her know how much I loved her.” “Me”, the 
narrator writes in response, “I have no mercy.”

This closing exchange echoes an earlier story, and the animosity of an earlier 
generation. In Dr HA Moynihan, a young girl helps her grandfather (the abusive 
dentist) pull out all his remaining teeth (“The sound was the sound of roots 
being ripped out, like trees being torn from winter ground.”) At the story’s 
end the girl, wanting her mother to share the compassion she feels towards her 
recuperating grandfather, asks, “You don’t still hate him, do you Mama?” To 
which her mother replies, “‘Oh, yes … Yes I do.” Exchanges like these 
illustrate the way Berlin instinctively recoils from moments that threaten 
sentimentality. Tellingly, she once said that she loved Carver’s work “before 
he sobered up and sweetened his endings”.

If Berlin is at her best when exploring character, she is at her weakest when 
concocting plot

However, Berlin does allow the bittersweet. The title of her story Del Gozo Al 
Pozo is a Mexican phrase that she translates as “from pleasure you go to the 
pits”. In a great many of her stories, happiness and misery don’t simply follow 
on consecutively from one another: they repeatedly entwine. “There are things 
people just don’t talk about,” she writes in Dust to Dust. “I don’t mean the 
hard things, like love, but the awkward ones, like how funerals are fun 
sometimes or how it’s exciting to watch buildings burning.” In Emergency Room 
Notebook, 1977, she writes: “Maybe I’m morbid. I am fascinated by two fingers 
in a baggie, a glittering switchblade all the way out of a lean pimp’s back. I 
like the fact that, in Emergency, everything is reparable, or not.” It is this 
sensibility, this ability to show the interrelatedness of horror and hope: she 
writes truthfully about depressing situations without being depressing.

What does it mean that even when the narrators’ names change (Lucia, Dolores, 
Claudia), the other details of their lives mostly stay the same? The abusive 
grandfather, the cruel mother, well-meaning but chaotic Uncle John, the 
bombshell cousin Bella Lynn, and most memorably of all Sally, the younger 
sister who is dying of cancer in Mexico City. In several stories – Wait a 
Minute, Mama, Grief, Fire, and Del Gozo Al Pozo – the final months of Sally’s 
life are recounted in a variety of ways.

A brief survey of the short story: David Foster Wallace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/may/25/a-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-david-foster-wallace>
I think what Berlin is doing here has something to do with a way of thinking 
about life and literature that also preoccupied David Foster Wallace. Wallace 
often expressed the view that life is too profuse for fiction to adequately 
capture it. The narrator of his story Good Old Neon puts forward the most 
extreme version of this belief, complaining that even a small portion of our 
internal thought process “is just too fast and huge and all interconnected for 
words to do more than barely sketch the outlines of at most one tiny little 
part of it at any given instant”. Berlin seems to shares this view, that 
individual narratives aren’t sufficient to capture certain episodes in life. As 
the narrator of Silence says of a piece of family lore: “I know it is true that 
Grandpa shot him, but how it happened has about 10 different versions”. It 
isn’t just that different people have different accounts of the same event: our 
memories can be plastic, contradictory, vulnerable to reinterpretation. In the 
case of Sally’s death, each time Berlin returns to it the angles are different, 
the focus has shifted, and yet the characters become more indelible. This isn’t 
repetition, but a process of ongoing definition.

If Berlin is at her best when exploring character, she is at her weakest when 
concocting plot. Plenty always happens in her stories but the events themselves 
are rarely the prime focus. When they come to dominate, as in the 
drug-smuggling-and-murder story Carmen, or Sombra’s overstuffed account of a 
death at a Mexico City bullring, the result is melodrama. It’s notable that 
these stories are the only places where Berlin’s dialogue, one of the great 
strengths and pleasures of her work, becomes clunky.

In her explorations of personal memory, however, Berlin is another writer 
entirely: one whose sure control of her material doesn’t slip. Her conclusions 
are not comforting: the older we get, the work attests, the more our acts of 
remembrance become catalogues of loss. Relatives die, relationships fall apart. 
“The good parts are as hard to deal with as the bad ones,” the ageing woman of 
A New Life concludes: “The point is, they are in the past.” The final story 
Berlin wrote, BF and Me, about an old woman in a trailer home tethered to an 
oxygen tank, trying to get a tiler – at least as old, and almost as emphysemic 
– to renovate her bathroom, provides a fittingly unsentimental conclusion to 
her work. It invokes Proust, as several of her other stories do: one is called 
Temps Perdu, and in Lost in the Louvre,she visits his house at Illiers 
<http://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/hotels-proust-article-102000>. Here, 
the “pong” of BF the tiler “was madeleine-like for me, bringing back Grandpa 
and Uncle John, for starters”. Just as in Proust’s great circular work, in 
Berlin the end becomes a pathway back to the beginning.
 