
For George Orwell, Rudyard Kipling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/rudyard-kipling> was "a jingo imperialist … 
morally insensitive and aesthetically disgusting". Frank O'Connor thought him 
"a damned liar"; Craig Raine has bemoaned his "grating air of worldliness"; 
Edmund Wilson described his entire body of work as "shot through with hatred". 
For Barbara Everett he is "the easiest of great writers to find repellent".

But Orwell also admired Kipling; O'Connor considered him, albeit grudgingly, 
one of the great short-story writers; Raine calls him England's "greatest 
short-story writer … whose achievement is more complex and surprising than even 
his admirers recognise". Wilson states, "Kipling really finds new rhythms, new 
colours and textures of words, for things that have not yet been brought into 
literature … he is extraordinary as a worker in prose"; and Everett asserts 
that his work possesses "an extreme originality of technique, which deserves 
all the recognition it can get." You can't, it seems, be unalloyed about 
Kipling. He not only divides opinion; he subdivides it.

Kipling was just 23 when his first collection, Plain Tales from the Hills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/short-stories/9780141442396/plain-tales-from-the-hills>
, was published in Calcutta and London. Many of these short, tough-hearted 
stories about civil and military Anglo-Indian administrators began life as 
"turnover" pieces in a Lahore newspaper. The economy they demanded persisted in 
his writing, becoming fundamental to his style. In his posthumously published 
autobiography,Something of Myself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9781840225679/something-of-myself>
, Kipling wrote: "A tale from which pieces have been raked out is like a fire 
that has been poked." The influence of Plain Tales is easily discernible in the 
work ofIsaac Babel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/10/brief-survey-short-story-isaac-babel>
 andErnest Hemingway <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ernesthemingway>, who 
also worked as journalists. This passage fromThe Gate of the Hundred Sorrows 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext05/8indt10h.htm#THE_GATE_OF_THE_HUNDRED_SORROWS>
 (1884) is perhaps a single repetition away from signature Hemingway:
 One of the Persians got killed in a row at night by the big well near the 
mosque a long time ago, and the Police shut up the well, because they said it 
was full of foul air. They found him dead at the bottom of it. 
One of Kipling's most famous innovations is his use of dialect, which begins 
agonisingly with the 'Oirish' of Private Mulvaney in Plain Tales, but which he 
honed into a powerful storytelling tool. Without it, wrote Edmund Wilson, we 
wouldn't have had "either the baseball stories of Ring Lardner or the Cyclops 
episode in Ulysses", to which Raine adds the cockney pub conversation in A Game 
of Chess from The Waste Land. Meanwhile, Kipling's love of intricate hoaxes, 
which attains its artistic climax in the Jamesian revenge storyDayspring 
Mishandled 
<http://www.telelib.com/authors/K/KiplingRudyard/prose/LimitsRenewals/dayspring.html>
 (1928), prefigures Borges.

It is fitting that a narrator so concerned with imparting technical knowledge 
(how to build a bridge, what being shot is like, the way a boat sinks in calm 
water – what Pound called "Kipling's 'Bigod, I-know-all-about-this' manner") 
should have continually developed his technique throughout his career. Some 
critics maintain, as Raine has noted, that "whereas in the early work excision 
creates intensity, in the later stories it merely creates obscurity". Certainly 
ellipsis and ambiguity define Kipling's post-1900 work, which, if not modernist 
itself, travels on a modernist trajectory. Here, as WW Norton identifies, 
Kipling "brought to its strange perfection that narrative manner of 
implication, abstention, and obliquity of which the first considerable example 
isMrs Bathurst <http://www.readbookonline.net/readOnLine/8678/>".

This confounding story of 1904 begins with a detailed description of place – a 
burning hot beach near Cape Town – and a series of missed connections, both of 
which take on symbolic importance as four men engage in desultory conversation. 
They discuss a deserter, his connection to the eponymous Auckland hotelkeeper, 
and his death in a Bulawayo teak forest, burned to charcoal by lightning. Why 
did the dead man obsess over a newsreel image of Mrs Bathurst detraining at 
Paddington? Who is the charred figure found squatting at his feet in the 
forest? Several theories have been advanced, but Everett thinks decoding the 
story misses its point. John Bayley sees it as "a perfect artistic embodiment 
of unreliable narrators and partial views scattered Empire-wide, and also of 
the fact that most things in life never 'come out'". Its "ambiguous charge of 
human feeling," writes Everett, "is the very stuff of Kipling's greatest 
stories".

A similar cryptic energy inhabits They <http://gaslight.mtroyal.ca/they.htm> 
(1904) andThe Wish House 
<http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/k/kipling/rudyard/debits/chapter11.html> (1924), 
which the younger Kipling, beholden to Poe and Maupassant, would have made more 
shocking and less resonant. The first, written in the aftermath of the death of 
Kipling's daughter, describes an isolated country house in which the ghosts of 
dead children congregate. The second – shadowed, like all the stories written 
after 1915, by the death of his son,John Kipling, at the Battle of Loos 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/john-kipling-killed-at-the-battle-of-loos>
 – portrays a Sussex cook who visits a "token", or wraith, to take on the 
suffering of the man who rejected her. Thus her cancer becomes both physical 
manifestation of her disappointment and symbol of unconditional love. Typically 
of late Kipling, this moving and disturbing story poses more questions than it 
answers.

Repressed or thwarted love is a dominant theme in this period, from the 
strange sadism ofMary Postgate <http://www.readbookonline.net/readOnLine/8332/> 
(1915), where a lady's companion appears to orgasm while watching a German 
airman – whom she may be hallucinating – die at the bottom of a country garden, 
to its most powerful evocation inThe Gardener 
<http://www.aftermathww1.com/gardener.asp> (1925). The story begins by 
describing how Helen Turrell's nephew, born of an unsuitable union, came to be 
in her care. Years after his death in the trenches, Helen travels to Belgium to 
visit her nephew's grave. The story turns on one word in its closing lines, 
easy enough to miss, which reveals that he is her illegitimate son, and that 
the story's third-person narration is in fact an expression of her 
self-deception. This realisation unlocks the story's freight of sadness, and 
explains the genteel, buttoned-down quality of its prose. Only once does this 
mask of reserve slip, when Helen ascends to the cemetery, like a soldier going 
over the top to face the enemy:
 Culverts across a deep ditch served for entrances through the unfinished 
boundary wall. She climbed a few wooden-faced earthen steps and then met the 
entire crowded level of the thing in one held breath. She did not know that 
Hagenzeele Third counted twenty-one thousand dead already. All she saw was a 
merciless sea of black crosses, bearing little strips of stamped tin at all 
angles across their faces. She could distinguish no order or arrangement in 
their mass; nothing but a waist-high wilderness as of weeds stricken dead, 
rushing at her.

The effect, emerging from such nondescript passages, is pointedly dizzying. 
Kipling may be unfashionable. He is certainly at times objectionable. But at 
his best he is also indelible, and a much more exciting, original writer than 
his reputation allows.

Next: Danilo Kiš
 