
When John Cheever's editor suggested an omnibus collection of his short 
stories, the writer was nonplussed. "Why do you want to do that?" he asked. 
"All those stories have already been published." The resulting book,The Stories 
of John Cheever <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Stories_of_John_Cheever> 
(1978), became one of the bestselling short story collections of all time, 
winning its author a National Book award and a Pulitzer. But it didn't just 
buttress Cheever's uncertain reputation. As Robert Morace notes, it "revived 
interest in the short story on the part of publishers and readers, making it 
both commercially more viable and critically more respectable".

Cheever published 121 stories in the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/bios/john_cheever/search?contributorName=john%20cheever>
 between 1935 and 1981, and others in Esquire, Playboy and elsewhere. His 
collected stories runs to nearly 900 pages, despite its exclusion, at Cheever's 
insistence, of his entire first collection. Hemingway's cadences, clearly 
discernible in the early stories, slip from view around the time ofThe Sutton 
Place Story 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1946/06/29/1946_06_29_019_TNY_CARDS_000205915>
 (1946), but much later, in The World of Apples (1966), the poet Asa Bascomb 
recites his personal pantheon before a Christian relic, ending with: "'God 
bless William Faulkner, Scott Fitzgerald and especially Ernest Hemingway.'" 
Throw in Chekhov and Flaubert, and Bascomb's list could be Cheever's. In 
addition to these, Elizabeth Hardwick notes, the "shadowy and troubled 
undergrowth of Cheever's stories brings to mind something of the temper of 
Melville and Hawthorne".

But, as Blake Bailey suggests in his extraordinary biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780330437905/cheever-a-life>
, Cheever absorbed his influences in such a way that identifying them adds 
little to the work. And if the workings of influence are obscure, in setting he 
really had no forebears: he became, by chance, the chronicler ofWestchester, 
New York <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westchester_County,_New_York>, just as 
it became the first large-scale suburban area in the world. His Shady Hill is a 
fictional territory to consider alongsideFaulkner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamfaulkner>'s Yoknapatawpha County or 
Thomas Hardy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy>'s Wessex. But 
while you might expect social commentary to trip across its manicured lawns, or 
satire to barge through the mushroom-coloured raincoats thronging its station 
platform, Cheever's suburban fantasias are a good deal stranger than that.

Proclaiming Cheever's strangeness should be a cliche, but for each generation 
the WASPiness of his settings seems to shroud his work in a phantom 
conservatism. Even if some of his most famous stories are fables about radios 
that transmit neighbours' private conversations (The Enormous Radio 
<http://web.sbu.edu/english/faculty/mjackson/CLAR110/cheever.htm>), or angels 
of death walking the streets of Manhattan (Torch Song), the casual observer's 
general impression remains one of cocktail hours, affairs and hungover Sundays. 
All those elements are there, of course, but rarely in ways one would expect. 
"[N]othing in Updike that isn't in Cheever first," writes Alan Bennett, but the 
similarities are in truth superficial; Updike is much less anomalous. Ben 
DeMott called Cheever's stories "dense in inexplicables", andCheever himself 
told the Paris Review 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/3667/the-art-of-fiction-no-62-john-cheever>
 that fiction is "experimentation … One never puts down a sentence without the 
feeling that it has never been put down before in such a way … Acuteness of 
feeling and velocity have always seemed to me terribly important."

These words describe as well as any the atmospheres generated by Cheever's 
best stories, which include, I think, three of the best in the language. Each 
of these –Goodbye, My Brother 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1951/08/25/1951_08_25_022_TNY_CARDS_000231454>
 (1950),The Country Husband 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1954/11/20/1954_11_20_038_TNY_CARDS_000246451>
 (1954) andThe Swimmer 
<http://shortstoryclassics.50megs.com/cheeverswimmer.html> (1964) – also shares 
a profound duality. Cheever, as any account of his life explains, had duality 
at his core, and it veins the work. In Goodbye, My Brother, the scion of a New 
England family catalogues the faults of a disfavoured brother, Lawrence, before 
attacking him on a deserted beach. An early mentor found the narrative 
"troublingly uncertain". Cheever's response – "There was no brother; there was 
no Lawrence" – at once simplifies, complicates, and expands the story in 
several directions at once. The Swimmer is both the account of a man returning 
to his Shady Hill house via the pools of his friends and neighbours, and a 
dreamlike fable about a man stripped of everything. As with Kafka's 
Metamorphosis there isn't a single "true" reading – only two simultaneous 
realities.

Of these stories, though, it is The Country Husband (1954) that most perfectly 
accommodates this quality. It is, Edmund White tells us, the story that made
Hemingway <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ernesthemingway> wake his wife in 
the middle of the night to read aloud to her. Here, everything is doubled. 
Surviving a crash-landing while on a business trip – the drama of which is 
completely ignored by his family – Francis Weed (the surname connoting both 
puniness and tenacity) returns to the idyll of home only to find a chaotic 
"battlefield". The babysitter is sick, and Francis falls in love with her young 
replacement. At a dinner party he recognises the French maid distributing 
drinks as a woman he saw stripped naked and spat on outside a Normandy village 
for collaborating with the Germans. The ambiguously named Shady Hill hovers 
between the end of summer and chilly autumn: "It was a frosty night when he got 
home. The air smelled sharply of change." I could go on; asNabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov> wrote, the story is "really 
a miniature novel beautifully traced, so that the impression of there being too 
many things happening in it is completely redeemed by the satisfying coherence 
of its thematic interlacings".

The story's justly famous closing lines take us away from a chastened Francis 
woodworking in his basement, and show us the curious evening rituals of Shady 
Hill:
 "'Go home, Gertrude, go home,' Mrs Masterson says. 'I told you to go home an 
hour ago, Gertrude. It's way past your suppertime and your mother will be 
worried. Go home!' A door on the Babcocks' terrace flies open, and out comes 
Mrs Babcock without any clothes on, pursued by a naked husband … Over the 
terrace they go and in at the kitchen door, as passionate and handsome a nymph 
and satyr as you will find on any wall in Venice … The last to come is Jupiter. 
He prances through the tomato vines, holding in his generous mouth the remains 
of an evening slipper. Then it is dark; it is a night where kings in golden 
suits ride elephants over the mountains." 
This widely quoted passage is exhibit A in the case for Cheever as, in Philip 
Roth <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth>'s phrase, an "enchanted 
realist". But standing alone, this passage appears much more whimsical than it 
is. Nearly all its elements carefully reprise phrases and episodes from earlier 
in the story. Most importantly, that extraordinary final line echoes and 
transforms what a sentimental host tells the Weeds about his wife at the end of 
a party: "'She's my blue sky. After sixteen years, I still bite her shoulders. 
She makes me feel like Hannibal crossing the Alps.'" Reencountered here, is 
this mawkishness being reclaimed in an act of grace? Ironic mockery? Cheever's 
crowning achievement is the ability to be simultaneously generous and cynical, 
to see that the absurd and the profound can reside in the same moment, and to 
acknowledge both at the detriment of neither.

Next: Roberto Bolaño
 