
David Foster Wallace <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-foster-wallace> 
was a maximalist. His masterpiece, Infinite Jest, is a 1,000-page, polyphonic 
epic about addiction and obsession in millennial America. His journalism and 
essays, about television and tennis, sea cruises and grammar, always swelled 
far beyond their allotted word counts (cut for publication, he restored many of 
them to their full length when they were collected in book form). In a letter 
sent to a friend from a porn convention in Las Vegas, Wallace exclaimed that, 
“writing about real-life stuff is next to impossible, simply because there’sso 
much!” It might seem surprising that a writer like this could or should want to 
function within the confines of the short story, yet besides Infinite Jest it 
is arguably his three story collections that represent the most important part 
of his work.

That said, many of Wallace’s short stories aren’t all that short, and often 
test the limits of traditional conceptions of story.As he told Larry McCaffery 
in 1993 
<http://www.dalkeyarchive.com/a-conversation-with-david-foster-wallace-by-larry-mccaffery/>
: “I have a problem sometimes with concision, communicating only what needs to 
be said in a brisk efficient way that doesn’t call attention to itself.” In 
fact, Wallace’s later works would rewire this statement: in order to say what 
needed to be said, he found his writing had no option but to call attention to 
itself. To experience a Wallace story is often also to experience someone 
making an agonised attempt to write a story. This was nothing new, of course: 
the postmodernists of the 1960s were committed to metafiction, the literary 
technique of self-consciousness that puts the lie to realism, making the 
audience constantly aware that what they are reading is an artificial construct.

This approach appealed to the young Wallace, who once remarked that Donald 
Barthelme’s short storyThe Balloon 
<http://www.nbu.bg/webs/amb/american/5/barthelme/balloon.htm> was the first 
work of fiction to “ring my cherries”, and who subsequently found a deep 
affinity with the work of Thomas Pynchon. Yet by the time of his first 
collection, 1989’s Girl With Curious Hair, and despite the significant debts 
individual stories owe to postmodern writers (John Billy is a tribute to 
Omensetter’s Luck by William Gass 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/98/11/01/specials/gass-luck.html>, while the 
political epic-in-miniature Lyndon takes its lead fromRobert Coover’s A Public 
Burning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/27/robert-coover-life-in-writing>
), Wallace’s relationship with postmodernism had grown more complicated. He 
believed that a movement that had taken shape to unmask the hypocrisies of mass 
culture had come to lend them an insidious power: once advertising became 
knowing and ironic, the postmodernist game was up. Wallace began attempting to 
move beyond irony towards a new sincerity, although he struggled with how to 
achieve this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F25%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-david-foster-wallace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218949338%2Faaf9bf4d-cd40-4711-ba9c-baddfd385a48-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brief%20survey%20of%20the%20short%20story%3A%20David%20Foster%20Wallace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F25%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-david-foster-wallace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brief%20survey%20of%20the%20short%20story%3A%20David%20Foster%20Wallace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F25%2Fa-brief-survey-of-the-short-story-david-foster-wallace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218949338%2Faaf9bf4d-cd40-4711-ba9c-baddfd385a48-1360x2040.jpeg>
 ‘Reflexive knots’ ... Wallace photographed circa 1996. Photograph: Gary 
Hannabarger/Corbis 
The novella that ends the collection, Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its 
Way, is a tortuously long assault on postmodernism that paradoxically satirises 
the strategies of metafiction by employing an encyclopaedic array of 
metafictional strategies – skilfully enough that it could easily be taken for a 
piece of metafiction itself. It is illustrative of the struggle Wallace had 
throughout his career with the shape and content of his fiction, that after 
several years of considering the story to be by far the most important thing he 
had written, he then disowned it: “In Westward I got trapped one time just 
trying to expose the illusions of metafiction the same way metafiction had 
tried to expose the illusions of the pseudo-unmediated realist fiction that 
came before it. It was a horror show. The stuff’s a permanent migraine”.

It is possible to see Wallace as an artist who grew less certain of what he 
was doing the longer he did it, but at the same time becoming increasingly 
certain that this uncertainty was where he should focus his energy. It is this 
decision, and the scrupulousness with which Wallace pursued it, that can make 
areas of his work so tricky to engage with. His second collection, for example, 
Brief Interviews With Hideous Men (1999), is a brilliant book that is very 
difficult to enjoy. Reviewing it, the novelist Lawrence Norfolk noted the 
“brutal trades” one story makes “between the integrity of its rhetorical 
position and any pretension to aesthetic pleasure”, which is a useful way of 
considering much of his work from this point on: it tends to have very specific 
reasons for existing in the forms it does, but those forms can be rebarbative. 
They include extremely long and knotty sentences, monologues by obsessive 
bores, and a perverse love of the extreme ugliness of certain types of 
specialised language – marketing terminology, programmer’s English, 
therapy-speak, and so on. They are ouroboros-like stories that consume 
themselves at the same time as we consume them.

One of the best of this latter group is Octet, an exhilarating but enervating 
story that Norfolk found “maddening”, although he remained insightful enough to 
note that the story’s multiplying “reflexive knots … are not ironic reflexive 
gestures meant to distance the writer from the imminent implosion of his own 
artefact. They are Wallace’s own, sincere misgivings.” The story, a series of 
what Wallace calls “short belletristic pieces” that present a situation then 
ask the reader a question about it, collapses into itself halfway through, then 
proceeds to analyse the reasons for that collapse in a section that begins, 
“You are, unfortunately, a fiction writer”. By its author’s own admission, the 
story becomes increasingly “dense and inbent” as successive arguments and 
positions are explored, expanded on, and digressed from. There is a moment in 
Infinite Jest when the weed addict Ken Erdedy dwells on “the paralytic stasis 
that results from the obsessive analysis of all possible implications of both 
getting up from the couch and not getting up from the couch”. In Octet, Wallace 
is working himself to just such a standstill.

But when Wallace’s stories devour themselves, it is not a hip trick. The 
misgivings catalogued and explored in Octet are, as Norfolk noted, sincere. 
Zadie Smith has written that “how you feel about Octet will make or break you 
as a reader of Wallace, because what he’s really asking is for you to have 
faith in something he cannot possibly ever finally determine in language … his 
sincerity, his apparent desperation to ‘connect’ with his reader in a genuine 
way”. This idea of human connection, and whether it is even possible, is 
present right through his work, from the early story Little Expressionless 
Animals onwards, but its most urgent interrogation comes in his final and 
darkest collection, Oblivion (2004).

In an interview he gave in 1996, referring to Infinite Jest, Wallace talked 
about addressing “a real American type of sadness 
<http://www.salon.com/1996/03/09/wallace_5/>”. It is unsurprising to note that 
a writer who struggled with depression from his teens, who committed suicide at 
the age of 46, and whose stories nearly all contain at least a passing 
reference to depression and/or suicide, should have returned to sadness as a 
theme, but it is in Oblivion that it is captured most starkly. Critics tend to 
focus on the stories Good Old Neon (told from the viewpoint of a suicide) and 
The Suffering Channel (about a man who can defecate great works of art, and, 
indirectly, 9/11), and both count among Wallace’s best fiction, but there is 
another story in the collection,The Soul Is Not a Smithy 
<http://recommendedreading.tumblr.com/post/76419968521/the-soul-is-not-a-smithy-by-david-foster>
, that is at once typical of his themes and extraordinary in the way it 
addresses them.

The editor and critic Sven Birkets, writing about his experience of first 
reading this story, describes “a density that was, at every step, forbidding – 
those sentences, the micro-obsessiveness of the narrating voice, the slow 
unfolding of suggestive implication that Henry James, title-holder in this 
category, would have applauded”. The story operates on several different 
levels: as an adult, the narrator reflects on the day in 1960 when he and three 
classmates were apparently held hostage by an unhinged supply teacher; in fact 
the narrator was unaware of being a hostage, because he was deeply involved in 
his habitual pastime of authoring a mental comic strip, the images of which 
appeared in the reticulate mesh of the classroom windows. Alongside this nested 
story – which we are told in great detail, and which is extremely funny, 
violent and sad – are interspersed memories of the narrator’s childhood home, 
and glimpses of his life since, including a detailed, digressive investigation 
of a dream sequence from The Exorcist.

Then, following the description of a recurring nightmare about his father’s 
office, the narrator presents an extraordinary portrait of this man, an 
insurance actuary who “for almost 30 years of 51 weeks a year … sat all day at 
a metal desk in a silent, fluorescent room, reading forms and making 
calculations and filling out further forms on the results of those 
calculations, breaking only to answer his telephone or meet with other 
actuaries in other bright, quiet rooms”. “I did not know,” the narrator says 
“that in mild weather he took his lunch down in the elevator and ate it sitting 
on a backless stone bench that faced a small square of grass with two trees and 
an abstract public sculpture, and that on many mornings he steered by these 30 
minutes outdoors the way mariners out of sight of land use stars”. Then, 
devastatingly, he remarks that his father “died of a coronary when I was 16, 
and I can acknowledge, despite the obvious shock and loss, that his passing was 
less hard to bear than much of what I learned about his life when he was gone”. 
He means the everyday sorrow of it, the smallness of its pleasures against the 
vastness of its mundanity, and the fear that this is his birthright. Earlier, 
describing his father’s daily ritual on arriving home, he describes how “this 
routine … cast shadows deep down in parts of me I could not access on my own”. 
This account, in tandem with numerous other glancing references to 
disappointments and misfortunes scattered throughout the story, is the capstone 
to a profoundly sorrowful work of fiction.

Flipping the entropy of stories like Octet, or Adult World parts I and II – 
where the story begins coherently only to become more and more unconventional 
until it atomises – here, unexpectedly, it is mimesis that comes to dominate a 
narrative that for much of its length has been fragmented and surreal. For 
once, Wallace slips his bonds and writes through to the end without the story 
dissolving or blowing up in his face, and it feels as though he caught himself 
by surprise in doing so (which is perhaps why hedescribed the story as “a very 
strange piece” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JAF5OgxN1d0>). This story 
realises the ambition Wallace described to Larry McCaffery back in 1993, when 
he was willing himself to become the writer he most wanted to be: “Really good 
work probably comes out of a willingness to disclose yourself, open yourself up 
in spiritual and emotional ways that risk making you really feel something. To 
be willing to sort of die in order to move the reader, somehow. Even now I’m 
scared about how sappy this’ll look in print, saying this. And the effort 
actually to do it, not just talk about it, requires a kind of courage I don’t 
seem to have yet.”

Wallace’s fiction contains enormous cruelty: rape, animal torture, child 
abuse, the severe and perhaps fatal burning of a baby. Relationships are 
fractured, parasitic, and often the cause for psychic pain and disturbance; sex 
is furtive or coercive. It can be difficult to take, even when the knots and 
involutions of it aren’t making it difficult to read on a purely formal basis. 
But it is also a deeply moral body of work. Its difficulties, and many of its 
cruelties, exist for specific reasons. Whether Wallace’s fraught projects are 
successes or failures is up to the individual, but these are judgments that all 
serious readers should want to make for themselves.
 