
In an interview Angela Carter gave in 1991 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/archive/writers/12245.shtml>, not long before her death 
from lung cancer at the age of 51, she can be heard struggling with being 
called an "English writer". She was the least English of English writers, a 
postmodernist with no interest in social realism. Aside from Shakespeare, Defoe 
and Blake, her influences came from Europe and the new world: Poe and Melville, 
the symbolists and surrealists, Borges, Calvino and Joyce.

A writer of great range, she was perfectly capable of describing, as she did 
in The Quilt Maker (1981), "south London on a spring morning. Lorries fart and 
splutter along the Wandsworth Road. Capital Radio is braying from an upper 
window." But she preferred to delve into myth and legend, and the extreme 
psychic landscapes of "forsaken castles, haunted forests" and "forbidden sexual 
objects".

A fragment of fairytale glimmers in Carter's earliest work, The Man Who Loved 
a Double Bass (1962), where an inanimate object is treated as though alive, and 
helmets tucked beneath motorbikes gleam "whitely, like mushrooms or new laid 
eggs". In her first collection, Fireworks (1974), the seam thickens 
discernibly. The Executioner's Beautiful Daughter is a savage piece of 
incest-themed gothic; in the Ballardian Penetrating to the Heart of the Forest, 
a menacing magic begins to unfold after a girl is pricked (in fact, bitten) by 
a flower; in Reflections, a rambler arrives at "a short, crumbling flight of 
steps that led to a weathered front door, ajar like the door of a witch's 
house".

In 1979, two years after translating a selection of Perrault's fairytales, 
Carter published The Bloody Chamber, a series of "revisionings" of some of the 
best-known fairytales, including Bluebeard, Red Riding Hood and Beauty and the 
Beast. The book is a supremely well-achieved critique and reformulation of 
stories that have been shaped by our society, and which shape it in turn. In 
the 1970s, myth and folklore was coming under fresh scrutiny in numerous ways – 
Bruno Bettelheim's Freudian reading inThe Uses of Enchantment 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/book/203434/the-uses-of-enchantment-by-bruno-bettelheim>
, Ann Sexton's poetry cycle Transformations, the incisive critiques ofJack Zipes
 <http://www.artofstorytellingshow.com/2008/06/29/jack-zipes-fairy-tales/> – 
but nowhere is the strange, warped power of the originals harnessed so 
strikingly as in Carter's work.

By retelling these tales, wrote Lorna Sage, Carter was "deliberately drawing 
them out of shape … The monsters and the princesses lose their places in the 
old script, and cross forbidden boundary lines." In The Tiger's Bride, the 
beauty sheds her skin to reveal "beautiful fur". In The Company of Wolves, Red 
Riding Hood uses sexual pleasure – hers and his – to tame the wolf.

Alongside these inversions are stories in which the hidden content of 
fairytales is made explicit. In the title story, a redaction of Bluebeard, the 
narrator realises by her husband's gaze – "the assessing eye of a connoisseur 
inspecting horseflesh" – that his lust will consume her, while in The Erl-King 
the objectified beloved discovers that "[t]here are some eyes can eat you". 
Carter told an interviewer in 1985: "I was using the latent content of those 
traditional stories, and that latent content is violently sexual."

Light is shed on The Bloody Chamber by another book Carter published in 1979, 
The Sadeian Woman 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Sadeian-Woman-Exercise-Cultural/dp/086068055X>, 
which argues that the two versions of the feminine De Sade presents – Justine, 
the victim, and Juliette, the victimiser – are both wholly male constructs, 
"and neither pays any heed to a future in which might lie a synthesis of their 
modes of behaviour, neither submissive nor aggressive, capable of both thought 
and feeling".

As Margaret Atwood writes: "The Bloody Chamber can be understood much better 
as an exploration of the narrative possibilities of De Sade's lamb-and-tiger 
dichotomy than as a 'standard' work of early-70s to-the-barricades feminism." 
At the time, Carter's nuanced position – as well as her assertion that women 
could be simultaneously attracted to and revolted by the predatory male – left 
her isolated. The New York Times labelled her"a rigid ideologue, fervidly 
feminist" <http://www.nytimes.com/books/98/12/27/specials/carter-sadian.html> 
while Andrea Dworkin dismissed The Sadeian Woman as "a pseudofeminist literary 
essay". To journalist Amanda Sebestyen, she was no less than the "high 
priestess of postgraduate porn".

Alongside an abiding fascination with folklore, in her last two collections, 
Black Venus 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099480716>
 (1985) andAmerican Ghosts and Old World Wonders 
<http://www.randomhouse.com.au/books/angela-carter/american-ghosts-and-old-world-wonders-9780099133711.aspx>
 (1993), Carter developed an interest in impressionistic biographies of 
historical figures, including Baudelaire's lover Jeanne Duval and Edgar Allan 
Poe. Most indelible of these is The Fall River Axe Murders (1987), her study of 
the allegedly murderous New England spinster Lizzie Borden. Here, the discord 
between Carter's forensic tone and fairytale details – a wicked stepmother who 
"oppressed her like a spell'; the detail that virginal Lizzie is menstruating 
on the day of the murders; talk of slaughtered pet pigeons baked in a pie – 
instils a heavy, malign tension. Carter, wickedly and perfectly, breaks off her 
account moments before chaos is unleashed, the story left like a blood blister 
about to burst.

Borden may be a dark expression of the empowered feminine, but for Carter that 
is preferable to what she called the "zomboid creatures inJoan Didion 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/joan-didion>'s novels", or the "dippy dames of 
Jean Rhys 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2013/feb/22/jean-rhys-novelist-yearning-rage-desire>
". Carter's ideal heroines possess sharp wits and "a certain cussedness, a 
bloodymindedness", as with the Moll Flanderseque protagonist of Our Lady of the 
Massacre (1979). In The Company of Wolves, just as the wolf is about to strike, 
his supposed victim "burst out laughing; she knew she was nobody's meat". At 
the climax of The Bloody Chamber, it isn't the bride's brothers who come to the 
rescue, as in Bluebeard, but her resourceful mother, who guns down the 
sword-waving, Sadeian marquis with a shot from her dead husband's service 
revolver (try unpicking that symbolism, if you will).

Carter's methods are too chilly and removed for some; her characters, as one 
reviewer suggested, more "specimens for analysis". But thick as the stories are 
with theory, and ascetically opposed to the enveloping pleasures of what Carter 
dismissively called "bourgeois realism", they nevertheless pulse with energies 
that trigger an emotional as well as an intellectual response. The story that 
best embodies this ability to bridge theory and feeling is Ashputtle or the 
Mother's Ghost (1987), which first takes the form of a lecture before 
transforming into a profoundly powerful and mysterious vision of,in Marina 
Warner's phrase <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UzVBgmD0X0M>, "dark, archaic 
grief".

Carter thought of narrative as "an argument stated in fictional terms", and 
she certainly has, asAS Byatt <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/asbyatt> said of 
Hans Christian Andersen, "designs on the reader". But any successful work of 
art must generate meanings beyond those it intends, and Carter's best work 
opens on to a territory that stretches far beyond her immediate aims. Even if 
we were living in a postfeminist utopia (and the recentVida report on gender 
prejudice <http://www.vidaweb.org/the-count-2012> shows we're not, even in the 
liberal enclave of book pages and literary journals), these stories would 
remain as vivid as fresh blood on white snow.

Next: Guy de Maupassant
 