
In his 1960 story, The Blessed Man of Boston, My Grandmother’s Thimble, and 
Fanning Island 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1962/01/13/thimble-and-fanning-island>, John 
Updike’s narrator expresses the challenge of capturing life in words. “[W]e 
would-be novelists have a reach as shallow as our skins,” he writes. “We walk 
through volumes of the unexpressed and like snails leave behind a faint thread 
excreted out of ourselves. From the dew of the few flakes that melt on our 
faces we cannot reconstruct the snowstorm.” In a lecture given 16 years later, 
Updike described himself as a person “whose chemistry must daily secrete a 
written page or two”, and the expression of writing as a natural process was 
wholly appropriate: for him, living was writing. In fact, the thread he 
secreted was enormous: 63 books in 50 years, including more than 20 novels and 
more than a dozen short-story collections.

William Maxwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/11/featuresreviews.guardianreview34>
, Updike’s first editor at the New Yorker, described him as a “conspicuously 
autobiographical writer”, a trait that, coupled with his longevity and 
prolificacy, gives his complete works the shape of an entire life. Teenage 
narrators in semi-rural Pennsylvania give way to young professionals in New 
York, marital strain, the death of parents, child-rearing and adultery in 
suburban Massachusetts, ageing and affluence, wistful longing for the energies 
of youth and, finally, an obsessive return to one’s beginnings (half of the 
stories in the posthumous collectionMy Father’s Tears 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2006/02/27/my-fathers-tears> are set in 
Olinger, Updike’s fictional version of his childhood home).

In Updike’s earliest stories, Salinger and Hemingway occasionally jut from the 
text. The narrator of A&P (1961) is unmistakably a Salinger type, while in
Pigeon Feathers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1962/03/18/books/updike-pigeon.html?_r=1pagewanted=all&>
 (also 1961), the teenage protagonist confronts an incipient fear of death in 
distinctly Papa-like fashion: by turning that fear outwards and visiting death 
on others. As he massacres pigeons in the family barn the prose becomes terser, 
culminating in lines that could be Hemingway’s: “He climbed down, and was 
struck by the silence in the barn. The remaining pigeons must have escaped out 
the other hole. That was all right; he was tired of it.”

Updike review – Adam Begley has written an 'exemplary biography
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/28/updike-biography-adam-begley> 
These influences were soon overlaid and overtaken: by Henry Green, whom 
Updike’s biographer Adam Begley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/18/updike-biography-adam-begley-review>
believes encouraged in the author “a looser, more flowing” syntax, and more 
striking metaphors; by Proust and Joyce, two writers expert at mining their own 
lives for fiction, and by Nabokov, whose fine-tooled descriptive talent clearly 
appealed. The Russian’s taste for metafictional games also left a mark, 
inspiring Updike’s Jewish-American alter ego Henry Bech: a humorous offshoot 
from his vast literary project.

Elizabeth Hardwick 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/1989/may/18/citizen-updike/> called 
Updike “[a]s productive of print as a Victorian”, describing his work as 
“efflorescent in observed detail, prodigal in image, brashly knowing and 
accomplished in the rhythms of current dialogue, and steaming with the orifices 
and bodily fluids of many fluent copulations”. Some see Updike’s voluminousness 
as irrepressibility, others as indigestible self-absorption. “Does the son of a 
bitch ever have an unpublished thought?” David Foster Wallace reported “a 
friend” asking, while Frank Kermode wrote about those instances “when the 
prolific becomes prolix”. But where they saw clutter,Cynthia Ozick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jul/04/cynthia-ozick-life-writing-interview>
 saw “busy Bruegelian amplitude”; andAlfred Kazin 
<http://www.nybooks.com/contributors/alfred-kazin/> judged – with only slight 
ambiguity – that: “John Updike writes as if there were no greater pleasure than 
reconstituting the world by writing.” They are each right, in a sense: there is 
enough Updike, with enough difference in quality, that you could plausibly read 
a lot of him without encountering a dud, and read just as much in another, 
unluckier direction without encountering anything particularly good. Few 
writers are more in need of a well-chosen collection of selected stories.

In lieu of one, some signposting is required. The best place to begin is in 
Olinger <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/olinger-stories.html>, as these 
stories probably represent the best of all his work, including the novels. The 
aforementioned Pigeon Feathers, rich in symbol and metaphor, is the most 
powerful of them. The Happiest I’ve Been (1958) is a superb evocation of a 
young man at manhood’s border, when the world simultaneously opens yet remains 
unfathomable (and how that implicitly despairing title subtly inflects the 
story!). Flight (1959) gives prominence to the strong mother who appears in 
many of Updike’s stories, and studies the ways in which one generation imprints 
its hope, frustrations and disappointment on to the next.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fshort-story-survey-john-updike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424351307887%2F7325c27e-825c-4d13-9f81-5bb501ce4941-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brief%20survey%20of%20the%20short%20story%3A%20John%20Updike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fshort-story-survey-john-updike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brief%20survey%20of%20the%20short%20story%3A%20John%20Updike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fshort-story-survey-john-updike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424351307887%2F7325c27e-825c-4d13-9f81-5bb501ce4941-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The stories of John Updike, seen here with his son in 1966, perennially 
visited the themes of family, ambition and first love. Photograph: Truman 
Moore/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
These stories, sprawling acts of memory, are about family, ambition and first 
love, but their common, fundamental theme is time. Updike writes a great deal 
about families, but while the elements of his typical family unit – child, 
parents and grandparents – suggest continuity through time, it is a sense of 
death and oblivion that dominates his stories. Updike might state, in his 
introduction to his collected Early Stories, that his aim was to “describe 
reality as it had come to me – to give the mundane its beautiful due”, but his 
work often struggles with an apprehension of death that undercuts the 
wistfulness of this definition.

A Sandstone Farmhouse (1990), an extraordinary story about the death of a 
parent, provides an example of the harsh wall that encircles Updike’s 
conception of the world. The narrator remembers a night in the old family home 
with his mother, towards the end of her life:

He was aware of his mother and himself, laying each in bed, as survivors of a 
larger party that had once occupied this house. It was as if, on a snowy pass, 
they had killed and eaten the others, and now one of the two remaining must 
perish next.

This apprehension appears elsewhere. In Packed Dirt, Churchgoing, a Dying Cat, 
a Traded Car (1961), the narrator lies in bed on his birthday and feels “death 
like a wide army advancing”. In Lifeguard (1960), a young divinity student 
admits that in the night he feels “my death rushing toward me like an express 
train”. In Pigeon Feathers, meanwhile, David Kern envisages death as “a long 
hole in the ground, no wider than your body, down which you are drawn while the 
white faces recede … Shovels pour dirt into your face”. A couple’s holiday with 
old friends in storm-struck East Anglia becomes a compelling metaphor for the 
violence and transience of life in The Afterlife (1986), and in Playing With 
Dynamite (1992), the nostalgia of the narrator, “living now in death’s 
immediate neighbourhood”, is deepened and darkened by the detail of a neighbour 
whose body lies undiscovered for days.

In 1985, Updike told an interviewer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1985/11/21/books/the-origin-of-the-universe-time-and-john-updike.html>
 about the “sense of futility and of doom and of darkness” in his fiction. He 
perceived death “behind everything in life, a sort of black backdrop”, while in 
a later scrap of memoir he admits that in 1955, aged 23, he was already 
“fearful and desolate, foreseeing, young as I was, that I would die, and that 
the substance of the earth was, therefore, death”.On Desert Island Discs in 
1995 he said <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7iJ0qkLKyyo>: “I’m always aware 
of my own death in me like a baby, getting bigger every day.” All the cliches 
of Updike’s fiction – from adultery to middle-class mores to religious crises 
to golf – are figures played above this ground bass of death. His work is more 
a threnody for life than a celebration of it.

This spurs Updike to both cruelty and beauty. The self-consciously Joycean 
Wife-wooing (1960), from the extended story cycle aboutRichard and Joan Maple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/11/maples-stories-john-updike-review>
 (a married couple whose affairs and eventual divorce are a precise recounting 
of Updike’s own first marriage), contains one of his most merciless passages. 
Sitting in front of the fire with his family, Richard regards his wife 
lustfully, and anticipates having sex after the children have been put to bed. 
But she would rather read about Nixon, and falls asleep reading. Richard’s 
resentment lasts overnight:

In the morning, to my relief, you are ugly. Monday’s wan breakfast light 
bleaches you blotchily, drains the goodness from your thickness, makes the 
bathrobe a limp stained tube flapping disconsolately, exposing sallow 
décolletage. The skin between your breasts a sad yellow. I feast with the 
coffee on your drabness. Every wrinkle and sickly tint a relief and a revenge. 
The children yammer. The toaster sticks. Seven years have worn this woman.

Top 10 John Updike short stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/07/top-10-john-updike-short-stories>
Behind the harsh judgment of the spurned lover lies the conception that life’s 
prime is so brief as to almost be a dream. The previous night, in the romantic 
but also obscuring firelight, the narrator could see “the orange shadows on the 
ceiling sway with fresh life”, but in the pale light of day such illusions are 
stripped away.

The same, apparently revelatory, light of day ends Plumbing (1970), one of 
Updike’s most successful evocations of life’s impermanence. He habitually made 
the attempt to invest everyday moments with resonance – a task he failed to 
complete at least as often as he succeeded, but does so here beautifully. 
Through a conversation between Richard Maple and a plumber in the cellar of an 
old, newly purchased house, and Richard’s flow of thoughts about the house just 
departed – once busy with their lives, now silent (“I feel guilty that we 
occupied it so thinly, that a trio of movers and a day’s breezes could so 
completely clean us out”) – Updike establishes an intricate pattern, whereby 
every symbol of rebirth, from the new house and pipework to the memory of an 
Easter egg hunt, is revealed to be a fresh opportunity for something to end; 
stages on the journey to death. “‘Don’t you want to be a big girl like 
Judith?’” Richard remembers asking his youngest child. ‘“Then you can wear 
lipstick, and a bra, and ride you bicycle even on Central Street.’” But the 
child doesn’t want to ride her bike on Central Street. “Why not?” he asks. 
“Because then I will get to be an old lady and die.” At the story’s conclusion, 
Richard and the plumber leave the cellar. “We push out through the bulkhead, a 
blinding piece of sky slides into place above us, fitted with temporary, 
timeless clouds. All around us, we are outlasted”.

“I cannot greatly care what critics say of my work,” Updike said in 1968 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/4219/the-art-of-fiction-no-43-john-updike>
. “If it is good, it will come to the surface in a generation or two and float, 
and if not, it will sink.” Much of his work, despite the nearly unfailing 
presence of a memorable simile, or pitch-perfect phrase, will disappear in 
time. Some – a small amount by Updike’s standards perhaps, but more than many 
can hope for – deserve the permanence we ourselves are denied.

• Next: Varlam Shalamov 
<http://russiapedia.rt.com/prominent-russians/literature/varlam-shalamov/>
• More from Chris Power’s A brief survey of the short story
 