
Researchers have discovered that Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch> is distantly related 
to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the author who created Sherlock Holmes, a role the 
actor has recently made his own.

Sherlock's future in doubt as stars' Hollywood schedules fill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/30/sherlocks-future-in-doubt-as-stars-hollywood-schedules-fill>
According to the website Ancestry.com, Cumberbatch, 40, and Conan Doyle, who 
died in 1930 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/jul/08/sherlock-holmes-conan-doyle>
, were 16th cousins, twice removed. Their common ancestor wasJohn of Gaunt 
<http://www.historytoday.com/richard-cavendish/death-john-gaunt>, duke of 
Lancaster, fourth son of King Edward III and father of Henry IV.

John of Gaunt, who died in 1399, was Doyle’s 15th-great-grandfather and 
Cumberbatch’s 17th-great-grandfather, the website said.

Sherlock returns to screens on Sunday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/benedict-cumberbatch-sherlock-series-four>
, for three new episodes broadcast in the UK by the BBC and by PBS in the US.

With Cumberbatch and co-star Martin Freeman having achieved Hollywood stardom 
– Cumberbatch in Marvel’s Doctor Strange and other films, Freeman in the Hobbit 
trilogy – the new episodes could be their last together onscreen asSherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> Holmes and Dr Watson.


Mark Gatiss, co-creator of Sherlock with Steven Moffat, told a gathering of 
journalists and fans this week: “We would love to do more, but we are not 
lying, we absolutely don’t know.

“It’s up to all kinds of factors, scheduling. Willingness to do it is all all 
here, but we are just not sure.”

Speaking to the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-4078768/We-ve-complete-Benedict-Cumberbatch-hints-new-Sherlock-series-revealing-hard-follow-new-episodes.html>
 on Saturday, Cumberbatch said: “This new series goes to a place where it will 
be hard to follow on immediately.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20Sherlock%20Holmes%20return%20in%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20Day%20episode%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20Sherlock%20Holmes%20return%20in%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20Day%20episode%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video&media=>
Watch Sherlock Holmes return in New Year’s Day episode trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/17/watch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video>
“We never say never on the show, but in the immediate future we all have 
things we want to crack on with, and we’ve made something very complete as it 
is. So I think we’ll just have to wait and see.”

Ancestry.com was not asked to research the backgrounds of Cumberbatch and 
Doyle, said a spokesman who added that its researchers love both the series and 
historical puzzles. The company has not told the actor of the connection.

The return of Sherlock: ‘Being a hero isn’t about being bigger, richer, more 
powerful'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/17/benedict-cumberbatch-sherlock-series-four>
“Making family history connections is similar to piecing together a mysterious 
puzzle, one that the great Sherlock Holmes himself would be intrigued to 
solve,” said Lisa Elzey, a family historian with the website.


Holmes and Watson first appeared in A Study in Scarlet, published in 1887. The 
last Holmes short stories were published in 1927.

In its report of Conan Doyle’s death three years later, the Guardian wrote: 
“The fact that SirArthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle> was at one time a 
politician and latterly a spiritualist will count for nothing compared with his 
fame as a writer of detective fiction. For detective fiction has flourished 
exceedingly, and he is its father.”

He was also a medical doctor and first-class cricketer.
 