Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuZ7JKmcLTsI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuZ7JKmcLTsI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FuZ7JKmcLTsI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
For anyone who thought A History of Violence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/106015/history.of.violence> was one of 
the best films of the last decade andEastern Promises 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/113762/eastern.promises>, while not 
brilliant, was certainly pretty gamey, the prospect David Cronenberg and Viggo 
Mortensen's third consecutive collaboration is exciting.
 Viggo Mortensen as Freud 
Trouble is, Mortensen doesn't seem to feature a whole lot. Most of the running 
time for the first look at A Dangerous Method – billed, on IMBb at least, as a 
look at the intense relationship betweenFreud 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/sigmundfreud> (Mortensen) and Jung (Michael 
Fassbender) and how it spawned psychotherapy – appears to be devoted instead to 
the intense relationship between Jung and a spank-happy Russian patient, played 
byKeira Knightley <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/keiraknightley>. 
 Michael Fassbender and Keira Knightley as Jung and his patient 
Christopher Hampton <http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/christopherhampton>'s 
screenplay, adapted from his stage play The Talking Cure, wobbles – in this 
condensed format, at least – awfully close to Carry On Shrinking. For the first 
half, at least. Loaded lines such as "Perhaps she's the one for your 
experimental treatment?"; "There has been the most dramatic improvement!" soon 
give way to frank erotica: "I want you to punish me", "Never repress anything", 
etc.

It does look gripping, in a Kinsey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/104975/kinsey>-meets-The-King's-Speech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137858/king-s-speech> kind of way. But 
are they flogging the sex angle a touch too hard?
 