
The Bura wind blows from the peaks of the Dalmatian Alps to the Adriatic, dry, 
cold and inescapable. It hisses through every crack and crevice, through winter 
and summer clothes and the gaps in the wooden walls of the smokehouses where 
Croatian prsut ham is cured. It is what gives the ham its distinct character. 
Although it is a cousin of serrano and prosciutto, it is unique, the lean and 
salty dry meat, not as exhausting on the tongue as its Italian and Spanish 
relatives. It is wrapped around a scallop on a swirl of polenta infused with 
Istrian black truffle, a potent and refined set of flavours. We have gone out 
for dinner in Zagreb with the guys who run Dancing Bear, our Croatian record 
label. "The staff are a little nervous. They think you're opera stars," says 
Silvije. "It's the name, Franz Ferdinand."

There is a noticeable Austro-Hungarian flavour to the beautiful city, a 
careless grace and grandeur like a supermodel nipping out to Lidl in her 
trackie bottoms and vest after a heavy night. I try to thank the waiter for the 
delicious home-made beetroot-stuffed ravioli made from poppy seed flour. 
"Hvala." It comes out more like "Hoovallurgh". Everyone laughs. My accent is 
bad. I try again. No. It does not come naturally.

We are in the vaulted brick basement of the Sorriso restaurant, where the 
speakers seep music that sounds like 80s power ballads sung with more 
consonants. It is a guy called Massimo, who is massive here. Imagine the long 
reverberating snares and saccharine synths of Foreigner's I Want To Know What 
Love Is or Berlin's Take My Breath Away behind the earnest crooning of what 
sounds like "szjckvcmpscljmj europsoj bajbji". The Croats all suck on domestic 
Ronhill fags between courses. The wine is Istrian too and very good, but not as 
interesting as the biska liqueur, a mistletoe brandy served in a thistle-shaped 
glass, which perfectly concludes a great meal.

We wander through the main square, still busy with trams. Zoran points out the 
defiant equestrian statue of Josip Jelacic, leader of the Croatian resistance 
in the 19th century. "His sword always points towards our enemies. He used to 
face north towards Hungary. We moved him to face south towards Serbia in 1990." 
"Where will they point him next?" I ask. "I don't know," laughs Zoran. 
"Probably Slovenia."

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 