
‘I remember stealing my first potato. I was 11. I put it in my top pocket. I 
thought everyone could see it. I felt like it was burning a hole through my 
shirt.” Our guide, Mr Lee, takes off his glasses and rubs the bridge of his 
nose. He is small and smiley. Even in the midday heat, a crisp crease runs down 
his khaki trousers.

We are standing at the exit to Choeung Ek, the most famous of the Killing 
Fields, south of Phnom Penh, after our official tour. “The Khmer Rouge had 
moved us to our final village,” says Lee. We ate watery rice in the evening. 
They pretended they ate the same, but we knew they had food after dark. Hunger 
took up all your day. It was all you could think of. Everything became edible.”

It is a legacy that lives on, perhaps, in Cambodia’s cuisine, where seemingly 
few things are off the menu. As a food enthusiast, I have come with an open 
mind and an empty stomach, keen to get to grips with the country’s unusual 
fare. My journey starts with me joining the intriguingly named Ducky and Mr 
Smiley (an animated Australian ex-pat and a toothy tuk-tuk driver) fromUrban 
Forage <http://www.urbanforage.co/> for a food tour of the night markets of the 
capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F06%2Fcambodia-food-tour-phnom-penh-siem-reap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409829335143%2Fe0fe1732-5263-4816-ac1f-1a1bfb60323c-2060x1820.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20food%20tour%20of%20Cambodia%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20travel%20writing%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F06%2Fcambodia-food-tour-phnom-penh-siem-reap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20food%20tour%20of%20Cambodia%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20travel%20writing%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F06%2Fcambodia-food-tour-phnom-penh-siem-reap%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409829335143%2Fe0fe1732-5263-4816-ac1f-1a1bfb60323c-2060x1820.jpeg>
 Olivia Swann and husband with a banana-leaf boat in Cambodia Photograph: PR 
In a fug of alien noise and smells we pass neat pyramids of tiny glistening 
brains, huge papillated curly tongues and duck-egg foetuses (pong tia koon). 
The latter, boiled and eaten with pepper and lime juice, supposedly give 
strength to the consumer. Holding the smooth white eggs up to the stall’s strip 
lighting reveals a fluffy silhouette curled inside, beak and feet tucked in 
tightly. It’s a bit too “out there” for me but some locals seem to be enjoying 
it.

I spend too long inspecting a spiky green rugby ball, which I find out is a 
jackfruit. The stall-keeper smiles, takes the knife she has been decapitating 
prawns with, and scoops out a bright yellow section. It tastes of bubblegum. 
And, of course, prawns.

Sleepy children sit atop piles of shiny vegetables while mopeds carve 
non-existent routes between tightly packed stalls. Trays of deep-fried 
grasshoppers are frozen in tableaux mid-leap. A man inspects a basket of black 
“thousand-year” eggs: duck eggs that have been stored in ash and salt until the 
shells blacken, the whites turn to a brown fetid jelly and the yolks to a 
gentle green slime. Nearby, a purple-edged crab scutters past my toes as it 
escapes from a bucket and makes a bid for freedom, only to find itself square 
in a moped’s path.

Ducky encourages us to try the offerings from the stalls surrounding the 
market. We start withkaw sach tru, wobbly pork belly oozing over hot coals, 
followed by muscular frogs’ legs dipped in lime, salt and pepper – both 
surprisingly delicious. We drink sharp pomelo juice from a plastic bag with 
straws and round off our Cambodian canapés with a handful of rambutans: 
delicately perfumed fruits encased in hairy, scrotum-like packaging.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F06%2Fcambodia-food-tour-phnom-penh-siem-reap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409829436115%2F49b296d1-18ff-426e-956a-946f1af4dc89-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20food%20tour%20of%20Cambodia%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20travel%20writing%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F06%2Fcambodia-food-tour-phnom-penh-siem-reap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20food%20tour%20of%20Cambodia%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20travel%20writing%20competition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F06%2Fcambodia-food-tour-phnom-penh-siem-reap%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409829436115%2F49b296d1-18ff-426e-956a-946f1af4dc89-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cookery class run by Frizz restaurant, Cambodia Photograph: PR 
The next morning we join a cookery class run by Frizz 
<http://www.frizz-restaurant.com/> restaurant (half-day course £10, full-day 
course £14). Together with a dozen other ineptbarang (foreigners), we are 
coaxed through the basics of makingfish amok: coconut fish curry steamed in a 
boat of banana leaves. Pummelling spices in a huge wooden pestle and mortar 
takes its toll on three American ladies, who opt instead for a seat and a cold 
Angkor beer. A small serious-faced Cambodian boy quietly takes over, swiftly 
producing perfect curry paste for each of them. In a nod to bushcraft specialist
Ray Mears <http://www.raymears.com/Ray_Mears/About_Ray_Mears.cfm>, we are 
encouraged to make a vessel for the steaming curry using only a banana leaf and 
two toothpicks. My husband tests his banana boat by filling it with curry and 
holding it over my head.

That evening we have dinner at Romdeng 
<http://www.tree-alliance.org/our-restaurants/romdeng.asp?mm=or&sm=rd>, a 
training restaurant for former street children housed in a handsome colonial 
villa. Our waiter’s trousers are two inches too long for him and he introduces 
himself timidly. His face beams when we order the deep-fried tarantula. “Scary, 
but very tasty, yes?”

When they arrive, the arachnids have been arranged as if they are chasing each 
other around the plate. Their legs crunch like hairy Twiglets; their abdomens 
are full of nondescript bitter brown sludge. I can’t imagine developing a taste 
for them.

Our waiter’s face beams when we order the deep-friend tarantula. ‘Scary, but 
very tasty,’ he says
 Spiders on sale in Phnom Penh. Photograph: Alamy 
The next morning we board the bus to Siem Reap where we are welcomed by a 
rotund lady with goody bags containing a plain baguette and a bottle of water. 
She informs us over the PA that we are “about to travel a very bumbly road” and 
advises that seatbelts must be worn at all time. She subsequently unfolds a 
battered red deckchair and sits in the middle of the aisle, eating crisps and 
watching Spiderman on the DVD player.

We spend our days exploring the incredible sights of Angkor Wat and our 
evenings exploring the vast choice of local restaurants. On our last night, we 
treat ourselves to the six-course tasting menu atCuisine Wat Damnak 
<http://www.cuisinewatdamnak.com/>. We sit in a cool, quiet courtyard drinking 
dry French wine. Heavy cutlery clinks politely and impeccably observant waiters 
anticipate our needs. But even here, in the most renowned of the city’s 
restaurants, there is still no ingredient that is out of bounds. The menu 
includes crispy beef tongue, stir-fried frog meat, and a salad of lotus: lotus 
roots, lotus stem and fresh lotus seeds.

The cooking may be fancy but the flavours are strong, proud and true. We are a 
world away from a stolen potato, but even here, in the long shadow of the 
regime, food serves as a reminder that everything is precious and nothing 
should be taken for granted.


• The trip was provided by Rickshaw Travel (01273 322399, rickshawtravel.co.uk 
<http://www.cambodiatravelplan.co.uk/holidays-cambodia.htm>), which offers 
bite-sized tours and longer itineraries, allowing customers to create their own 
trips. A 15-day tour to Cambodia and Thailand starts at £1,155pp, including 
internal but not international flights
 