
For an emerging film-maker, breaking new ground can be a poisoned chalice. A 
few years ago, the gentle childhood drama Wadjda became the first 
feature-length film shot entirely in Saudi Arabia, a landmark achievement that 
inevitably dwarfed the impact of the film itself (a decidedly low-key affair 
about a teenage girl who dreams of owning a pushbike). Director Ana Lily 
Amirpour may well avoid such a fate with her striking debut feature A Girl 
Walks Home Alone At Night, hailed in its press release as “the first Iranian 
vampire western”, if only because it’s hard to imagine such a niche 
claim-to-fame inspiring many imitators.

More importantly, that buzzy strapline doesn’t account for half the pleasures 
to be found in this silkily strange little film, in which genre awareness is 
always a part of the journey but rarely the destination. Shot in California but 
scripted in Farsi, the film follows a skateboard-riding, hijab-wearing teen 
vampire as she roams the streets of Bad City, a fictional Iranian gangland 
populated by sinister characters cut neatly from the pages of hardboiled crime 
novels.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_YGmTdo3vuY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_YGmTdo3vuY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_YGmTdo3vuY&media=>
The title, with its echoes of patriarchal reprimand, signals a feminist 
sensibility that bubbles ceaselessly beneath the surface of the film, boiling 
over every time our bloodthirsty protagonist permits herself to feast on those 
men who fail to pay Bad City’s female population the proper respect. For the 
most part, though, A Girl Walks Home Alone At Night is more concerned with 
atmosphere, aesthetics and the possibilities that arise as the narrative and 
stylistic norms of contemporary vampire fiction are thrown to the wind.

Case in point: when our hero falls for a handsome, troubled mortal, a familiar 
quandary ensues – like all young nosferatu, she must choose between love and a 
good meal. Here, however, the dilemma is framed in the nihilistic tones of 
actual adolescence, and not the tawdry theatrics of the Twilight saga.

StudioCanal, DVD, Blu-ray & VOD
 