
Pakistan's general election on 11 May will mark the first time a 
democratically elected government in the country has been succeeded by another. 
Since independence from Britain in 1947, civilian rule has been repeatedly 
overturned by military coups, the last led by GeneralPervez Musharraf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pervez-musharraf> who held power from 1999 
until 2008, when democracy was restored.

The election is also remarkable for its unpredictability following a 
significant constitutional devolution of central government power in 2010 under 
the presidency of Asif Ali Zardari, and the linked development of a more open, 
freer public discourse. Demographic pressures, economic and security worries, 
the advent of social media andnumerous new challenges to the hegemony of the 
established parties 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/131447032/Previewing-Pakistan%E2%80%99s-2013-Elections>
 have added to the uncertainty.

The electoral landscape

Pakistan's population totals roughly 190 million, of whom an estimated 
two-thirds are under 30. About 92 million of the total are adults aged 18 or 
over, and of them, 84.4 million are registered voters. An estimated 40 million 
young Pakistanis will be eligible to vote for the first time. The absence of a 
recent census, large-scale, ongoing shifts in population from the countryside 
to the cities and a lack of reliable nationwide opinion polls and polling data 
mean that any predictions are mostly guesses.
 Pakistan population estimates by age group Photograph: Guardian 
The issues that may shape the outcome are more clear-cut. Pakistan's economy 
has been battered by three years of successive floods from 2010 to 2012 that 
damaged the country's agricultural heartlands. Power cuts are endemic, with 
some rural areas receiving only four hours of electricity a day. Clean water 
and food, adequate education and healthcare remain beyond the reach of many 
Pakistanis. Crime and unemployment are big issues in the cities.

A low or no-skill workforce, low productivity, lack of competitiveness, poor 
infrastructure, unaffordably high public spending, lack of foreign investment, 
endemic corruption and physical insecurity combine to threaten the prospects of 
future generations. Foreign exchange reserves are falling, the fiscal deficit 
is rising, and IMF bailout help is again being sought. Little wonderthe 
government is all but broke 
<http://www.nation.com.pk/pakistan-news-newspaper-daily-english-online/business/18-Apr-2013/pakistan-to-miss-4-2pc-growth-target-imf>
; in Pakistan, less than 1% of the population is registered to pay income tax.

The process

Pakistan's elections largely follow the Westminster first-past-the post 
system, although 70 seats are reserved for women and minorities and allocated 
by PR. Candidates on 11 May will seek seats in the lower chamber of the 
national assembly and in the four provincial assemblies – Punjab, Sindh, 
Baluchistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (formerly North-West Frontier Province).
 Map of Pakistan showing major cities and provinces Photograph: Guardian 
A total of 172 out of 272 directly elected seats is required for a governing 
majority in the national assembly, although no single party is expected to 
achieve that. At present a caretaker government is in place. An independent 
election commission has been created to oversee the polls, and outside 
organisations such as the EU have agreed to send observers. Most commentators
expect the election to produce another coalition government 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pakistani_general_election,_2013> after a 
possibly prolonged period of wrangling.

Concern has been expressed about the reliability of electoral rolls given 
rapid population shifts and the possibility of deliberate fraud. Some voter 
lists have been computerised for the first time. Intimidation of voters by 
extremist religious or separatist groups is another worry.

Five terrorist attacks since 11 Apri have killed 24 people 
<http://dawn.com/2013/04/17/electioneering-turns-sour-for-liberal-political-parties-in-kp-2/>
, includinglethal bomb explosions at election rallies 
<http://dawn.com/2013/04/19/21000-polling-stations-declared-sensitive/> in 
Peshawar and Khuzdar.

The players
 Asif Ali Zardari 
The centre-left, secular Pakistan People's party 
<http://www.ppp.org.pk/pppchange/> (PPP) of the assassinated former prime 
minister, Benazir Bhutto, remains Pakistan's foremost political force. It led 
the outgoing government in coalition with other parties, controls the Sindh 
assembly, and participates in ruling coalitions running all the other provinces 
bar Punjab. Bhutto's widower, Asif Ali Zardari, holds the presidency (he is due 
to stand down in September), and their son, Bilawal, is the party's new leading 
light. But the PPP is expected to pay a price for governmental failures and 
could fall foul to a US-style "throw the bums out" mood among disillusioned 
voters.
 Nawaz Sharif 
The conservative, right-leaning PML-N, or Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz 
<http://www.pmln.org/>, is led by Nawaz Sharif, the prime minister ousted in 
1999 by Musharraf and the only figure outside the PPP with tested national 
appeal. Sharif could do well. All the same, the PML-N remains basedprincipally 
in its Punjab stronghold 
<http://dawn.com/2013/04/18/pml-n-names-candidates-for-lahore-seats/>, where 
Nawaz's brother, Shahbaz, is chief minister, and it is unclear how well placed 
it is to withstand the challenges presented by iconoclastic new entrants.
 Imran Khan 
Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) is an insurgent new party led by the former 
cricket star Imran Khan, which has tapped into popular anger and frustration 
with the main parties. Making good use of social media and public rallies, the 
party strongly opposes the US alliance, campaigns for an end to American drone 
strikes and has adopted a conservative profile favouring an "Islamic democratic 
welfare state". But its ability to translate street-level success into 
parliamentary seats isas yet untested 
<http://dawn.com/2013/04/18/imran-khans-home-attacked-by-miscreants/>.

The Jamaat-e-Islami <http://jamaat.org/beta/site/index/> (JI) is a leading 
religious party with links to the Muslim Brotherhood that boycotted the 2008 
elections but is taking part this time on an Islamist-nationalist platform. It 
is a member of the Defence of Pakistan Council that includes other conservative 
parties such as PTI and leaders of the Punjab-based, nominally-banned
Lashkar-e-Taiba <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lashkar-e-Taiba>. It is to be 
differentiated from the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-e-Fazl (JUI-F), a clerical party 
that was part of the MMA coalition of religious parties that was defeated in 
2008, but still exercises limited influence.

Other parties include the Karachi-based Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM), 
originally formed by Urdu-speaking migrants from present-day India known as 
Mohajirs; the Awami National party (ANP), a secular Pashtun nationalist 
grouping that controls Khyber Pakhtunkhwa; the Baluchistan National 
party-Mengal (BNP), which advocates greater autonomy for Baluchistan; the 
Pakistan Muslim League-Q, comprising former supporters of Musharraf; and 
Musharraf's new All Pakistan Muslim League,which appears still-born following 
his arrest 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/apr/19/pervez-musharraf-house-arrest-pakistan>
.

Game-changers
 General Ashfaq Kayani 
The military: so far the army appears to have stayed out of the election 
process, fulfilling a pledge of non-interference by the chief of staff, General 
Ashfaq Kayani. If true, this marks a change from the past, when the military 
and theInter-Services Intelligence 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-13272009> (ISI) spy agency covertly 
encouraged political proxies to further their own agendas. The military remains 
Pakistan's single most powerful institution. But tarnished by the unpopular 
Musharraf, and in the context of a more open, less controlled public discourse, 
it has been forced to tread more carefully.
 Iftikar Chaudhry 
The judiciary: activist judges led by the supreme court chief justice, Iftikar 
Chaudhry, have succeeded in freeing themselves from governmental control since 
the Musharraf period, when many were arrested. Chaudhry is a self-styled 
champion of democratic legal rights and while he has sometimes over-reached, he 
has made judicial independence an uncomfortable reality for politicians. 
Pakistan's last two prime ministers were both bested by the supreme court. Now 
Musharraf hasfallen foul of the court 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/musharraf-arrest-tempts-clash-of-powers/2013/04/19/6b1e78c6-a8dc-11e2-9e1c-bb0fb0c2edd9_story.html>
, too. If post-election legal disputes ensue, it is possible the next 
government will require Chaudhry's blessing.
 A picture made available on 15 December 2011 shows masked Pakistani Taliban 
militants during exercises Photograph: Saood Rehman/EPA 
Tehreek-e-Taliban (TTP) <http://www.nctc.gov/site/groups/ttp.html>: The 
Pakistani Taliban are committed to the forcible overthrow of secular, 
pro-western governance and the establishment of an Islamist state based on 
sharia law – and they will wreck the elections if they can. Although a 
minority, Pakistan's connivance with the US-led Nato campaign in Afghanistan, 
and the resulting violent overspill (including the killing of Osama bin Laden), 
has fed the TTP cause. Other extreme political, religious and separatist groups 
threaten disruption in Baluchistan, where turnout is usually low as a result of 
intimidation, in Lahore, Karachi, and in the lawless Federally-Administered 
Tribal Territories (Fata), where organising any kind of vote is highly 
problematic.

The Facebook election?

Social media including Twitter and Facebook are having an impact, albeit 
unquantifiable, on the election, especially among affluent younger voters. 
According to one study, Khan's PTI is leading the way.PTI's website 
<http://elections.insaf.pk/> is one of the top 160 most visited in Pakistan, 
with the older parties trailing far behind. Facebook is the most frequently 
visited website in the country. But the digital revolution has some way to go. 
Fewer than one in 10 Pakistanis enjoy internet access, one of the lowest 
penetration rates in the world.
 