
Atlanta is a city chock-full of ambition, where entrepreneurship is on the 
rise. Its burgeoning startup culture marks it as a destination for creatives, 
innovators, and business founders.


But if you’re new to the city, or just visiting, how do you tap into local 
networks, find like-minded people and make new business contacts? Where should 
you go if you want to meet a client over coffee, or relax after a busy 
afternoon of networking?

Here are my recommendations for entrepreneurs visiting Atlanta, from the best 
restaurants for a business lunch, to my favourite places to park my laptop.

Best place to get a coffee

Aspiring entrepreneurs have long been scribbling down business ideas on the 
back of napkins atOctane Coffee Bar + Lounge <http://octanecoffee.com/>. As 
well as the best coffee in the city, theOctane Westside 
<http://octanecoffee.com/westside/>, Grant Park 
<http://octanecoffee.com/where-to-find-us/> and Atlanta Tech Village 
<http://octanecoffee.com/buckhead/> are great places to gather over a latte or 
a craft beer.
 Octane Coffee Westside branch. Photograph: Octane 
Some of my favorite conversations about Atlanta’s tech, startup, and arts 
communities have happened at Octane. I recently went there for a drink with a 
local musician/producer and a contact at a music tech company. We chatted about 
the ways that tech startups, business leaders, and artists in Atlanta can 
better collaborate and support each other’s work.

Making contacts

There are many great ways to get involved in Atlanta’s startup community. One 
of the best methods to get acquainted with the companies and people involved is 
to check out the monthlyAtlanta Startup Village 
<https://atlantastartupcommunity.wordpress.com/> event where five founders 
present their startups to hundreds of attendees. If you’re looking for a casual 
way to connect with new contacts, look no further than Startup Chowdown 
<http://atlantatechvillage.com/events/startup-chowdown>, a weekly lunch at 
Atlanta Tech Village that attracts about 250 people

If you’re looking for a casual way to connect with new contacts, look no 
further than Startup Chowdown

I’ve met some incredible entrepreneurs at these events. My favorite piece of 
advice came from Joe Gebbia, co-founder of Airbnb, at Startup Chowdown when he 
leveled with a few hundred entrepreneurs about how hard entrepreneurship really 
is. Joe spoke about Airbnb’s days in the“trough of sorrow” 
<http://venturebeat.com/2011/10/25/airbnb-failcon-joe-gebbia/> after the early 
buzz around the product wore off, before they really started to scale. I looked 
around and saw many nodding heads and knowing looks from other startup founders 
around the room.

Along with great weekly and monthly gatherings, the city has a fantastic event 
for meeting investors, corporations, and other startups inVenture Atlanta 
<http://ventureatlanta.org/>, the region’s annual venture conference. Venture 
Atlanta is one of the best places to hear from the newest, most innovative 
startups in the city, startup founders who have successfully built businesses, 
as well as the investors who have helped fuel their growth.

Where to set up your laptop

Contacts and community are crucial to success but you also have to do the work 
in order to get your startup off the ground. Need to pop in somewhere and get 
an hour or two of work done but don’t want to end up at Starbucks? You’re 
likely to be near to one of Atlanta’s co-working spaces such asAtlanta Tech 
Village <http://atlantatechvillage.com/>, Strongbox West 
<http://www.strongboxwest.com/>, Roam <http://meetatroam.com/>, Industrious 
<http://www.industriousoffice.com/locations/atlanta>, C4 Atlanta 
<https://c4atlanta.org/>, Opportunity Hub <http://opportunityhub.co/>, Foster 
<http://www.fosteratl.com/>, or NEX Atlanta <http://www.nexatlanta.com/>. Most 
of them offer day passes so you can drop in, use their spaces, and connect with 
other entrepreneurs.
 One of Atlanta Tech Village offices. Photograph: Emily Detrick 
Where to unwind

If you’re taking a day off to reenergise, why not enjoy a classic Atlanta day 
– a late brunch and bottomless mimosas followed by a walk on theBeltline 
<http://beltline.org/about/the-atlanta-beltline-project/atlanta-beltline-overview/>
 or an afternoon inPiedmont Park 
<http://www.piedmontpark.org/visit/park_map.html>? Or, if you want to avoid the 
crowds and enjoy a more unconventional Atlanta oasis, venture over toLake 
Claire Community Land Trust <http://lcclt.org/>near Candler Park 
<http://www.candlerpark.org/>.

On the days when I want to escape the city and soak up a bit of history and 
nature, I head 25 minutes east of Midtown toSweetwater Creek State Park 
<http://gastateparks.org/SweetwaterCreek> and explore the old ruins along the 
trails. This park is one of Atlanta’s best-kept secrets.

Business drinks

Atlanta offers a variety of options for dinner or drinks after a day plugging 
away at your business.Tech Square <http://www.sandboxcrew.com/> is just minutes 
away from some of Atlanta’s best restaurants and bars, includingEmpire State 
South <http://www.empirestatesouth.com/>, Barcelona 
<http://barcelonawinebar.com/atlanta.htm>, Serpas <http://serpasrestaurant.com/>
 andKrog Bar <http://www.krogbar.com/menu.html>.

Head a bit further into downtown and you’ll find Studio No. 7 
<http://www.studiono7.com/info>, one of Atlanta’s newest bars, which doubles as 
a co-working space for creatives and artists during the day. One of my 
favorite’s isNoni’s <http://www.nonisdeli.com/>, which is on the new Atlanta 
Streetcar line <http://streetcar.atlantaga.gov/>. Their pasta is delicious, 
plus they’ve got a great wine list, and I love their vintage decor. It’s 
spacious enough that you can find a nook and have a one-on-one conversation or 
network with a larger group.
 Atlanta has a variety of bars. Photograph: Floortje/Getty Images 
Leaving [north Atlanta neighbourhood] Buckhead after a long day of networking 
at Atlanta Tech Village or Roam? TryKing + Duke <http://www.kinganddukeatl.com/>
, Holeman and Finch <http://www.holeman-finch.com/>, or Seven Lamps 
<http://sevenlampsatl.com/>. Want to accompany your cocktails with a killer 
view of the city? Look no further thanWhiskey Blue 
<http://gerberbars.com/whiskey-blue-atlanta>, one of Atlanta’s best rooftop 
bars.

Or – if you prefer a more low-key evening – try a historic pub in Virginia 
Highland likeAtkins Park <http://atkinspark.com/> or, my personal favorite, 
Manuel’s Tavern <http://www.manuelstavern.com/history.php>. If you’re up for an 
evening of fun, play a game of billiards or bocce atOrmsby’s 
<http://www.ormsbysatlanta.com/> in West Midtown or go bowling at The Painted 
Pin <http://www.thepaintedpin.com/>. No matter how you spend your time in 
Atlanta, it’s nearly impossible to leave the city uninspired, having had some 
interesting conversations and made some great contacts.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 