
Watch this episode on iPlayer here. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00mg1pm/Desperate_Romantics_Episode_6/> 

So. Farewell then, Desperate Romantics. Just six weeks after they'd 
materialized in a flurry of buttocks and hubris, we found ourselves laying a 
wreath by the pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood's upturned boots. There would be no 
more sniggering tubas or laudanum by gaslight. No more stiff-bristled 
assertions of alpha-male supremacy or lingering shots ofRossetti 
<http://www.artcyclopedia.com/artists/rossetti_dante_gabriel.html> roaring at 
the ceiling with his britches around his ankles. It was curtains for the whole 
bally lot of it – a heavy velvet drape drawn across a series that had taken 
artistic license to extremes, then set fire to it, then run away laughing.

But not just yet. While we wondered what to wear to the wake (Clothes? Or 
would that be overdoing it?), there was a final episode to be getting on with. 
So it was all off toMillais 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/exhibitions/millais/>'s tedious connubial love 
nest for some tea and plot. As the bone china chinked chastely, the bird-like 
milksop had a confession to make. "I miss us boys. I missus," he twittered, 
pecking feebly at the empty box of Trill he'd been using to store the remains 
of his masculinity. He wanted them all to live together. Likethe Monkees 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xo9pi_the-monkees-daydream-believer_music>. 
"A reunion! The gang back together!" he simpered, envisioning a headline set at 
the Royal Academy – they could do Ophelia as an encore and get Ruskin on vibes 
and everything!

But doom beckoned. As S Club Painters prepared to move into the Fame Academy, 
Rossetti was planning to take a mallet to his wedding vows by nabbing Jane from 
the virginal ninnyWilliam Morris 
<http://www.walthamforest.gov.uk/william-morris> ("When left alone, we play 
hide and seek ... ")

Elsewhere, Ruskin <http://www.visitcumbria.com/ruskin.htm> delivered a hefty 
disclaimer regarding his own impotence/innate asexual superiority, a large, 
unnerving polemic that contained the phrases "moist grunting encounters" and "I 
like the company of children and young people". Brr.

Then Lizzie killed herself. "I killed her!" howled Rossetti, inconsolably. The 
sudden onset of a conscience had taken the git by surprise. In a scene of 
genuinely touching loveliness, Lizzie's ghost appeared and held the sobbing 
adulterer's hand. "She is not at peace because she thinks I did not love her," 
he bugled through the tears, his faithless nose throbbing with guilt. The 
script adjusted its black armband and sighed. There followed a solemn montage 
that furthered the "being quite sensitive while conveying the ongoing 
disintegration of the Brotherhood" vibe: an Annie-lessHunt 
<http://www.artchive.com/artchive/H/hunt.html> moping around in his dressing 
gown and mourning-beard; a nonexistent Fred weeping violently on some cobbles.

Naturally, the misery couldn't last. Overcome by greed/boredom, Rossetti dug 
up the poetry book he'd dropped despairingly on Lizzie's coffin and skipped off 
grieflessly into the night, confident his poems about leaves and sleeping would 
keep him in coins and guilt-free sex for life. At this, the final traces of 
Fred's admiration for Rossetti drifted off like dandelion fluff. Alone in the 
graveyard, the feckless groupie cleared his throat for the inevitable 
what-a-bastard coda. "I realise I will never believe another word Rossetti 
says," said Fred, sighing. "I am finally free."

The end.

So. Did the blithe contempt for historical accuracy tweak your bustle? Did the 
constant parade of oscillating lady-bits jar with the drama's obvious sympathy 
for the plight of the oppressed Victorian muse? Or was the liberty-taking 
merely the cherry on a wobbling dramatic blancmange of audacious fun? Your 
Desperate thinkings below, if you'd be so kind.
 