
Character over cash

Western Sydney Wanderers’ Asian Champions League coronation is another 
milestone moment in Australian football history. Importantly too, it isone more 
massive step 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/02/western-sydney-wanderers-are-kings-of-asia-and-the-football-story-of-the-year>
 in Australia’s decade-long integration into Asia.Of course the win was 
certainly not one for the connoisseurs 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/?nk=cad5fb5310f035383b97079212646f0b>. In fact it 
was downright ugly at times. However, what is forgotten at times across Asia, 
and even locally, is that A-League squads are constrained by a salary cap. Such 
a notion would be unthinkably in most countries, let alone the Gulf nations who 
make up most of west Asia’s football elite. Privately one or two Wanderers 
players admitted after the first leg that their opponents were superior. Yes, 
money can buy rare talent, but purchasing heart and team unity is a far more 
difficult commodity to collect off the shelf. The next challenge for Australian 
football will be for modern ball-playing teams like a Brisbane Roar of recent 
years, or the new-look Melbourne Victory, to win with style and élan. Not that 
Australian football should forget its strongest characteristics, merely build 
upon them.

Happy wandering

There are many notable factors from Western Sydney Wanderers’ ground-breaking 
continental conquest. Undoubtedly they had an incredible amount of luck along 
the way. There were 25 Al Hilal shots to three for the visitors in Riyadh 
according to AFC’s official statistics. Al Hilal fans will be looking at this 
match and collectively shaking their heads much like Socceroo fans were at the 
MCG on 29 November 1997.Mark Schwarzer’s double-block against Uruguay in 2005 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ZdbW7PSPGk> will remain unsurpassed for its 
significance and sheer quantity of TV replays, butAnte Covic’s miracle save 
from Yasser Al Qahtani <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4tOxINBlpFY> will be 
remembered equally fondly by the local football cognoscenti. Hilal, of course, 
had three substantial claims for penalties. All of them were strong cases, 
although they did themselves no favours with the modern penchant for ‘finding 
contact’, and subsequent theatrical tumble. Mr Nishimura from Japan clearly was 
spooked fromprevious experiences that gained global notoriety 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9vY3DP9pu-Q>. Who would have thought the 
opening game of the 2014 World Cup could have such an impact on Australian club 
football? Though, of course, given Covic’s presence and form, he may well have 
remained unbeatable, even from the penalty spot. Perhaps the most notable 
over-arching factor of all from the campaign was that the Wanderers’ simply 
embraced the tournament. Not every A-League participant can say the same over 
the years. It is no coincidence that Adelaide United did so in 2008 and equally 
reaped rewards. The Wanderers clocked up an incredible 100,000km in a 
tournament Tony Popovic described as “an honour” to participate in. The end 
result?Dancing on the streets of Parramatta 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ObnJ1nTczUs>. There are many that never 
thought they would live to see such a day. Johnny Warren, 10 years since his 
passing, must be looking on from somewhere with pride.

Melbourne City’s still to find their heart

One wonders how Melbourne City will score goals in any quantity without a 
quality No9 in their squad. City have constantly misfired in front of goal so 
far this season and are light on proven goalscorers. David Villa aside of 
course, with theSpaniard’s farewell spoiled by the impressive Adelaide United 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-10-31/adelaide-united-spoils-villa-farewell-by-beating-melbourne-city/5859300>
. Many too, arequestioning the shallow nature of changing a club identity 
<http://www.shootfarken.com.au/early-evolution-of-melbourne-city-fc/>, and with 
valid reason. And for all the positive headlines around the newly-rebranded 
entity, the confusion around the length of Villa’s stay does little to help the 
credibility of the club, or even the competition. But it is what can happen 
when the league is beholden to wealthy owners. Unfortunately until the 
governing body has potential club owners forming an orderly queue out the door, 
such growing pains are part and parcel of the league for now.

Tightening margins

The on-field quality continues to grow in the A-League, and so too has the 
equality between the clubs. Champions Brisbane Roar and new Asian kingsWestern 
Sydney Wanderers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers>
 currently prop up the bottom of the ladder, albeit having played fewer games 
than most rivals. Even Newcastle Jets, who many tipped for the wooden spoon, 
have shown some promising signs in the opening weeks. They will improve further 
as they find their rhythm under the new direction of debut coach Phil Stubbins. 
The smallest gap between top and bottom at the end of any season (with a 
10-team competition) was 19 points in 2010. That figure could well change come 
next April. A similar scenario exists in the W-League, and is also another sign 
of Australian football’s growing. The W-League started seven years ago with 
only three genuine championship contenders. This season, for the first time, 
every team in the competition has genuine semi-final ambitions. Remarkably, 
Brisbane Roar currently prop up the table despite 11 internationals on their 
books.

Just like old times

Meeting your former employer is always likely to result in some friction. 
Graham Arnold (and Bernie Ibini) had such a reunion against Central Coast, 
which gave theSydney FC <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> boss a 
chance to use the significant knowledge he has on all things Mariners. In many 
ways, the Mariners still operate under Arnold’s blueprint. It was with the 
Mariners and at the same Allianz Stadium where Arnold had his greatest coaching 
triumph 18 months ago in winning the A-League. The derby certainly had some 
spicy moments as Sydney won 2-0. The almost comedic interruption to the fast 
bowler’s free-kick run-up of the seemingly combustible Eddy Bosnar was one 
notable that was undoubtedly discussed at Sydney training this week.
 