
With its horticulturally-framed romance, period setting and Alan Rickman in 
the director’s chair,A Little Chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-little-chaos> could have been the year’s 
big costume drama – but UK cinemagoers, perhaps drained by the sight of Aidan 
Turner’s abdominals in Poldark on TV, have not flocked to see it.

How did Fast & Furious 7 become the fastest film to break the $1bn barrier?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2015/apr/20/fast-and-furious-7-fastest-film-break-1bn-barrier>
A Little Chaos review – a load of compost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/16/a-little-chaos-review-peter-bradshaw>
The film earned £330,373 at the weekend from an extensive 426 screens, leaving 
a £775 screen average. It lost out to rivals, including Tom Hardy thriller 
Child 44 (£505,422) and Woman in Gold (£367,764), starring Helen Mirren.

Its prospects were perhaps damaged by middling to hostile reviews – the 
Telegraph and Independent praised Kate Winslet’s lead performance, but the 
Evening Standard and the Guardian handed out one-star ratings. It’s the second 
drama dud in a row for Winslet, whose film with Josh Brolin, Labor Day, also 
stalled at the box office. She is, however, part of the successful YA franchise 
Divergent, playing the megalomaniacal Jeanine Matthews.

At the top of the chart for a third week was Fast & Furious 7, adding another 
£3m at the weekend to take it to £32m – part of its $1bn tally globally. It’s 
closing in on the £34.8m that Fifty Shades of Grey made earlier in the year, 
meaning that by the end of the week it should be 2015’s biggest film in the UK 
so far.

Also continuing to perform well are Cinderella in second place, its takings 
now at £17.4m, and Home, which crossed the £20m mark to become the 
best-performing animation of the year. Mid-budget and star-free teen flick The 
Duff also sticks around, dropping off only 33% in its second week.

All will be quaking at the arrival of The Avengers: Age of Ultron, which will 
be the main draw for cinemagoers this weekend. Some are expecting the Marvel 
sequel to outpace even the first Avengers film, which is the 
third-highest-grossing film of all time. It sits at number 19 on the all-time 
UK box office list.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fa-little-chaos-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193050887%2Fcrop_KP_181431_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Little%20Chaos%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fa-little-chaos-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Little%20Chaos%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fa-little-chaos-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193050887%2Fcrop_KP_181431_640x360.jpeg>
 Video review for A Little Chaos. 
UK box office, 17-19 April

 * Fast & Furious 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fast-furious-7> (£3m) 
 * Cinderella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cinderella> (£1.08m) 
 * Home <https://www.theguardian.com/film/home> (£854,377) 
 * Child 44 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/child-44> (£505,422) 
 * Woman in Gold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woman-in-gold> (£367,764) 
 * The Spongebob Movie: Sponge Out of Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-spongebob-movie-sponge-out-of-water> 
(£364,000) 
 * A Little Chaos <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-little-chaos> (£330,373) 
 * The Duff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/02/the-duff-review-high-school-makeover>
 (£326,000) 
 * John Wick <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-wick> (£309,000) 
 * Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/18/paul-blart-mall-cop-2-review-segway-sequel-rumbles-through-the-motions>
 (£288,975)  