
Of the countless pictures Anthony Browne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-browne> produced as a child, only a 
single example survives. "It's from when I was about six," he says, "and it's 
of a pair of legs - mine, probably - in short trousers. Poking out of one sock 
is a little figure in a pirate's hat, and - this is slightly embarrassing - 
there's another one disappearing up the leg of the shorts; all you can see are 
his feet waving around. And there's a voice bubble coming down from above 
asking 'What's in my sock? And who's going up my trousers?'"

The legs, he believes, had been subjected to what he and his brother called 
"the shape game". It's a game that pivots on the act of transformation: one 
player sketches an object - "a circle, a star, a hat, anything" - the next adds 
a couple of pencil strokes to set it off in a new direction. "And I imagine 
what happened was that I drew a pair of legs walking along, then made them over 
into something different: into a story. I only wish," he laughs, "it were a bit 
less psychological-seeming. Nothing even vaguely like this happened to me. It's 
not meant to be dark, just funny!"

Perhaps. But what began as straightforward, if off-beat, humour in his 
childhood pictures has shifted since then into dicier, more liminal territory: 
as a children's illustrator, Browne's greatest strength is his willingness to 
let the darkness in. His work traces a line back through the threat and promise 
of Jan Pienkowski, Maurice Sendak and, ultimately, Lewis Carroll, marrying 
surrealist wit with real, honest-to-goodness menace in drawings in which 
kettles sprout ears, faces scream out of tangled branches and shadows bulge and 
slide and unpick themselves from their owners. It is the resultant atmosphere 
of ambiguity - the implication that nothing, not even what's before our eyes, 
can be relied on - that lends his work such complex and enduring appeal, and 
that made his appointment as the UK's sixth children's laureate earlier this 
month such an exciting one. His stories, said the former poet laureate Andrew 
Motion, "give deep and immediate pleasures ... his work entrances children, and 
has influenced an entire generation of illustrators."

First dreamed up, so the story goes, by the then-poet laureate Ted Hughes and 
his friend Michael Morpurgo while the pair were carp-fishing, the children's 
laureateship carries a two-year tenure and a bursary of Â£15,000. Browne's first 
move as laureate, he says, will be to attempt to reinvigorate the role of 
picture books in society, "to encourage everybody to value the act of looking. 
In recent years, picture books have become the sole province of the very young; 
children are encouraged to move on to 'proper' books earlier and earlier. 
Looking is just as important as words: if vision is marginalised, we lose our 
ability to really see."

Of Browne's antecedents in the role, only one, Quentin Blake, is an 
illustrator; like Blake, the others - Morpurgo, Jacqueline Wilson, Michael 
Rosen, Anne Fine - are all authors with established public profiles. Although 
his fine watercolours, in which every hair and blade of grass are painstakingly 
picked out, are instantly recognisable to scores of children, Browne himself is 
a little-known figure; one of his chief anxieties about the job is the amount 
of talking it will entail. "Writers are articulate. Artists find it more 
difficult," he suggests. "For Michael [Rosen, his immediate predecessor] I 
don't think it was that different from what he did already: broadcasting, 
speaking, reading ... My life is sitting in a room on my own, painting 
pictures. So, yes: I'm a little bit nervous about that."

He shouldn't be. In person, Browne turns out to be one of nature's talkers; 
warm and easy, with a fondness for the demonstrative pronoun ("we moved to this 
pub", "we went to this school") that leaves you feeling as if you're peering 
over his shoulder at a shared history. It's a history that began in 1946 in 
Sheffield where Browne was born, the second son of his parents, Jack and Doris. 
Shortly after his arrival, the family moved to his grandparents' pub in the 
small village of Wyke, near Bradford; the pub itself he remembers as "cramped, 
dark, cold, and pretty rough - working-class men drinking Tetley's bitter, 
which was known as 'fighting beer'. My dad watered it down, but it didn't stop 
the fighting."

The son of a Yorkshire farmer, Jack Browne joined up as soon as the second 
world war broke out - a decision that would cast a long shadow over Browne's 
childhood. "It was a very traumatic experience for him," Browne says now. "I 
found his diaries after he died; he wrote about killing German guards with his 
bare hands - a shocking thing to discover about your gentle, loving father. My 
mum told me she came into the house one day and found him in a frenzy, 
wrestling on the floor with a vacuum cleaner: when he came to, he said he'd 
thought it was a German. There was no post-traumatic stress therapy; the 
memories hung pretty heavily. Whenever he drew for us it would be of soldiers 
in uniforms."

Between teaching cadets after the war and moving to the pub, Browne's father 
was briefly employed as an art teacher ("in a private school, where you didn't 
need qualifications"), and it was he who first prompted Browne to pick up a 
pencil. "We learned by copying him," Browne explains. "The first things I 
remember drawing were battles - big sheets of paper covered in terrible scenes 
of carnage - though when you looked closely there were little jokes and speech 
bubbles and odd things going on in the background." Further inspiration came 
from comics, but in the end, Browne found, drawing "was simply something I did: 
in the same way that I loved to kick a ball around, I loved to draw".

As he grew older, his hobby began to yield benefits. Browne and his brother 
attended the local school, where his skill with a pencil provided a shortcut to 
popularity. "People asked me to draw pictures; the other kids were impressed, 
though it very nearly got me into trouble on one occasion. We had a very 
attractive English teacher, Miss Jones, and one lesson, to impress the others, 
I started drawing her naked - or at least," he grins, "what I imagined her to 
look like naked. And of course, she discovered me. I was mortified ... but she 
picked the picture up, smiled and walked away! She said nothing, and I never 
saw it again."

Browne's school was supportive of his artistic ambitions; however, despite 
embarking on English and art A-levels, he left without taking the exams. "I was 
bored," he confesses. "So I left, and did my foundation year at art college in 
Leeds. And it was in that year that my dad died."

The shattering effect of his father's sudden death on the 17-year-old Browne 
would play out for years to come in stories haunted by flawed fathers. The 
father in his chilling, crepuscular retelling of Hansel and Gretel is 
shamefully weak, dominated by the children's chain-smoking stepmother; in 
Piggybook he is obnoxious; in Browne's best-known work, Gorilla, he is all 
absence: cold and distant, glimpsed from behind as he hunches over his desk. 
And yet when he talks about his own childhood, Browne is full of praise for his 
father, whom he describes in warm, almost reverent terms. It was many years 
before he was prepared to recognise, then investigate, the disjunction.

"I slowly became aware that people kept asking: 'Why d'you give dads such a 
hard time?'" he says. "At first I was defensive, thinking, no, I don't - but of 
course they were right. And then I started to wonder whether it was to do with 
my not forgiving my dad for going away when he did."

His recollection of the day itself is quasi-mythical, filled with the sort of 
symbols and portents that inflect his stories. "It was Easter Monday," he 
remembers. "I was playing rugby for the first time with the men's team, and my 
parents had come to watch. My brother was playing, too; I travelled on the 
coach with the other men; it felt like a real coming-of-age moment. The sun 
shone, we won, and afterwards we drank in the bar with my parents and all these 
heroes I'd been watching for years. I felt I was really pleasing my dad, being 
the kind of son he wanted.

"And then we got home. Dad was mending a plug when suddenly he fell, seemingly 
in slow motion, and started writhing around making these terrible noises. It 
went on and on: we didn't know what to do . . . and then he was just lying 
there: this great, god-like figure on the floor, amid this scene of total 
devastation. I'd thought he was invincible. And I'd just started to rebel 
against him; we'd only just begun to argue ..."

For years afterwards, it's possible to read Browne's books as one long 
answering-back: a means of carrying on the barely begun argument beyond the 
grave. It wasn't until much later that the chance discovery of his father's old 
dressing gown allowed Browne to move their relationship beyond that frozen 
moment. "My mother had come to live with us, and she'd brought this old 
suitcase. When I opened it, there it was: dad's dressing gown, just as I 
remembered it. It really took me back to being a small boy, thinking of him as 
a god who could do everything. The memory freed me to do a positive book about 
him [the celebratory My Dad]. Though I won't say I'd never criticise fathers 
again ..."

After graduating from art college, Browne found work as a medical illustrator 
at Manchester Royal Infirmary, a job he credits with teaching him how to "use 
watercolours in a controlled, tight way, and tell stories in pictures". From 
there, he went on to design greetings cards for Gordon Fraser, until 
eventually, feeling the need to supplement his "fairly meagre" income, he sent 
off some of his more child-oriented designs to publishers. Hamish Hamilton 
suggested he try his hand at a picture book, and introduced him to Julia 
MacRae, who would become his editor for the next 20 years. The idea for the 
first book they produced together, Through the Magic Mirror (1976) was based on 
("stolen from") Magritte's portrait of the man who looks into a mirror and sees 
the back of his head; it was Browne's first foray into the playful surrealism 
that permeates his work. "It wasn't a conscious decision," he says now, "but 
actually, all children are surrealists. It catches an echo of the way they see 
the world, looking at it for the first time." (His ongoing fascination with 
Magritte would, years later, land him in hot water. After publishing Willy the 
Dreamer, in which Willy dreams of becoming a painter, Browne's French publisher 
called to inform him he was being sued by the Magritte estate. "None of the 
pictures looked anything like the originals, but his estate paid a very 
expensive art copyright lawyer to go through the book saying 'This is an 
infringement, and this, and this'. I thought I was paying homage. It's a 
peculiar business.")

Several modest successes followed, but it wasn't until the 1983 publication of 
Gorilla, which won a raft of prizes, including the Kurt Maschler award and the 
Kate Greenaway medal (which he'd win again in 1992 for Zoo), that his work shot 
to prominence. "Force me to choose my best book, and I always come back to 
Gorilla," he admits. "It was the first time I felt I understood what picture 
books could do." The now-classic story of lonely Hannah whose disappointment on 
receiving a toy monkey blooms into delight when it swells into a living, 
breathing gorilla who takes her everywhere (the zoo, a cafÃ©, dancing in the 
moonlight) her own father is too busy to take her, took fire from two separate 
sparks. "The first," Browne explains, "was a childhood birthday. I'd longed for 
a trumpet, a real one, but when I woke in the night and opened my present, I 
found this shiny plastic version. I remember the disappointment, vividly. And 
the second was a little boy in the village I used to live in. His parents had 
split up, and he was living with his mother. He could only have been about 
four, but he wandered the village, and practically every day he'd knock on my 
door, dressed in his Superman outfit. I think he saw me as a father figure, and 
it made me think about loneliness - the way Hannah looks for a father."

Fathers again. Asked to explain his fascination with gorillas, Browne begins 
by saying "well, they're glorious to draw, in the way old people's faces are - 
all the lines", but soon admits "it is to do with my dad, I think. He was a big 
man, but kindly, and gorillas are like that: powerful, capable of aggression, 
but mostly gentle, sensitive." It's a view he holds even though his only 
real-life encounter with gorillas ended badly. "A production company asked me 
to present a programme on picture books," he recalls, "and they thought it 
would be a great idea for me to meet my first gorilla. The keepers explained 
that the gorillas needed to get used to me, so I had two sessions before the 
cameras showed up, and they'd groomed me, and climbed on my back. But it turned 
out the zoo-owner, John Aspinall, had had an argument with the TV company about 
how much they were paying him, so on the day itself, as I was going in, he 
threw rose petals into the cage. These are like sweets for gorillas; they get 
very excited. And the first gorilla came up to me and suddenly sank her teeth 
into my calf. It was the most excruciating pain I've ever felt. I knew I was 
hurt: the leg of my jeans was turning black. Eventually the producers saw what 
was going on and took me to hospital."

Although he's never ventured back into a cage, his preoccupation with primates 
endures. His creation of meek, wistful Willy the chimp, who battles the bully 
Buster Nose and befriends gentle giant Hugh Jape, proved his ability to tap 
into the anxieties children wrestle with; he tackled social exclusion and 
snobbery through the unobtrusively sophisticated layered viewpoints of Voices 
in the Park (another Maschler winner), and the sexual division of labour in 
Piggybook. In 2000 he became the first British illustrator to win the Hans 
Christian Andersen award (illustration's highest accolade) for a body of work 
that consistently, distinctively blends sunshine with shadow, and tackles 
tricky subjects with warmth and wit. "Children are more than capable of coping 
with all kinds of stories; it's adults who are threatened by the darkness in 
children's books," he says. "But it has a place: an essential place. If we 
insist on telling children that everything in the garden is lovely, we're doing 
them a disservice."

Browne on Browne

I see Hansel and Gretel as a breakthrough book for me, and one of the reasons 
is because I started to apply meaning to the hidden details. Whereas in 
previous books I had treated them as little more than doodles in the 
background, in Hansel and Gretel I employed them as subtle aids in telling the 
story. Not only do they re-enforce the main narrative: they also offer an 
insight into extra narrative information that isn't expressed in the text.

Here, as the stepmother prepares to wake the children, we can see that her 
shadow on the wall behind her is extended by the gap in the curtains so that it 
appears as if she is wearing a pointed hat. As she formulates her plan, the 
implied hat links and equates her with the witch whom the children encounter 
later in the story. If you look even more carefully, you can see this 
triangular motif is repeated several times within the picture: the shadow above 
the chest of drawers, the steeple of the church in the picture on the wall, the 
mouse-hole in the skirting board and an ambiguous object on top of the wardrobe.
 