
A weirdly bracing atmosphere of disillusion pervades Anton Corbijn’s superbly 
composed and controlled movie, adapted by the Australian screenwriter Andrew 
Bovell fromJohn le Carré <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre>’s 2008 
spy novel, and featuring an outstandingly wintry performance from Philip 
Seymour Hoffman in his final leading role on screen. The all-encompassing 
cynicism induces a stark kind of clarity, for the audience if not the fictional 
participants. This film is pregnant with ideas, and an awful kind of disquiet.

What the debacle of Burgess and Maclean was for the world of Tinker Tailor 
Soldier Spy in the early 70s, so 9/11 is for the international intelligence 
community in this tense drama, set among quarrelling spies in Hamburg, where a 
decade previously the WTC kamikaze attacks had been planned. This is a world of 
agents arguing about the size and shape of bolts to be affixed to the barn 
door, strenuously competing with each other to assess the horse’s sickening 
absence, and yet tormented with the thought that a second horse might yet 
suddenly emerge from the hay.

The spycraft on offer looks modern and yet in some ways as old as the hills. 
USB sticks with top-secret material are gingerly removed from packs of 
cigarettes bought with a curt exchange of gaze-avoiding pleasantries from a 
trusted vendor. Chiefs have Ipcress-File-style turf spats, tumblers of scotch 
are gulped in the middle of the day, great big tank-like Mercs are driven 
around, and spies in male-female pairings pretend to be snogging while carrying 
out surveillance – that time-honoured device for spy movies to sneak in a bit 
of sexiness.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F19%2Fsundance-film-festival-most-wanted-man-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F1%2F19%2F1390124303810%2FSundance-film-festival-20-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sundance%20film%20festival%202014%3A%20A%20Most%20Wanted%20Man%20and%20Whiplash%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F19%2Fsundance-film-festival-most-wanted-man-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sundance%20film%20festival%202014%3A%20A%20Most%20Wanted%20Man%20and%20Whiplash%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F19%2Fsundance-film-festival-most-wanted-man-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F1%2F19%2F1390124303810%2FSundance-film-festival-20-017.jpg>
 Sundance film festival 2014: A Most Wanted Man and Whiplash - video review 
Günther Bachmann is the dishevelled German spymaster running a covert, 
deniable operation to root out jihadis in Hamburg; he is played with a rumpled 
worldliness by Hoffman, looking like a hungover panda, his great bristly 
eyebrows often arched up in fatigue and pain. At one stage, Hoffman emerges 
from a helicopter and staggers towards the camera while tucking his shirt in, a 
lonely, unhappy unmade-bed of a man. He speaks English with a German accent, a 
convention that has the effect of tamping down some of the mannerisms that this 
actor was perhaps a little prone to. The resulting speaking voice has something 
of Anthony Hopkins about it. Bachmann’s team have located an illegal Chechen 
immigrant and suspected terrorist called Karpov (Grigoriy Dobrygin). He is not 
the usual penniless asylum seeker: Karpov has a letter of introduction to a 
sinister private banker, Thomas Brue (Willem Dafoe) and, to the authorities’ 
astonishment, this man now wishes to clean out a certain numbered account. 
Glowering intelligence chief Dieter Mohr (Rainer Bock) wants to bring in Karpov 
straightaway, but Bachmann urges hanging back, because Karpov might lead them 
to someone higher up the command chain, and appears to have the support of a 
CIA operative, Martha Sullivan (Robin Wright). Yet Bachmann’s perceived laxity 
enrages his supposed colleagues and increasingly the chief suspect, the most 
wanted man, could be Bachmann himself.

The suspected Chechen terrorist puts the story at the nexus of toxic bad faith 
in post-cold-war relations. After 9/11, America was concerned with the war on 
terror, and had no energy to devote to the apparently obsolete issue of 
challenging Russian expansionism: their wars in Chechnya were in any case 
widely seen as an entirely understandable battle with Islamic terrorism. 
Corbijn’s film tacitly indicates how Karpov himself, though haunted by a split 
ancestry of Chechens and Russians, also effectively has a third political 
parent for his current existence: America, along with its ally Germany.
 Philip Seymour Hoffman in A Most Wanted Man. Photograph: Panther 
As for Bachmann, what is his game plan? It is a question that Robin Wright’s 
CIA agent puts to him politely and
repeatedly. Does he really want to let Karpov lead to a bigger fish, and then 
another even bigger fish? Or is he now simply concerned with his own 
realpolitik, never bringing down a top spy, never achieving an ethical or 
ideological victory, but just managing the situation, simply owning and running 
compromised figures, for fear that destroying them will create a dangerous void 
for unknown new players?

Hoffman’s Bachmann is not the taciturn and pathetic George Smiley as imagined 
by Gary Oldman or Alec Guinness, but he is a wan, exhausted figure, burdened 
with his own fathomless vision of the unending not-so-great game, and perhaps 
ennobled by his determination to make the best of it. It is a commanding 
performance from Hoffman, and an overwhelmingly satisfying note for this actor 
to end on.

 * This article was amended on 11 September, to clarify this is Hoffman’s 
final leading role
 