
My most depressing film experience of all time? Watching A Most Wanted Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-most-wanted-man> in Screen 1 at the Odeon 
Cinema, on Panton Street off London’s Leicester Square – a small, cold, dingy 
space in which rose-scented air freshener only thinly disguised the smell from 
the gents next door. I remember it was Monday night – last Monday, in fact, but 
it calls for some distance – and there were only three other people in the 
room. The setting wouldn’t have seemed out of place in the film itself as 
another gloomy, fetid place into which its German spymaster Günther Bachmann 
(played byPhilip Seymour Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/philipseymourhoffman>) lumbers, wheezing, and 
lights up a fag.

Not even a second viewing could convince me that Anton Corbijn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn>’s adaptation of John Le 
Carré <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre>’s 2008 spy thriller – 
Hoffman’s “superb swanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/a-most-wanted-man-review-philip-seymour-hoffman>
g” – is actually any good. It’s a “five-star” film (likePhilomena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/philomena>) that belongs, if anywhere, on TV 
– a two-hour episode in which Bachmann’s next anti-terror operation in Hamburg 
is to bring in a Chechen refugee called Issa Karpov (Grigoriy Dobrygin), 
suspected by the Russian authorities of being a deadly terrorist. Karpov may be 
the “most wanted man” – Bachmann wants to use him in a sting operation, 
intelligence chief Dieter Mohr (Rainer Bock) wants to bring him in right away, 
while CIA agent Martha Sullivan (Robin Wright) seems willing to wait – but this 
film is really all about Bachmann. And Bachmann is a bit of a bore.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F19%2Fsundance-film-festival-most-wanted-man-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F1%2F19%2F1390124303810%2FSundance-film-festival-20-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sundance%20film%20festival%202014%3A%20A%20Most%20Wanted%20Man%20and%20Whiplash%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F19%2Fsundance-film-festival-most-wanted-man-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sundance%20film%20festival%202014%3A%20A%20Most%20Wanted%20Man%20and%20Whiplash%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjan%2F19%2Fsundance-film-festival-most-wanted-man-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F1%2F19%2F1390124303810%2FSundance-film-festival-20-017.jpg>
 Sundance film festival 2014: A Most Wanted Man and Whiplash - video review 
Hoffmann does get inside the role of a man who is heavy and slow with fatigue 
(and boy do we hear every breath, each rattle of his lungs as they plead for 
air); he is unkempt, never far from a tumbler of whisky, yet sharp as Sherlock. 
But the political issues – the complex dilemmas and power struggles surrounding 
counterterrorism in the wake of 9/11 – seem more plausible than the way he 
behaves. How to explain the dated espionage moment in which he and his 
second-in-command, Irna Frey (Nina Hoss), snog in the street so as to hide his 
face during an undercover operation? Or the meeting that takes place between 
Bachmann and Sullivan in a sleazy bar where, in poorly timed exchanges 
(critically praised for capturing “sinister undertones 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/07/28/spell>”) they search for deeper 
meaning in what they do? And then he sends his fist into the face of a random 
drunken punter who is being abusive to his girlfriend: it’s so bad it’s surreal.

Meanwhile, the characters that surround Bachmann – the pawns that he is 
manoeuvering – are in desperate need of a greater sense of purpose. There’s 
Karpov’s naive young lawyer (Rachel McAdams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rachel-mcadams>), who, when she’s not 
pedalling around on her bicycle (please, somebody give her a BMW, and have her 
put her foot down), spends far too much time making meaningful eye contact with 
the tortured and apparently vulnerable Karpov. He, in turn, spends way too much 
time throwing paper darts at a sheet of polythene in the room where he is held 
for his safety. Meanwhile, Bachmann’s crack team resemble a bunch of actors 
waiting for something to happen – for Seymour Hoffman to arrive, for some 
dialogue to begin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fa-most-wanted-man-my-most-overrated-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F17%2F1416228346043%2F4cf60b35-c90a-4553-9416-6249d36ebf9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Most%20Wanted%20Man%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fa-most-wanted-man-my-most-overrated-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Most%20Wanted%20Man%3A%20my%20most%20overrated%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F18%2Fa-most-wanted-man-my-most-overrated-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F17%2F1416228346043%2F4cf60b35-c90a-4553-9416-6249d36ebf9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In need of purpose … Rachel McAdams, Willem Dafoe and Grigoriy Dobrygin. 
Photograph: Allstar/Film4/Sportsphoto 
This high-alert scenario has been described in one five-star review as “bracing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/a-most-wanted-man-review-philip-seymour-hoffman>
”, yet what the film most sadly lacks is suspense. However Corbijn dresses it 
up – with brutalist architecture backdrops; in green and yellow colours; with a 
slippery, sinister banker (Willem Dafoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/willem-dafoe>) – there’s no escaping the 
pedestrian pace of a storyline that is propelled by the findings of a forensic 
accountant. And so it is that the climactic moment to which the whole film 
builds is not the balancing of a coach laden withgold bullion on the edge of a 
cliff <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36279/italian-job>, but the 
signing of a cheque in a bank, after which, watching from their surveillance 
van, the spies exhale sighs of relief – and so do we, as the film’s end at last 
seems in sight.
 