
Over the past five years, New York City has become a playground for fans of 
immersive theater. In these often rewarding experiences, viewers step into the 
world of the play and are asked to participate in strange and unique ways. 
Audience members watch as Macbeth conspires with Lady Macbeth at Sleep No More 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/31/sleep-no-more-avant-garde-theatre-new-york>
, and sip tea with Alice and the Mad Hatter atThen She Fell 
<http://www.thenshefell.com/>. But though New York is overstuffed with movie 
theaters, both first run and repertory, there’s been nothing comparable to the 
immersive theater experience for film fanatics – until now. On 25 March, the 
Regal Cinemas at Union Squarewill open the first 4DX theater on the east coast 
<http://screenrant.com/batman-v-superman-4dx-theater-release/>, one of only two 
in the US. Having experienced the supremely silly fun of 4DX last year in Los 
Angeles, I couldn’t be more thrilled.

4DX began in South Korea in 2009, and quickly caught on around the world. But 
it wasn’t until 2014 that the company finally introduced it in the US, at Los 
Angeles’ LA Live multiplex 
<http://www.lalive.com/movies/4dx-is-coming-to-regal-cinemas-la-live>. As a 
kid, I’d riddenStar Tours 
<https://disneyworld.disney.go.com/attractions/hollywood-studios/star-tours/>, 
the Disneyland simulation ride that moves the theater around to make you feel 
as though you’re on a spacecraft on the run from Darth Vader. I’d also ridden
Universal Studios’ Back to the Future Ride 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yn1UzVVWrmw>, Steven Spielberg’s attempt to 
silence George Lucas, who taunted him that he could never match Star Tours’ 
achievement. (He didn’t, Star Tours was way better). So I sort of knew what to 
expect when I walked into LA Live to seeAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man> in 4DX last summer. I’d heard about 
seats that shake and the blasts of air that fly by your head if one character 
fires a gun at another. But those are just a few of the bells and whistles that 
would make legendary horror directorWilliam Castle 
<http://listverse.com/2011/05/24/top-10-william-castle-film-gimmicks/> green 
with envy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2F4dx-cinema-new-york-batman-v-superman-fake-rain-smells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffefe3a98f30543630e8e761e010bdff915cc3a3f%2F0_0_2160_1216%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%20in%204DX%20with%20fake%20rain%20and%20added%20smells%3F%20Bring%20it%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2F4dx-cinema-new-york-batman-v-superman-fake-rain-smells%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%20in%204DX%20with%20fake%20rain%20and%20added%20smells%3F%20Bring%20it%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2F4dx-cinema-new-york-batman-v-superman-fake-rain-smells%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffefe3a98f30543630e8e761e010bdff915cc3a3f%2F0_0_2160_1216%2F2160.jpg>
 Paul Rudd in Ant-Man: you’ve not seen it unless you’ve seen it in 4DX. 
Photograph: Allstar/Disney 
Castle, the brains behind campy classics such as The Tingler 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5kATTmjxt-o> and House on Haunted Hill 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0051744/reference>, was the first to add a level 
of immersion to the film experience when he came up with gimmicks such as 
buzzing seats, skeletons that floated over the theater, and nurses stationed in 
the lobby in case viewers suffered heart attacks. But where Castle’s gags were 
delightfully cheap, 4DX goes hi-tech, retrofitting an entire movie theater with 
special seats that can lurch forwards, backwards and side to side. They’re also 
equipped with other motion devices to make you feel as if you’re riding in a 
car or flying through the air. When it was raining on Ant-Man onscreen, I could 
feel droplets hitting my head (don’t worry, you can turn the multiple water 
functions off). When he was flying through the air during his final 
confrontation with Yellowjacket, there were lightning flashes, clouds of fog 
and a crisp, cool night wind blowing through the room as the seat bounced me 
back and forth. I squealed and giggled at the joy of it all.

I’m an old-school 3D purist. I like flaming arrows shooting off the screen 
into your chest, hissing snakes that seem as though they’re about to strike 
that little old lady in the third row or big hands that reach out for help over 
the heads of the audience. I’ve no interest in the way 3D has been done since
Avatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/17/avatar-james-cameron-film-review> 
revived the technology in 2009. Cameron’s film seemed to use 3D as a way to 
broaden out the cinematic space, creating depth in a film which lacked it in 
almost every other area. The superhero flicks and animated kids films which 
were later retrofitted with 3D also fell flat for me, as far as the experience 
went.

Zack Snyder: new Batman v Superman trailer is not a super-sized spoiler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/08/zack-snyder-new-batman-v-superman-trailer-is-not-a-super-sized-spoiler>
3D is supposed to be fun. You’re supposed to scream and throw up your hands as 
that crow swoops down to strike you on the head, then laugh at the silliness of 
it, and scream again. It’s trickery, magic, razzle-dazzle, a realization of 
that classic canard about the audience at the Lumière brothers’ The Arrival of 
a Train at La Ciotat Station who supposedly jumped out of their seats and ran 
for the exits, thinking that the approaching locomotive was going to wipe them 
all out. Essentially, that’s what 4DX does. It turns the moviegoing experience 
into a ride, a sensory experience, complete with bubbles, fog, mist, wind, 
lightning, andyes, John Waters fans, smells  
<https://interactivemediaarchive.wordpress.com/odorama-john-waters-polyester/>
piped right into your olfactory sensors.

The best part about it for me is that it makes even a somewhat mediocre film 
such as Ant-Man fun. Whatever you feel about the movie itself, you’re not 
getting swindled on the experience. I hadn’t planned on seeingBatman v Superman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2> because I still cannot quite 
wrap my head around the concept of why the two should be enemies. But I’ll be 
there on 25 March, giggling my ass off and flying through the air with the 
spandex-suited superheroes. Take that, Sleep No More.
 