
For the first time in Pakistan's history, a former army chief is to be tried 
for an offence, treason, that until now has been reserved for trouble-making 
journalists and Baloch nationalists. Until Monday, the newly elected Pakistani 
prime minister,Nawaz Sharif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/12/pakistan-elects-nawaz-sharif-imran>
, had avoided making statements about the fate of the former president,General 
Pervez Musharraf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/22/pakistan-court-summons-pervez-musharraf>
, who is in house-prison on a number of charges, including complicity inBenazir 
Bhutto's murder <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-22394552>.

But when the PM addressed parliament this week, he made the boldest statement 
a prime minister has yet made about a former army chief: Musharraf was to be 
tried under Article 6 for treason.

Musharraf seized power in a coup in 1999 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/6960670.stm>, toppling a 
democratically elected government, and in the last year of his reign, imposed a 
state of emergency, a kind of mini martial law, by making himself both 
president and army chief. As Sharif spoke, desks were thumped in agreement, and 
parliamentarians from all political parties echoed the prime minister's 
statements.

In a country where politicians can't agree on a national terrorism policy, 
opposing the military's interference in politics is a stand embraced now by all 
parties, from the nominally liberalPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> People's party (PPP) to the 
religious Jamaat-e-Islami.

This is unprecedented. The distance travelled over the past five years is 
significant. Much more instructive than speculating on the outcome of 
Musharraf's case – likely to end in a brokered amnesty and reciprocal exile of 
the kind given to Sharif in 1999 – is understanding Pakistan's burgeoning 
commitment to parliamentary democracy.

For five years, from 2008 to 2013, the PPP government pushed through all 
manner of threats. It sacrificed economic growth at the altar of survival – 
including shrewd appeasement of the military when the occasion demanded – to 
become the first government in Pakistan's 66-year history to successfully 
complete its term in office. The PPP survived four major events – theOsama bin 
Laden raid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/01/pakistan-osama-bin-laden-military>
;memogate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/22/pakistan-military-conspiracy-gilani-speech>
 (in which former Pakistani ambassador to the US Husain Haqqani was accused of 
conspiring against the armed forces); "Salala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/26/nato-attack-pakistan-kills-eight>
", in which 24 Pakistani soldiers were killed by US-led Nato forces at two 
Pakistani military checkposts at Salala, along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border; 
and resistance to an influential preacher-turned-activist,Tahir-ul-Qadri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/16/cleric-qadri-creates-pakistan-crisis>
, who held the country hostage for a week demanding the corrupt PPP government 
be brought down. President Zardari survived these events in addition to 
removing sweeping powers of the president and restoring them to the prime 
minister.

Then, six months after Bin Laden was killed, and rumours of a coup began 
afresh, then prime ministerYousuf Raza Gilani 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-16511826> lashed out against the 
military, saying: "They cannot be a state within a state. They are answerable 
to parliament." This was the first time a prime minister had dared to refer to 
the covert actions of the armed forces – from intelligence-gathering to 
meddling in Afghanistan – in clear terms. The media picked up on it, and some 
columnists and talk-show hosts even lauded the former PM for his bravery and 
conviction.

Finally, the 2013 elections proved that Pakistanis themselves desperately wish 
to experience uninterrupted representative democracy. The most thrilling aspect 
of the elections was the sight of voters coming out in record numbers in the 
midst of the most violent election campaign Pakistan has ever seen. The Taliban 
had repeatedly warned Pakistanis to stay home, to spurn democracy, to spurn 
parliament, to spurn the western system of governance. They killed 125 people 
in the run-up to the elections – especially members of the secular Awami 
National party – to show they meant business. And yet, the people of Punjab 
voted en masse for governance, the people ofKhyber Pahtunkhawa 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khyber_Pakhtunkhwa> for peace, and the Sindhis – 
mired in the tragic history of the Bhuttos – voted on the compulsions of 
patronage. Caught in a web of sectarian and state-sponsored violence, 
Balochistan registered the lowest turnout. It is no small feat that the 
election commission still declared the voter turnout to be 60%.

Sharif, the 63-year-old prime minister who was born in the cradle of 
dictatorship, has styled himself over the past decade as the military's wiliest 
baiter. Sharif's clash with Musharraf in a 1999 coup – which led to a stint in 
prison followed by a decade-long exile – has left Sharif with a deep suspicion 
of the military. One of the lessons Sharif grasped during his decade-long exile 
is that if Pakistan's civilian leaders want to keep the military at bay, then 
the paradigm that keeps the military in power – enmity with India – must be 
changed. His constituents voted in record numbers for governance over ideology, 
prosperity over animosity (with India).

Pakistan has a long way to go before the benefits of representative democracy 
trickle down to the poor. But the groundwork of the past five years, including 
a successful transition to a new government, indicates that Pakistanis want to 
participate wholeheartedly in elections as a means of discarding failed rulers 
and empowering those who talk about governance. The old respect for the 
military continues as a diffuse "feeling" but bread-and-butter issues are far 
more important.

In the run-up to the elections, the cricket-luminary-turned politician, Imran 
Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/04/imran-khan-pakistan-cricketer-politician>
, moved hundreds of thousands of Pakistanis with his vision of a 
corruption-free "new Pakistan". Notwithstanding continuing problems with 
terrorism and energy, a distinct strain of a new Pakistan has indeed been born. 
It is not a country in which entrenched codes of patronage have disappeared 
overnight or in which a developing democracy has purged itself of an abstract 
noun (corruption). The new Pakistan is a country in which shifting demographics 
and a rising, politically aware urban electorate can increasingly determine the 
outcome of its choices.  
 