
I didn't know a thing about Chicago music when I arrived here from Brooklyn in 
1977. But the day I set foot in the city I fell in love.

The first thing you notice is there's an enormous gospel influence in Chicago 
music. The black community of the city pride themselves on two things: their 
education and who has the best church choir. In my first six months in Chicago 
I went to more churches and listened to more choirs than I had ever done in my 
life, and learnt a whole new appreciation for gospel music.

The music I first started playing at the Warehouse, the club I was DJing in at 
the time, was mainly soul-based disco. But as disco died, we started to play 
around with drum machines and re-edit old songs, to keep the crowd engaged, to 
make them hear classics in a different way. Other people who were perhaps more 
musically inclined than me, often because they were musicians in church bands, 
saw this as a new way of doing things and picked the ball up and ran with it. 
Jamie Principle, whom I worked with at the time was a keyboardist in his church 
band and his father was a preacher. At first people in Chicago referred to the 
new music as 'Warehouse music', after the club where they first heard it, and 
then that was shortened to house music, which went on to become a universally 
recognised genre. Which is why they call me the Godfather of House.

Even today, Chicago still favours more soulful house music. The most popular 
DJs are playing more soulful house, not techy or trancey house or electro. If 
you really want to see where the locals party, go down to Boom Boom Room at 
Green Dolphin Street on Mondays, or Friday night at Zentra. That's where you'll 
see the city in its element. Chicago obviously also has a strong blues 
heritage, and more recently a strong hip hop and alternative rock scene. But, 
for me, it is all about house music.

Â· Listen to Frankie's podcast www.gochicago.com/mychicago 
<http://www.gochicago.com/mychicago>
 