
There aren't many traces on the internet of the early Polish pioneers: people 
such asKazimierz Prószyński 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kazimierz_Pr%C3%B3szy%C5%84ski> and Bolesław 
Matuszewski <http://www.kinema.uwaterloo.ca/article.php?id=346&feature> who 
were operating at the turn of the century, turning out silent short docos 
called things like Ślizgawka w Łazienkach (Skating-rink in the Royal Baths). 
(Prószyński was also a pioneering camera inventor, developing a model called a
pleograph <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pleograph> in 1894, and a handheld 
effort called anaeroscope <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aeroscope> in 1909.) 
Nor is there any link for Anton in Warsaw for the First Time, Poland's 
legendary first feature film, directed by and starring Antoni Fertner in 1908.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ5xCarbhOhA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ5xCarbhOhA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQ5xCarbhOhA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Fertner, though, went on to a respectable career as an actor in the interwar 
period – you can see him as an old man in Książątko (1937, above) andGehenna 
(1938) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BIPidtnJcxw>.

The first Polish film-maker to leave a significant dent in cinema history was 
Władysław Starewicz <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ladislas_Starevich> – whose 
complicated ethnic background highlights Poland's own political travails at the 
time. Born in Moscow to émigrés from the part of the old Polish-Lithuanian 
commonwealth that had been absorbed into the Russian empire after partition in 
1795, Starewicz had grown up in the Lithuanian city of Kaunas and went back to 
Moscow to work on his pioneering insect stop-motion films. Notable titles 
include The Cameraman's Revenge (1912) ...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvIC0Sb6pLvI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvIC0Sb6pLvI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvIC0Sb6pLvI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
... and The Insects' Christmas.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLs2WtJakgo0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLs2WtJakgo0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLs2WtJakgo0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The Russian revolution forced him to flee to France, where he set up his own 
studio and completed his masterpiece,The Tale of the Fox 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Tale_of_the_Fox>, in 1930 (though it wasn't 
released until 1938).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Frz0wAD1o0gs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Frz0wAD1o0gs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Frz0wAD1o0gs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Polish silent cinema also unearthed another major star, who could take 
advantage of the internationalism afforded by the absence of dialogue. Born 
Barbara Apolonia Chałupiec, it was asPola Negri 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pola_Negri> that she shone in first Polish, then 
German, silents.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQBF7uW4UoDg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQBF7uW4UoDg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQBF7uW4UoDg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
In 1922, she made the big switch to the US and ended up becoming one of silent 
Hollywood's biggest stars, courting scandal with a string of affairs (including 
with Chaplin and Valentino) and being tagged as the "Queen of Tragedy".
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4WWqXvVbznE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4WWqXvVbznE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4WWqXvVbznE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The interwar period, in which Poland achieved nationhood for the first time in 
centuries, led to an outpouring of nationalist epics, often adapted from 
literary sources. One of the leading figures of the period was director Henryk 
Szaro, a one-time student of theatre innvovator Vsevolod Meyerhold, and who 
went on to direct significant films such as Mocny Człowiek (The Strong Man) 
(1929) –due to screen at the Polish film festival in London next week 
<http://www.kinoteka.org.uk/movie/the-strong-man_mocny-czlowiek>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnKcXU52teqY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnKcXU52teqY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnKcXU52teqY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Szaro also flourished in the sound era; he made the Faustian drama Pan 
Twardowski <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pan_Twardowski> in 1936 (below) and 
followed it with a Yiddish film,The Vow 
<http://www.kinoteka.org.uk/event/kinoteka-closing-night>, on the eve of the 
war. Szaro, a Polish Jew, was shot dead in 1942 after the Nazis invaded Warsaw.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEWG7NLjquC4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEWG7NLjquC4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FEWG7NLjquC4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Ironically, probably the best-known film to survive Poland's sound period was 
the Yiddish musicalYidl with a Fiddle <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0027231/> 
(1936), shot in Krakow'sKazimierz <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kazimierz> 
district with an imported American star,Molly Picon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molly_Picon>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNMRop4BT2G4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNMRop4BT2G4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNMRop4BT2G4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Prolific Polish film-maker Michał Waszyński also found time to direct a 
Yiddish classic, The Dybbuk, adapted fromthe Russian-Jewish play by S Ansky 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dybbuk>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4yg-sEBoAYc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4yg-sEBoAYc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4yg-sEBoAYc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The chaos and destruction wrought by the second world war meant that Poland 
had to reinvent its film industry from the ground up. The subsequent Soviet 
occupation meant that cinema became a state concern; the director of Film 
Polski, the government production company, wasAleksander Ford, a well-organised 
Stalinist <http://www.kinema.uwaterloo.ca/article.php?id=114&feature> who had 
joined the Red Army during the war. Here's a bit of footage of Ford in 1959, 
shootingKnights of the Teutonic Order 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knights_of_the_Teutonic_Order_%28film%29> (1950), 
Poland's anti-German answer to Eisenstein'sAlexander Nevsky 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Nevsky_%28film%29>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9vqVXLnlmjQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9vqVXLnlmjQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9vqVXLnlmjQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
One plus point: the Łódź film school 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Film_School_in_%C5%81%C3%B3d%C5%BA> was 
founded in 1948, with virtually every Polish film-maker of substance in the 
postwar years passing through its doors. One of its graduates,Andrzej Wajda 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrzej_Wajda>, was apprenticed to Ford and then 
given a chance to direct his own film. The result was the revelatoryA Generation
 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048500/> (1955), in which Wajda emerged as an 
independent and fresh voice and the leader of a new spirit in Polish cinema.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnVedEkQIXLU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnVedEkQIXLU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnVedEkQIXLU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
A Generation was the story of a callow youth sucked into the anti-Nazi 
resistance; Wajda would go on to produce two more in his "war trilogy", Kanal 
(1956, below) and Ashes and Diamonds (1958)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSzxXvVJSMoc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSzxXvVJSMoc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSzxXvVJSMoc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Meanwhile a contemporary of Wajda's, who even had a small role in A 
Generation, was plotting his escape from postwar Poland. Roman Polanski made 
one extraordinary Polish production, Knife in the Water (1962): a three-hander 
filmed with such impeccable stylishness that it earned an Oscar nomination for 
best foreign film and allowed Polanski to head off to the west and shoot
Repulsion <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/78751/repulsion> in London.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLaBa2Wj3gHk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLaBa2Wj3gHk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLaBa2Wj3gHk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Another émigré from postwar Poland was animator Walerian Borowczyk, who made 
the surrealist stop-motion filmDom <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dom_%28film%29>
 (House) (1958), in collaboration with Jan Lenica, shortly before leaving for 
France in 1959.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fp9M8AkOYyTU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fp9M8AkOYyTU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fp9M8AkOYyTU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Borowczyk became notorious for the erotica he produced in the 1970s – but 
returned to his Polish roots in the mid-70s to make anadaptation of The Story 
of Sin <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0072919/>, the literary classic by Stefan 
Żeromski already filmed by Szaro in 1933. Incredibly it's on Megavideo (below), 
though without subtitles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFUL0U3LKe4a%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFUL0U3LKe4a%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFUL0U3LKe4a%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Jerzy Skolimowski was another director who found life difficult in 1960s 
Poland; he worked as a scriptwriter on Knife in the Water and began a series of 
semi-autobiographical films in 1965. The fourth of these,Hands Up! 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Wex4DZ3pLM> (1965), triggered the authorities' 
wrath and like Polanski he headed west. Among the films he made in exile is the 
extraordinaryDeep End <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77888/deep-end> 
(1971), due for reissue on 6 May 2011.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxb4zMypfawg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxb4zMypfawg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxb4zMypfawg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Wajda, meanwhile, had been plugging away in Poland throughout the 1960s and 
1970s, withMan of Marble <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0075902/> (1976), his 
critique of theStakhanovite movement 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stakhanovite_movement>, his most successful film 
of the period.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F22LYox7MITk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F22LYox7MITk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F22LYox7MITk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
That is, until its follow-up. Part of Man of Marble was set in the Gdańsk 
shipyards – the cradle ofSolidarity 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solidarity_%28Polish_trade_union%29>, the Polish 
trade union federation – and gave Wajda unparalleled access to the labour 
movement. In 1981, he madeMan of Iron <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Man_of_Iron>
, containing the same central character, which offers an amazing record of a 
turning point in Polish history.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FB7GU98L4Ml0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FB7GU98L4Ml0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FB7GU98L4Ml0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The subsequent clampdown meant Wajda, like Polanski before him, was off; but 
he spent his time abroad profitably.Danton 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0083789/> (1983, below), starring Gérard 
Depardieu, was arguably the best of the work he produced before he could return 
home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FaXlbYlzLWqM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FaXlbYlzLWqM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FaXlbYlzLWqM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The high-achievers of the next generation of Polish cinema were led by 
Krzysztof Kieślowski, the key figure of a movement known as the "cinema of 
moral anxiety". Kieślowski had been making films since the 1960s, but only made 
an international impact with 1979'sCamera Buff 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iTAaifMu1Qk>. His epic project based on the 10 
commandments,Dekalog <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Decalogue> – composed of 
10 one-hour films – catapulted him to international renown on the back of its 
two feature film spin-offs, A Short Film About Killing andA Short Film About 
Love <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/102874/short-film-about-love>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4jp6zdr_Rpo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4jp6zdr_Rpo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4jp6zdr_Rpo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
But it was his Three Colours trilogy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/84232/three-colours-trilogy>, beginning 
with Blue in 1993, that sealed Kieślowski's reputation: it remains almost the 
perfect film-in-exile, shot in France with Juliette Binoche and themed around 
the French flag.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXHv6K1JVZPE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXHv6K1JVZPE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXHv6K1JVZPE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
One of Kieslowski's writers on Blue 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77082/three-colours-blue>, Agnieszka 
Holland <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agnieszka_Holland>, carved out her own 
career as a director: she started in Poland with the allegorical backstage 
drama Provincial Actors (1978), before heading west like many before her and 
making an impact internationally with Europa Europa (1990) andThe Secret Garden 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0108071/> (1993).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCDz2HraZPMk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCDz2HraZPMk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCDz2HraZPMk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Amazingly, through it all, Wajda has kept going. After returning to Poland to 
makeKorczak <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0099949/> in 1990 (with an Agnieszka 
Holland script), he has enjoyed an improbable Indian summer. His 1999 filmPan 
Tadeusz <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/85789/pan-tadeusz> caught the 
post-communist mood with its nationalist sentiments and was a huge domestic 
success. And his 2007 featureKatyń 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122875/katyn>, about the gruesome second 
world war massacre covered up the Soviets, is arguably his towering achievement.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9DrgSHIJXAQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9DrgSHIJXAQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9DrgSHIJXAQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=> 