
This film certainly brings back memories. Like its main character, a solo 
sailor played byRobert Redford <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertredford>
, I know what it's like to be alone and in trouble on the open sea. In 1997,my 
yacht capsized in a storm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,,1985507,00.html> in the 
Southern Ocean while I was competing in a solo round-the-world race. I spent 
four days in the upturned hull until I was rescued by the Australian navy. In a 
situation like that, a new person emerges from inside you: you either become 
determined to survive, or you don't.

Redford's character, whose name we are never told, makes a lot of mistakes the 
average person probably wouldn't notice, but they're obvious to an experienced 
sailor. You can't climb back into your boat after falling off it in a storm – 
just try grappling with a yacht in enormous waves. And we don't see him 
carrying any of the usual safety equipment: he has no handheld GPS, no distress 
beacon, noVHF radio 
<http://www.acma.gov.au/Citizen/Consumer-info/All-about-spectrum/Marine-and-Amateur-Radio/marine-vhf-radio>
, not even a pair of binoculars. It's never clear when the film is set, but if 
it's meant to be modern he would surely have had these devices.
 Ahoy! … British sailor Tony Bullimore was rescued in 1997 after four days at 
sea. Photograph: Reuters 
I did enjoy All Is Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/26/all-is-lost-review>, but I 
couldn't work out what the storyline was: we never learn why the sailor is 
making his solo voyage. I suppose some people might wonder, similarly, why 
anyone would decide to sail alone across vast oceans. We all have our reasons. 
I do it because I love the challenge of competing in races; others just decide 
to plod off round the world, taking their time, thoroughly enjoying themselves. 
That's not my idea of fun. If I'm not racing, I'd rather be sailing with the 
people I love, drinking wine and frying up some good food.

Despite the grim experience it depicts 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lk_R04LfUQU>, I don't think the film will put 
people off learning to sail. There's a gulf, anyway, between those who sail on 
holiday and those who train to sail competitively around the world. And we do 
see Redford's character enjoying himself before his problems start – pottering 
about, making cups of tea. I was surprised he didn't talk more, though. When 
you spend so much time alone, you do tend to start talking to yourself.
 