
A Taste Of Honey, London

Director Joan Littlewood's centennial year is being marked at the moment by Oh 
What A Lovely War at Stratford East, with Lionel Bart's Fings Ain't Wot They 
Used T'Be coming there in May. But in 1958 her Theatre Workshop also premiered 
Shelagh Delaney'sA Taste of Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-taste-of-honey>. Set in Salford, it was 
19-year-old Delaney's first play and tackled issues of sex, class, race and 
sexual orientation. Here, Lesley Sharp plays alcoholic mother Helen (Angela 
Lansbury played the same role on Broadway), who takes up with a younger lover, 
leaving teenage daughter Jo (Kate O'Flynn) home alone. When Jo becomes pregnant 
by a black sailor, her gay friend Geoff becomes the surrogate father.

National Theatre: Lyttelton, SE1, Mon to 11 May

MC

Jane Eyre, Bristol

Adaptation sometimes has a bad name in the theatre, seen as a safe bet at the 
box office and lacking ambition on stage. That shouldn't be the case with this 
two-part version of Charlotte BrontÃ«'s Jane Eyre, which will be devised with 
the company and directed by Sally Cookson, whose versions of Cinderella and 
Peter Pan have been theatrically bold in every way. They were delightful, too, 
and very thoughtful in relation to the way their heroines are presented or 
excluded from the story. That inventiveness should suit the story of the mousey 
governess who turns out to have a will of steel and the courage to make a life 
for herself on her own terms.

Bristol Old Vic, Mon to 29 Mar

LG

1984, London

Since Rupert Goold took up the post of artistic director at the Almeida, its 
collaborations with his Headlong company have resulted in Lucy Kirkwood's 
Chimerica and the brilliant musical of American Psycho. Now, George Orwell's 
1984 is the subject of a new co-production with Nottingham Playhouse, with 
Robert Icke and Duncan Macmillan's multi-media adaptation reflecting on topical 
themes of surveillance culture, identity and the nature of truth.

Almeida Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, N1, Sat to 29 Mar

MC

Frozen, Birmingham

There are some plays that sear themselves into your mind. Bryony Lavery's 
drama, first seen on the main stage here in Birmingham in 1998, is one. Set in 
the years following the disappearance and murder of a 10-year-old girl, it 
takes the form of a series of entwining monologues. At its heart are three 
people: Nancy, the child's mother; Agnetha, a criminal psychologist exploring 
the nature of evil and forgiveness; and Ralph, a loner on the lookout for some 
distraction. It's full of compassion, is infinitely reflective and unbearably 
moving.

Birmingham Rep, to 15 Feb; touring to 11 Mar

LG

An August Bank Holiday Lark, Newcastle-under-Lyme

It's Wakes week in 1914, and a rural community in Lancashire is looking 
forward to having a rest and celebrating the annual Rushbearing festival. There 
will be singing and dancing and courting, and nobody wants to think about the 
storm clouds gathering on the horizon that signal war. Taking its title from a 
line in Philip Larkin's poem about the first world war, MCMXIV, Deborah 
McAndrew's new play follows the community as the peace is broken, the young men 
head off to war and what is happening far away starts to affect the lives of 
local people in the fictional village of Greenmill. With the revival of Oh What 
A Lovely War, plus Pat Barker's Regeneration in Northampton later in the year, 
Northern Broadsides' production is but one of many dramas this year remembering 
the start of the war.

New Vic Theatre, to 1 Mar; touring to 14 Jun

LG

The Odyssey, Derby

Simon Armitage's The Last Days Of Troy will be staged at Manchester's Royal 
Exchange in May, but first off there's this Homeric take on the consequences of 
war from the very fine Mike Kenny. It's an ambitious choice for Derby Theatre, 
which is showing real signs of revitalisation under its artistic director, 
Sarah Brigham. Brigham herself directs an epic story that explores the 
aftermath of war and how difficult it is for soldiers to put their lives back 
together on their return home. In a clever move, the show comes with a 
one-woman companion piece, Penelope Retold (19 Feb to 1 Mar), which looks at 
the story from the perspective of Odysseus's wife, and was created by Caroline 
Horton, best known for Mess and You're Not Like The Other Girls Chrissy.

Derby Theatre, Fri to 1 Mar

LG
 