 Anthony Worrall Thompson, known to his many fans as Wozza, this week railed 
against the standard of service in Britain's restaurants. Calling for an end to 
the minimum wage to make waiters work harder for tips, he also blamed eastern 
Europeans for lowering standards. Here, a Polish waitress, Agnieszka Zubik, at 
the Island restaurant in the Isles of Scilly, responds.
Mr Worrall Thompson's remarks about Polish waiters not speaking good enough 
English are an exaggeration. I do not think that is the problem. English is 
very popular in Poland. I did it at university, and we even learn it in primary 
school. Maybe we do not know a very posh kind of English or a large variety of 
words, but still I think it's enough to communicate.

Waiting is not what I plan to do for the rest of my life, but I do take it 
seriously. I have the opportunity to talk to people and to solve problems - I 
find it very satisfying. Probably the best proof of this is that last year I 
was just a waitress and they told me they would like me back this season as a 
supervisor.

You do need at least basic English to work in a restaurant, of course, and you 
have to know how to provide the best service you can. For example, very often a 
guest will ask me to describe one of the dishes, especially now that I am the 
supervisor. And we also give staff briefings before every service, in which I 
explain what the dish looks like and what its ingredients are - even to the 
English waiters.

Diners also keep asking, "Where are you from?" When I tell them I am from 
Poland, they often ask what life is like there and why I am here, not back home 
working on a career. They are really willing to talk to you, and if you do have 
five minutes to talk to them, they do appreciate it. Those little things can 
make their day.

I don't think making us rely on tips is a very good idea, because when they 
get their bill, guests often think that service is included. And sometimes at 
lunch we may only serve two tables, with five people on the staff, so it would 
be very hard for us to get any money.

Remember that the employer has a choice. If a person doesn't know any English 
at all, then the question is: why did the employer employ them in the first 
place?

Â· Agnieszka Zubik was speaking to Leo Benedictus
 