
"You won't see us again until after the operation" says my secondary clinician 
at theWest London Mental Health Trust Gender Identity Clinic 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/gi/gender-identity-clinic/>, supporting my main 
therapist's recommendation that I be referred for surgery. The questions – 
about whether I've made the right decision, about how family, friends and 
colleagues have reacted to my coming out and how I've dealt with transphobia – 
are over.Having lived  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>and 
worked as female 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
 for two years, I've finally completed theReal Life Experience 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-life_experience#Real-Life_Experience> or, if 
you prefer, passed the Real Life Test (as it's also been known).

I thought I'd be jubilant, but leaving, I feel strangely indifferent. Perhaps 
this is because the referral represents a strange mid-point: I addressed the 
RLE's main challenges and became comfortable with my new reality so long ago 
that it seems surreal to link this official end to the (sometimes fraught) 
process of managing my social interactions; but 27 months after entering the 
pathway, I neither have a date for surgery nor any idea when I'll get one.

Before my first GIC appointment, I'd suspected that the RLE would constitute a 
box-ticking exercise, and began asking transsexual friends what boxes there 
were and how I could ensure they were ticked fastest. In practice, this 
involved little more thanchanging my name by deed poll 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/11/become-a-woman-juliet> and 
getting proof of when I starting working as female so my Test could begin from 
the date I provided.

I thought that once I met my supervisors, we could work together on any 
serious problems with loved ones, health, housing or employment, but by the 
time I actually saw them, I'd handled them all myself. There was virtually no 
'therapy': just brief appointments, with basically the same questions asked 
each time, followed (usually weeks later) by a transcript saying that I was 
coping well, and reiterating that I should access the desired medical 
interventions at the earliest point allowed by GIC protocol.

By now, I've been on hormones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/12/transgender-health-and-wellbeing>
 for many months, having been granted access to them aftermy second GIC 
appointment. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/01/transgender-mental-health> 
These have made my social interactions far easier, changing my appearance 
enough so that I 'pass <>' in casual, wordless encounters, or at least stop 
taking abuse from strangers in public spaces. As I became more confident, I 
realised that I'd underestimated the effect that this abuse had on my mental 
health, the full force of which only hit once I began to relax about it.

The new Standards of Care potentially allow the RLE to be abolished entirely, 
but speaking for myself, I would not have committed to anything irreversible (
as did Miranda Ponsonby, transitioning via private healthcare in 1994 
<http://zagria.blogspot.com/2009/10/miranda-ponsonby-1933-soldier-farmer.html>) 
without some prior idea of the ramifications of living as female, or some sense 
that a professional would look after me where necessary. The consequences of a 
failed Real Life Test could have been very serious: it would not have been 
impossible to resume my previous identity, but while my relationships survived 
my coming out, I'm not sure how many would have withstood de-transition.

That said, I never seriously contemplated this, and instead found myself 
frustrated at the system's inflexibility. In particular, I struggled with the 
withholding of oestrogen until after the second appointment – the earliest that 
they can be administered according to GIC rules – especially as I'd lived as 
female far longer than the required three months.

With the possibility of seeing a private clinician who might produce a hormone 
prescription, or even buying them online (with attendant health risks), this 
seemed absurd, especially asthey take months to have any visible or 
irreversible effect 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Gender-dysphoria/Pages/Treatment.aspx>. However, 
there would be equity issues if some were immediately given medication and 
others weren't: the need to avoid litigation from those who feel they've been 
treated unfairly, or been rushed through before deciding, too late, that 
transition was not for them is paramount, particularly in the current financial 
climate.

Taking into consideration its history and the fact that it will doubtless 
continue to evolve, the new Standards of Care state that 'treatment forgender 
dysphoria 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/gender-dysphoria/Pages/Introduction.aspx> has 
become more individualised', aware that there is no one-size-fits-all solution: 
the current model has many frustrations for those certain of themselves (and I 
count myself in this category) but after more than 50 years of trying to 
balance competing pressures from transsexual people and their critics, it's the 
best system that the experts have produced. That's not to be Panglossian: more 
to say that in my two (non-expert) years of navigating the pathway, I haven't 
come up with anything better.
 