
On a train from Brighton to London, I check my appearance, wondering if my 
gender will complicate matters at my destination:The Den 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Den_Stadium>, home of Millwall FC 
<http://www.millwallfc.co.uk/page/Welcome> and their notorious supporters 
<http://www.millwall-history.co.uk/Millwallversusthemob.htm>. Football, widely 
seen in England (but not the USA or Australia, for example) as the last bastion 
of unreconstructed masculinity, is the final sphere of my life in which I began 
to present as female – largely because transitioning involved not just altering 
my body but rethinking all received ideas about gender.

As I said in my first column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/02/transgender-journey>, my 
earliest consciousness of the role that gender plays in socialising came at 
primary school, when a friend said that I had to become "more masculine". Then 
as now, this seemed absurd; I ignored it until a few years later, when I 
realised my desire to transition. Now, I know that my fundamental transsexual 
impulse and my disdain for stereotypically 'masculine' traits are separate 
concerns, but their relationship has been complicated, and managing myassigned 
gender 
<http://sites.google.com/site/transchristians/trans-101/trans-101-assigned-gender>
 before starting thereal life experience 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_life_experience> was, if anything, harder 
than dealing with the varied responses tomy living as female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>.

Plenty of male-to-female transsexual narratives 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1079616/Pictured-British-ex-MOD-boss-70-transsexual-geisha-Japan.html>
 describe a pre-transitional flight into hyper-masculinity as they tried and 
failed to repress their gender identities. This was never the case for me: male 
testosterone levels alone aren't enough to explain typically 'masculine' 
behaviour, and at school, I always felt uncomfortable around louder, more 
aggressive boys. I didn't really know what it meant to be 'masculine' (beyond 
liking the holy trinity of cars, girls and football) but I knew what it wasn't, 
because inappropriate behaviour was rigorously policed: my strongest memory is 
of sitting cross-legged before someone yelled "You sit like a queer!" and I 
realised just how vigilant some teenage boys could be against even the tiniest 
gender transgressions.

After leaving school, I thought differently about how I managed my gender, 
resolving to just be myself, whatever combination of 'masculine' and 'feminine' 
behaviours that entailed. In my early twenties, I enjoyed being androgynous – 
when it felt safe (I'd read too manymedia reports 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article502539.ece> that offered men 
the 'transsexual panic' defence after inflicting violence on trans women). What 
pleased me most, even then, was being read as female: I remember walking around 
Brighton, with long hair and makeup, when a young man swaggered up to me and 
said "That's a bird's coat, mate!" I walked past, relieved as his female 
companion told him, "That is a bird, you muppet!" – a pre-transitional moment 
that made me realise that although playing with my gender presentation might be 
risky at times, it could also be fun (and funny).

So, as I became an adult, I wasn't too bothered about how my behaviour fitted 
other people's expectations. Having acted on my transitional desire, this still 
feels true: I'm aware that having been socialised as male has strongly 
influenced my interests and social circles: having lived as female for nearly 
two years, I see no reason to alter my tastes or break any friendships. I 
thought my existing relationship dynamics within groups of male friends may 
change, but they haven't, really – partly because I was open about my 
transgenderism long before I came out as transsexual, but also (I generalise) 
for two other reasons.

Firstly, many display acceptance by not treating me differently (I recall one 
seeing me as Juliet for the first time, pausing momentarily and then saying "I 
seeNorwich sacked Nigel Worthington 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/football/teams/n/norwich/5397320.stm>"). 
Secondly, as a trans man speculated to me recently, many men will only change 
their behaviour around a woman if they fancy her – while I want my friends to 
respect my identity and gender me accordingly, I'm not (quite) that demanding.

Getting over that deeply ingrained fear of more aggressive men has taken a 
while, especially asit's always males who hurl abuse at me in the street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/28/passing-as-a-woman> – for 
a short while after beginning transition, I 'femmed down' for football matches, 
unwilling to stop doing something I loved, but afraid that the gender 
regulation I still encounter might move from taunts to violence if I dressed 
too conspicuously in the wrong context. (All for a third division draw on a wet 
November afternoon. In Southampton.)

Entering the away end without hassle, I take my seat (just a few places away 
fromone of my heroes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-B6ucoSoIy4>) and just 
enjoy the match – at least until the end of the second half, when Millwall 
striker John Marquis equalises after four minutes of injury time. On the plus 
side, I reflect, it should placate the home crowd: sure enough, the short 
journey back to London Bridge, on a train packed with Millwall supporters, is 
incident-free.

I go to a pub with a friend, reflecting on how the majority of Millwall's fans 
are boisterous (something perpetuated by their reputation) but essentially good 
natured, and that the atmosphere they create is often preferable to the stony 
silence of many other stadiums. Then I hear that another friend's 
eleven-year-old daughter has been hit by a coin, mindlessly lobbed at the away 
fans by a home supporter. She's crying, apparently, and says she never wants to 
go to a game again: I feel sad that this is all it takes to generate such fear, 
but optimistic that in time, she'll realise that one individual's 
thoughtlessness, however reprehensible, should not dominate her view of any 
group, nor stop her doing anything she wants.

• Juliet Jacques's column appears fortnightly. You are invited to post 
comments and questions for Juliet below, and are very welcome to share your own 
experiences.
 