
I knew after my second visit to the Gender Identity Clinic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/01/transgender-mental-health>
 that my appointments withWest London Mental Health Trust 
<http://www.wlmht.nhs.uk/gi/gender-identity-clinic/> (or 'Charing Cross', as 
it's still colloquially known) would feel different now that I had addressed 
most of the social challenges of the 'Real Life Experience' (RLE) – and been
prescribed female hormones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/01/transgender-mental-health>
.

Even before arriving in Hammersmith, I noticed that the time between 
consultations felt far shorter. I'd become used to thelong waits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/mar/09/transgender-journey>, and 
more prepared to be patient, having finally begun medical treatment. It helped 
that the duration became easier to guess: I had been told to anticipate a four- 
to five-month period between half-hour slots, which were now all I needed. I 
expected my further consultations to be a matter of routine, unless some 
unforeseen life crisis complicated matters: if I was going to have serious 
second thoughts about transition, I would have done so by this point. Even a 
traumatic event, whatever that may be, would only delay proceedings.

My third and fourth appointments were with my main clinician, Dr Davies. With 
no questions remaining about my past, the focus shifted entirely to the 
present, discussing how I felt about the slow physical changes induced by the 
oestrogen, and whether or not any new social challenges had arisen as a direct 
consequence of myliving as female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/30/living-as-a-woman>.

I tell him not, as we quickly assess the main spheres of my life – family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/14/tell-family-transgender>, 
friends, physical andmental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/05/transgender-journey-depression>
, housing andemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/25/transsexual-people-sex-work>
. Over varying periods of time, all have settled back into normality, without 
coming out causing me to lose or leave my job, become more uncomfortable in my 
living space or be estranged from close friends or family members. I appreciate 
that this is not necessarily usual for transsexual people – these are the kind 
of things that problematise transition for some people, resulting in them 
staying on the pathway for months or years longer than they perhaps imagined, 
and my clinician agrees that I've been very fortunate.

Then we cover the specific challenges of transsexual living, and what feels 
like a second puberty brought on byhormone replacement therapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/12/transgender-health-and-wellbeing>
. I tell the doctor that I feel able to 'pass' most of the time, and that it's 
gradually becoming less effort as the oestrogen subtly softens my complexion 
and shifts my facial structure. Others seem to notice this more than I do, 
occasionally pointing out little details. It follows that strangers would have 
to scrutinise me more closely to see that I was not born female before hurling 
abuse, and most people just aren't that bothered. (If you need more details of 
the physical effects of HRT, thisTS Road Map 
<http://www.tsroadmap.com/physical/hormones.html> page has some useful 
information.)

After the third appointment, the clinician doubles my dose from 2mg to 4mg, 
satisfied that I'm happy with the physical changes and managing the chemically 
induced changes of mood. The latter get noticeably worse with the increased 
prescription – I feel a tiredness that no amount of sleep ever completely 
dispels, and consequently I'm much tetchier, especially at work, but once I'm 
given an anti-androgen injection to suppress my natural testosterone and thus 
stop my body fighting itself, this dissipates.

Dr Davies and I agree that everything is going as well as could be hoped, and 
at the fourth appointment we discuss surgery for the first time. Although I've 
only spent three hours with my clinicians, I've had nearly two years to think 
about this, and for all the RLE's challenges, I've never seriously considered 
opting out. Some people do remain content with hormone-assisted living in their 
chosen gender: this has been especially true for female-to-male people, as 
surgery is often more expensive, when privately funded, with less satisfactory 
outcomes.

Although the doctor told me during my third appointment that we might have 
discussed surgery then if my oestrogen levels had been sufficiently high, he 
proceeds with caution. Dr Davies ensures that I understand the process to be 
irrevocable – both for my own peace of mind and, perhaps, to cover the service 
against any potential litigation should I later regret it and try to argue 
(however implausibly) that I didn't realise this, and that the clinic should 
not have let me proceed.

This will not happen soon, he tells me – I will need a second opinion from the 
supporting clinician, Dr Lenihan, which will be provided in my next 
appointment. If all goes smoothly then, given the waiting lists, I will 
probably complete the pathway next spring – a total transition time of three 
years, as I was led to expect when I started by mylocal PCT 
<http://www.brightonandhovepct.nhs.uk/>'s gender reassignment policy. The end 
is still some distance away, but at least it is finally in sight.

• Juliet's column was longlisted for this year's Orwell Prize 
<http://theorwellprize.co.uk/> in the Blog category
 