
The question: Does civility matter? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2011/jan/17/arizona-shootings-civility>

Civility is like pornography: difficult to define and enormously complex, but 
intuitively well understood by most people. Like pornography, some are inclined 
to condemn it out of hand, and like pornography, it is part of the basic human 
condition: some will employ it and some will not.

However complicated it is, civility is an essential issue to tackle; one of 
the few things that differentiates us biologically in significant ways from 
other very closely related primates, such as chimpanzees, gorillas and bonobos, 
is that humans are able to live together in far, far larger groups than any of 
our closest animal relatives. Civility is one of the main reasons why we can 
live in such large groups without the sort of bloodbath one would unavoidably 
see if one tried putting a similarly large number of gorillas or chimpanzees 
close together.

Civility can be misused or abused in itself or as a label to hide something 
else; snobbishness and social decorum can be used as weapons of oppression, and 
be misleadingly termed as civility; yet civility can be a real weapon for 
liberation from oppressive restraints as well, as Mahatma Gandhi and Martin 
Luther King Jr showed by using civil disobedience and nonviolence as weapons 
for achieving freedom and equality.

So, too, civility is a theological and an atheist issue. There is Jesus's 
injunction to turn the other cheek (which is actually a form of civil 
disobedience and protest in the original text, not, as many misunderstand, an 
instruction to merely suffer without complaint), and then there isKarl Barth 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Barth>, the famous 20th-century theologian, 
who was greatly uncivil in saying: "Belief cannot argue with unbelief, it can 
only preach to it," which is little short of dictatorial rudeness, showing a 
very real antipathy towards civility in practice. Both atheists and religious 
believers often argue over civility among each other; the debates among 
atheists as to so-calledaccommodationism 
<http://worldofweirdthings.com/2010/03/14/a-philosophers-case-for-accommodationism/>
 mirror debates among religious believers as to how to behave towards 
unbelievers.

It is, of course, easy to be civil towards those one likes and/or agrees with; 
it is far harder to be civil to those one does not like, but that is where it 
is often needed. Some will try to manipulate others' wish for civility in 
interaction, and will demand indulgence of their own wants at the expense of 
everyone else. Such malicious and manipulative people will cry out in glee 
should anyone else be caught out being rude to them; yet this is mere 
dishonesty.

To show why, consider punching someone. Clearly, it is not at all desirable 
that we all go around punching each other all the time. In fact, it is so 
undesirable that for the greatest majority of our social lives, we prohibit it 
with laws. Yet, for example, if someone is trying to mug or rape you, you are 
in the ethical, practical, social and legal right to punch them very hard. Just 
in that way, most of us intuitively understand a principle of natural justice, 
and being rude to those who would oppress, use or abuse us is part of that.

Civility rests, then, on many factors, including a sense of natural justice, 
though we can see easily how some will try manipulating it. Genuine civility 
equalises power relations and enables the point of view of those who are 
quieter to be heard too.

Some will decry civility itself as a contemptible goal, but from recent events 
we can see what is wrong with that idea. There was therally in Washington held 
by Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/31/rally-restore-sanity-jon-stewart-washington>
 in October last year calling for more civility in the political atmosphere in 
the US; then theshooting this year of Gabrielle Giffords and others in Tucson, 
Arizona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/08/gabrielle-giffords-shot-tucson-arizona>
, brought the debate into sharp relief.

The murder of Salmaan Taseer in Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/04/pakistan-attack-kills-punjab-governor>
 and the barely veiled death threats against his daughter Shehrbano Taseer 
bring the civility debate in even more marked form. Salmaan Taseer was 
advocating genuine civility in defending those unfairly accused under 
Pakistan's draconian blasphemy laws, while his opponents, under a mask of 
demanding respect for Islam, are actually pushing very uncivil oppression.

Civility is something that is not always appropriate, but it is something we 
all need as a normal state of affairs.
 