
WEDNESDAY 

Surreal … Out of body … These are words and phrases I'll be uttering and 
thinking over the next week. It began at the Air France check-in desk at 
Heathrow Terminal 4. I was already bleary-eyed after arriving on an overnight 
flight from New Orleans, where I'd been songwriting. The idea of queueing up 
with my luggage ahead of Brian Eno andDamon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn> at 7.30am on a Wednesday seems 
like a dream. My guitar-wielding brother, Seye, is also on board, which is 
great as we rarely have the opportunity to work together.

The airport in Bamako is a mixture of chaos and bureaucracy familiar to me 
from my years growing up in Lagos. A wave of tiredness hits me as we step out 
into the warm air of the city. It's been a long trip, but there's no rest at 
the hotel – Damon and the Africa Express team have arranged for us to go to 
Maquis le Diplomate, a club and restaurant owned by the legendary Malian 
musicianToumani Diabaté <https://www.theguardian.com/music/toumani-diabate>. 
It's an inspired move; this is when I snap awake and Mali becomes real for 
myself and others in our party who are visiting for the first time.

We walk in and Manou Diabaté, Toumani's nephew, is playing kora, a 21-string 
harp lute, in a killer band made up of a guitarist, drummer and bassist, along 
with a keyboard player who is working miracles on an old Yamaha. Different 
singers and musicians sit in with the band as people warm and begin to dance.

A special moment comes as the band gets near to the end of their set: Toumani 
slips into the club and I get to meet him. This unassuming man welcomes me to 
his country and carries himself with a humility that belies his status as a 
musical giant. Then he gets up and plays, inviting members of our group to join 
him.

I've only been in Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> a few hours, 
and already I have a memory I will carry with me for the rest of my life.

FRIDAY
 Brian Eno recording in Bamako. Photograph: Olugbenga Adelekan 
This picture captures what is so special about Africa Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express>. You could say we came here 
to make an album, but we're also here to document this moment in Malian music. 
Much of what we do is collaborative, but often the songs and performances are 
so incredible that you just need to set up some good microphones, and put the 
musicians at ease to capture a special few minutes. I am very fortunate to 
watch Brian Eno create a number of these moments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdpIEOtUZ9LU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdpIEOtUZ9LU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdpIEOtUZ9LU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch the session here
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dpIEOtUZ9LU>
Brian speaks some French, but the duo he plays with speak a regional Malian 
dialect, so it is doubly difficult for him to communicate. The special thing 
about this session is that I see Brian edit this performance without ever 
sitting in front of a computer. He listens to the musicians play their song 
once and then makes an assessment about sections that could be shorter or 
longer. Then he uses a system of signals to communicate his directions. The 
second time they play the piece, it is recognisably the same, just clearer. It 
is a privilege to see this happen.

For those of us who were not already aware, it quickly becomes obvious that 
there's a mind-boggling level of musicianship here. In our collaborations with 
singers, drummers and other musicians of all stripes, we watch again and again 
as they pick up the grooves in minutes and then improvise performances that 
couldn't have been better if they'd spent days writing something. They usually 
only need one or two takes. This level of musicianship is an inspiration and a 
challenge. It's fitting that I've come to Mali from New Orleans, because Bamako 
is a city that also has music in its DNA.

SATURDAY and WEDNESDAY


The real magic of this experience comes in the moments of spontaneity. Early 
on Saturday night, I sit in the back of the main studio watching Damon produce 
a session for singer Kankou Kouyaté and her band. When there is a moment's 
lull, I ask if I can try some stuff with the band when Damon is done. Then I 
get my laptop out and work on a few beat ideas while they finish the session.

When my turn comes, it takes a minute for the engineers to set up a channel 
for my laptop. Meanwhile, Kankou's n'goni player asks: "What do you do? Do you 
sing or do you play?" I try to explain that, yes, I sing but this was gonna be 
a cool electronic-producer thing. All he understands – or maybe all he choses 
to understand! – is "Yes, I sing."
 Olugbenga with Diamantou Sacko and band. Photograph: Africa Express 
Immediately the band starts playing around with a riff and he insists I sing 
something with them. The first thing that pops into my head is the negro 
spiritualWade in The Water <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wade_in_the_Water>. A 
few minutes later, Brian and Damon (both lovers of gospel music) join in. I 
quickly abandon my original idea; this is way cooler, and something about doing 
this in West Africa makes it feel like we're going to the heart of gospel 
music's roots. And it wouldn't have happened without Kankou and her band.

Even with the wealth of material that we generate, we record until the last 
possible minute. Early on Wednesday, we discover that our flight back the UK 
will be delayed a few hours. Most of the musicians take this as an invitation 
to work on the music a little longer. It helps that we've tracked down as many 
of the musicians in the collective as possible for a group shot, and their 
enthusiasm for trying new ideas hasn't waned. I watch Ghostpoet lay down a 
vocal for a song in the afternoon and then Damon lay down some backing vocals a 
few hours later. A nearly complete track comes together just a few hours before 
our amazing engineers Steve Sedgwick and Kaktus Einarsson have to pack up the 
studio. Upstairs, conductor André de Ridder corrals any and all musicians, 
including me, to record parts for an interpretation of Terry Riley's classicIn C
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/jan/28/terry-riley-contemporary-music-guide>
.

It's a suitably whirlwind end to what has been a whirlwind week. Finishing 
this diary in the airport as I wend my way home, I realise the significance of 
what we experienced will take time to sink in. Is an album like this going to 
change the world? No one here is naive enough to think that it will. But Africa 
Express has grown out of the deep relationship that Damon and Africa Express 
co-founder Ian Birrell have with Mali, one that is well into its second decade 
and shared by other key people involved, such as Marc-Antoine Moreau (who 
manages the Malian duo Amadou and Mariam). And to say what happened in and 
around Maison des Jeunes is just an album is really to miss the point. In a 
society where music so permeates every facet, promoting Malian music is 
promoting Mali itself.

• Africa Express headline the Fiesta des Suds in Marseilles on Saturday 19 
October. <http://www.dock-des-suds.org/fiesta2013/africa-express.html>
 