
The Sunday Times TV critic AA Gill refers to his girlfriend as "The Blonde", 
nothing more. I have idly wondered in the past why he chooses to describe her 
like this in his columns. Perhaps, because in our society, and particularly in 
the world of male one-upmanship, "blonde" has connotations of beauty, sex 
appeal and desirability. By stating so often that he has a "blonde" on his arm, 
Gillprobably feels others will admire, respect, even envy him 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/lifestyle/health/my-brunette-blunder--the-blonde-loses-her-bottle-6711289.html>
 for attracting such a golden-haired trophy.

I write this because in my view it explains everything about the way Gill 
evaluates women. In his Sunday Times column this week he started his critique 
of BBC2'sMeet the Romans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/apr/17/meet-the-romans-mary-beard>
 by saying the presenter, ProfessorMary Beard, "really should be kept away from 
cameras altogether" 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/picturegalleries/celebritynews/9223149/Mary-Beard-hits-back-at-AA-Gill-after-he-brands-her-too-ugly-for-television.html>
. Why? "Because she's this far from being the subject of a Channel 4 dating 
documentary." Gill was obviously referring to Channel 4's recent controversial 
seriesThe Undateables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/apr/02/undateables-channel-4-disability-rights-wrongs>
, about people with disabilities and their quest for love: a programme he 
described in a recent review as a "mocking freak show of grotesques and 
embarrassments".

After the cheap personal shot, Gill went on to criticise the esteemed 
classicist's professional analysis of life in the Eternal City, which he has 
every right to do of course, but I'd rather go with Beard's expert take on 
things rather than (by his own past admission) an uneducated TV critic's 
opinion about whether"Rome was really an international, homogeneous funky berg" 
<http://www.historytoday.com/the-siren/2012/04/gill-vs-beard-unkindest-cut>. 
Er, run that one by me again.

Meet the Romans opened with a very healthy 1.9 million viewers in its 
Tuesday-night slot. Only a small number have taken to Twitter to criticise the 
way Mary looks: "Can't she brush her hair?", "Did she try to look so haggard?" 
and "Shouldn't she be sexing herself up a bit?" were some of the jibes.

My answer is: Why? What's wrong with a 57-year-old woman looking how she wants 
to look as a 57-year-old woman presenting on TV? Beard obviously doesn't feel 
she has to conform to the female TV stereotypes we've been force-fed for years. 
The problem isn't that she has grey hair that looks as if it hasn't been 
brushed, or that she hasn't sexed herself up; the problem is with some viewers 
– and this particular TV critic – who equate their idea of what's attractive 
with ability.

From what Beard has written 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2134146/Too-ugly-TV-No-Im-brainy-men-fear-clever-women.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
, it appears she had been stung by the criticism. No matter how clever or 
strong a person you are, cruel digs about your appearance can eat away at your 
confidence and self-esteem. Please don't tell me insults come with the 
territory. I don't buy into the idea that if a woman appears on TV then she 
should accept derision about her personal appearance when it has nothing to do 
with her professional ability. Women are targets for these kinds of insults far 
more than men.

It's been three years since I took a stand against ageism at the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/11/countryfile-miriam-oreilly-tribunal?INTCMP=SRCH>
. When I won my case in January 2011 the BBC promised that it would do more to 
represent older women on TV. Recently Mark Thompson, the BBC director general, 
said my case was a "turning point".

That's because Thompson knows the tide is turning, albeit slowly. A recent 
poll by the Cultural Diversity Network revealedTV viewers want to watch older 
women 
<http://www.womensviewsonnews.org/2012/02/tv-audiences-call-for-more-older-women/>
, but not as figures of fun, as some have been portrayed on Strictly Come 
Dancing, but as role models to whom they can aspire. TV executives seem to be 
getting the message that viewers don't find wrinkles offensive and that grey 
hair, is well, just a natural part of getting older – it'll happen to everyone, 
if they're lucky.

Professor Beard tells a riveting, exciting story of life in Rome; she tells it 
with the credibility that comes from years of experience in the classics, and 
as a viewer I like and respect her even more because, in these pioneering days 
for women in TV, she has the courage to be herself.

As Beard knows better than I, the Roman empire lasted so long because its 
civilisation kept evolving with the changing times. So put away the prejudice, 
Adrian, and pull up a seat for Mary's next instalment; you just might learn 
something.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<http://twitter.com/#!/commentisfree>
 