
Norfolk, avers AA Gill, is "the hernia on the end of England 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-12621744>". On a rare excursion to East 
Anglia to review a restaurant, the Sunday Times critic unleashed a 
characteristically savage attack on the county of Lord Nelson, Stephen Fry and 
Boudicca.

Locked away as it is behind the News International paywall, you will have to 
trust me to accurately convey a flavour of Adrian Anthony's bile. Quite 
rightly, Gill points out that every nation has its Norfolk – "a region for 
mockery, a space for low jokes and coarse assumptions, a backward place to 
allocate dark lusts, incest and idiocy". Norfolk, he argues, lives up to its 
stereotype of "weird, web-footed, dribbling, six-fingered sister-shaggers who 
shop with traps and eat stuff live" with "wall-eyed, tongue-tied, 
spittle-flecked indignation". It is "a poverty-bitten place, keeping up its 
stained trousers with baler twine". And the food at theRose and Crown 
<http://www.roseandcrownsnettisham.co.uk/> in Snettisham reminds him, 
variously, of "boarding school tissues", "Shrek fart" and "cattle lick".

To react to this tirade will only delight such an attention-seeker and look 
like a sense of humour failure of my part (yes, I admit I hail from the land of 
Cathy Dennis, Ed Balls and, yawn, Alan Partridge). As a professional 
controversialist, Gill's opinions ofNorfolk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/norfolk> could easily be recycled columns, 
such as when he called the Welsh "loquacious, dissemblers, immoral liars, 
stunted, bigoted, dark, ugly, pugnacious little trolls", or described the Isle 
of Man with its "foul" weather and "medieval" food as being "covered in 
suicidal motorists and folk who believe in fairies".

As Gill tosses off his columns, I'm sure he tells his acolytes he is brutally 
funny about everyone, including the English. In fact, he tends to lazily pick 
easy targets, such asClare Balding 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2010/09/20/aa-gill-nominated-for-stonewalls-bigot-of-the-year-award/>
 orthe baboon he once boasted about shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/26/aa-gill-shot-baboon>.

This particular review is worth responding to, however, because it vividly 
shows the growing disconnect between the metropolitan media classes and the 
rest of Britain. The metropolitan-provincial culture wars are well established 
in the States and are becoming more entrenched here. It is no wonder that 
British newspapers are in crisis, when they (including the Guardian at times) 
drip with attitudes that are so woefully ignorant of the people they hope to 
flog them to. People who don't work in London journalism, and don't spend their 
days tweeting, lunching and sneering, are genuinely perplexed by the confected 
fury of columnists such as Gill – whose clever, splenetic wordplay is feted by 
his peers at awards ceremonies – and at the affectation of a man who calls 
himself AA. Journalists such as Adrian Anthony leave most readers completely 
cold.

Gill is right about one thing: Norfolk is different. But he doesn't understand 
what this difference is. As an attempt to convey a sense of the place, Gill's 
review is a woeful piece of journalism. He mistakenly elides "the flatlands" of 
Norfolk with the Fens, which span parts of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire and 
Lincolnshire. You would be far better turning to Graham Swift's novel, 
Waterland orRoger Deakin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/aug/29/guardianobituaries.environment>'s 
magical book Waterlog, to get a true sense of that strange, bleak and very flat 
land. Norfolk is famed for its Broads, marshes and wide skies but it is far 
from flat. Nor does its dry, sunny climate make it "damp" or "dank".

Gill showily displays his learning by referencing significant Norfolk 
historical figures such as "smelly"Tom Paine 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/empire_seapower/paine_01.shtml> and the 
much overlooked medieval mysticJulian of Norwich 
<http://www.julianofnorwich.org/>, the first Englishwoman to write a book, whom 
he traduces by summing her up as having dismissed the Black Death with the 
words "all shall be well". He knowingly deploys an old dialect word for 
Gypsies, "didicoys", and, most offensively of all, then writes: "You pass 
covens of them, loitering in broad fields emitting a faint squealing that might 
be a hare or a child."

Norfolk is not manicured like the home counties. It is not pretty-pretty like 
the West Country or hilly like the north. Its countryside can be bleak but it 
is also the least densely populated part of southern England. It is a genuinely 
wild place: watery, beautiful, lonely. Gill scornfully writes that local 
entertainments include "birds in a V formation going somewhere more 
interesting"; watching great strings of pink-footed geese descend on to the 
north Norfolk marshes at twilight is one of the natural wonders of the world.

Gill may be blind to Norfolk's special beauty but more talented writers are 
not: hailed as Britain's greatest living nature writer,Richard Mabey 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Mabey> moved to Norfolk and found it 
helped cure his depression, which he chronicled in his book Nature Cure. The 
naturalistMark Cocker <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/markcocker> also 
lives in Norfolk and the writerRobert Macfarlane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/commonground> bases himself in East 
Anglia. Norfolk has more than its fair share of artists, painters and poets who 
find inspiration in its isolation.

As for the "wall-eyed, tongue-tied, spittle-flecked indignation" of locals, 
well, Norfolk people are stubbornly different. In centuries past the Fens 
preserved Norfolk's geographical isolation; today, the absence of a motorway or 
dual carriageway into the county does the same. Norfolk is becoming more 
multicultural, changing fast with influxes of Portuguese, Poles and Lithuanians 
(and, as Gill notes, pockets of London media types) but retains a rebellious 
indifference to the materialism of the capital. Norwich is a dynamic and 
surprisingly bohemian city. Norfolk people do not have the chatty bonhomie of 
the north. Many "DFLs" (down from London) such as Gill are treated with a 
subtle, impassive contempt. There is no superficial luvviness here, it takes 
time to earn friendship in Norfolk.

If Gill and other Metropolitan media sneerers could only see how they appeared 
in the eyes of people living in places such as Norfolk, they might write with 
more honesty, humbleness and generosity. They look like imbeciles: 
materialistic, braying, ignorant, intolerant snobs who are always in a hurry 
and never satisfied; who rail against the clone communities but disdain 
difference; who expect the countryside to bend to their whims every weekend 
before rushing back to their cramped lives in polluted cities. People "in the 
sticks" feel sorry for folk likeAA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill>. They are figures of frivolous 
inconsequence, utterly oblivious to the vital beauty and beating heart of 
places like Norfolk.
 