
She would have been 32 this year, but you can't quite imagine Aaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> Haughton at that age. Her death in 
a plane crash, 10 years ago this week, was cruelly premature – but she'd 
already been in the entertainment business for seven years by that point, and 
it is her youth, frozen in time, that defines her legacy.

Aaliyah's signature look was the swoop of hair that hid one eye while the 
other fixed the camera with a steely gaze: a combination of unnerving emotional 
honesty with a sense of mystique – or caution, the knowledge not to give too 
much of yourself away – that carried over to her music. Even in her earliest 
material, she casually mixed insouciance with a gravitas unusual for a teenage 
pop star: on 1994'sAge Ain't Nothing But a Number 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rRwhm-B6yNI&ob=av2n>, she sounded like she was 
expressing a deep love – and gently imparting some wisdom, too – rather than a 
giddy crush; the song easily transcended theicky gossip 
<http://theurbandaily.com/gossip-news/shamika-sanders/new-book-suggests-r-kelly-got-aaliyah-pregnant-at-15/>
 about the relationship between Aaliyah and its writer, R Kelly. She sounded so 
sure of herself from the start, singing about her "jazz personality, G 
mentality" on herdebut single <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6zP7nnp-5I> – 
and this sense of self, as untouchable or relatable as you needed her to be, is 
the reason she continues to be revered by R&B fans.

Aaliyah's music has often been spoken of in terms of its producers and 
songwriters first: as Timbaland's "baby girl" muse, she was part of the 
vanguard that transformed R&B around the turn of the century. It would be a 
mistake, though, to reduce the singer to what the critic Simon Reynolds called 
an "exquisite cipher 
<http://bringthenoisesimonreynolds.blogspot.com/2008/03/bring-noise-deleted-scene-aaliyah.html>
". Should genius be conceptualised only as the grunt work of sitting down and 
penning music – or is a necessary part of it also the ability to bring the best 
out of songwriters, to catalyse them to transcend themselves, as Aaliyah 
undoubtedly did? In an excellentretrospective 
<http://youknowigotsoul.com/?p=11345> of her last album on the blog You Know I 
Got Soul, its producers revealed just how much Aaliyah dictated how the 
finished product would sound. Aaliyah never pretended her skill lay in 
composition, but as a performer she had a rare gift for subtly drawing every 
emotional nuance out of her songs.

Take the devastating I Care 4 U <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KTYxr-xZxIA>, 
in which Aaliyah comforts a broken-hearted friend with unconditional tenderness 
even as her own unrequited love for him tears her apart: twin heartaches, 
orbiting each other futilely. Both impatience and menace underpinIf Your Girl 
Only Knew <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wG5ilt3Hrt4> (along with a bassline 
I'd be happy to listen to forever). OnIt's Whatever 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DvM6XK1hL6U>, she flirts with the dual 
interpretations of the title: what seems like an offhand shrug ends up invested 
with limitless possibilities. Aaliyah's blank, numbed delivery onI Can Be 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OhHOV0TYOAU> makes being the other woman seem 
like an emotionally masochistic form of self-medication. She could use the 
slight air of detachment in her voice as a warning to keep your distance, as on
Extra Smooth <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AJg3goAt-yI> – or to magnify 
intimacy, as though you and she were detached from the rest of the world (the 
sensuality ofRock the Boat <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aY7bCktS9Mo>, the 
pledge of eternal friendship onI Gotcha Back 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_lkBaM3or54>).

Tracing Aaliyah's influence since her death offers few clues as to what might 
have been. Though various elements of her aesthetic have cropped up – the 
dreamy timbre ofCiara's voice 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UcGWy7xUZQE&ob=av2e>, the lush clarity of 
Teedra Moses <http://www.teedramoses.net/>'s "champagne soul 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zq83QZxs0mw>" – direct comparisons would do a 
disservice to the individuality of each artist. By her last album, she had 
deliberately begun to use fewer Timbaland productions, as well as diversifying 
into a nascent acting career; few of the R&B trends that dominated the last 
decade seem like a natural fit for her, though perhaps, had she lived, those 
trends would have ended up following her rather than vice versa. But it is not 
the pompous concept of "importance" for which Aaliyah's fans remember her: it 
is for how she could so effortlessly tap into the human condition when she 
sang. On her 1994 cover of the Isley Brothers'At Your Best (You Are Love) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8D1Zn-Ij6Mw&ob=av2n>, she pleaded in a clear, 
unguarded voice, "Stay at your best, baby." She ended up doing just that.
 