
When someone’s style is described as “timeless”, it’s a rather flat, 
eye-rolling description. You think of the likes of Marilyn Monroe or Audrey 
Hepburn, whose fashion has been picked over so endlessly that it has become a 
meaningless byword for taste.

It’s tempting to use that word to describe Aaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah>, who died in a plane crash 15 years 
ago this week. In fact, it might be more accurate to say that her fashion sense 
was deeply prescient. Her short career from 1994 to 2001 saw her pioneer trends 
that have become woven into the fabric of 2016’s fashion vocabulary. Unlike 
Madonna or Bowie, she wasn’t chameleonic about her reinventions: they felt 
organic and gradual. She incorporated elements of previous styles into her next 
looks, not a fashion 360 but a natural evolution.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Faaliyah-fashion-originator-athleisure-health-goth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee31e06fe736bfbdb2d4fef8dad7c9d72b6f0dea%2F142_188_1445_2724%2F1445.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaliyah%3A%20fashion%20originator%20of%20athleisure%20and%20health%20goth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Faaliyah-fashion-originator-athleisure-health-goth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaliyah%3A%20fashion%20originator%20of%20athleisure%20and%20health%20goth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Faaliyah-fashion-originator-athleisure-health-goth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee31e06fe736bfbdb2d4fef8dad7c9d72b6f0dea%2F142_188_1445_2724%2F1445.jpg>
 Aaliyah in 1997. Photograph: Fotex/Rex/Shutterstock 
The look on her debut album, 1994’s Age Ain’t Nothing But A Number, glowed 
with multiple meanings. She was the shy but feisty girl next door. The clothes 
she wore were a mix of the tomboy (boxer shorts, vests, Timberland boots) and 
homegirl-ish (wraparound shades, bandanas). It presagedathleisure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/29/what-wore-week-athleisure-neckline-jess-cartner-morley>
 in the way she mixed sportswear with more everyday items. Heavily logoed 
clothes meshed with denim (baggy jeans, dungarees), and she bridged the gap 
between off the track/court and the street. It was “fresh from the basketball 
court” chic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Faaliyah-fashion-originator-athleisure-health-goth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb97140e8d7188122f3c1fdb55d90baa21ed857c5%2F0_0_1988_3000%2F1988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaliyah%3A%20fashion%20originator%20of%20athleisure%20and%20health%20goth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Faaliyah-fashion-originator-athleisure-health-goth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaliyah%3A%20fashion%20originator%20of%20athleisure%20and%20health%20goth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Faaliyah-fashion-originator-athleisure-health-goth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb97140e8d7188122f3c1fdb55d90baa21ed857c5%2F0_0_1988_3000%2F1988.jpg>
 Aaliyah on stage in 1997. Photograph: Jeffrey Mayer/WireImage 
Gigi Hadid’s recent collaboration with Tommy Hilfiger drew very heavily from 
Aaliyah’s own collaboration with the brand in 1996, featuring bra-tops worn 
with wide-legged Hilfiger trousers. That was around the time of her second 
album, One In A Million, where her look incorporated leather and lots of black 
with sportswear. She basically invented the health-goth look that is 
influencing labels from Ivy Park to Alexander Wang. In Lil Kim’s video for 
Crush On You, she wears an oversize Hilfiger jacket in Sonic-the-Hedgehog blue 
and high-vis yellow, which feels very current (see Cara Delevingne on the cover 
ofVogue’s September issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/09/vogue-elle-september-cara-delevingne-editions-fashion-magazines>
 with an oversize Balenciaga jacket – the jacket of next season).

By the time of her final album, Aaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah>, in 2001, there was a look of 
monochrome sophistication about her. She incorporated Sade’s less-is-more style 
but also, as in the We Need A Resolution video, lots of black sheer and subtle 
cut-outs, nodding to past looks but also elegantly transitioning from her 
previous looks.

As with fashion, her influence on pop culture is as current as ever (Drake has 
a tattoo of her on his back, Beyoncé posted a throwbackInstagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BJif72ZhhZH/>) and it’s tempting to wonder what 
her style would have been in 2016.
 