
Aaliyah's family have denied any involvement in her new posthumous album, 
which is being spearheaded by Drake. "There is no official album being released 
and supported by the Haughton family," announced the late singer's brother,
Rashad Haughton 
<http://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=10152021546610515&id=26702510514>
.

The family's announcement follows Sunday's debut of Enough Said 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4HNgVmHSuVM>, a "duet" between Aaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> and Drake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> that was produced bythe rapper's 
longtime collaborator,Noah "40" Shebib 
<http://www.thefader.com/2011/10/13/noah-40-shebib-best-he-ever-had/>. The song 
is built on one of Aaliyah's previously unreleased vocal tracks, with a verse 
by Drake, in which the rapper brags about his watch, expresses his ennui, and 
appears to diss Chris Brown.

Many fans have taken exception to Enough Said, accusing Drake of 
tastelessness. Before she died in 2001, Aaliyah was most famous for her work 
with Missy Elliott and Timbaland, on 1996'sOne in a Million 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/one-in-a-million-mw0000185422>. But as of 
Tuesday, neither artist had been approached by Drake. "I don't know what's 
going on," Timbaland told Power 105. "The proper way to do [a collaboration] 
would be for me, [Drake] and Missy to be all on the record."

Several big names joined the chorus: "That new aaliyah/drake beat sounds like 
my first beat in reason," complainedFlying Lotus 
<https://twitter.com/flyinglotus>. "I think Timbaland needs to choke someone 
out â€¦ When I'm dead, don't mess with my music. Don't be having whoever 'finish' 
my demos n shit. fuck all that."

Since then, Drake has apparently contacted Timbaland 
<http://www.complex.com/music/2012/08/timbaland-will-be-involved-in-posthumous-aaliyah-project>
; the hip-hop veteran will now reportedly produce two songs on the Aaliyah LP, 
with Shebib helming most of the rest. Despite bringing Timbaland into the fold, 
Drake has not mended fences with Aaliyah's family. "Do you want a [new] Aaliyah 
album?" they wrote on Facebook. "If so, who should executive produce it or be 
featured on it? The Haughton family would love to hear what her FANS have to 
say."

For now, Drake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> does not appear to 
need the Haughtons' support. Enough Said is co-released by the rapper's own 
label, October's Very Own, and Blackground, the record company founded by 
Aaliyah's uncle, Barry Hankerson. Hankerson, who was also Aaliyah's manager, 
issued all of her previous records and is likely to own the rights to her 
unreleased recordings.
 