
It's 10 years to the day since we lost Aaliyah. The singer was killed in a 
plane crash in the Bahamas aged 22, on her way home from filming the music 
video for her singleRock the Boat 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5AAcgtMjUI&feature=related>. Her death seemed 
all the more tragic for the fact that Aaliyah was pushing a minimalist and 
futuristic sound that far surpassed anything she – or her peers – had done 
before.

Her third, eponymous album came out a month before she died, but if it was 
released today it would still sound startlingly fresh. Producer Timbaland 
hasn't come close to creating anything as sonically stunning since, although 
it's likely his success on this record was responsible for the commercial peaks 
he reached with Justin Timberlake and Nelly Furtado. FromWe Need a Resolution 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZQPvgHEMCFs>'s odd, skittish argument with a 
bad boyfriend to the gentle soul ofI Care 4 U 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KTYxr-xZxIA>, it's pop music in a different 
league, as playful as it is inventive.

As friends and fans tweet tributes today, linking to videos of tracks that 
meant the most to them, it's remarkable not only that few chose the same song, 
but also how different and complex each track is. The music was rarely smooth – 
famously, Timbaland makes use of a baby's cry for the percussive drive ofAre U 
That Somebody? <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2cFYFuAX4N4&feature=related>. 
Such starkness has had a lasting and far-reaching effect on music – not just 
shaping the direction of singers such as Cassie and Ciara but also reaching out 
to everyone from Dirty Projectors tothe xx 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=88ZyJrSeI7A> to Gossip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zj4DShPSX8k>. 

Even 10 years after her death, the feeling that, were she still alive, Aaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> would still be releasing remarkable 
music, has not yet subsided, and maybe it never will.
 