
Aaron Eckhart's day began as they all do: an hour in the gym, then same again 
with a cigar. Jetlag cannot disrupt that, snow can throw no spanners. "I was 
outside at 6am smoking with my hood on, watching everyone come to work, 
freezing my ass off. That's how dedicated I am."

Then breakfast, another cigar, four hours of interviews and lunch in his room, 
Moby on the deck 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Go_%E2%80%93_The_Very_Best_of_Moby>, steak on the 
plate. "I ordered it medium rare. I got it medium beyond." Did he finish it? 
"Oh yeah, every little bit. I am a carnivore." Then another cigar. He'd like to 
be puffing on one right now. At least three more will get sucked before he 
sleeps.

"They're excellent to study to," he explains, "you can put 'em down, pick 'em 
up – they keep you company while you're thinking. They're a good thinking man's 
tool." Eckhart creases; smile gummier than you might expect, blinding whites 
under wraps. At 45, his face still looks ripped from Mount Rushmore, chin 
dimple so deep you could keep your handbag in it. But the butter hair is 
closer-cropped these days, there's slightly more of a raptor aspect all round. 
These are not features looking for definition; big geek glasses add extra 
anyway.

He rocks back. "With cigars it's inherent in the mechanics that you're going 
to sit down for a long time. You plan your day around it. If you go to a cigar 
bar [he frequents one in Malibu] you're going to feel your bottom on the chair, 
the feet on the ground; you're going to have two or three coffees. We watch 
ball games together. We all have the same sort of crude sensibility and that's 
good because nobody feels out of place. And nobody else in their right mind 
will go in there because it stinks so bad."
 Aaron Eckhart, as the US president (right), with Morgan Freeman in Olympus 
Has Fallen. Photograph: Millennium Films/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Are there ever any women there? "Let me tell you a secret about women and 
cigars …" He leans forward. Eckhart, it seems clear, wants to talk smoking. Or 
shopping. Or clubbing. Or the colour of his T-shirt ("Range Rover would call it 
Stornoway Grey <http://gtcarlot.com/colors/car/1792935.html>"), or of my frock 
("I would call thatgraphite <http://www.colourlovers.com/color/454343/Graphite>
"). He rolls up his jeans to show me his legs, freshly shaven for smoother 
cycling. He discusses waxing (he hasn't tried it), considers carefully whether 
his legs could get colder than those of other men. He is good at, and 
interested in, chat – for its own sake, and because of the difficulty, he 
thinks, of accurately capturing it both in print, and on film. He is, perhaps, 
not quite so energised by talking about his new movie, much as he loves it 
(and, for the record, it is great, shameless fun).

"So let's say I'm dating a girl and at first she'll have whatever concept of a 
cigar, and then let's say we are intimate and so we kiss and stuff like that. 
By a week or two she will be begging to smoke a cigar before we kiss. It's 
incredible! It's anhabitude. It becomes part of the intimacy which is extremely 
weird because you'd think it would be revolting. I mean, if you polled the 
public whether it was worse to beat your grandmother or smoke a cigar I don't 
know who would win. People freakinghate cigars. And there's a stigma with it, 
that you're a certain kind of a person."

Eckhart began his screen career specialising in that kind, first as a smoothie 
shark who seduces and dumps a deaf colleague for kicks in Neil LaBute'sIn 
the Company of Men 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/69910/in-the-company-of-men>, then as a 
sexual narcissist inYour Friends and Neighbors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/75102/your.friends.and.neighbors> – also 
by LaBute, a fellow Mormon (Eckhart is now lapsed) he met in college. But he 
made bad palatable inThank You For Smoking 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112704/thank.you.for.smoking>, as a 
tobacco lobbyist supercharged with charm. That was in 2005, just after he 
himself quit booze and fags.

The reason, he says now, was the lack of control. Cigarettes encourage 
neuroses. "And by the third drink, you're all different people. With a 
cigar you're the same person from the start to the end. Whereas with drink and 
drugs you're either fighting or stealing each other's girlfriends or hating 
yourself. That was my alcohol experience." He laughs hard.

Eckhart's press suggests self-discipline is of paramount importance. He's 
spoken of the power he has to read body language 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2007/aug/19/features.magazine77> and the 
advantage that gives him. Yet today he seems to be enjoying the strain on the 
leash. He can't really mind sailing close to the wind; after all, cigars might 
not leave you with a hangover, but they do come with consequences.

That, he says, is why he doesn't inhale. "Because I'm a serious athlete. I 
train every single day. I would never want to take smoke into my lungs. I know 
I'm getting some, but if I walked up to Piccadilly I'm getting a lot. But 
non-smokers think it's the most unhealthy, unattractive thing they've ever 
seen. I was in Australia one time, by a bridge, smoking a cigar and taking some 
pictures. These runners went by and this woman just had a visceral reaction, 
made a noise like 'Eeeerugaah'. And I said: 'Here I am standing in piss and 
vomit from last night andthat's OK, but God forbid I smoke a cigar and have a 
little bit of peace.'" What did she say? "Oh, she was up the road by then. I 
let her know though. I'm not going to take that."

Eckhart does not smoke in Olympus Has Fallen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154314/olympus-has-fallen>. That's 
because he is playing his most apple-pie part yet: as the straight-shooting US 
president, an unwavering trouper, delightful to his wife, a sweetheart to his 
son, a hope for the nation. The ciggies are the preserve of the North Koreans 
who storm the White House, rack up a fantastic body count, then chain the 
president to a railing in the bunker. There he remains for most of the movie, 
trying not to spill secret nuclear codes. His only hope is Gerard Butler's 
wisecracking secret service maverick, Mike, who has managed to infiltrate the 
building and is picking off foreigners at a rate of knots.
 Aaron Eckhart with Liana Liberato in The Expatriate. 
That film is out next week; a fortnight back saw the release of The Expatriate 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154180/expatriate>, which has Eckhart 
doing the world-saving himself, rather than just watching from the sidelines. 
It's a less blockbusting prospect: set in Belgium, with Eckhart by far the 
biggest name, as a single dad CIA enforcer now on the run from his former 
employers. If his role in Olympus channels Harrison Ford – an elder statesman 
with a background in biffing – The Expatriate is an attempt to do whatTaken 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125815/taken> did for Liam Neeson, 
recharging a still formidable force (watch out for a scene of shirtless Semtex 
manufacture). 

Yes, agrees Eckhart, Olympus is the bigger hitter. "The Expatriate hasn't 
found its little place in the world." Why is that? "Well, honestly, I can't 
tell you. I mean I could tell you. I know the answer but I can't tell you. I'll 
just say some films resonate with people somehow. I enjoyed making it, but 
y'know it just .... it's all about the captain of the ship." And in this case 
that's who? "I couldn't possibly tell you. I couldn't possibly insinuate what 
you're about to extrapolate."

Eckhart likes to tease. This can encourage you to push. I was surprised, I 
say, that the president was quite so impotent in Olympus. In the climatic 
battle, he's knocked to the floor as Butler and the chief baddie slug it out. 
The fight progresses along conventional lines, with Butler winning, then their 
positions flipping and all seeming lost. We cut to Eckhart, whom you expect to 
stagger up and deliver the crucial blow, saving the world and rescuing the 
friend who, as has been foregrounded, taught him to box. But he doesn't. He 
just sits there and wheezes: "Come on, Mike".

Eckhart sighs at some length. "OK, hold on. Stop right there. You've really 
hit a nerve." He's not kidding. "How do you think I feel? You don't think I 
suggested that? You don't think the audience would have loved that? You don't 
think they'd have got out of their seats and fucking clapped?"

So why did it not happen? "Next question. You're giving me a fucking heart 
attack. Holy moly. This isn't your first rodeo. But yeah, it would have been 
good. It's pretty much set up for it, isn't it? What did I just say about The 
Expatriate? There are forces sometimes working against the betterment, I think, 
of the overall good."

OK: have action heroes had a crisis of masculinity lately? Eckhart riddles me 
again. "It's the way the business is going, and the world. You can't have any 
real enemies any more, you can't really say what you wanna say, you can't say 
what you mean. Political incorrectness, all that stuff. People are so hen ... 
tied? Picked? Anyway, they're so strapped down trying to be the perfect person 
that they've lost their identity. Gerry [Gerard Butler] lets it hang out in 
this movie. He lets people know who he is in real life. He's not afraid. People 
love that; it's attractive and it's what makes a movie star. I want men – or, 
not men – I just want my 70s action hero back. I want the code: 'You fuck with 
me and I fuck with you. You look at my girl and you're gonna get it.' I want 
families to go see these movies and them all to be inspired."
 Aaron Eckhart and Helena Bonham Carter in Conversations with Other Women. 
Eckhart's biggest payday was as Harvey Dent in The Dark Knight 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122806/dark.knight> – another upstanding 
lawman (for most of it at least) – and another unimpeachably multiplex 
performance. LaBute aside, the further from the mainstream Eckhart wanders, the 
less successful he seems to be. His riskiest role was in Alan Ball'sTowelhead 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125687/towelhead>, as an ex-soldier who 
sleeps with the 13-year-old daughter of his Palestinian neighbour. The film was 
iffily reviewed and took just $372,000 (£241,700); about the same as that in 
which he might be best,Conversations with Other Women 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/118158/conversations.with.other.women>, 
opposite Helena Bonham Carter. A certain disillusion would be forgivable. He's 
now trying to get his own directing and producing projects off the ground. "So 
I can get my own vision out. I feel I have a little bit more to say than just 
being tied up to a railing." Would he like an Oscar? "Shit yeah I'd like one. 
I'd like todeserve one. I'd like to go to the big show."

The day before we meet, he joined Twitter <http://www.twitter.com/aaeckhart>. 
"My agent made me. Because there's this crazy insane notion that it all matters 
for business. They'll tell me so-and-so has this many followers. I go: 'Yeah, 
but did it get him a job? Are they a better actor?' And they're like: 'No.' And 
I'm like: 'But everyone knows everything about him.'"

So why did you give in? "That's insulting. Churchill's turning over in his 
grave right now. Whydid I give in. Well, I haven't really, have I? I have 13 
followers and two tweets. I'm an old man. What do I needTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> for? Mostly it's just to get 
chicks."

He's really that desperate? "Yes I am. I really am. I'm very shy. I know you 
don't believe it. It's true." Has he tried internet dating? He hasn't – people 
might recognise his picture. "And then they tweet it and everything. Like, I've 
had some weird experiences, not with dating sites … let's not go into that …"
 Aaron Eckhart with Julia Roberts in Erin Brockovich. Photograph: 
Sportsphoto/Allstar/Cinetext Collection 
Eckhart has been engaged, but has never married. Nor, more crucially, has he 
settled down with an onscreen partner. He's played against some big stars –
Catherine Zeta-Jones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/119563/no-reservations>, Nicole Kidman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/138728/rabbit-hole>, Jennifer Aniston 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131766/love-happens>, Julia Roberts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77568/erin.brockovich> - but no one 
twice, never quite finding a Jennifer Lawrence to his Bradley Cooper. His great 
acting hero is Cary Grant; he's spoken in the past of his admiration for his 
enduring partnership with Katharine Hepburn. Does he feel he could have done 
with something similar? 

"Yes. Yes. I would like that. Whenever I find an actress that is attractive 
and good and I like her, I would like to make several movies with her. Hepburn 
and Grant, Hepburn and Tracey, Hepburn and James Stewart … Maybe they were all 
just boinking Katharine Hepburn."

Our time's nearly up; his agent and the film's PR have come to retrieve him. 
There's just chance to ask about spiritual manifestation, the conviction you 
can action things by thought alone. "I don't believe it's easy. I believe it's 
a science and it's absolutely true. I believe I can heal myself. The other day 
I was chopping wood at my house at 5.30am and this bit whacked me in the eye, 
knocked me down, spilt my coffee. You just release everything; release the 
pain. And you're healing – boom, boom, boom, all of a sudden – pain's gone, 
eye's cool."

I'm smiling a bit; so are the other people in the room. Someone mentions that 
he might still be jetlagged. "Are you gonna call me crazy?" he grins. "Well, I 
guess if you're gonna be safe, what's the point?"

Later, I logon and become his 14th Twitter follower. On Monday he's up to 300 
and dutifully posting updates about how nice the fans are in Rome, and how 
friendly South Africa is. By Tuesday, the account has been suspended. That 
cigar must have tasted especially sweet.

• Olympus Has Fallen is released in the UK on 17 April
 