
The president of the National Union of Students, Aaron Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, has argued that it is 
time to move beyond lobbying parliament about the rise in university tuition 
fees and start applying more pressure on universities.

In a move that has angered some members of the student movement, Porter said 
that while he will maintain a "principled opposition" to fees and is "not 
happy" about the rise, he nevertheless "accept[s] the law that passed" and 
rules out campaigning for its immediate repeal.

Instead, Porter advocates targeting individual universities, in an attempt to 
convince them not to raise fees far beyond the current rate.

In an interview with Varsity <http://www.varsity.co.uk/news/3029>, the 
Cambridge student paper, Porter said: "We could just continue our principled 
opposition and do nothing else, or we could recognise that the law has been 
passed and universities over the next few weeks and months will be sitting 
down, making a decision about what price they are going to charge."

But Mike Chessum, co-founder of the National Campaign Against Fees and Cuts, 
called Porter's comments a "capitulation". NCAFC is organising three marches 
this month to protest against the tuition fees rise and the scrapping of the 
educational maintenance allowance (EMA).

Chessum said: "These comments are really outrageous … It's totally ludicrous 
to accept the will of parliament, given that the bill only got through as a Lib 
Dem betrayal. This attitude of capitulation fits with the NUS leadership's 
record on grad tax."

The NUS had previously suggested replacing tuition fees with a graduate tax – 
a policy that was seen by some as too concessionary to the government.

Chessum added: "We have a mass movement, the awakening of a generation's 
consciousness. The NUS is totally failing to reflect that, and we'll have to 
fight on without them if we have to."

But Porter said the NUS needed to campaign on more practical terms.

In the interview, he said: "Recognising that that is going to happen, we could 
play a role in saying that if a university is going to charge six, seven, eight 
or nine thousand pounds … I think we could win some considerable concessions 
from those universities."

Porter has previously faced calls to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jan/11/nus-porter-failed-student-protestors>
 because of the way he has handled the campaign against fees. In November,he 
apologised for "dithering" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/nov/28/student-leader-apologises-over-dithering>
 in his support of student occupations.

Parliament will vote on whether to scrap the EMA on Wednesday. The NUS is 
organising protests against the proposals, as well as a rally in Manchester on 
29 January.
 