
The gap between 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?sectioncode=26&storycode=414763&c=1>
 the official and the unofficial student movements is growing. Last month, tens 
of thousands of studentsgathered on Parliament Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2010/dec/09/tuition-fees-student-protest-police>
 in an attempt to prevent parliament passing legislation that would allow 
tuition fees to increase – the latest in a series of demonstrations, 
occupations and other actions over the preceding month. As students attempted 
to defend their education system, around the corner, tucked out of sight on the 
Victoria Embankment, 200 people were mourning its death at a glow-stick vigil 
organised by the National Union of Students (NUS).

The contrast between these two events – both in terms of size of attendance 
and in tone – provided a stark illustration of why the NUS president,Aaron 
Porter <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/aaron-porter>, is no longer fit to 
lead the student movement. He demonstrated this yet again at this week's NUS 
National Executive Council (NEC) meeting by voting against supporting two 
further student actions in January.

Parliament may have passed the tuition fees bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/dec/09/tuition-fees-vote-end-of-coalition>
 on 9 December, but students involved in mobilisations at the end of last year 
have made clear that they are not giving up. The phrase "this is just the 
beginning" has become our mantra. It is evidence of our resolve that we have 
called two major actions for January: a "SaveEMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/education-maintenance-allowance-ema>" 
day of action on 26 January and a "Defend Education" demonstration in London on 
29 January. The latter is intended as a complement to a youth rally for jobs
taking place in Manchester 
<http://anticuts.com/2010/12/20/a-two-of-two-demos-demonstrate-in-london-or-manchester-29-january/>
 on the same day. It has the backing of the UCU, Unite, GMB, NUS Black Students 
Campaign, the Coalition of Resistance, the National Campaign Against Fees and 
Cuts, the Education Activist Network and the Free Education Campaign. Yet in a 
clear sign of how out of step the NUS leadership is with its members and the 
rest of the union movement, Porter and the majority of the NUS NEC voted 
against backing either.

At a time when union leaders such as Len McCluskey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/dec/19/unions-students-strike-fight-cuts>
 are praising students and calling on the labour movement to follow in their 
footsteps, the NUS president is refusing to back further actions to defend 
education.

It is also a sign – and not the first one – that Porter seems to be giving up 
the fight. Over Christmas, he wrote anopen letter to Simon Hughes MP 
<http://studentbroadleft.org.uk/2011/01/students-must-not-meekly-accept-defeat-on-fees-a-response-to-aaron-porter%E2%80%99s-letter-to-simon-hughes/>
, the government's newly appointed advocate for access to education. In it 
Porter says: "We are finding it hard to get the government to explain how it 
will ensure that £9k rather than £6k fees will be the 'exception'". There you 
have it: Porter's response to the threat to higher education is to politely 
request an explanation of how tuition fees will only be doubled rather than 
tripled in most cases.

The NEC vote was just the latest in a series of betrayals. The NUS repeatedly 
failed to back, let alone call, days of action in the weeks leading up to the 
vote. Porter only belatedly pledged support for occupations and then failed to 
deliver on his promise to provide them with legal support. In the days after 
the last demo, he refused to make a statement condemning police violence, 
despite more than 43 students being injured.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> need a fighting 
union. The fact that 52,000 people from right across the country attended on 10 
November demonstrates the ability the NUS has to mobilise when it puts its 
infrastructure behind it. We move into the new year with the firm belief that 
we can defeat the government's plans. But to do so we need an NUS leadership 
that will fight with us and for us, not one that will resign itself to defeat 
before the battle has barely commenced.

Two universities – Birkbeck and the School of Oriental and African Studies – 
have already passedmotions of no confidence 
<http://news.sky.com/skynews/Article/201009115854589> in Aaron Porter. Twenty 
five will be enough to trigger a national conference and acampaign for this to 
happen 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/It-is-time-to-go-Aaron-Porter-we-need-a-fighting-NUS/163785053665281?v=info>
 is already gathering momentum.

It is not too late for Aaron Porter to change his mind. Actions planned for 26 
and 29 January are crucial next steps in our fight against the government's 
cuts. The NUS needs to demonstrate its willingness to lead the fight by backing 
both events. Otherwise, it's time forAaron Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter> to go.
 