
England’s tour of South Africa has moved on from Cape Town to the Highveld, 
nearly 6,000 feet above sea level, for this week’s third Test at the Wanderers 
in Johannesburg where the home side begin afresh under their most gifted 
cricketer, Abraham Benjamin de Villiers.

An unchanged Proteas squad land into the capital of Gauteng province on Monday 
morning, 1-0 down but with some confidence restored following the battling draw 
at Newlands in which Hashim Amlasigned off from the captaincy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/06/hashim-amla-resigns-captain-south-africa-second-test-england>
 with a double-hundred ​and the honest admission that it would be better if 
someone else was in charge​.

For the final two Tests of the series, that someone is De Villiers, their 
premier batsman, one-day captain and veteran of 104 Tests now finally stepping 
up to the job he was so publicly disappointed to miss out on when, after 11 
years under the indomitable Graeme Smith ended in 2014, the mild-mannered Amla 
got the nod fromCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> South 
Africa.

Why cricket knocks the likes of Facebook and BuzzFeed for six | Emma John
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/09/cricket-facebook-buzzfeed-computer-age>
It is a move that has certainly provided a twist to the plot of an already 
intriguing series, not least when you consider how it began for De Villiers: 
having previously been pressed into wicketkeeping duties, the first Test was 
only a day old when in a television interview he was alreadytalking of reducing 
his workload 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/28/ab-de-villiers-south-africa-dale-steyn-england>
. He was responding to, but not flatly denying, a report of his impending 
retirement that had appeared in an Afrikaans newspaper.

Perhaps it is why Cricket South Africa has not committed to De Villiers’ 
captaincy in Test cricket beyond seeing out the current series, although with 
the team’s next assignment not until August, at home to New Zealand, there is 
no urgent rush; a permanent successor to Amla is not likely to be named until a 
board meeting in July.

Both De Villiers and the board are seeing how the land lies here too, with the 
31-year-old, like others in the squad, understood to be considering a deal to 
play in July’s Caribbean Premier League, filling what would be his only 
extended spell of downtime this year. When the rand is weak, as at present, the 
lure of Twenty20 overseas grows stronger for their senior core.

However they got there, it feels like the Proteas have the right man in charge 
for their immediate predicament and the highly respected Amla, who informed 
senior players of his decision midway through the Cape Town Test, is now free 
to focus solely on his batting. For the rest of us looking on, it is a chance 
to finally find out what type of Test captain the wonderfully talented AB will 
be.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fab-de-villiers-south-africa-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F645ec1c729ee3ca2cae40a77db484b54fea9f9bc%2F0_150_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AB%20de%20Villiers%2C%20South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20seasoned%20captaincy%20novice%2C%20tests%20England%20anew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fab-de-villiers-south-africa-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AB%20de%20Villiers%2C%20South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20seasoned%20captaincy%20novice%2C%20tests%20England%20anew&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fab-de-villiers-south-africa-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F645ec1c729ee3ca2cae40a77db484b54fea9f9bc%2F0_150_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 AB de Villiers’ already impressive batting record has improved even further 
since he took over the ODI captaincy. Will the same happen in Tests? 
Photograph: Mike Hutchings/Reuters 
While he has grown as one-day captain over the past four years after a shaky 
start, there is nothing to go on in terms of his prior record in red-ball 
cricket; when he pulls on his green blazer on Thursday morning and walks out to 
the middle with Alastair Cook for the toss, it will be the first time he has 
captained a game of first-class cricket.

But when discussing a remarkable individual such as De Villiers – owner of the 
fastest 50, 100 and 150 in one-day cricket, with an average in excess of 47 in 
each of his past eight calendar years as a Test cricketer – this lack of 
leadership experience in whites scarcely feels noteworthy.

Great players do not come with a guarantee of being great captains, of course, 
but considering the way he plays his cricket, it seems doubtful he will be the 
cautious type. As a batsman, the right-hander has multiple options with which 
to strike any given delivery – his nickname is Mr 360 – so one rather suspects 
his tactics will be towards the proactive end of the spectrum.

Ominously for the tourists, the responsibility of captaincy in one-day cricket 
has taken him to new heights as a batsman in that format too, with his average 
over the past four years a staggering 69.28, 24 runs more than when merely 
among the rank and file.

South Africa name unchanged squad for last two Tests against England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/08/south-africa-named-unchanged-16-man-squad-for-last-two-tests-against-england>
South Africa, entering must-win territory for the series itself and, it has 
been rumoured, their head coach, Russell Domingo, will hope this to be the case 
in Test cricket, and that this change at the tiller can provide the kind of 
bounce intended when struggling football clubs replace their manager.

But, as countless relegated sides will tell you, there are no guarantees, and 
De Villiers looks set to start without his most dangerous weapon, the attack 
leader Dale Steyn, who is still struggling with the shoulder injury that led 
him to pull up during the defeat at Durban and miss the Cape Town stalemate 
altogether.

The Wanderers is historically a result pitch with only one draw in the past 13 
Test matches, and South Africa are already discussing playing four seamers, 
with Kyle Abbott, fit again after a hamstring strain, and the uncapped quick 
Hardus Viljoen vying to replace either the spinner Dane Piedt or the opener 
Stiaan van Zyl; the latter scenario needs the batsman Temba Bavuma to move up 
the order.

England, who arrived on Johannesburg on Sunday after three days of rest, may 
have been a little rattled by afifth-day wobble at Newlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/06/england-draw-south-africa-second-test>
 but are more settled than their hosts and plan to be unchanged at this stage. 
There is no room for complacency however, especially, now that AB has the (c) 
at the end of his name.
 