
AB de Villiers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> will return 
to the role of wicketkeeper for South Africa in the opening two Tests of their 
series against England starting in Durban on Boxing Day.

Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> South Africa confirmed the 
move as they named a 13-man squad for the first two Tests that also included a 
call-up for the uncapped left-handed batsman Rilee Rossouw.

The versatile De Villiers did keep wickets during last season’s home series 
against West Indies when Quinton de Kock was injured but before that had not 
donned the gloves in a Test since the 2013-14 home series against Australia.

Steven Finn’s hopes grow of featuring in England tour of South Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/09/steven-finn-england-south-africa>
Both De Kock and Dane Vilas, who kept wickets in the recent 3-0 series loss in 
India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/07/india-beat-south-africa-fourth-test-report>
, have been dropped for poor batting form but will play for South Africa A 
against England in a two-day fixture starting next weekend. Vilas will captain 
the side and keep wickets while De Kock will bat at No4.

De Villiers’s return to an all-rounder role will enable Temba Bavuma to move 
back to his normal batting position in the middle order while Dean Elgar and 
Stiaan van Zyl will resume their opening batting partnership at the top of the 
order.

Rossouw has been included in the squad as an extra batsman while Dane Piedt is 
the only spinner selected with both Simon Harmer and Imran Tahir dropping out 
from the squad that went to India.

With Vernon Philander on the injury list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/08/south-africa-vernon-philander-miss-england-tests>
, Kyle Abbott retains his place in the four-man fast bowling attack along with 
Morne Morkel, Kagiso Rabada and Dale Steyn, who faces a fitness test next week 
on his troublesome groin injury.

“One of the issues that concerned us during the tour to India was the lack of 
depth to our batting, particularly in the lower order and the change in AB’s 
role means that we can now have a specialist batsman at No7,” the CSA selection 
convenerLinda Zondi said in a statement 
<https://cricket.co.za/news/10280/AB-takes-the-gloves-for-start-of-England-Test-Series>
. “We now feel that the side has a much better balance about it without in any 
way reducing the tactical options available to our captain, Hashim Amla.”

The second Test will be played in Cape Town from 2 January, with further 
matches in Johannesburg and Pretoria.

South Africa squad

H Amla (capt), K Abbott, T Bavuma, AB de Villiers, JP Duminy, F du Plessis, D 
Elgar, M Morkel, D Piedt, K Rabada, R Rossouw, D Steyn, S van Zyl.
 