
AB de Villiers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers>, in his 
first press conference as South Africa’s Test captain, cast doubt on his future 
beyond the series with England, saying the crowded schedule and the financial 
pull of Twenty20 could lead him to walk away from the world stage.

Speaking on the eve of the third Test, with his team 1-0 down with two to 
play, the 31-year-old batsman said reports of his impending retirement before 
the start of the series contained “a little bit of truth”. He also revealed he 
has not always enjoyed playing for his country in the past three years.

England’s Jimmy Anderson looks long and eyes series win over South Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/jimmy-anderson-england-south-africa-third-test>
De Villiers, who took over the captaincy from Hashim Amla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/06/hashim-amla-resigns-captain-south-africa-second-test-england>
 after the drawn second Test in Cape Town, was unable to offer any commitment 
to South Africa beyond the next two matches, having voiced concerns over his 
workload during the first Test defeat in Durban.

“There has been a few rumours floating around and in most rumours there is 
always a little bit of truth,” De Villiers said. “I’ve found myself on the 
pitch in the past few years, every now and then, not enjoying myself as much as 
I should be and that raises concerns. I’ve been searching for answers and 
speaking to a few people and that has leaked a little bit.

“I’m still very committed. To the job [of captaincy] I’m not sure, obviously 
the two Test matches for now is all I’m focusing on, and there is a nice 
six-month break before we play Test cricket again [at home to New Zealand in 
August].

He added: “Lots of things can happen before then and I don’t want to commit 
myself too much to everything before then but for now I’m as committed as I can 
be and I’m very hungry to make a success of the next two Test matches.”

De Villiers, who is also South Africa’s one-day captain, earns $1.4m playing 
in the Indian Premier League for Royal Challengers Bangalore – estimated to be 
10 times his annual contract withCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> South Africa – and is in talks to 
play in the Caribbean Premier League in July, a deal that would wipe out his 
remaining downtime in 2016.

His intention to play in these tournaments – and scale back his workload for 
South Africa by cherry-picking high-profile bilateral series and global events 
– is a stark warning to the International Cricket Council at a time when the 
long-term future of Test cricket is being debated and Twenty20 leagues are 
enjoying bumper crowds in comparison.

De Villiers said: “I think it is an ongoing concern for the ICC. Test cricket 
is the main format and we all want to be part of that. There are huge 
traditions and culture in this format but I truly believe there are one or two 
areas where we can improve and the guys keep their focus in the right place.

“There are big tournaments going on around the world and some of them you 
cannot ignore because financially they make a huge difference in our lives. 
International cricket is the main one you want to play and one or two things 
will have to change in order for that to happen.”

Compared with South Africa, England’s Test players are well rewarded by their 
central contracts and match fees. De Villiers’ opposite number, Alastair Cook, 
insists the international game cannot afford to stand still.

He said: “I don’t think we’re reaching the end game. Everyone loves Test 
cricket, everyone knows we have got to protect Test cricket because it is 
really the ultimate test of a cricketer but you can’t stand still. You have to 
always look at how we can improve the game.

“With Twenty20 coming in, who’d have said 10 years ago the effect that would 
have? I was watching the Big Bash today with 40,000 people in the crowd and it 
looked a great spectacle.

“We can’t stand still as a game. The people who run it have got to know the 
responsibility is on their shoulders to look after it and try to push it 
forward the best way they can.”

South Africa are expected to name their permanent Test captain in July. De 
Villiers will sit down with his advisers to consider his international future 
before then. “I don’t know what the answers are,” he said. “I can’t make a 
statement. All I know is there are quite a few guys feeling we are playing a 
bit too much cricket and we just need to get the focus right.”
 