
Abbas Kiarostami: a highly sophisticated, self-possessed master of cinematic 
poetry | Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jul/04/abbas-kiarostami-master-of-cinematic-poetry-peter-bradshaw>
Abbas Kiarostami, the multi-award-winning Iranian director whose 1997 film 
Taste of Cherry was awarded the Palme d’Or at theCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, has died aged 76.

“Abbas Kiarostami, who had travelled to France for treatment, has died,” 
reported 
<http://isna.ir/news/95040108421/%DA%A9%DB%8C%D8%A7%D8%B1%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%85%DB%8C-%D8%AF%D8%B1-%D9%BE%D8%A7%D8%B1%DB%8C%D8%B3-%D8%A7%D8%B2-%D8%AF%D9%86%DB%8C%D8%A7-%D8%B1%D9%81%D8%AA>
 the semi-official Isna news agency on Monday. Iran’s house of cinema confirmed 
the report, Isna said.Kiarostami had been diagnosed with gastrointestinal cancer
 
<http://new.tehrantimes.com/news/300235/Abbas-Kiarostami-undergoes-operation-at-Tehran-hospital>
in March 2016, and had undergone a series of operations, includingin Paris 
<http://www.payvand.com/news/16/jun/1150.html> last month.

Speaking to the Guardian from Tehran, Oscar-winning Iranian film-maker Asghar 
Farhadi – who had been due to fly to Paris to visit his friend later tonight – 
said he was “very sad, in total shock”.

Abbas Kiarostami obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/04/abbas-kiarostami-obituary> 
“He wasn’t just a film-maker,” Farhadi continued, “he was a modern mystic, 
both in his cinema and his private life.” Farhadi said Kiarostami’s success 
enabled many generations of Iranian film-makers: “He definitely paved ways for 
others and influenced a great deal of people. It’s not just the world of cinema 
that has lost a great man; the whole world has lost someone really great.”

Mohsen Makhmalbaf echoed the sentiment, saying Iran’s cinema owes its global 
reputation to his fellow director, but that this visibility did not translate 
into a greater visibility for his work in his homeland.

“Kiarostami gave the Iranian cinema the international credibility that it has 
today,” he told the Guardian. “But his films were unfortunately not seen as 
much inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. He changed the world’s 
cinema; he freshened it and humanised it in contrast with Hollywood’s rough 
version.”

“He was a man of life, who enjoyed living and made films in praise of life – 
that’s why it’s so difficult to come to terms with his death,” he said.

Kiarostami’s rise to the status of one of the world’s foremost auteurs started 
from relatively humble beginnings. He was born in 1940 in Tehran, and 
originally studied painting at the University of Tehran; Kiarostami began 
working as a graphic designer and went on to shoot dozens of commercials for 
Iranian TV. In 1969 he joined Kanun (the Centre for the Intellectual 
Development of Children and Young Adults), where he ran the film department, 
and was able to make his own films.In 2005 Kiarostami told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/apr/16/art>: “We were supposed to make 
films that dealt with childhood problems. At the beginning it was just a job, 
but it was the making of me as an artist.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f1c7f228104175b8abc8992413e41d1d4964c83%2F0_0_5296_3177%2F5296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abbas%20Kiarostami%2C%20Palme%20d'Or-winning%20Iranian%20film-maker%2C%20dies%20aged%2076&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abbas%20Kiarostami%2C%20Palme%20d%27Or-winning%20Iranian%20film-maker%2C%20dies%20aged%2076&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f1c7f228104175b8abc8992413e41d1d4964c83%2F0_0_5296_3177%2F5296.jpg>
 Palme winner ... Taste of Cherry Photograph: Moviestore/REX Shutterstock 
In the two decades he worked for Kanun, Kiarostami made films continuously, 
including his first feature, The Report, in 1977. He managed to negotiate the 
transition triggered by the Khomeini revolution, re-working the films he made 
to try and accommodate the demands of a new set of censors. Unlike many of his 
film-industry peers, Kiarostami decided to remain in Iran after the revolution, 
likening himself to “a tree that is rooted in the ground”. “[If you] transfer 
it from one place to another, the tree will no longer bear fruit ... If I had 
left my country, I would be the same as the tree.”

It was while he was at Kanun also that Kiarostami embarked on what would 
become known as the Koker trilogy, the three films that established his 
international reputation as a director of considerable sensitivity and 
intellectual rigour. The first, Where Is the Friend’s Home?, was completed in 
1987, and its sympathetic story of a schoolkid’s attempt to return a 
classmate’s exercise book, won Kiarostami’s first major award, the Bronze 
Leopard at the Locarno film festival.

Life, and Nothing More..., finished in 1992, saw him blend fiction and 
documentary in his account of his search for the earlier film’s cast after the 
devastating earthquake of 1990. Said Jean-Luc Godard after seeing the film: 
“Film begins with DW Griffith and ends withAbbas Kiarostami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/abbas-kiarostami>.” In 1994, Kiarostami made 
Through the Olive Trees, which revolved around the making of a fictional second 
instalment of Life, and Nothing More.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf86fa2d3aa0be1d86789d7beb4f947d47156114%2F0_64_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abbas%20Kiarostami%2C%20Palme%20d'Or-winning%20Iranian%20film-maker%2C%20dies%20aged%2076&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abbas%20Kiarostami%2C%20Palme%20d%27Or-winning%20Iranian%20film-maker%2C%20dies%20aged%2076&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf86fa2d3aa0be1d86789d7beb4f947d47156114%2F0_64_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Imapct ... Close-Up Photograph: handout/Handout 
However, the hostile censorship climate meant he had already left his job at 
Kanun, shortly after completing another film, Homework, in 1989. Close-Up, from 
1990 was an agile docu-fiction about a man who had been put on trial for 
impersonating Kiarostami’s fellow film-maker Mohsen Makhmalbaf. At the same 
time, Kiarostami wrote and produced films by other directors, most notably The 
White Balloon, the 1995 directorial debut of Jafar Panahi, who had worked on 
Through the Olive Trees as an assistant director.

A life in cinema: Abbas Kiarostami
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/13/abbas-kiarostami-film> 
Kiarostami’s upward ascension as a major auteur was confirmed in 1997, when 
his seventh feature, Taste of Cherry – a study of a man driving around looking 
for someone to help him commit suicide – was awarded the Palme d’Or (jointly, 
with The Eel, directed by Shohei Imamura).

Kiarostami’s subsequent career alternated between formal features, such as the 
poetic drama The Wind Will Carry Us and Ten, which exploitedKiarostami’s 
fondness for filming and photographing in cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jul/29/photography-abbas-kiarostami-best-shot>
, and outside ideas such as ABC Africa, which arose after Kiarostami was 
invited to film Aids orphans in Uganda, and Tickets, a three-part film made 
with Ken Loach and Ermanno Olmi. He also moved into what can only be described 
as minimalist documentary with Five (subtitled Dedicated to Ozu), which 
comprised a series of lengthy shots of Spanish landscape, and Shirin, composed 
of a series of headshots of women watching an unseen film.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed3a79dfbaa3939113cc6630c5ccd8f0e7de27f6%2F71_0_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abbas%20Kiarostami%2C%20Palme%20d'Or-winning%20Iranian%20film-maker%2C%20dies%20aged%2076&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abbas%20Kiarostami%2C%20Palme%20d%27Or-winning%20Iranian%20film-maker%2C%20dies%20aged%2076&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fabbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed3a79dfbaa3939113cc6630c5ccd8f0e7de27f6%2F71_0_2496_1497%2F2496.jpg>
 Awarded ... William Shimell and Juliette Binoche in Certified Copy Photograph: 
Publicity image from film company 
Cannes 2012: Abbas Kiarostami: 'The world is my workshop'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/28/cannes-abbas-kiarostami-interview>
Latterly, Kiarostami found it increasingly difficult to film in Iran, as 
political strife grew in the wake of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s rise to power. His 
next two films, Certified Copy and Like Someone in Love were filmed abroad, in 
Italy and Japan respectively, even if they dealt in Kiarostami’s familiar 
themes of authenticity and relationships. Both were screened at Cannes, and the 
former won the festival’s best actress award for Juliette Binoche.

Last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/30/oscars-new-members-list-2016-eight-things-we-learned>
, Kiarostami was among 683 film-makers asked to join the Academy of Motion 
Picture Arts and Sciences; many commented on the belated nature of the invite. 
In 2003, The Guardian ranked him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/nov/14/1> the sixth best working 
director.

Kiarostami was married once, in 1969, to Parvin Amir-Gholi, but they divorced 
in 1982. They had two sons together: Ahmad (a mulitmedia publisher) and Bahman 
(a documentary-maker).
 