
The death of the legendary film-maker Abbas Kiarostami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/04/abbas-kiarostami-obituary> has 
sparked an intense debate in Iran over the right of patients to be told the 
truth about their illness after claims that the director did not know the 
severity of his condition until shortly before he died.

The Palme d’Or winner underwent four operations in Iran before his death last 
week aged 76 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/04/abbas-kiarostami-palme-dor-winning-iranian-film-maker-dies>
 but had resisted his family’s attempts to transfer him to Paris for treatment 
until it was too late, relatives said.

The Iranian government has launched an official investigation into the death, 
and Ahmad Kiarostami, the director’s son, said the family was planning a legal 
claim against the medical team.

There have been conflicting reports about the cause of Kiarostami’s death, but 
family members say they were unable to make potentially life-saving decisions 
about treatment because they were kept in the dark about the nature of his 
illness.

A life in cinema: Abbas Kiarostami
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/13/abbas-kiarostami-film> 


“We were in a dark tunnel and we were not supposed to be informed about what 
had happened,” Kiarostami’s other son, Bahman, told BBC Persian. He said the 
medical team had refused to give information either to the patient or his 
family.


Bahman Kiarostami said his father had been angry about this silence before his 
death. He recalled his father asking: “What sort of secret is it that even the 
patient cannot be informed about it?”

Bahman also said his father believed it was only in France that the family had 
been properly informed about his condition. “In four months, this was the first 
time that a doctor was giving us information,” Bahman said.

The complaint has touched a nerve in Iran, where patients are often not told 
about the severity of their medical condition. Dariush Mehrjui, an acclaimed 
Iranian director, lost his temper earlier this week at a tribute to Kiarostami,
saying 
<http://www.tehrantimes.com/news/404236/Cow-director-blames-medical-team-for-death-of-Kiarostami>
: “I’m angry over this accident that is the outcome of the carelessness and 
irresponsibility of the surgeons who killed Abbas Kiarostami.”

According to Kiarostami’s French doctor, his first operation was to remove 
bowel polyps, which an Iranian official had previously said was aimed at 
preventing the spread of cancer. His further surgeries were reportedly due to 
manage subsequent complications such as blood poisoning and infection (sepsis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/13/sepsis-should-be-treated-same-as-heart-attacks-health-watchdog>
), arising from this operation, which, according to his family, were the cause 
of his death.

Maryam Behnam, a GP based in London who trained in Iran, said a patient’s 
authority and right to confidentiality, as well as their right to be kept 
informed, were widely violated inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. 
She said: “Sometimes the patient is not told about the diagnosis, but his or 
her uncle or his or her neighbour might know.”

Mania Akbari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/15/iranian-filmmaker-mania-akbari>, 
a friend of Kiarostami who starred in his filmTen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2002/sep/29/features.review17>, said 
she had had a similar experience 10 years ago when she was diagnosed with 
breast cancer and was given a mastectomy without her knowledge. Akbari said: 
“[After the first operation] I was still unconscious and they took me in again 
for a second operation without me knowing. When I woke up I was shocked to see 
my breasts had been removed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fabbas-kiarostami-film-maker-death-sparks-debate-patient-right-be-informed-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4859ba2249414096724f8a78295a00858a7cce9%2F0_181_5444_3267%2F5444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abbas%20Kiarostami%20death%20sparks%20debate%20on%20patient's%20right%20to%20be%20informed%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fabbas-kiarostami-film-maker-death-sparks-debate-patient-right-be-informed-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abbas%20Kiarostami%20death%20sparks%20debate%20on%20patient%27s%20right%20to%20be%20informed%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fabbas-kiarostami-film-maker-death-sparks-debate-patient-right-be-informed-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4859ba2249414096724f8a78295a00858a7cce9%2F0_181_5444_3267%2F5444.jpg>
 The Iranian film director Asghar Farhadi speaks at a tribute for Kiarostami. 
Photograph: Atta Kenare/AFP/Getty Images 
Dr Majid Hashemi, a senior bariatric surgeon in the UK, said that patients in 
Iran were “not as empowered as they are here”. He said: “[In the UK] we are 
told that we have to involve the patient with any … decision-making, [that] 
that’s ethically the right thing to do. In Iran I found that that didn’t 
happen.”

Dr Pari-Naz Mohanna, a consultant plastic and reconstructive surgeon at St 
Thomas’ hospital, London, said withholding information from patients was not 
standard practice in Iran but that cultural factors meant family members 
sometimes had greater authority than patients.

She said: “The family tends to have control, whereas in the UK the patient is 
always involved; nothing is carried out without the patient’s consent unless 
it’s an emergency.

Sick in Iran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2014/mar/05/iran-fathers-cancer-father-sick>
“In Iran, it’s a different situation; I wouldn’t say it’s the same across the 
whole country, but with certain diseases, terminal diseases in particular, the 
families tend to prefer that the patient isn’t informed, so that they aren’t 
distressed.”

On Tuesday a group of 30 senior doctors, scholars and judicial officials met 
for five hours in Tehran to investigate Kiarostami’s death. A deputy health 
minister told the semi-official Isna news agency that the findings would be 
released next week.

Iran’s ministry of health said this week that Kiarostami should not have gone 
to France. “Overall, our medical team showed no negligence in his treatment,” 
said a spokesperson, adding that the health minister had visited the patient 
six times, Isna reported.

On Sunday, Kiarostami was buried in northern Tehran after thousands gathered 
in the capital to pay tribute to a figure who was more celebrated abroad than 
at home. The Oscar-winning directorAsghar Farhadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/asghar-farhadi> praised him for remaining 
loyal to his country and making its cinema global despite, he said, politicians 
putting barriers in his way.


“First welcome, last farewell,” read placards at the funeral, a reference to 
the fact that such huge crowds had never been allowed to gather for Kiarostami 
during his lifetime. A red carpet was rolled out at the airport for his body on 
its return from Paris – the first time Kiarostami had officially been on one in 
his native land.

Abbas Kiarostami
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/apr/28/hayfilmfestival2005.guardianhayfestival>
Since Kiarostami’s death, an increasing number of people in Iran have urged 
authorities to treat the country’s artists with more dignity. Iran’s most 
famous traditional singer,Mohammad-Reza Shajarian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/10/ramadan-mohammed-rez-shajarian-iran>
, currently being treated for cancer, has not been allowed to perform in 
concerts in recent years, while the sculptorParviz Tanavoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/parviz-tanavoli-iranian-artist-made-something-nothing>
, 79, was recently barred from leaving the country and had his passport 
confiscated.


Kiarostami was famous for making films in praise of life, especially 
masterpieces such as Where Is the Friend’s Home?, about a schoolboy who wants 
to return his classmate’s notebook; and Close-Up, a docudrama about a man who 
pretends to be the Iranian film-makerMohsen Makhmalbaf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mohsen-makhmalbaf>. Kiarostami’s Taste of 
Cherry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/apr/13/curzon-on-demand-taste-of-cherry>
won the Palme d’Or at Cannes in 1997. Before falling ill, he was involved in 
training in Cuba and had plans to make a film set in China.

“You can learn from gamblers,” Kiarostami said in his final days in an audio 
broadcast by BBC Persian. “They say if you’re on the losing side, better to 
change your seat and leave. I’m doing just that, going to France.”
 