
ABC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> has defended Raven-Symoné, in 
response to a petition calling for The View co-host’s resignation that has 
collected more than 120,000 signatures.

South Carolina sheriff fires deputy seen manhandling teenage girl in video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/28/south-carolina-parents-speak-out-school-board>
Symoné courted controversy after she partially defended the South Carolina 
police officer who dragged a female high school studentfrom her classroom last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/28/south-carolina-parents-speak-out-school-board>
.

Before the Richland County sheriff’s department fired the officer, Ben Fields, 
Symoné said the teenager may have deserved to be treated that way.

“We don’t know what she said, but she did not get up,” Symoné said. “They 
called [Fields] as a last resort. He talked to her for 30 seconds and she still 
didn’t get up. She still didn’t put the phone away.

“You do not need to be manhandling a child that way, but at the same time, 
kids, put your phones away.”

Her comments inspired Change.org user Che Scott-Heron to create a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/barbara-walters-petition-to-remove-raven-symone-from-the-view?recruiter=293473025>
 addressed to The View’s executive producer, Barbara Walters, calling for 
Symoné to be removed from the show.

“African Americans and black people around the diaspora need a voice 
representative of their views and not a voice representative of what white 
people want us to say,” the petition reads.

“We need strong black role models in prominent positions on television and 
Raven-Symoné cannot provide that.”

As of Sunday afternoon, the petition had collected more than 126,500 
signatures. On Saturday, ABC releaseda statement 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/abc-responds-petition-have-raven-835826?utm_source=twitter>
.

Anyone can be a white supremacist. Just ask Raven-Symoné | Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/14/raven-symone-shows-anyone-can-be-white-supremacist-names-racism>
“We love Raven,” the network said 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/abc-responds-petition-have-raven-835826?utm_source=twitter>
. “She is confident, genuine and opinionated, all qualities that make her a 
great addition to the panel.”

The View’s co-hosts are known for making controversial statements. Symoné has 
upheld the tradition since joining the show in June. Last month, sheapologized 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/raven-symone-clarifies-ghetto-name-slur-it-was-in-poor-taste-20151210>
 after saying she would not hire a person with a “ghetto” name.

Her father, Christopher B Pearman, said on Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/christopher.b.pearman/posts/877701705671241?pnref=story>
that his daughter’s comments about “ghetto” names were an “inexcusable gaffe”.

“Her Mother and I love her very much and will always support her and have her 
back,” he wrote. “Even if sometimes … she says some dumb S#%T!”
 