
Mirror Group Digital's network of websites – including mirrorfootball.co.uk 
and 3am.co.uk – was the standout performer among national newspaper digital 
operations in April, a month when all its rivals saw a drop in traffic despite 
the royal wedding.

MGD saw its daily average users increase 17.45% compared with March, to 
631,100 – beating its previousrecord high posted in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/24/february-abce-mail-online>. 
Monthly users were up 23.56% month on month. UK users account for 52% of all 
online traffic.

All the other UK national newspaper websites that report monthly Audit Bureau 
of Circulations Electronic figures saw traffic decline in a month that included 
the royal wedding, but also the Easter bank holiday.

Guardian.co.uk, which is part of the network that publishes 
MediaGuardian.co.uk, posted the largest fall in daily average users, down 
11.58% to 2,407,265.

However, this follows a record month in March, when theguardian.com had just 
over 2.7 million average daily users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/28/abce-mail-online-double-digit-growth?INTCMP=SRCH>
, and was 31% up on April 2010.

Guardian.co.uk remained the second most popular UK newspaper website behind 
Mail Online, which saw its average daily users fall by 1.79% in April, to 
3,596,040, also after a new record high in March. Average daily users were up 
just over 50% compared with March 2010. Monthly users dropped by 3.4% compared 
with the previous month.

Telegraph.co.uk also posted a slight fall in online traffic last month, with 
average daily users slipping 3.16% to 1,932,618, and monthly users dropping 
4.33%.

Independent.co.uk had 586,070 average daily users in April, a month-on-month 
dip of 3.18%. Monthly users fell 3.79% over the same period.

Guardian.co.uk did not report monthly traffic figures for April as part of a 
new policy of only reporting this data every other month.

A spokeswoman for theguardian.com publisher Guardian News & Media said: "We 
have made some minor alterations to the way our web traffic is audited by ABC. 
We have for some time focused on reporting our daily average unique browsers 
measure, which the industry agrees is the most useful, robust and transparent 
way to monitor web traffic.

"To reflect this focus we will continue to audit and report our daily average 
unique browser figures on a monthly basis whilst reducing the frequency with 
which we audit monthly unique browsers on theguardian.com to once every other 
month."

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 3,596,040

Month-on-month change: -1.79%

Year-on-year change: +51.96%

Monthly browsers: 63,753,237

Monthly change: -3.40%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 2,407,265

Month-on-month change: -11.58%

Year-on-year change: +31.02%

Monthly browsers: N/A

Monthly change: N/A

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 1,932,618

Month-on-month change: -3.16%

Year-on-year change: +22.06%

Monthly browsers: 40,139,803

Monthly change: -4.33%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 631,100

Month-on-month change: +17.45%

Year-on-year change: +42.86%

Monthly browsers: 14,108,330

Monthly change: +23.56%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 586,070

Month-on-month change: -3.18%

Year-on-year change: +28.73%

Monthly browsers: 12,852,508

Monthly change: -3.79%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 