
Mail Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> was the only UK 
national newspaper website to defy a dip in online audience in December, 
topping 3 million daily users for the first time in the process.

The Daily Mail's network of websites recorded 3,044,961 average daily users 
during December, up 3.58% from November, according to the latest figures from 
the Audit Bureau of Circulations Electronic published today.

Despite a boost in traffic from WikiLeaks US embassy cables content in the 
first half of December, the theguardian.com network saw a slight overall fall 
for the month.

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> News & Media 
website network recorded 2,234,360 average daily users, down 3.9% from 
November. However, this was up by just over 18% compared with December 2009. 
Its UK audience accounted for 35% of monthly users.

UK traffic accounted for 35% of Mail Online's total monthly audience, with one 
source indicating that US growth was a key driver of traffic for the site.

Mail Online already has an office in LA with three editorial and advertising 
staff, and is in the process of opening a New York office three times that 
size. "We're also starting to reach the kind of scale where growth is 
self-perpetuating," said the Mail Online insider. "There's content that is 
universally interesting."

Part of Mail Online's successful strategy has been its front-page sidebar with 
links to popular celebrity stories. The source described that as a navigation 
tool that takes the effort out of searching for stories. "Other sites give that 
job back to the user."

Telegraph.co.uk's traffic fell 8.15% from November to 1,583,322 average daily 
users, with 33% of its audience in the UK.

All UK national newspaper sites that report monthly ABCe figures recorded 
year-on-year growth, with the Mail Online seeing a far bigger increase of 
60.32% from December 2009.

News International's titles the Sun, News of the World, Times and Sunday Times 
stopped reporting monthly ABCe figure last year before the publisher began 
introducing paywalls for online content.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 3,044,961

Month-on-month change: +3.58%

Year-on-year change: +60.32%

Monthly browsers: 53,943,420

Monthly change: +4.88%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 2,234,360

Month-on-month change: -3.9%

Year-on-year change: +18.32%

Monthly browsers: 39,067,825

Monthly change: -4.26%

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 1,583,322

Month-on-month change: -8.17%

Year-on-year change: +3.16%

Monthly browsers: 31,087,385

Monthly change: -5.50%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 504,507

Month-on-month change: -9.90%

Year-on-year change: +32.81%

Monthly browsers: 11,041,306

Monthly change: -3.01%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 503,959

Month-on-month change: -5.66%

Year-on-year change: +12.33%

Monthly browsers: 11,099,976

Monthly change: -3.01%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 