
Mail Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online>, the most popular 
UK newspaper website network, suffered a fall in online traffic in February 
after a period of sustained growth.

The Daily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> & General Trust 
website network's daily average users fell 1.4% in February on the previous 
month to 3,143,141 and monthly users were also down 9.08% month on month, 
according to the latest figures from the Audit Bureau of Circulations published 
on Thursday.

However, Mail Online remained by some distance the UK's most popular newspaper 
website with its daily average and monthly traffic figures both up by about 40% 
year on year.

February is a traditionally tough month for news websites, due to a shorter 
calendar month and an unfavourable comparison with January.

Mirror Group Digital's network of sites suffered the heaviest fall in online 
traffic in February, with a 9.02% slide in daily average users to 548,303 
compared with January,when it had its best ever figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/24/mirror-group-hjanuary-abces?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

UK users, a lucrative audience for newspaper advertisers, accounted for 58% of 
Mirror Group's online traffic – the largest proportion of all British national 
newspaper sites.

Independent.co.uk recorded the biggest jump in daily users last month, up 
10.8% to 621,129 – with 42% of visitors in the UK – leapfrogging back ahead of 
Mirror Group Digital in the process.

Telegraph.co.uk also recorded a significant rise in daily average users – 36% 
based in the UK – in January, up 7.88% to 1,851,554.

Guardian.co.uk, which is part of the network that publishes 
MediaGuardian.co.uk, posted a 6.85% rise in daily users last month, to 
2,460,009. UK users accounted for 40% of Guardian.co.uk traffic last month.

Associated Newspapers' Metro did not publish online traffic figures for 
February, having done so for the first time in January.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 3,143,141

Month-on-month change: -1.4%

Year-on-year change: +38.73%

Monthly browsers: 50,927,975

Monthly change: -9.08%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 2,460,009

Month-on-month change: +6.85%

Year-on-year change: +31.59%

Monthly browsers: 39,485,496

Monthly change: -0.26%

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 1,851,554

Month-on-month change: +7.88%

Year-on-year change: +19.6%

Monthly browsers: 32,845,994

Monthly change: +0.51%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 621,219

Month-on-month change: +10.8%

Year-on-year change: +33.5%

Monthly browsers: 12,070,535

Monthly change: +3.33%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 548,303

Month-on-month change: -9.02%

Year-on-year change: +16.8%

Monthly browsers: 10,900,788

Monthly change: -15.48%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian> 
 