
Trinity Mirror's national newspaper website network saw its monthly unique 
browsers drop by more than 30% in February compared to the previous month, 
after a botched relaunch of flagship siteMirror.co.uk <http://www.mirror.co.uk/>
.

Guardian.co.uk enjoyed another record month, topping 4 million average daily 
unique browsers for the first time, while Mail Online was down slightly 
month-on-month.

Mirror Group Digital, which includes websites such as 3am.co.uk and 
MirrorFootball.co.uk, reported a 31.3% month-on-month fall in average monthly 
unique browsers to 13,117,464 in February.

The company's average daily unique browser numbers plummeted by a quarter to 
662,162, according to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulations figures published 
on Thursday.

However, year-on-year MGD daily and monthly browser numbers were both up 20%.

Mirror.co.uk relaunched on 8 February but crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/feb/08/daily-mirror-digital-media>
, forcing the website to revert to its old front page for several hours.

A spokesman for Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> said that another factor in 
the traffic decline was because the comparison was with a record month in 
January, when news of the football transfers traditionally fuels browsing 
online.

He added that the relaunch itself did not result in any loss of traffic, 
because the old site was put up in its place, but because of a subsequent 
decline in "organic" search traffic, meaning non-Mirror branded search terms on 
Google.

"The declined was not unexpected and is typical of any major relaunch where 
you're redirecting millions of URLs," he said. "The decline was driven by a 
temporary drop off in organic search traffic through Google."

At theguardian.com, the Guardian News & Media website network that includes 
MediaGuardian, average daily unique browsers were up 12.67% month-on-month to 
4,047,643. This was a 64.54% year-on-year increase.

The GNM website only reports monthly unique browsers every other month. 
However, the unaudited GNM internal figure for February put monthly browsers at 
69,448,446, up 9.9% compared to January and 75.9% year-on-year.

GNM's mobile website, m.theguardian.com, also enjoyed its second month on the 
trot of record traffic, clocking up 640,220 average daily unique browsers, a 
28% month-on-month rise.

Adam Freeman, GNM executive director, said: "At Guardian News & Media we are 
building a global news platform that is open to our audiences, new forms of 
content and new markets. We are building that on the rock-solid foundations 
laid by our newspapers, but it is online that we are finding growth.

"Our record traffic revealed today is thanks to our presence on the web, on 
tablets and on mobile phones, and this growth is an indication of just how 
powerful our digital first and open strategy is."

Mail Online, which picked up website of the year at the Press Awards on 
Tuesday, failed to break the 100 million monthly browser mark –in January it 
was less than 800,000 browsers short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/23/mail-online-close-to-100m-users?INTCMP=SRCH>
 – with an 8.13% month-on-month fall to 91,148,015.

Daily online browser numbers remained resilient, down 0.67% compared to 
January, at 5,745,989.

However, Mail Online's year-on-year growth remains prodigious, with daily 
browers up 82.81% and monthly browers up nearly 79%.

Associated Newspaper's Metro website network lost some of the gains it has 
been making recently with a 13% month-on-month drop in monthly browsers, to 
7,454,540, as daily browsers dropped by just under 10% to 317,984.

Telegraph.co.uk saw monthly unique browser numbers fall 4.43% compared to 
January to 46,151,900, although daily browsers climbed 2.14% to 2,511,429.

Monthly browsers to Standard.co.uk fell 12.17% month-on-month to 3,628,954, 
while average daily unique browsers fell 6.67% to 160,790.

Independent.co.uk shed 2.34% of monthly browsers compared to January, to 
12,820,010, as daily browsers climbed 3.33% to 622,910.

The Sun reported an increase of 2.29% compared to January in monthly online 
browsers, to 24,606,960. Daily browsers climbed 6.3% month-on-month to 
1,564,536.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 5,745,989

Month-on-month change: -0.67%

Year-on-year change: +82.81%

Monthly browsers: 91,148,015

Month-on-month: -8.13%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 4,047,643

Month-on-month change: +12.67%

Year-on-year change: +64.54%

Monthly browsers: N/A

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 2,511,429

Month-on-month change: +2.14%

Year-on-year change: +35.64%

Monthly browsers: 46,151,900

Month-on-month change: -4.43%

Sun Online

Daily average browsers: 1,564,536

month-on-month change: +6.3%

Year-on-year change: N/A

Monthly browsers: 24,606,960

Month-on-month change: +2.29%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 662,162

Month-on-month change: -25%

Year-on-year change: +20.77%

Monthly browsers: 13,117,464

Month-on-month change: -31.29%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 622,910

Month-on-month change: +3.33%

Year-on-year change: +0.27%

Monthly browsers: 12,820,010

Month-on-month change: -2.34%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <https://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 