
Mirror Group Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> 
reported a significant boost to its online traffic in January, with a 20% 
increase in average daily users compared with December that made a record month 
for the company online.

January is traditionally a healthy month for online news traffic, benefiting 
from a long calendar month and a lift after the Christmas break.

Mirror Group Digital's network of sites, including Mirror.co.uk, 3am.co.uk and 
Mirrorfootball.co.uk, generated 602,685 average daily users last month, up 
19.59% from December – overtaking Independent.co.uk in the process.

UK users, the most valuable audience for most newspaper advertisers, accounted 
for 60% of the site's monthly traffic.

Mark Hollinshead, managing director of Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> Nationals, said the runup to 
the football transfer season deadline had helped boost the site's traffic.

"We welcome these results as they show our strategy of developing a loyal and 
engaged audience is on the right track," he added. "Importantly, 60% of our 
users live in the UK, meaning we are delivering the audience that is important 
to our advertisers."

Mail Online, the most popular UK newspaper website network, reached 3,187,658 
daily users, increasing 4.69% month on month, with 37.91% of its audience 
UK-based.

Telegraph.co.uk daily average users reached 1,716,359, up 8.4% from December, 
with 35% of users in the UK.

Guardian.co.uk also saw a 3.04% increase in traffic to 2,302,300 average daily 
users, with UK users making up 40% of its audience.

Independent.co.uk also had a good month with 560,686 daily users, up 11.14% 
month on month, with 49% UK-based.

Associated Newspapers' network of Metro websites, the online extensions of its 
regional freesheets, made its ABCe debut this month with a January daily 
average user number of 238,240. Similar to the Financial Times, Metro will 
publish only occasional ABCe figures.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 3,187,658

Month-on-month change: +4.69%

Year-on-year change: +47.85%

Monthly browsers: 56,016,340

Monthly change: +3.84%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 2,302,300

Month-on-month change: +3.04%

Year-on-year change: +19.18%

Monthly browsers: 39,586,711

Monthly change: +1.33%

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 1,716,359

Month-on-month change: -8.4%

Year-on-year change: +3.85%

Monthly browsers: 32,680,855

Monthly change: +5.13%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 602,685

Month-on-month change: +19.59%

Year-on-year change: +22.56%

Monthly browsers: 12,896,957

Monthly change: +16.19%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 560,686

Month-on-month change: +11.14%

Year-on-year change: +29.75%

Monthly browsers: 12,070,535

Monthly change: +9.32%

Metro

Daily average browsers: 238,240

Month-on-month change: N/A

Year-on-year change: N/A

Monthly browsers: 5,848,802

Monthly change: N/A

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 