
With financial shares heading higher as Brexit fears recede, Aberdeen Asset 
Management is among the biggest gainers.

The company, more than 5% better at 281.5p, has been the subject of takeover 
speculation recently, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/may/20/ftse-on-track-for-biggest-rise-for-five-weeks-as-aberdeen-climbs-on-bid-talk>
 and analysts at Numis have taken a look at possible buyers and a takeout 
price. In short, major global asset managers and 380p a share or £5bn 
respectively. Numis said:

Following recent press speculation that the company is up for sale and a 
number of parties have taken an informal look, as well as our recent note 
highlighting the scope for an increased level of sector M&A (given a weak 
organic earnings growth outlook), we have taken a look at who we think could 
buy Aberdeen and how much we think they could pay.

We conclude that an acquirer would need to be fairly large (probably a global 
top 40 asset manager to have at least equal scale with Aberdeen and allow scope 
for reasonable cost synergies), have willingness to acquire / access to capital 
(ruling out some of the bank owned asset managers), have some similarity in 
investment approach / business model / culture and would probably lack a 
significant emerging markets/Asia franchise but would want one (Aberdeen’s key 
strategic asset that most companies would want exposure to long term in our 
view).

Whilst a PE deal is possible, given the lower scope for cost synergies and 
lesser desire to own an emerging markets franchise long term, we see these as 
less likely participants. We believe a realistic take out value would be around 
£5.0bn/380p per share (around 40% above the current market value).

Numis lists a range of possible suitors: Blackrock, JP Morgan, Capital, PIMCO, 
Amundi, Natixis, Invesco, T. Rowe, Legg Mason, AMG, Sumitomo Mitsui, 
Ameriprise, AllianceBernstein, Standard Life, Pru/M&G, Credit Suisse, 
Mitsubishi, Macquarie and Aviva.
 