
Aberdeen Asset Management’s funds under management fell by more than £40bn 
last year as clients grew nervous about shares inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and other emerging markets that the 
fund manager had built its reputation on.

At the end of September, Aberdeen’s assets under management were £283.7bn 
compared with £324.4bn a year earlier – a fall of 12.5%. Net outflows were 
£33.9bn and equivalent withdrawals from equity funds increased to £16.4bn from 
£13bn the year before.

Emerging markets, which Aberdeen specialises in, have fallen from favour this 
year amid concerns about global growth, particularly in China,where the economy 
is slowing sharply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/19/chinese-economic-growth-slows-to-69-in-third-quarter>
.

Investors have also pulled money out of emerging markets in expectation of 
rising US interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/04/janet-yellen-december-rate-hike-still-on-table>
, causing the final quarter of Aberdeen’s year to be the worst for outflows 
from these markets since the financial crisis.

Aberdeen Asset Management shares hit by emerging market fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/23/aberdeen-asset-management-shares-emerging-markets-us-interest-rates>
Aberdeen’s net fund outflows hit £12.7bn in the fourth quarter, up from almost 
£10bn in the preceding three months and the 10th straight quarter of net 
outflows.


Shares of Aberdeen, down by a third since April, fell 4% on Monday morning to 
321.5p.

Underlying pre-tax profit in the year to the end of September rose by £1.3m to 
£491.6m and net revenue increased 5% to £1.17bn, helping fund an 8.3% increase 
in the dividend to 19.5p a share.

Martin Gilbert, Aberdeen’s chief executive, said: “The cyclical correction in 
Asian and emerging markets and resulting negative investor sentiment has, as 
expected, led to further flows from our equities business.

“While we believe the current weakness may have some way to run, the long-term 
fundamental attractions of investing in these high-growth economies remain 
compelling for patient investors.”

Aberdeen’s prominence increased as it concentrated investments in Asian and 
other emerging markets. Those bets paid off while developing economies grew and 
mature markets such as the US and Europe suffered after the financial crisis 
but China’s slowdown has hit confidence in emerging markets.

Gilbert, who founded Aberdeen in 1983, said the company’s decision to broaden 
its products and expand into developed markets such as the US had helped 
underpin a solid set of results. Speculation emerged last month that Gilbert 
might sell Aberdeen but he said the company was determined to stick to its 
strategy to benefit clients and shareholders.


“We continue to rebalance and diversify the business, to focus on managing our 
costs and to generate cash and this has helped to mitigate the impact of the 
outflows we’ve seen,” Gilbert said.


Aberdeen said it had found £50m of cost savings it would make later in the 
current financial year with the full benefit coming through the following year.

The company acknowledged its share investments had performed worse than their 
benchmark indexes but said it would continue to manage funds actively to seek 
returns that beat benchmarks.

Analysts at the broker Numis said investor worries and Aberdeen’s mixed 
performance combined with uninspiring prospects for earnings meant “we see no 
obvious reason to rush to buy today”.
 