
Specialist journalists are traditionally required to predict the major figures 
of the next generation: prospective party leaders, future England captains, 
potential poet laureates. Such prophecies bring a double risk because some 
talents –Graeme Hick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jul/25/cricket1> 
in cricket,Michael Portillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/jul/22/conservatives.uk> in politics 
– fail to pay out on the investment of hope, while others – such as Jeremy 
Corbyn or the writerDiana Athill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/05/diana-athill-memoir-costa-interview>
, who had her first bestseller at 83 – all go undetected until they erupt 
unexpectedly.

For those who follow playwrights, though, there’s a pleasure in seeing two of 
the younger English dramatists whose work we have observed in recent years 
being confirmed as talents who seem likely to figure in dramatic histories of 
the early 21st century in the way that Pinter, Stoppard, Churchill, Ayckbourn 
and Hare are cited in studies of the previous period.


Both Abi Morgan, in her mid-40s, and Mike Bartlett, a decade younger, have 
come to prominence through a combination of work for theatre and screen. 
Bartlett’s award-winning royal what-if playKing Charles III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/11/king-charles-3-flawed-premise-royally-entertaining>
 has followed its Almeida theatre and West End runs with a 13-date UK tour that 
reaches Plymouth just before Christmas, and the first five weeks of the tour 
coinciding withDoctor Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/10/doctor-foster-review-suranne-jones-bertie-carvel>
, his ecstatically reviewed five-part infidelity thriller currently running in 
the 9pm peak-time slot on Wednesdays on BBC1.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442501689833%2Fcf87dfc4-5814-42b9-8bbf-5ccbbab9e76a-2060x1438.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abi%20Morgan%20and%20Mike%20Bartlett%20are%20our%20new%20superstar%20dramatists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abi%20Morgan%20and%20Mike%20Bartlett%20are%20our%20new%20superstar%20dramatists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442501689833%2Fcf87dfc4-5814-42b9-8bbf-5ccbbab9e76a-2060x1438.jpeg>
 Doctor Foster, starring Suranne Jones and Bertie Carvel: Mike Bartlett’s 
‘brilliant and gripping portrait of a marriage slowly being poisoned’. 
Photograph: Phil Fisk/Drama Republic 
Later this year, similar scheduling prominence will be given to Morgan’s 
River, a six-part crime psycho-drama that coincides with the release of a movie 
she scripted,Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/suffragette-review-historical-drama-tub-thumps-hard-despite-having-your-vote>
, and follows this summer’s successful production of a stage play.Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/05/splendour-donmar-warehouse-theatre-review-abi-morgan>
 (at the Donmar Warehouse until 26 September) features four women personally or 
professionally connected to the revolution-threatened dictator of an un-named 
country.


Theatrical purists may object to acclamation on these pages for writers whose 
current high-profile is half due to screenwriting. But today’s dramatists are 
increasingly likely – for reasons of both economics and cultural upbringing – 
to move between live and filmed drama, and part of what makes Bartlett and 
Morgan such fascinating writers is the way that their experience of each form 
of storytelling clearly informs the other.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442504206349%2F99e5faa3-0cc6-494c-b792-838b5fa5ca94-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abi%20Morgan%20and%20Mike%20Bartlett%20are%20our%20new%20superstar%20dramatists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abi%20Morgan%20and%20Mike%20Bartlett%20are%20our%20new%20superstar%20dramatists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442504206349%2F99e5faa3-0cc6-494c-b792-838b5fa5ca94-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Abi Morgan’s Splendour, at the Donmar Warehouse. Photograph: Johan Persson 
Such cross-fertilisation was obvious in Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/04/game-review-mike-bartlett-almeida-theatre-london>
, the Bartlett piece premiered at London’s Almeida theatre in February. 
Although it was a play for the stage, television inspired both the content – a 
post-Big Brother scheme in which the poor are given accommodation in 
camera-filled houses in exchange for providing prurient public entertainment – 
and the form: the audience sat in pseudo-living rooms separated from the 
performers by screens of glass. More obliquely, Splendour, an updated version 
of a Morgan play first seen in Edinburgh 15 years ago, is constructed as a 
complex stream of scenes from present, past and future, which create a 
narrative fluidity more usually associated with television or cinema.


Another tribute to their skills is that both writers, in their TV work, have 
managed to transcend the limited generic range of modern mainstream television, 
in which almost every current major TV fiction features cops or docs. But while 
Doctor Foster is a sort of medical drama – the central character, Dr Gemma 
Foster, played by Suranne Jones, runs a Midlands medical practice – Bartlett, 
whose 2012 ITV three-parterThe Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/dec/05/town-rome-eternal-city-tv-review>
 similarly challenged the medium’s tendency to categorise by content, uses the 
NHS elements only to find dark new possibilities in the dilemma of a woman who 
suspects her husband of infidelity.


For instance, the writer uses the requirement of medical confidentiality to 
create a situation in which Gemma’s closest colleagues know more about her 
husband’s life, through details revealed in consultations with him and other 
patients, than she does. A scene in which Gemma examines the woman she believes 
to be the mistress involves layers of tension – due to the professional and 
personal deceits involved on either side of the consultation – that the 
grandmaster of dramas featuring relationship chess-games,Henrik Ibsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ibsen>, would have been happy to create.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442502995629%2F2652a140-3cf7-4c5d-accb-3300f4944ec6-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abi%20Morgan%20and%20Mike%20Bartlett%20are%20our%20new%20superstar%20dramatists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abi%20Morgan%20and%20Mike%20Bartlett%20are%20our%20new%20superstar%20dramatists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fabi-morgan-mike-bartlett-new-superstar-dramatists-doctor-foster-splendour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442502995629%2F2652a140-3cf7-4c5d-accb-3300f4944ec6-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Stellan Skarsgård will star in the noir drama River. Photograph: Nick 
Briggs/BBC/Kudos 
 In the same way, River is, on the outside, another recruit to TV’s vast squad 
of detective dramas, but Morgan takes it as far fromScott and Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/11/scott-and-bailey-review-top-notch-british-telly>
 as Bartlett steers his piece clear ofDoc Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/08/doc-martin-clunes-cornish-idiots-review>
. Stellan Skarsgård plays a Swedish-born London DI who appears to be a single 
father with a teenage daughter and, at work, to suffer something of a crush on 
his lively, mouthy detective sergeant, played by Nicola Walker. It’s soon 
clear, though, that River is not a realistic police procedural: although the 
series is apparently set in 2015, one of the central characters claims to have 
been born in 1850. As in Doctor Foster, what characters and viewers believe 
they are seeing is constantly qualified by contrary information.

 The fearful and febrile atmosphere of both Doctor Foster and River recalls 
Jacobean stage plays, and the homage is surely conscious, at least from 
Bartlett, whose mock-Shakespearean verse for King Charles III showed his 
interest in applying classical forms of theatre to contemporary subjects. 
Morgan’s scripts for River, though, also allow the brutal realities of humanity 
to coexist with ghosts in a way more associated with early 17th-century theatre 
than contemporary police series. If the structures of Game and Splendour showed 
the screen work of the writers influencing their stage plays, Doctor Foster and 
River find them bringing the traditions of theatre to bear on television.

There’s a term used in the TV industry – “green light giant” – which denotes 
writers who can get backing for any project they suggest. Whether or not 
Bartlett and Morgan are yet in that category for commissioners, I would want to 
see anything that either goes on to do in either theatre or TV. Whether judged 
by their stage plays or their screenplays this year,Mike Bartlett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mike-bartlett> and Abi Morgan have become 
this generation’s names to watch.
 