
A leading insurance company has changed the terms of its private medical cover 
to ensure policyholders suffering from late-stage prostate cancer can be 
treated with the drug abiraterone.

Axa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> PPP, the second biggest private 
medical insurance company in the UK, providing cover for more than 2 million 
people, has changed its stance on the drug and will now consider it eligible 
for benefit and will pay for it.

A spokesman, John DuBois, said: "We have done this because we believe it is 
the right thing to do."

Policies from Bupa, the market leader, and WPA already covered treatment with 
the drug, which costs £3,000 a month per patient.

Dr Annabel Bentley, the medical director of Bupa Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Wellbeing, said: "If a cancer 
drug is licensed by the EMA [European Medicines Agency] and is clinically 
appropriate for our members, we will fund it regardless of cost.

"Bupa routinely funds abiraterone for members whose prostate cancer has 
spread. We fund cancer treatments for as long they are needed and we do not 
apply cost or time limits."

Trials of abiraterone 
<http://cancerhelp.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/cancer-questions/abiraterone-for-prostate-cancer>
 found that the drug extended patients' lives by an average of four months and 
reduced the pain they suffered. The EMA licenced it for use in the UK in 
September last year, but the National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence (Nice) has issued a draft decision thatthe drug is too expensive for 
use in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/feb/02/cancer-drug-too-expensive-nhs>.

About 480 NHS patients in England have been treated with abiraterone since 
November through theCancer Drugs Fund 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Aboutus/Features/DH_125762>, a £200m-a-year fund set 
up by the government in 2010 to enable cancer sufferers to benefit from drugs 
not approved by Nice or not yet available through the NHS.

Patients in England apply through their clinicians for funds, which are 
administered by strategic health authorities around the country. In the rest of 
the UK, patients must apply to an exceptional case committee for treatment.

Money for the Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Drugs Fund 
dries up in March 2014, when it will be replaced by a "value-based pricing" 
system, and future funding arrangements for drugs including abiraterone are 
uncertain.

Sarah Woolnough, the director of policy at Cancer Research 
<http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/>, said: "At the moment you can get 
abiraterone through the Cancer Drugs Fund, but it's an issue of concern that 
the tap might be turned off. It is unclear what will happen under the new 
system when Nice has said no to a drug."

Owen Sharp, the chief executive of the Prostate Cancer Charity 
<http://www.prostate-cancer.org.uk/>, said Nice's decision was a bitter blow to 
thousands of men and their families.

"Quite simply, abiraterone prolongs the life of men with incurable prostate 
cancer. The drug is one of the biggest breakthroughs in the treatment of the 
disease for many years and it will be devastating if this drug remains out of 
their reach when they need it the most."

Rick Betton, who was diagnosed with aggressive prostate cancer in July 2010, 
is claiming for abiraterone through his employer's PMI scheme. He was 
previously prescribed two different drugs through the NHS which failed to work, 
but when his consultant applied to the NHS for abiraterone he was rejected.

"I thought it was worth seeing whether I could claim through my Bupa policy, 
and they now deliver the drugs by courier every three weeks to my home. I take 
four pills every morning," he said.

Betton was diagnosed with prostate cancer after collapsing following a night 
out. "I was staying in a hotel and woke up in the night sweating and with a 
pain in my back. I got home but collapsed on the drive, and blood tests 
confirmed I had cancer three days later."

Betton said the drug had enabled him to regain some of the weight he had lost 
and to carry out some of the day-to-day functions his wife, Rachel, had been 
doing for him. "I am finding life a lot more comfortable, and felt better in 
myself. My condition seems to have stabilised. It meant I could walk my eldest 
daughter Gabriella down the aisle in November. I wouldn't have been able to do 
that without abiraterone."
 