
Atheists’ hugely lopsided support for choice is a simple reflection that 
opposition to abortion isinherently a religious position, just like creationism 
or opposition to LGBT rights. Anti-choice ideology is founded on the belief 
that a single-celled zygote possesses a supernatural appendage called a soul 
that makes it the moral equal of an adult human.

Still, it’s hard to recall a worse time for reproductive choice in an 
increasingly secular America. In the wake of deceptively edited “sting” videos 
purporting to show Planned Parenthood selling fetal tissue for profit,multiple 
state investigations have cleared the reproductive health provider of any 
wrongdoing 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2015/08/state-investigations-planned-parenthood-fetal-tissue-south-carolina>
 – yet congressional Republicans threatened to shut down the government anyway 
to punish them. Then theysummoned the group’s president, Cecile Richards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/29/planned-parenthood-president-congressional-grilling-republicans-cecile-richards>
, for hectoring, accusatory questions as if her organizationhad been caught 
doing something illegal or unethical and not providing women with legal 
abortions.

Meanwhile, religious hospitals, especially Catholic ones, are gobbling up 
their secular counterparts and then imposing bishop-decreed restrictions 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2013/03/the-increasing-problem-of-religious-hospitals/>
 on abortion care and birth control. Conservative, limited-government 
Republicans (particularly John Kasich, the alleged moderate 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/09/john-kasich-targets-abortion-providers>
) continue to enact Targeted Regulation of Abortion Providers (Trap laws), 
legislation cynically designed to be impossible with which to comply, so that 
clinics will be forced to close. And when none of those tactics work, there’s 
straightforward terrorism: Planned Parenthood clinics inWashington 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2015/10/planned-parenthood-arson/408511/>
,California 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2015/09/05/437829915/fire-at-washington-state-planned-parenthood-clinic-fire-deemed-arson>
 and elsewhere have been targeted by arson attacks.


It may seem hard to imagine what could change this gloomy picture – but, 
despite atheism’s public image as amale-dominated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/03/finally-atheists-are-no-longer-just-old-white-men>
 andtoo-often obliviously sexist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/18/richard-dawkins-sexist-atheists-bad-name>
 community, atheists are getting active in the fight to preserve women’s 
reproductive choice.

The Satanic Temple – an atheist group, despite the cheeky name – has hit on 
the brilliant strategy ofciting their religious liberty under the Hobby Lobby 
ruling 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2014/07/this-one-weird-trick-nullifies-all-abortion-restrictions/>
 to allow patients and doctors to ignore burdensome regulations on abortion 
care. Their first test case is still pending in the courts. (Ireally want to 
see religious conservatives try to explain why this shouldn’t work.)

We atheists can use growing clout to beat evangelicals at their own political 
game | Adam Lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/14/atheists-evangelicals-politics>
Meanwhile, American Atheists is attacking the problem on another front: 
they’ve announced a lobbying push for a “Right to Know Act 
<http://news.atheists.org/2015/09/29/atheists-demand-right-to-know-act-for-patients-in-americas-religious-health-care-system/>
” that would require healthcare providers to clearly state in advance which 
medical procedures they won’t perform – shockingly, this wasn’t already 
required by the law. While this won’t solve the problem of religious takeovers 
of hospitals and clinics, it will help people make better choices when they 
have those options. The Secular Coalition for America has also advocated to
permanently end the global gag rule 
<https://www.secular.org/issues/globalgagrule> that bans US-funded overseas 
non-governmental organizations from even mentioning abortion. Atheists for 
Human Rights offersdirect grants to help pay for abortion 
<http://www.atheistsforhumanrights.org/#moral>, and Secular Woman has an “Abort 
Theocracy <http://www.aborttheocracy.org/>” campaign.


The increase in pro-choice activity by atheists reflects wider demographics: 
the non-religious areby far the most pro-choice demographic in America. 
According to Gallup 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/154946/non-christians-postgrads-highly-pro-choice.aspx>
:

Americans with no religious attachment (self-identified atheists, agnostics, 
and those with simply no religious preference) identify as pro-choice by a 
49-percentage-point margin over pro-life, 68% to 19%. This represents the 
strongest propensity toward the pro-choice position of any major U.S. 
demographic (as distinct from political) subgroup.

Given the increasing political power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/26/millennials-godless-politics-religous-conservatives>
 of the non-religious, our support for reproductive rights has obvious 
political implications. As secular millennials become a larger and larger part 
of the electorate, right-wing religious groups fixated on identifying 
themselves as anti-abortion above all else will see their power dwindle.

Non-believers have a long history of supporting choice, from the 1973 Humanist 
Manifesto <http://americanhumanist.org/Humanism/Humanist_Manifesto_II> which 
declares, “The right to birth control, abortion, and divorce should be 
recognized”, to individual activists likeAnne Nicol Gaylor 
<http://www.progressive.org/news/2015/06/188189/my-mother-anne-nicol-gaylor-feminist-activist-freethinker>
 who fought both for secularism and for choice. Now more than ever, that’s a 
legacy that atheists should be proud to uphold.

 