
The home secretary, Amber Rudd, sparked fresh anger over her decision to 
reject an inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
 into the “battle of Orgreave” on Tuesday when she failed to appear in the 
House of Commons to justify her decision.

The police minister, Brandon Lewis, was left to deny charges from Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the former shadow home 
secretary, that Rudd had “cruelly misled” campaigners at a meeting in 
September, which they left under the impression that some form of inquiry was 
going to be authorised.

Burnham said Rudd’s decision to reject an inquiry into the clash between the 
police and miners in June 1984 at the height of the miners’ strike was “a 
bitter betrayal” that had been reached after an “incomplete and unsound 
process”.

Orgreave inquiry campaigners say the gloves are off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/01/orgreave-inquiry-campaigners-say-gloves-are-off-amber-rudd-miners>
He questioned whether the home secretary had reviewed the relevant South 
Yorkshire police files that had never left Sheffield, had read new testimony 
from ex-officers who had been there or had read the secret cabinet minutes in 
which Margaret Thatcher had told her home secretary, Leon Brittan, to increase 
the rate of prosecutions of miners.

Burnham, who had tabled the Commons urgent question, also appeared to accuse 
the home secretary of bad faith over her meeting with the Orgreave Truth and 
Justice Campaign, which left them with the clear impression that “the only 
remaining question was what form that the inquiry would take”. The Times 
reported next day that there would be an inquiry, quoting ‘Whitehall sources’, 
Burnham said.

“It is utterly cruel to have given the campaigners false hope and misled them 
in this way. We will never give up this fight,” said Burnham.

Neil Kinnock, the leader of the Labour party at the time of Orgreave, strongly 
criticised Rudd’s rejection.

“The refusal of an inquiry into the battle of Orgreave deepens the justified 
sense of injustice right across coalfield communities, especially when there 
are substantiated claims that there was politicised policing and tampering with 
evidence in the wake of the conflict,” he told the House of Lords.

The former Labour home secretary David Blunkett, who was leader of Sheffield 
city council at the time of Orgreave, called for a “light-touch inquiry” and 
said there was evidence and a “genuine feeling” that the truth had been 
withheld.

'Burning injustice' of Orgreave is left smouldering | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/burning-injustice-of-orgreave-is-left-smouldering>
But Lewis told MPs he had been present at the September meeting of home 
secretary and the campaigners and denied she had given the impression that an 
inquiry would go ahead. The home secretary had only made clear that she would 
take a decision at a later date, he said. The minister acknowledged there was a 
disagreement about the meeting but it did not mean the decision to reject an 
inquiry was wrong.

Rudd’s absence from the Commons was also sharply criticised by the shadow home 
secretary, Diane Abbott, who accused the government of leading the campaigners 
up the garden path. She criticised the home secretary’s justification for 
refusing an inquiry, saying that the absence of deaths or wrongful convictions 
was no reason to refuse to investigate an injustice.

Abbott quoted the former Conservative prime minister Harold Macmillan, who 
described the miners as “the best men in the world” and the 1984 strike as 
heartbreaking. The criticism of Rudd’s decision united Labour MPs, with both 
the former party leader Ed Miliband and the veteran Dennis Skinner, voicing 
strong concern.

Orgreave was part of the class war that ended with 96 dead at Hillsborough | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/orgreave-class-war-96-dead-hillsborough-amber-rudd-inquiry>
The Conservative backbencher Philip Davies, MP for Shipley in West Yorkshire, 
sparked fresh outrage when he backed Rudd, saying: “These people were trying to 
bring down the democratic government at the time. They lost. They need to get 
over it.”

His sentiments echoed those of Norman Tebbit, one of Thatcher’s ministers, who 
told the Telegraph on Tuesday that “the police behaved properly at Orgreave. An 
inquiry could have been used as a stick with which to beat the Thatcher 
government.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fwhat-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happened%20at%20the%20'Battle%20of%20Orgreave'%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fwhat-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happened%20at%20the%20%27Battle%20of%20Orgreave%27%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fwhat-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer&media=>
What happened at the ‘Battle of Orgreave’? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/01/what-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer>
In a defiant press conference at the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) hall 
in Barnsley, campaigners said they were considering mounting a crowdfunded bid 
for a judicial review ofAmber Rudd’s decision not to hold any kind of inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
 into the episode.

Barbara Jackson, secretary of the Orgreave Truth and Justice Campaign, was 
close to tears as she described feeling “shocked and devastated” by the home 
secretary’s decision.

Addressing the crowd of former pitworkers, their relatives, supporters and 
union activists in the South Yorkshire town, Jackson said: “As you can all tell 
this is very difficult and very disappointing but there are options for the 
future, some of them we will be discussing with the legal people about the 
possibility of a judicial review.

“We have focused on police violence because we thought that was the best way … 
Now we’re going to focus as well as that on the political side of the strike 
and the involvement of Margaret Thatcher’s government of the time … We regard 
the gloves as off on our side.”

Jackson told the gathering she struggled to contain her emotion when she 
received the “very calculated and very cold” phonecall from Rudd informing her 
of the government’s decision on Monday afternoon.

“When she rang she was completely matter of fact, she said, ‘Listen to me say 
what I’ve got to say, then you can ask any questions.’ It was all very 
calculated and very cold. She read me – I didn’t know at the time – but she 
read me what was her ministerial statement she was going to read to parliament. 
I was shocked and devastated to find out we were not going to be offered 
anything.”

Jackson said the campaign had received a flood of support and donations since 
the announcement, as she revealed that its lawyers were considering a 
crowdfunded bid for a judicial review.
 