
You know what to expect from a sitcom big-screen spin-off 
<http://www.thekettering.co.uk/?p=124>: like as not, it will be a pallid, 
over-stretched travesty of its cherished TV begetter. In a vain effort to cloak 
its enervation, its makers will probably wheel out a witlessly melodramatic 
plot, glamorous but cliched overseas locations, irrelevant celeb cameos or all 
of the above. Critics will sigh; faithful fans lured like moths to the sacred 
flame will rise from their seats feeling vaguely betrayed.


Fear that such a fate might befall the jewel that was Ab Fab stayed the hand  
<http://www.digitalspy.com/tv/feature/a660983/the-absolutely-fabulous-story-of-patsy-and-eddies-boozy-big-screen-debut/>
of Jennifer Saunders, the creator of the BBC series, for many years. As 
recently as 2013, she was still swearing that a movie version would“never 
happen” 
<https://secure.magazineboutique.co.uk/checkout/cnde/Checkout?PUBL=CNDE&PUBC=GLA&PROM=7GL14480&COUNTRY=GBR&utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=GlamourBMM&utm_term=%2Bglamour%20%2Bmagazine>
. She gave way only in the face ofhectoring 
<http://www.tv3.ie/xpose/article/entertainment-news/157853/Joanna-Lumley-insisted-on-Absolutely-Fabulous-movie>
 from Joanna Lumley on a par with Patsy’s endless badgering of Edina. Lumley, 
who is now 70, wanted one last throw of the dice, just as Pats would surely 
have done.

Three rules the Absolutely Fabulous movie must follow to avoid being awful
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/27/three-rules-the-absolutely-fabulous-movie-must-follow-to-avoid-being-awful>
The first indications were that Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/absolutely-fabulous--the-movie> would more 
than justify its originator’s forebodings. Trailers replete with pratfalls and 
celeb walk-ons were watched through trembling fingers. Ominously, the film was 
withheld from reviewers. But once the wraps were off, anxiety lifted.

The critics concluded that, on the whole, Saunders, Lumley and director Mandie 
Fletcher, a veteran from the TV show, had just about got away with it. Peter 
Bradshaw found the exercise“reasonably good fun” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/29/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-review-absolutely-fatuous-thank-god>
. Othercritical verdicts 
<https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/absolutely_fabulous_the_movie/reviews/?page=2&sort=>
 ranged from “sometimes funny” and “not quite fabulous” to “better than 
expected” and “an endearing shambles”. At least, then, a cut above February’s
Dad’s Army 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/dads-army-review-film-who-dont-you-think-you-are-kidding>
 and a safe distance from horrors such asSex and the City 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/26/sex-and-the-city-2-review>.

Filmgoers have shown yet more enthusiasm. Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
achievedthe biggest opening for a British film since Spectre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/04/absolutely-fabulous-corking-start-uk-box-office>
, and by all accounts audiences are pronouncing themselves satisfied. So what 
are our packed cinemas hosting? A leftover slice from a once gourmet dish 
that’s turned out a bit less mouldy than it might have done? Or could something 
more be involved?

In fact, the film isn’t just a souped-up version of its TV forebear, as The 
Inbetweeners Movie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-inbetweeners-movie> 
was. In 1992, when the series launched, Eddy and Pats were real if low-level 
combatants in the heady tournament ofCool Britannia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/20/pass-notes-cool-britannia-visitbritain>
. The passage of time has necessarily thrown them on the scrapheap, and a sense 
of tragic hopelessness underlies their now even more desperate antics. Eddy’s 
client list has emptied, and Pats must botox up before she dares go out. 
Saunders has lost her twinkly charm; Lumley has become a grotesque panstuck 
parody of her formerly bewitching self, more fetching as a pretend man than as 
a woman.

The cruel lot of the vogue-addict beached by age is a familiar theme, 
addressed, for example inZoolander 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/11/zoolander-2-video-review>. 
But the Zoolander films, likeBrüno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/10/film-review-bruno> and TV’s 
AbFab, celebrated the gorgeous world in which their heroes struggled to 
prevail. Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie doesn’t just take down its heroes; it 
also drains the once ambrosial swamp in which they swam.

It cannot help reminding us that the once celestial Lumley now enjoys the 
dread status of national treasure, devoting what remains of her sweetness to 
Gurkhas and garden bridges. Yet it’s the treatment of so many of the other 
supposed stars of our current firmament that hangs on the heart.

In this production, celebrity cameos don’t just provide a brief sprinkle of 
stardust. There are60 
<http://www.instyle.co.uk/celebrity/pictures/absolutely-fabulous-cast> of them 
in all, more than in any other film sinceIt’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXD6xZVnClk> in 1963, and they infect the 
essence of the experience. It’s a celebrity playing herself who provides the 
springboard for the plot, while others are also accorded integral functions.

Participating fashionistas include Alexa Chung, Lily Cole, Jourdan Dunn, Jean 
Paul Gaultier, Poppy Delevingne, Stella McCartney and Suki Waterhouse. Barry 
Humphries is there, along with Joan Collins, Jerry Hall, Gwendoline Christie 
and Jon Hamm. There is Strictly Come Dancing winner Alesha Dixon, Graham Norton 
and musicians Tinie Tempah and La Roux, but we also get Judith Chalmers and 
Orla Guerin.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&media=>
Absolutely Fabulous: the Movie: Edina and Patsy in big screen debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/apr/27/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video>
Gracing a film with your starry presence doesn’t just show you’re a good 
sport. It also dulls your celebrity sheen. It may hint that your status needs 
revalidating: apparently, celebsqueued up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cA76zIPeoSA> to be allowed their 15 seconds in 
this film. Nonetheless, many have ended up looking more than a bit soppy.


Why are they here? In her heyday would Kate Moss have allowed herself to become
the butt of farce <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dj3ZWhlmexw>? Seeing Jeremy 
Paxman and Kirsty Wark jumping through this hoop diminishes the supposedly 
august domain from whence they hail. The collective effect of this parade of 
clowning luminaries is to bracket the whole pantheon with Eddy and Pats. 
They’re equally washed up, but unlike the two principals they’re not smart 
enough to know it.


It’s not just these once awesome figures who seem to have passed their sell-by 
date. The universe that sustained them also seems to be in unexpected decline. 
The final redemption of our two heroes serves only to underline its 
impossibility. Yet this grim portrait of a world lost begins to chime with 
external reality.

For a generation, fashion, along with music, art, advertising, journalism, 
broadcasting and the rest of our close-knit creative empyrean maintained an 
unchallenged cultural hegemony. Its eminences were our gods and goddesses. We 
sat at their feet, worshipped them and dutifully devoured their output.

Today, the celebrity whirligig seems to continue as ever, but it’s looking 
more and more like the endless ball in Roger Corman’s The Masque of the Red 
Death.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDRyWK59PS6g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDRyWK59PS6g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDRyWK59PS6g&media=>
Beyond the castle walls, the peasants no longer pledge unquestioning fealty. 
Instead, the ungrateful rabble have dared to start entertaining themselves.

Instead of consuming what’s tossed before them from above, they swap their own 
selfies, sext and drivel endlessly on messaging apps. Their former idols have 
become mere fodder for a torrent of democratised and disrespectful chatter. 
Inevitably if imperceptibly, the infrastructure sustaining the glitterati elite 
has started to crumble.

Once, if briefly, Eddy’s trade, PR, was where it was at. Launches, festivals 
and junkets continue, but the electricity is starting to short-circuit them. As 
Saunderstold an interviewer 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-interviewing-its-stars-jennifer-saunders-and-joanna-lumley-might-end-a7105461.html>
: “The idea of PR now is that anyone can do it. Anyone can review a film, 
anyone can get their stuff online, so it is a very different world.” It’s not 
only Eddy who’s over the hill; it’s her profession.

Similarly, journalism has – to some extent – morphed from the heroic 
investigation beloved by Hollywood into desk-bound churnalism.Advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> is now about manipulating 
Google algorithms and bribing bloggers, not winning creative awards. The music 
industry has been hollowed out by the might of MP3. All of these trends are 
stripping creative practitioners of their once exalted status.

Not that a Bolly-swigging, glitzy super-elite seems as necessary as it used 
to. In the excitable 1990s, viewers were eager to see sensible young Saffy 
swatted aside. Now middle-aged, she rules, decreeing a world of political 
correctness and 20mph speed limits. Her children have little interest in sex, 
drugs and rock’n’roll. Instead they want safe spaces and a Help to Buy ISA. 
Meanwhile, Brexit threatens tocut off EU cultural funding  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/24/less-cash-fewer-movies-meltdown-how-brexit-may-affect-the-british-film>
and curb free movement of the beautiful people and their Eurotrash hangers-on.

It seems unlikely that Saunders set out to synopsise this phenomenon, but 
that’s what she’s done. Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie is more than a middling 
giggle. It’s a telling elegy for an era. Not a noble era, perhaps, but one that 
was more fun than what may lie ahead.

 