
The Western European PC market declined in this year's second quarter, but 
only by 3.3%, according tothe latest provisional numbers from Gartner 
<http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1115612>. Acer increased its unit sales 
by 24.3% to 3.2m units to take top spot from Hewlett-Packard, which grew sales 
by only 1.4% to 3.0m units. This was mainly the result of Acer shifting almost 
half the netbooks sold in Europe.

Basically, the professional PC market plunged by 21%, hitting companies that 
sell a lot of business machines such as HP, Dell, Lenovo and Fujitsu. The 
consumer PC market grew by 21%, benefiting companies such asAcer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer>, Apple, HP and Samsung -- those 
with more consumer-oriented products, and netbooks in particular.

Ranjit Atwal, principal analyst at Gartner, says: "Without mini-notebooks, the 
market would have declined more than 15%, but given the new routes to market 
and price points of these PCs, they have managed to prevent a more severe 
decline."
Asus's shipments tumbled by 15%, but Atwal says the company's sales in Western 
Europe are dependent on the distribution deals it manages to sign at any 
particular time.

Though it doesn't appear in any of the tables, Samsung also did well, growing 
its second quarter shipments by 250% in Western Europe. "It has connections 
with telcos through its mobile phones, and it's using netbooks as a vehicle to 
get into the PC market," he said.

In the UK, Dell held on to the top spot with 606,000 shipments, down by 6%. It 
was followed by Acer (536,000, up 32.6%), HP (431,000, down 25.1%), Toshiba 
(208,000, down 14.7%) and Apple (136,000, up 14.7%). Overall, the market 
declined by 6.5%, in units.

Atwal says Apple benefited from the declines suffered by business PC suppliers 
but did well to increase sales without playing in the netbook market. He 
credited this to the "level of awareness" and brand benefits of the success of 
the iPhone, iPod, and iTunes.

Apple was in 6th place in France and Italy, and 8th in Germany, but coverage 
varies by country and "they don't really have a presence in Eastern Europe," he 
said.

In France, PC shipments fell by 1.2% to 2.6m units: the market did better than 
expected thanks mainly to strong sales of netbooks. Acer was the top supplier, 
shippping 706,000 PCs for a market share of 31.3%. It was followed by HP 
(24.7%, with shipments up by 16.1%), Dell (10.2%, down 27.8%), Asus (5.4%, down 
17.8%) and Toshiba (5.3%, down 6.5%).

In Germany, PC shipments fell by 2.7% to 2.3m units. Acer increased sales by 
38.6% to hold on to its top spot, with 413,000 shipments and a 17.8% market 
share. It was followed by HP (13.2%, with shipments up by 10.3%), Dell (9%, 
down 23.7%), Fujitsu (8.3%, down 31.1%) and Asus (7.8%, up 20.1%).

It's noticeable that Lenovo -- the Chinese company that bought IBM's PC 
business -- no longer appears in any of the major tables. Like HP/Compaq it 
must have suffered from large corporations cutting back on PC purchases, but 
unlike HP/Compaq, it hasn't managed a corresponding lift from consumer sales of 
laptops and netbooks. The PC market used to be driven by IBM and Apple, and now 
it's HP and Acer. Nobody predicted that.

Dell, HP, Toshiba, Lenovo, Fujitsu and others will no doubt be looking forward 
to the days when corporations return to the professional PC market -- they 
can't put off buying new PCs forever. But despite the appearance of Windows 7, 
which is now shipping electronically, Atwal doesn't expect much to happen until 
next year.
 