
Acer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer>, the Taiwanese company that 
is the second-biggest PC maker in the world, will cut 300 jobs in Europe and 
has slashed its full-year shipment target for tablets by almost 60% to around 
3m units. The company also said it expects lower notebook shipments this year 
as it struggles to clear excess inventory.

The job cuts in Europe will come in "the next few months" and follows huge 
losses in the region, including a $150m writeoff for excess inventory and 
disputed payments in the Europe, Middle East and Africa region.

The company said earlier this week that it has around 3m laptops that will be 
sold at large retailers. At the start of June the company said in a statement 
that it had "discovered abnormalities in terms of channel inventory stored in 
freight forwarders' warehouses, and in the accounts receivables from channels 
in Spain".

The company is in the midst of upheaval after the abrupt departure in March of 
its chief executive Gianfranco Lanci, who clashed with founder Stan Shih over 
the company's direction. Shihfavoured a tablet- and smartphone-oriented strategy
 <http://www.cens.com/cens/html/en/news/news_inner_35793.html>, seeing them as 
offering higher profit margins than PCs and especially the imploding netbook 
market on which Acer rose to prominence from 2008 onwards.

The company has missed its last three quarterly revenue and profit forecasts, 
but said it expected overall shipments to improve later this year. "The third 
quarter will be considerably more stable. It will be similar to the second 
quarter or better," chairman JT Wang told a shareholder meeting on Wednesday. 
"The fourth quarter will be even better."

Wang told reporters after the meeting that the new target for tablet shipments 
this year was 2.5m to 3m units â€“ dramatically lower than the 5m to 7m units 
target set at the beginning of the year. Acer now expects to sell 800,000 
tablets in each of the second and third quarters.

Wang said he expected total shipments in the second quarter to fall less than 
10% from the previous quarter, better than had been feared. Last month, the 
company posted a 29.2% drop in total sales.

In April, the PC maker cut its forecast for shipments in the second quarter to 
a 10% decline from January-March, citing its recent reorganisation, inventory 
adjustment and a seasonal slowdown in the PC industry. That would take it down 
to around 9.8m machines shipped in total, and could mean that it will lose its 
second place in the PC sales rankings to Texas-based Dell.

Shares in Acer have plunged 30% since March 25, when the company first cut its 
first-quarter PC revenue outlook and followed by the sudden management changes.
 