
The Acta treaty that has been the subject of street protests around Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is unlikely to be ratified by 
the European Union, according to Neelie Kroes, the powerful European 
commissioner for telecoms and technology.

Speaking on Friday, Kroes said that "we are now likely to be in a world 
without Sopa" – the US's proposed Stop Online Piracy Act – "andActa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acta>."

Acta, the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement, has been signed by 22 of the 
EU's 27 countries, as well as the US and Japan. But even in some of the 
countries that have signed it, parliaments have declined to ratify it due to 
public pressure.

Ryan Heath, a spokesman for Kroes's office, said the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> has not changed its 
position on the usefulness of Acta, and was continuing to work toward its 
ultimate ratification, but added that Kroes was "observing political reality".

Kroes's comments come weeks before the commission, the EU executive, is due to 
make public new rules to ensure that musicians and film-makers get paid, and 
while it is trying to overhaul the bloc's copyright regime to cater for the 
internet era.

Critics say the commission is holding back planned reviews of the EU's own 
rules because officials are worried it will come up against the same kind of 
resistance asSopa <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sopa> and Acta.

"After the tremendous mobilisation of citizens around the world against Sopa 
and Acta, it would be extremely dangerous politically for the commission to 
propose a new repressive scheme," said Jeremie Zimmermann, from internet 
advocacy group La Quadrature du Net.

Acta is meant in part to provide methods for governments to crack down on fake 
consumers goods and medicines, and on websites that break copyright laws. It 
had been moving through the approval process in the European parliament when
street protests began breaking out in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/jan/27/acta-protests-eu-states-sign-treaty>
 over the lack of transparency about its contents – whose drafting was carried 
out almost entirely in secret for some years – and the breadth of its assault 
on alleged copyright infringement on the internet.

The EU in April asked its top court in Luxembourg to examine Acta's 
lawfulness, after politicians and campaigners said the agreement would allow 
companies to spy on ordinary internet users suspected of downloading 
copyrighted material. A ruling could take up to a year.

Liberal politicians in the more than 700-seat European parliament have been 
lobbying fiercely against the agreement. "Although we unambiguously support the 
protection of intellectual property rights, we also champion fundamental rights 
and freedoms," Guy Verhofstadt, the leader of the legislature's liberal group, 
said. "We have serious concerns that Acta does not strike the right balance."

Several governments in the developed world have been pushing for multilateral 
agreements to ban trademark and copyright theft and ban websites that offer 
large numbers of copyrighted films and songs for free, such as Kim Dotcom's 
MegaUpload and ThePirate Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pirate-bay>
.
 