
In 2010, Victor Henning, founder of Mendeley, won the inaugural Activate Tech 
Talent Pitching workshop. Earlier this year, Mendeley was bought by Reed 
Elsevier, for a reported $100m (£65m). Here is what Victor had to say about his 
Activate experience:

'The chance to speak on the Activate main stage was one of the most 
exhilarating moments in my start-up career. Exploring how to change the world 
through the internet with some of the brightest minds in tech, academia and 
politics has created amazing opportunities for Mendeley.'

View Mendeley's presentation at the 2010 Activate summit here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/activate/video/activate-2010-victor-henning?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>

Is your company the next Mendely? Does your startup have the potential to 
transform the way we live, work and interact? The Guardian is giving you the 
chance to find out.

We're looking for 10 innovative startups to come and pitch their startup 
concept at our Activate tech talent day. Taking place onTuesday November 19 
(the day before the Guardian's annual Activate Summit) at the Metropolitan 
Pavilion, New York the workshop will be judged by leading investors, inventors 
and entrepreneurs from across the world.

Want to get involved? Read on to find out how to enter your start up.

We are looking for the brightest tech startups to submit entries telling us, 
in no more than 300 words, why they believe their startup will change business 
and/or wider society. You will also have to demonstrate that the idea is 
commercially sustainable.

The winner will have the opportunity to present at the Activate Summit the 
next day in front of a 350-strong senior-level audience, taking the podium 
alongside Werner Vogels, CTO, Amazon.com, Chris Dixon, general partner, 
Andreessen Horowitz and Ben Huh, CEO and founder, Cheezburger.

The winner will also win £40k in advertising across the Guardian's global tech 
platform.

Deadline for submissions is Friday October 18 2013.

For more information on the pitching process and criteria – click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/18/pitching-process-activate-new-york>

You can submit your application here 
<http://www.f6s.com/theguardianactivatenewyork2013#/apply>

If you have any questions, please contact adam.davidi@theguardian.com 
<mailto://adam.davidi@theguardian.com>

Follow us on Twitter @ActivateSummit <https://twitter.com/ActivateSummit> for 
news and updates

More information on the Activate tech talent day 

Agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/18/tech-talent-day-agenda>
Pitching process and criteria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/18/pitching-process-activate-new-york>
Judging panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/18/judging-panel-activate-tech-talent>
FAQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/18/frequently-asked-questions-tech-talent>
 