
In association with

Omidyar Network

Omidyar Network is a philanthropic investment firm dedicated to harnessing the 
power of markets to create opportunity for people to improve their lives. 
Established in 2004 by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar and his wife Pam, the 
organization invests in and helps scale innovative organizations to catalyze 
economic and social change. To date, Omidyar Network has committed more than 
$500 million to for-profit companies and non-profit organizations that foster 
economic advancement and encourage individual participation across multiple 
investment areas, including financial inclusion, entrepreneurship, property 
rights, consumer internet, mobile and government transparency. To learn more, 
visit www.omidyar.com and follow Omidyar Network on TwitterÂ @OmidyarNetwork.

Ebuzzing 

Ebuzzing are the global experts in video advertising. Ebuzzing creates 
engaging, high impact video experiences, distributing video ads to audiences 
through placements within social media, and premium media.

To date, they have distributed thousands of campaigns for the world's leading 
brands including Heineken, Acer, LG, Samsung, Evian and Adidas.

Founded by Bertrand Quesada and Pierre Chappaz in 2007, Ebuzzing now has 200 
employees with offices across in New York, London and across France, Italy, 
Germany, Spain, Luxembourg, Morocco and Dubai. Its R&D department employs 50 
people, demonstrating the company's commitment to innovation.

Ebuzzing 2012 revenue was $52 million, up 78% from the previous year.

Propeller mobile
 . Photograph: . 
Propeller Mobile offers comprehensive mobile app solutions for businesses. Our 
Event Engine app helps event organisers to build customer engagement, create 
new revenue streams and capture data that can help to tailor future events. We 
also provide bespoke solutions, whether that's to enhance communities and 
membership groups or digitally publish and monetise your content. Our apps work 
across all platforms (iPhone, iPad, Blackberry, Android, and Windows Mobile). 
Furthermore we create tailor-made websites and, working alongside our sister 
company Propeller PR, we can offer a content and social media solution to 
populate and promote your digital platforms.

United Nations Development Group

The United Nations Development Group (UNDG) unites 32 United Nations funds, 
programmes, agencies, departments, and offices that play a role in sustainable 
development. The group's common objective is to deliver more coherent, 
effective and efficient support to countries seeking to attain internationally 
agreed development targets, including the Millennium Development Goals. For 
more information:www.undg.org <http://www.undg.org>.

UK Trade & Investment <http://www.ukti.gov.uk/home.html?guid=none>

UK Trade & Investment is the Government Department that helps UK-based 
companies succeed in the global economy. We also help overseas companies bring 
their high-quality investment to the UK's dynamic economy acknowledged as 
Europe's best place from which to succeed in global business.

UK Trade & Investment offers expertise and contacts through its extensive 
network of specialists in the UK, and in British embassies and other diplomatic 
offices around the world. We provide companies with the tools they require to 
be competitive on the world stage.

UK Trade & Investment is responsible for the delivery of the Solutions for 
Business product "Helping Your Business Grow Internationally." These 
"solutions" are available to qualifying businesses, and cover everything from 
investment and grants through to specialist advice, collaborations and 
partnerships.

For sponsorship enquiries please contact Stefanie Schmidt

Stefanie Schmidt
Media sponsorship
Guardian News and Media
stefanie.schmidt@theguardian.com <mailto:stefanie.schmidt@theguardian.com>
+44 203 353 4889
 