
The technology industry, in particular software development, has a diversity 
problem. Even the industry giants such as Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/03/apple-diversity-report-race-gender-facebook-google>
 and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/14/facebook-diversity-report-silicon-valley-employment>
 are struggling to get a more balanced workforce, and the guardian is no 
different, with women making up just 20% of the Digital department.

Ada Lovelace <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace> Day is an 
international celebration of the achievements of women in science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics, aiming to raise the profile of women in tech and 
inspire a new generation of women to consider a career in technology.
Who was Ada Lovelace explainer. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=fc239b82-1f64-4f06-9e1a-97294770a879>
We celebrated the day at the Guardian by inviting 50 schoolgirls aged between 
12 and 17 from schools around London to come to the office and learn about 
careers in technology and what we do in the digital department.

Sally Goble, the head of quality at the Guardian (and winter swimming champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-swimming-blog/2016/sep/13/chillswim-making-it-to-the-other-side-of-the-lake>
) kicked off the day by talking about women who have inspired her. This was 
followed by some words from Aron Pilhofer - the Guardian’s chief digital 
officer - on the wide range of opportunities available in technology (not just 
engineering - product, UX, design, data and project management). We then split 
the students between two workshops - a coding workshop, and a UX, product and 
data workshop.

On Ada Lovelace Day, we break down how diverse tech companies actually are
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/ada-lovelace-day-tech-company-diversity-equality>

For the coding workshop, we got students to create their own Guardian front 
page. This was done using real data from the Guardian’scontent API 
<http://open-platform.theguardian.com>. At the start of the session we spent 10 
minutes explaining what an API is, and why it’s useful to have one.

Next came the fun part! Beginning with a relatively dull page containing a few 
headlines from pre-selected topics, students made improvements in several 
stages:

 * Basic modifications to the header, initially using the developer tools 
before modifying the HTML file

 * Changing the content API queries to get headlines on topics of their choice 
 * Adding summary text and images to the page, using the information fetched 
from the content API 
 * Adding links - for this step students had to work out where to find the URL 
of a piece of content inside a content API response, then add it to the object 
that was being used to render their page 
 * Styling! We showed the students how to fiddle with the colours on the page 
and add some CSS3 animation effects  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F073f99e97f87632667e80c913fb3546994bb93c3%2F28_0_2014_1134%2F2014.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F073f99e97f87632667e80c913fb3546994bb93c3%2F28_0_2014_1134%2F2014.png>
 Screenshot of my guardian workshop before any changes are made. Photograph: 
Philip McMahon 
This was a lot to get through in just 1 hour, especially as for the majority 
of the students this was their first experience of programming of any kind. To 
avoid anyone getting stuck on something for too long we had a small army of 
Guardian staff helping out.

In the end, our fear that there was too much stuff to get through were 
unfounded - the students picked things up quickly, and soon had some 
great-looking pages. In the older group, some students even started adding 
fields of their choosing to the page by working out where in the content API 
response they could find the information they needed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c97edc385e7a58dc6919a0ee2f6c1d20a2b33b2%2F16_14_2088_1254%2F2088.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c97edc385e7a58dc6919a0ee2f6c1d20a2b33b2%2F16_14_2088_1254%2F2088.png>
 Finished page from the coding workshop Photograph: Philip McMahon 
This is the second time we’ve run this workshop for Ada Lovelace day, and it’s 
gone down well with students on both occasions. Maybe you could make use of it 
too! All the skeleton code we used (as well as a ‘finished’ version of the page)
is available on GitHub <https://github.com/guardian/my-guardian-workshop>, 
together with the slides and details of what we talked about. You’ll need a 
content API key, which you can get from theGuardian open platform website 
<http://open-platform.theguardian.com/>. Unfortunately, high quality images 
aren’t available on the free developer tier of the API, so once you get to the 
point where you want to try this workshop out on some students, get in touch 
with us with your key and we’ll try and sort out getting it upgraded for you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9eefae408fabb5ea44fbb8c60bbac6b35549f15%2F0_0_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9eefae408fabb5ea44fbb8c60bbac6b35549f15%2F0_0_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
 Students customising their front page with help from Natalia Photograph: 
Maria-Livia Chiorean 
The second workshop was focused on the disciplines of product management, UX 
design and research, and data analysis - a wide set of skills to understand in 
just 1 hour! The girls got a (very speedy) overview of what these roles entail 
at the Guardian and were then given the chance to do our jobs for the day.

In small groups, the girls were asked to create a Guardian front page that 
appealed to young people. They started with idea generation and then began 
cutting, sticking and sketching to create their first paper prototype. They 
were encouraged to think mobile-first with the help of giant smartphone 
templates and many, many post-it notes.

The ideas were fantastically varied and very creative, from an app for 
learning and sharing dance routines, to a page for exploring international 
education, complete with an interactive rotating globe and even ads for plane 
tickets!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa397b72d82b55cb6612ea23a4f64f86a12418060%2F0_142_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa397b72d82b55cb6612ea23a4f64f86a12418060%2F0_142_4272_2563%2F4272.jpg>
 Iterating on front page designs with Mick and Iona Photograph: Maria-Livia 
Chiorean 
We had lots of great conversations about the way we work at the Guardian - 
iterating on ideas, ‘failing fast’ and not getting too attached to our ideas 
early in the design process (something everyone was able to relate to). The 
user testing phase came next - a few girls took on the role of ‘user’ and were 
assigned to different groups.

Each group conducted a mini user interview to learn about how their prototype 
appeared to a ‘real’ user and what did and didn’t work well. Lots of great, 
insightful questions were asked and the ‘users’ really got into character! This 
was all made more fun and realistic by the location of the workshop - our 
fantastic UX lab, complete with a one-way mirror and lots of devices.


Everyone was asked to consider three key metrics when designing their 
prototype and considering their user feedback: engagement, return visits and 
social shares. With these in mind, the groups came back together, chatted about 
their research findings and began finalising their prototype. The groups really 
took on board what their users had told them and were very astute in the way 
they iterated on their designs to address the key metrics.

Following some very professional presentations from each group, we cast votes 
based on which designs would perform best on each of the key metrics - much 
like hypothesis generation. We discussed how the next step would have been to 
obtain live data from our audience and conduct detailed analysis, before 
returning to the design and our user testing. It was great for everyone to see 
such a range of ideas, get a chance to present and explain their designs, and 
hopefully feel pleasantly surprised at what can be achieved in such a short 
period of time if you adopt this rapid, flexible way of working. Very 
impressive work from all!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F963fa84cf15786c4b82efa06f1238774eacc0492%2F100_212_3262_1957%2F3262.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ada%20Lovelace%20Day%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finfo%2Fdeveloper-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fada-lovelace-day-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F963fa84cf15786c4b82efa06f1238774eacc0492%2F100_212_3262_1957%2F3262.jpg>
 Presenting front page prototypes to the group Photograph: Maria-Livia Chiorean 
Over lunch, the students heard from a number of women in the department about 
how they came to work in technology, and watched a shortened version of the 
film ‘CODE: Debugging the gender gap <http://www.codedoc.co/about/>’. We then 
had an informal discussion about the film before heading off to the second 
round of workshops.


The day ended with a tour of the department, where the girls could meet and 
question someone from each team. This was a fun way to end the day and a nice 
way to show the reality of software development - not a group of wizards 
staring into the matrix, just some people sitting at desks making things 
together.

We had a great time! And we had positive feedback from the girls and their 
teachers as well. Ada Lovelace Day 2017 is already in the pipeline, so if 
you’ve got any suggestions or experiences off running your own days it would be 
great to hear from you. Alternatively, if you’d like to get in touch about 
using some of our resources or just getting some advice on running your own day 
then please do. You can find us on twitter@gdndevelopers <>. 

 