
Researchers, students and members of the public are gathering just across the 
street from the University of Oxford's science buildings to change scientific 
history. Rather than test tubes or computer models, however, they are armed 
with stacks of reference material, ready to square up to the online Goliath 
that isWikipedia <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wikipedia>.

Welcome to our latest editathon, <https://blogs.it.ox.ac.uk/adalovelace/> 
which brings together people with an interest in improving Wikipedia coverage 
of a particular subject. In the spirit ofAda Lovelace Day 
<http://findingada.com/>, which helps spreads the word about the achievements 
of women in science, technology, engineering and maths, today's editathon 
focuses onwomen in science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2013/oct/08/ada-lovelace-day-share-your-stories-of-women-in-science-and-technology>
.

Hosted by Oxford's Bodleian Libraries and IT services, alongside Martin 
Poulter, JISC's recently appointed Wikimedian ambassador, participants will 
sharpen up the coverage of individuals, events and resources related to women 
in science – whether that's writing an article from scratch about Margaret 
Jennings, one of the Oxford team working on penicillin in the 1930s and 1940s, 
or simply checking that articles have accurate references.

The key factor here is interest rather than experience. Most editathons are 
open to all regardless of Wikipedia editing skills and many provide editing 
training for new users. Editathons are growing in popularity with past events 
covering subjects as diverse as scientific history, English drama and the first 
world war. This time last year, editors contributed to articles on Mary 
Somerville, Ida Mann and theMillion Women Study 
<http://www.millionwomenstudy.org/introduction/>, while international Ada 
Lovelace groups made dozens of other updates.

Events like this also train women to be Wikipedia editors themselves, helping 
them to add their voices and increase the number of female contributors beyond 
the 'less-than-15%' suggested by recent surveys. We are directly addressing 
what has been termed as"Wikipedia's women problem" 
<http://www.nybooks.com/blogs/nyrblog/2013/apr/29/wikipedia-women-problem/> and 
in doing so, supporting the university's own aims of advancing the careers of 
women in academia.

Oxford isn't the only organisation with an Ada Lovelace Day event – 
celebrations centre around Imperial College, London 
<http://findingada.com/events-2013/> – and the impact of international efforts 
to improve coverage is substantial. The importance of hosting a Wikipedia 
editathon in a university setting goes beyond the articles it generates. 
Wikipedia is an enormously important resource: estimates suggest Wikimedia 
sites are viewed around 365 million times each month. It's useless to ignore it 
orsimply tell students not to use it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/may/13/should-university-students-use-wikipedia>
, yet many teachers and academics seem to harbour an extreme distaste for the 
site.

One of the goals of events like this editathon is to show the academic 
community that Wikipedia is an extraordinary resource for teaching and 
learning, bringing together the knowledge of thousands of experts and the 
opportunity to participate in conversations about how we shape history.

Yes, there are those who post false information (though a study in Nature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v438/n7070/full/438900a.html> claimed 
that Wikipedia's accuracy compares to that of Encyclopedia Britannica). But 
used correctly, Wikipedia can help develop the very skills universities are 
trying to impart: critical thinking and reasoning, and the ability to convey 
information clearly – with references. Contextual information like its 'talk' 
and 'history' pages help students understand how we arrive at historical 
consensus and, taken as a whole, the site empowers them to participate in that 
discussion.

Wikipedia's open nature not only enables the academic community to edit 
knowledge (and academics are just the types of experts Wikipedia needs), it 
also makes it possible for that knowledge to flow outside the university walls. 
Oxford is no stranger to open practice; its academics have produced thousands 
of materials under theOpenSpires initiative <http://podcasts.ox.ac.uk/open> 
free for reuse, remixing and redistribution in education worldwide. Wikipedia 
can be a stepping stone to deeper engagement, and we have experimented with 
blending Wikipedia content with other open resources.

Open content is growing in importance, and JISC's Wikimedian project 
<https://wiki.wikimedia.org.uk/wiki/Expert_outreach/Jisc_Ambassador> is 
providing training to university staff around the country in using Wikipedia, 
particularly in teaching and impact assessment. If you'd like to get involved 
or learn more about Wikipedia in teaching and learning, join one of the manyAda 
Lovelace Day events taking place worldwide 
<http://findingada.com/events-2013/worldwide-events-2013/>. You can also keep 
an eye on theWikimedia UK events calendar 
<https://wiki.wikimedia.org.uk/wiki/Events>, which lists upcoming editathons 
and training opportunities.

For a full list of this year's Ada Lovelace Day events, visit findingada.com 
<http://findingada.com/>

Liz McCarthy is communications and social media officer for the Bodleian 
Libraries <http://www.bodley.ox.ac.uk/> and special collections librarian for 
theUniversity of Reading <http://www.reading.ac.uk/>. Kate Lindsay is manager 
for education enhancement at the – follow them on Twitter @McCarthy_Liz 
<https://twitter.com/mccarthy_liz> and @KTDigital <http://twitter.com/KTDigital>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 