Ada Lovelace is often described as being the world’s first...  Mathematician  
Economist  Computer programmer  Engineer Which video encouraging girls to go 
into science went viral for all the wrong reasons after it featured sexist 
cliches including high heels and lipsticks?  A promotional video for science 
courses at Oxford University  A department for education video for teenage girls
 A European Commission video for their campaign “Science: it’s a girl thing!”  
A video by the University of California promoting a science summer school This 
year the Royal Society awarded 43 University Research Fellowships (URFs), but 
how many went to women?  2  7  13  20 Who were the Edinburgh Seven?  The first 
group of women students to study medicine at a British university  The first 
group of women students to be awarded degrees  A group of male students who 
argued that women should be granted entrance to Edinburgh university  A group 
of male students suspended for rioting in response to news that women were to 
be allowed in their university Women make up 46% of the UK’s workforce, but 
what percentage of women work in Stem?  12%  15.5%  27%  52.2% Which female 
scientist, credited with the development of protein crystallography and 
establishing the structures of vitamin B12 and penicillin, was awarded a Nobel 
prize in 1964? The news was reported by the Daily Mail under the headline: 
“Oxford housewife wins Nobel"  Barbara McClintock  Alice Ball  Fiona Wood  
Dorothy Hodgkin Girls now out-perform boys in GCSEs and A-levels, and there are 
more women graduating from university than men, but what percentage of 
engineering and technology undergraduates are women?  12%  21%  34%  7% Which 
famous physician is this?  Elizabeth Garrett Anderson  Marie Curie  Maria 
Petraccini  Rosalind Franklin  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  