
In the bowels of London’s Science Museum, Dr Tilly Blyth gingerly opens an 
envelope. Inside is a lock of long, dark hair tied with a green ribbon. It’s a 
curiously poignant moment. The lively, intelligent woman to whom it belonged 
died young, but her mathematical work with computer pioneer Charles Babbage has 
seen her become a paragon for women in science and technology. Gazing down at 
the tresses, the centuries seem to shrink away. Ladies and gentlemen,Ada 
Lovelace <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ada-lovelace> is in the room.

It’s an impression Blyth hopes to share. Curator of a new exhibition 
<http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/visitmuseum/Plan_your_visit/exhibitions/ada-lovelace>
 at the museum opening on “Ada Lovelace day”, she is hoping to breathe life 
back into the tale of Lord Byron’s daughter in the year of her 200th birthday, 
bringing together the locks with portraits, letters and artefacts to allow 
visitors to capture a glimpse of Lovelace “as an individual”.

Others too are keen to support a fresh portrayal. “She was certainly not an 
angel,” says mathematician Dr Hannah Fry, citing Lovelace’s tempestuous 
relationships with men, alcohol and gambling. “I think that being perfect isn’t 
a prerequisite to achieving something,” says Fry, the presenter of a recent BBC 
documentary about Lovelace, “and I think that it is actually really nice that 
she is just this very difficult figure.” Furthermore, “the thing that you are 
contributing doesn’t even have to make a difference,” says Fry, pointing out 
that although Lovelace’s achievements were “astonishingly impressive”, they had 
little impact at the time.

Newly asked questions: Are women doing better or worse in IT since Ada 
Lovelace?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/mar/26/ada-lovelace-day-babbage> 
Among the items on show is a punch-card operated Jacquard loom of the type 
that inspired Babbage’s plans for a grand computing machine, the Analytical 
Engine, as well as a humble marble-covered notebook – Lovelace’s translation of 
Luigi Menabrea’s seminal 1842 essay on Babbage’s ideas. Her own extensive notes 
run to more pages that the original article and even contain instructions for 
the engine. It’s a work that Blyth believes should inspire us to widen our 
appreciation of the oft-overlooked contributions of translators, communicators 
and collaborators that, she notes, were often “the kinds of roles that women 
played at that time”.

Blyth believes the exhibition – an intimate one-roomed show – will also 
encourage visitors to appreciate Lovelace’s true legacy, which, she says, is 
not so much her instructions for Babbage’s machine – which was never completed 
– but something more profound. “I would say what is really more significant is 
that intellectual leap that she made for considering what the analytical engine 
could do,” says Blyth. “[Babbage] was thinking about the different simultaneous 
equations that the engine could calculate but what she saw is [that] this isn’t 
just about number; it’s about symbol and therefore music and possibly letters – 
and [the machine] could calculate a whole range of different things.”

Fry agrees: “She was the first published computer programmer but whether she 
actually came up with the program herself is still debated,” she says. 
Ultimately, Lovelace’s greatest achievement was even more extraordinary. “She 
was prophesying the computer age,” says Fry.

The Ada Lovelace exhibition at the Science Museum 
<http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/visitmuseum/Plan_your_visit/exhibitions/ada-lovelace>
 in London openson Tuesday, 13 October.
 