
There’s a problem with power in the modern world, says Adam Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis> – it’s just too boring. 
“A few years ago I was filming in Silicon Valley, in the richest postcode in 
the world, a place called Atherton. You just wouldn’t know it. Everyone is 
wearing North Face. Or whatever the American equivalent of North Face is these 
days.” The film-maker is dressed in his own uniform of ill-fitting suit and 
starched white shirt, a clamshell phone in his hand like he’s Anna Wintour. 
“Back in the days of the robber barons, they all dressed up, they all had 
opulence and everyone got angry about it. Now, it’s just… North Face. The North 
Face world. North Face is a thing of our time. And yet those people might have 
billions and billions of dollars.”

Getting good images of powerful characters is Curtis’s business. He makes 
documentaries about the secret histories of power, from the way Freud’s nephew 
inspired consumerism to the shared characteristics of Islamism and 
neo-conservatism. They are stories that are grand and disconcerting, but the 
way Curtis tells them they’re also energising, funny and beguilingly beautiful 
to watch. His style is comparable to that of a collage artist. From his desk in 
the BBC archives (at a location he refuses to divulge), Curtis will watch 
hundreds of hours of footage, frequently in fast forward, looking for the 
relevant details, the right images to illustrate the stories he wants to tell. 
He’s been praised as an auteur and one of the most original thinkers on TV. 
He’s also been denounced as a dangerous contrarian and a teller of tales that 
simplify the complex realities of the modern world. Right now he’s puzzling 
over how to make sense of a ruling class dressed entirely in breathable fabrics.

After a four-year absence from our screens Curtis is about to return with a 
new film, a two-and-a-half-hour BBC iPlayer-only epic called Bitter Lake. It 
takes as its premise a meeting in February 1945 between the then US president 
Franklin D Roosevelt and King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia. Sitting on a yacht on 
the Great Bitter Lake of the Suez Canal, the pair struck a deal: the US would 
support this newly formed state and, in return, the Saudis would ensure a 
continuing stream of oil to the west. From that one point, argues Curtis, came 
the spread of Wahhabi Islam, the rise of personality politics and the Afghani 
version of The Thick Of It.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzeiA5MkTXw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzeiA5MkTXw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOzeiA5MkTXw&media=>
“I’d always known about the Bitter Lake meeting,” says Curtis. “I’d seen the 
footage, this really gloomy, almost Edward Hopper-style shot of President 
Roosevelt – who is about to die – sitting on a warship meeting the king of 
Saudi Arabia, who’d ruthlessly created this new kingdom 20 years before. I’d 
always thought this was rather an epic moment and it has stuck in the back of 
my brain.”

That meeting was epic, Curtis argues, because it saw the US pledge to protect 
the house of Saud from external threats – while their subsequent dependence on 
the same people for oil influenced global politics for generations to come. 
Bitter Lake seeks to track that influence. “I just think we haven’t fully 
understood how important Saudi Arabia is to the problems of the Middle East,” 
he says. “What’s fascinating about Saudi Arabia and its relationship with the 
west is that it actually destabilised politics. One, because of the oil shock 
of 1973, which really did put a spanner in the works of the grand political 
dream that you could plan and manage everything in society, and helped bring 
people like Thatcher and Ronald Reagan to power. It also, in the process, 
re-established the power of finance, because suddenly there’s all these 
petrodollars floating around the world that the banks got hold of, and they 
could trade them and lend them. And the banks began to become powerful.”

If that sounds like a grand hypothesis, well, it’s typical Curtis. He doesn’t 
do things by half measures and, indeed, Bitter Lake has an entire other angle 
to its story, the film also covering the last 70 years of western involvement 
in Afghanistan. “I’ve been writing a lot about Afghanistan on my blog,” says 
Curtis who, during the gap between films, has been producing shorts and 
surfacing footage in a shadowy corner of the BBC website. “We’ve been fighting 
a war in Afghanistan for 13 years, and yet we haven’t done a history on the 
BBC. But then a cameraman called Phil Goodwin came to me. He’d gone out to 
Kabul and opened the cupboards at the back of the BBC offices. He’d got out the 
tapes of everything we’d shot there over the last 40 years, the rushes, the 
unedited material. He sat there for weeks with his laptop, digitising it all. 
And he came back with 26 terabytes of footage.

“No one was really interested at the BBC, but he gave them to me about two 
years ago and I’ve been going through them. They’re wonderful, amazing. And I 
just realised that you could make a film out of the footage, one that actually 
captured the reality of the experience there. Not of everything. But it gives 
you a sense of how complex, strange and knowing the Afghans are.”

Certainly, watching Bitter Lake is a strange experience. Freed from the 
constraints of TV schedules, the film can feel like watching a dream. A visual 
Curtis trademark is the quick, ironic juxtaposition, where a passage about the 
rise of neo-conservatism in 1970s America, say, is illustrated by clips from 
Perry Mason and footage of an expensive helicopter falling into the sea.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwcy8uLjRHPM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwcy8uLjRHPM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwcy8uLjRHPM&media=>
That style is not entirely absent here – there are clips of the Afghani 
Malcolm Tucker and footage of a poor British Council rep trying to explain 
conceptual art to a group of baffled young people in Kabul – but largely it’s 
replaced by something much slower: lingering unedited shots, moments that were 
perhaps never intended for broadcast, that hang in front of your eyes without 
commentary. There’s little music either, the most frequent sound being the sort 
of drone you’d normally associate with the end of a My Bloody Valentine 
concert. The film acquires different qualities as a result, as you spend more 
time thinking about the scenes in front of you. One particular passage, filmed 
during a military operation in Helmand, is just a minute of a soldier stroking 
a bird that has landed on a branch in front of him. The soldier looks at the 
cameraman, his eyes bright with a childish wonderment. It left my bottom lip 
wibbling.

Curtis is only making this film for iPlayer because they won’t have him on TV 
any more, right? “Not at all. Quite the opposite,” he says flatly. “I have 
deliberately done this because iPlayer gives me the chance to experiment. I 
wanted to create something you wouldn’t put on television. It’s a deal I have 
with the BBC: you can experiment, but don’t cost any money. Bitter Lake was 
made for £12k, I think – that’s it. And I know that in five years’ time, 
everyone’s going to watch everything on iPlayer, so let’s get in there before 
the bureaucrats do.”

A conversation with Curtis is fast, intense and likely to jump off in a new 
direction without warning. His curiosity is apparent, not just about politics, 
history and technology but culture too. He makes shorts for Charlie Brooker’s 
Screen Wipe and has produced high-profile collaborations withMassive Attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack> and the Punchdrunk theatre 
company amongst others. His musical tastes cover a broad range. He says he 
likes Kanye West for the moments he’s “a real soppy badger” and that Burial is 
a “musical genius of our time”. He’s into both Rihanna’s We Found Love and the 
country music of Elizabeth Cook, specifically the songs Girlfriend Tonight and 
Heroin Addict Sister. At a slight tangent, he also has a respect for Jane 
Fonda. “She’s one of the great ideologues of our time. Starts up as this sort 
of Marxist revolutionary, but then not only does she start the VHS boom with 
her exercise videos, she makes that shift towards what I call ‘body fascism’, 
where you give up trying to change the world and instead manage yourself with 
an iron will.”

He may spend his working life telling stories about how power is controlled by 
an elite, but Curtis is not a cynic. “I believe that it’s possible to make the 
world intelligible – however complex and chaotic it is,” he says. “That is the 
progressive job of journalism. The other reaction – which is to say, ‘Things 
are just so complex and unpredictable that you can never make sense of them’ – 
is, I think, one of the main motors that supports the conservatism of our time.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyv_S8GdylEA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyv_S8GdylEA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyv_S8GdylEA&media=>
Yet to his critics, Curtis is the same as the politicians he attacks. Does he 
too not simplify complex reality? “My response is this,” he says. “All reality 
is incredibly complex and chaotic. To make sense of it we have to tell stories 
about it – which inevitably simplifies. And that is what politicians – and 
journalists – do. WhatI try to do is to find new facts and data, things you 
haven’t thought about, and turn them into new stories. My aim is to use those 
stories to try and make the complexity and chaos intelligible.”

Being unable to deal with the complexity of the world has seen us retreat into 
what Curtis calls a “static world”. Instead of looking to change the world for 
the better, we look either to change small things (our bodies, our own rights 
as an individual), or we fall back into the past. “This obsession with risk 
that politicians, terror experts and finance people have, it’s about going back 
into the past, looking for patterns – which computers now allow you to do – and 
adjusting everything to make sure things are stable.

“When I was working with Massive Attack, I used an old Bauhaus song called 
Bela Lugosi’s Dead and [on the big screens] I constantly repeated the phrase, 
‘If you like this, then you’ll love that.’ I think in a way that’s the motto of 
our time. We’ll give you tomorrow something very similar to what you had 
yesterday. And then the world will be stable. And that’s true in politics, 
finance and culture.

“Look at the way culture plays it,” he continues. “I mean, look at me. Look at 
Edgar Wright: he makes movies constantly referencing things. We constantly play 
yesterday back to you in a slightly altered form, to try and make you feel 
stable and happy. And the world stays stuck and everyone gets ratty, which is 
why they all snark at each other on the internet.”

Typical. Just as you’re wrapping up one topic of conversation, Curtis’s mind 
leaps off into another: digital culture, “feedback loops” and a “free” space 
owned by corporations. That story is for another time, though, and it will be 
difficult to tell, he says – just think of all that North Face.

Bitter Lake is available on BBC iPlayer from 9pm on Sun
 