
Adam Goodes will remain close to the Sydney Swans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-swans> after thanking fans for 
persuading him not to retire midway through the final season of his 
distinguished AFL career.

Friday’s emotional Sydney Club Champion dinner was the first time Goodes had 
spoken publicly since his retirement after the semi-final loss to North 
Melbourne.

Midfielder Josh Kennedy won the Bob Skilton Medal but it was Goodes who the 
crowd of over 1000 clearly wanted to hear from most.

He said it had been a tough year, but made no direct reference to the booing 
and vilification he copped over several weeks from opposing fans, which wore 
him down and prompted him to stand down for a week in late July.

Goodes said it was the support of Swans fans that coaxed him into extending 
his club record games tally to 372.

Rafael Nadal beats Jack Sock to reach semi-finals of China Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/09/rafael-nadal-beats-jack-sock-reach-semi-final-china-open-tennis>
“There was no way that I thought I’d come back from that,” Goodes said. “But 
I’m glad I did because this football club means a lot to me and it’s given me a 
lot of strength and a lot of good memories.”

Goodes gave few clues as to his future plans other than revealing he was about 
to embark on a two-month overseas holiday with his partner Natalie.

“I’m not disappearing, I’m not dying,” Goodes said. “This football club is 
something that I want to be a part of for the rest of my life. I do love this 
football club, I love the relationships. That’s what I’m going to miss the most 
is the relationships with players.

“Anyone that I played with this year, if you don’t take my phone call next 
year, I’m going to come and knock on your door and go ‘why didn’t you answer my 
phone calls?’”

Sydney’s other retiring player, defender Rhyce Shaw, is joining the club’s 
coaching staff.

It has been speculated ruckman Mike Pyke would also retire but the Canadian 
made no announcement when he spoke after being recognised for reaching his 
100-game milestone.

Coach John Longmire acknowledged the impending departure of Lewis Jetta by 
saying the club would miss the speedster, who is seeking a trade back to his 
home state of Western Australia.
 