
About a third of the way into Adam Foulds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/adam-foulds>'s latest novel – In the Wolf's 
Mouth, a second world war story set in north Africa and Sicily – one of his 
protagonists, a young American soldier, finds himself having to run through a 
battlefield to escape German fire. As he begins to negotiate the mayhem, so the 
words on the page start to float apart. "Running, burn of ankle twist over // 
Like people, shaped like people? // over rocks. Behind rocks, a piece of sky". 
In effect, Foulds's prose breaks down and dissolves into poetry.

"I like it when the lines behave just as they want in terms of crossing the 
page or not," explains Foulds. "What is most important is getting as close as I 
can to the reality I'm trying to describe." As both a prize-winning poet and 
novelist, it is little surprise that Foulds should adopt such techniques. But 
he is also aware that when a reviewer describes a book as a "poet's novel", it 
is not usually meant as a compliment, and is a description that often comes 
with a hint of oversensitivity and overwriting. "I do know what they mean," 
Foulds says. "But I also think that to use 'poetic' as a criticism in that 
sense displays a not very accurate understanding of what good poetry is. Great 
poetry such asWilliam Wordsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamwordsworth>'s The Prelude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/26/william-wordsworth-the-prelude> 
is not 'poetic' in that sense, in that it is full of the brilliant accuracies 
of description you find in good prose. Really good poetry is about intensity, 
and a freshness of language and seeing. And that is also true ofDH Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence> or Virginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf> or lots of other writers' 
prose. So for me it is more about wanting language and perception to be alive 
and sensually immersive, none of which is what I think people mean when they 
say 'poetic'."

It is an approach that has proved remarkably successful for Foulds so far. His 
debut novel,The Truth About These Strange Times, won the Betty Trask 
<http://www.societyofauthors.org/betty-trask-past-winners> and Sunday Times 
Young Writer of the Year awards. His book-length epic poem about an English 
schoolboy's experience of the violence of the Mau Mau rebellion in 1950s 
colonial Kenya,The Broken Word 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview>, 
won several major awards including the 2008 Costa poetry prize. His 2009 novel,
The Quickening Maze <https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-quickening-maze>, 
about the literary historical oddity that linked the poetsJohn Clare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/john-clare> and Alfred Tennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson> with an Essex mental 
hospital in the 1830s, was shortlisted for theMan Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>. Last year Foulds was named on 
the Granta list of the 20 best British novelists under 40, and now comesIn the 
Wolf's Mouth, in which he pits the invading allied forces against not 
only their Axis enemies, but also the entrenched social structures of the local 
populations, including the mafia.

Foulds has a certain amount of fun writing against the genre expectations of 
gangster fiction, but he also works through some of the more serious themes 
that underpinnedThe Broken Word in terms of violence and trauma, "and the 
chaotic weather systems of great events that sweep people up, and how you then 
put the world back together, or at least start to, after those experiences". 
There are also many contemporary resonances in a story that is in part about 
the attempted reconstruction of a country after conflict, "that was well 
intentioned and partly successful, but was also unpredictable and undertaken 
with a very partial understanding of the local people. It's a state of affairs 
that obviously speaks to the present moment."

Foulds concedes there is some political impulse behind his work. "Certainly in 
The Broken Word I wanted to contribute to breaking a silence about those events 
in Kenya. But when writing an artistic work, its immediacies, prerogatives and 
irresponsible vitality always take precedence. Of course there are bits of my 
psyche and my sense of society in there, but it is not campaigning. It is about 
a terrible complexity, not something that resolves itself into a political 
programme."

Although Foulds suspects that with this new book he has "now done with 
violence and trauma for a while", he admits that the roots of his interest in 
the subject run deep. "I grew up in a Jewish family. I was educated about the
Holocaust <https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust>, and the camps were 
always a place in my imagination and the ultimate moral arena where you would 
be driven to think about how you would behave.Nathan Englander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nathan-englander> described it so well in 
a wonderful short story when he asked who would hide him today? That's what you 
think about as a nine-year-old in north-east London. Who of my friends would 
hide me if it came to it? As a kid my nightmares weren't about generic 
monsters, they were about real violence and hatred. That compelled me then and 
does still."

Foulds was born in 1974 and brought up on the border of London and Essex. He 
says his family was not particularly observant when he was growing up, although 
after he had left home his father trained as a rabbi once he had retired as an 
accountant. Foulds says one of the great discoveries of his reading life came 
at university when he was exposed to the "great American Jewish novelists such 
asSaul Bellow <https://www.theguardian.com/books/saulbellow> and Philip Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth> and finding in them my own 
world, or the world of my parents or grandparents. It is true of all minority 
cultures that having your own experience reflected back at you is quite a 
giddying experience at first. It kind of ratifies your experience as being 
valuable as, well, material."

As a child Foulds's first loves were bird watching and natural history, 
and for a time he assumed he would become a zoologist. "Looking very carefully 
at the natural world was important to me. And I realise now that there 
is something about the things I like about writing – a kind of intense and 
illuminated accuracy – that are the same as seeing the world through the lenses 
of binoculars."

He attended an independent day school where Hari Kunzru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/harikunzru> was the star English pupil a 
few years above him. There Foulds began to write poetry, and one teacher was so 
impressed that he advised him to keep hold of his drafts as one day scholars 
might be interested in them. Then came Oxford, where he describes himself as a 
"very judgmental and cultish reader. I started withJohn Keats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnkeats>, then came WB Yeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wbyeats> and over time I would very 
begrudgingly add people to my personal canon.Les Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/22/les-murray-poet-life-profile> 
was one who got in, and when he came to Oxford to read I went to see him 
afterwards and gave him some of my poems." Murray later published a few in a 
literary magazine. Another important figure for Foulds at Oxford was his tutor
Craig Raine <https://www.theguardian.com/books/craig-raine>, who suggested that 
he apply for the creative writing course at the University of East Anglia – "He 
essentially said if I could get funding for a year's writing I should take it" 
– and first publishedThe Broken Word in his literary magazine Areté.

After UEA Foulds, who had by now switched to prose, worked on The Truth About 
These Strange Times, a story featuring the world memory championships and an 
odd relationship between a lonely man and a 10-year-old maths prodigy. To 
support himself he took on many jobs, including working in a warehouse and data 
entry in "essentially Ricky Gervais'sOffice. Things were periodically shaky, 
but ultimately it helped me, as not resorting to my plan B of becoming an 
academic helped me, in that I was out in the world and not mingling my creative 
life with my working life. I'm now aware that for people who want to write but 
are working in, say, publishing there is the risk of a certain 
self-consciousness kicking in. In my case, no one knew what I was up to and 
that was quite a powerful position to be in, and one I was quite sorry to lose 
when I became a published writer and had to own up to it."

Despite its prizewinning success, he concedes that his debut novel now "sits 
slightly at a distance from the latter books", and it certainly gave little 
clue as to his next project. "As soon as I came across the story of the Mau Mau 
uprising I immediately wanted to write about it. And as I worked on it I found 
I needed to use the resources of poetry, in breaking the lines and so on, so as 
to create some kind of control of the reader's experience." He says the closest 
example of the approach he came across wasChristopher Logue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/christopher-logue>'s translations of 
Homer, "which I love. But I didn't go into it thinking ofThe Broken Word as 
a poem, it was just finding the best way to write this text."

When The Broken Word won the Costa prize for poetry in 2008, it "only partly" 
prepared him for being shortlisted for the Booker in 2009 forThe Quickening Maze
, where he became "one of the first to go under the golden steamroller of 
Hilary Mantel", whoseWolf Hall won that year. "But I was in good company on the 
shortlist.JM Coetzee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jmcoetzee>, AS Byatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/asbyatt> and Sarah Waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sarahwaters>. We all went under together."

He says The Quickening Maze had been bubbling away in his mind ever since 
discovering that Clare and Tennyson, who may or may not have actually met, were 
certainly in Epping Forest at the same time. "So it was wonderful to have these 
compelling presences materialise in my back garden. And while there is 
obviously an enormous audacity in taking on two people who, at their best, are 
both writers of genius, there are thousands of pages attesting to their 
consciousness in the form of their poetry, which gives you a kind of access 
that you don't get with other people. My poetry is miles off theirs, but I do 
know what the physical sensation of writing poetry is like from the inside so I 
could also write that experience."

Having published his first three books in rapid succession, Foulds says he 
needed to "repair a little, to have a rest and to adjust to the way that life 
now was. I also needed to be back in the world and to see things. My writing, 
in the density of its imagery, is quite expensive in terms of experience, there 
is a lot of noticing that goes into it and so I had to go back to do that for a 
while."

In the time since The Quickening Maze Foulds has married the Canadian 
photographerCharla Jones <http://charlajones.com>; they live in south London. 
He has taken up opportunities to travel and teaches creative writing part-time. 
While writingIn the Wolf's Mouth he has also assembled "half a book" of new 
material in the form of short stories that might yet become novellas.

He says "apart from a few things for myself" he hasn't recently written any 
short-form poetry, but nevertheless feels his new work is increasingly drawing 
on his interest in verse. "I like those things when the genres converge, such as
Michael Ondaatje <https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-ondaatje>'s early 
booksComing Through Slaughter or The Collected Works of Billy the Kid. Books 
written in service of the subject matter and that use any formal device they 
like to most fully realise it. Where the line should stop is determined by what 
is being said, such as the episode of extreme violence inIn the Wolf's Mouth 
when the prose breaks up. I think there will be more of that in the future."
 