
Not for 108 years have British swimmers enjoyed a more productive time in the 
pool at anOlympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>. Six 
medals – one gold and five silvers – may not sound much compared to the US’s 
stash of 33 medals but it represents a sharp improvement on four years ago and, 
historically, has been exceeded only once, in London in 1908.

As well as outpacing the target of three to five medals set by UK Sport prior 
to the Games, GB’s head coach Bill Furniss and performance director Chris Spice 
are also presiding over a young team with much improvement still to come. 
Anyone who saw Adam Peaty competing in Rioknows a twinkling new global star is 
born 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-his-own-world-record-again-in-golden-olympic-swim>
 and his infectious attitude is rubbing off on those around him.

If even half of GB’s seven fourth-place finishes had produced medals it would 
have been a major triumph, which explains Furniss’s strongly expressed 
frustration with the number of proven dopers in the competition. “We need to 
clean it up,” he said. “How you do it is more difficult but that’s not my 
problem. All I can say to my athletes is that we have to ignore it and get on 
with it but we expect a clean sport and playing field.”

Adam Peaty makes light work of pressure as hard work pays off in Rio pool | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-his-own-world-record-again-in-golden-olympic-swim>
Once the Rio wash-up commences in earnest, even so, the mood should brighten 
significantly. “What pleased me is not just the six medals, it is the seven 
fourths,” Furniss said. “It shows we have got depth. We were also pretty 
resilient and that’s what we have been working on. We feel we belong at that 
level now. We will just keep doing what we are doing and look forward to the 
next four years. The second you relax in performance sport you’re going to get 
passed. We won’t take our foot off the gas.”

Most of the key policy decisions taken – a smaller, leaner squad, a tough love 
approach to training and standards, the backing of youthful promise – have 
transparently paid off but, without in any way diminishingthe double silver 
endeavour of Jazz Carlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/rio-2016-double-silver-swimming-medallist-jazz-carlin-pays-tribute-to-parents>
 behind the unstoppable Katie Ledecky of the US, it is Peaty who is set to 
propel swimming back into the British national consciousness.

Some athletes have unfair expectations thrust upon them; a handful such as 
Andrew Flintoff, Rory McIlroy and now the 21-year-old Peaty just exude so much 
ability the only question mark surrounds their readiness for such sudden fame. 
So far there is nothing about the impressively normal, level-headed lad from 
Uttoxeter to suggest he will do anything from now other than push on to still 
greater heights.

Jazz Carlin pays tribute to parents after second silver of Rio 2016 Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/rio-2016-double-silver-swimming-medallist-jazz-carlin-pays-tribute-to-parents>
Furniss, for one, believes there is much more to come from him over the next 
two Games cycles. “The attention won’t affect him. You could not meet a more 
grounded individual. I know [his coach] Mel Marshall will look after him and I 
know his agent really well. He was also Rebecca Adlington’s agent; you couldn’t 
have a better guy. Mel will police it and they’ll work together. You’ve got 
three good things: a great coach, a great athlete who’ll keep his feet on the 
ground and you couldn’t have better than the people who are managing him.”

Peaty’s team-mate James Guy has no doubt about Peaty’s pedigree – “He’s just a 
freak” – and neither does the great Michael Phelps, who was full of praise for 
Peaty’s 56.59sec breaststroke split time in the 4x100m medley relay whichhelped 
earn GB a first men’s relay medal since 1984 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/team-gb-4x100m-medley-relay-silver-best-olympic-swimming-haul-since-1908>
. “He was like swearing and saying: ‘56.5 is mad’,” Peaty said. “He was pretty 
impressed. Looking at the TV as a kid you never think you’d impress Michael 
Phelps with all those golds round his neck but hopefully there is a lot more to 
come.

“I was a man on a mission. It was absolutely amazing just to get that split 
because a lot of people have been saying online I couldn’t do it [go under 57 
seconds]. It wasn’t a 56.9, it was a 56.5. Hopefully that’s a message for the 
rest of the world in four years’ time. We are looking at a very good relay 
coming together.”

By 2020, when Peaty will still be just 25, he will almost certainly have added 
the 200m breaststroke to his repertoire, with Guy also bound to be better for 
his first Olympic experience. “It’s absolutely incredible to see where we have 
come in these four years,” Peaty said.

“A lot of people were slating British swimming four years ago, as well as in 
the 2013 world championships. I wasn’t on those teams but, with this young 
talent now coming through, we are showing we are hungry, we can take on the 
world and we are not scared of anything. That’s the mentality in British 
swimming now. Hopefully that will continue.”
 