
The leading British sprinter Adam Gemili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> has warned the widespread 
doping unearthed in Russia could be taking place in “a lot of other countries” 
– and urged the authorities to act.

Gemili, who has been warm-weather training in Qatar after recovering from the 
hamstring tear that forced him to miss the world championships, said he hoped 
the World Anti-Doping Agency would expand its investigations to other potential 
black spots following thepublication of Dick Pound’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/09/london-olympics-russia-doping-report>
.

“I read that document and it said there were other countries as well so 
there’s a lot more investigation that needs to be done,” he said. “Personally I 
don’t think it has just been going on with Russia but that’s for them to get 
out there and sort out.”

Clouds gather as Kenya fears sunshine days are over for its athletics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/16/kenya-athletics-iaaf-drugs-in-sport-russia>
Gemili, the only British athlete to run under 10 seconds for the 100m and 20 
seconds for the 200m, also urged fans not to “lose faith” in track and field 
despite the problems that have rocked the sport to its foundations in recent 
weeks.

“I train so hard every day I know what work I put into it so it’s a shame when 
people think the sport isn’t credible anymore,” he said. “You’ve got the big 
names, Usain Bolt who’s a clean guy and leading the sport, saying this is what 
we can do clean. Don’t give up faith in the sport. That’s why I think it was 
extremely important him winning in Beijing.”

Gemili, who yesterday graduated with a 2:1 in sports and exercise science from 
the University of East London, admitted he would like to see other countries 
adopt the UK Anti-Doping Agency’s rigorous testing model.

“We get tested so often in Britain,” he said. “If anyone is doing it, it’s 
very difficult to get away with it. You would like to think that is happening 
across the globe in every country. Unfortunately it’s not. That’s down to the 
IAAF and Wada to actually put that into place and make sure every time I’m 
getting a knock at the door, someone in other countries is also getting tested 
just as much.”

Gemili also backed Sebastian Coe to turn athletics’ fortunes around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/13/sebastian-coe-british-challenge-russia-doping>
, despite the corruption inquiry by French police into former members of the 
IAAF. “Seb’s been under a lot of fire,” Gemili said. “But I know what he’s like 
and how passionate he is about athletics. I have a lot of faith in him and I 
believe he will – as best as he can – clean up the sport.”
 