
Adam Buxton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-buxton>, one half 
of BBC 6 Music's award-winning duo Adam and Joe, is to return to the digital 
station with a solo music show.

Buxton, whose Saturday morning breakfast show is on a long-term break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/dec/23/adam-joe-leave-6music-sabbatical>
 while his partner, Joe Cornish, directs a film, said his new show would 
feature his "favourite weird but accessible music". He hoped Adam and Joe would 
return later this year.

Half of the two-hour show will feature a guest talking about their own 
favourite music "and just talk generally about any other rubbish that comes up",
said Buxton on his blog today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/adamandjoe/2010/03/adam-buxtons-big-mix-tape.shtml#comments>
.

A pilot for the new show, featuring The Mighty Boosh's Julian Barratt, is 
being recorded tomorrow for broadcast this month.

"If it all goes to plan Joe and I will be back together for our show later in 
the year but until then I'm hoping to do a show on my own and this week I'll be 
recording a pilot for a weekly two-hour show with our regular producer James 
Stirling in London," Buxton said.

"It's supposed to be kind of like a compilation tape that I've made for the 
listeners with a different theme or mood each week. The show is two hours so 
it's divided into two sides with a guest joining me for an hour to add their 
own tracks and just talk generally about any other rubbish that comes up."

6 Music has been earmarked for closure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music> by BBC director general Mark 
Thompson's strategy review, prompting a huge backlash from listeners and the 
music industry.

"As you may have gathered it's been a turbulent few days for 6 Music," said 
Buxton. "Last week I was called upon to say my part on Channel 4 News though 
apart frominviting Mark Thomo Thompson out for some punching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2010/mar/03/bbc-adam-buxton-mark-thompson>
 I didn't really say anything very useful. All the stirring and important stuff 
I'd been planning went out of the window as soon as I heard the man in my 
earpiece telling me we were live in five seconds. After that it was just a 
question of not weeping or swearing."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 