
The footballer Adam Goodes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> 
will coach young Indigenous people about mental health and cultural resilience 
at the Koori youth summit on Thursday in one of his first speaking engagements 
since retiring from the AFL last year.

The former Sydney Swans player, who retired after being continually booed by 
football fans throughout the 2015 season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/sydney-swans-champion-adam-goodes-announces-retirement-from-afl>
, has banned media from attending the Q&A event, which will be attended by 180 
young Victorian Indigenous people as part of the two-day summit.

Greg Kennedy, the state coordinator of the Koori Youth Council, said that 
Goodes, a Adnyamathanha and Narungga man from South Australia, had been invited 
to speak as a “symbol for strength and standing up and success and pride” for 
the Koori community.

AFL great Adam Goodes honoured by Sydney Swans fans in delayed farewell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/afl-great-adam-goodes-honoured-by-sydney-swans-fans-in-delayed-farewell>
“We are hoping that he will be able to support the young people to stand up 
and succeed,” Kennedy said.

Kennedy, himself a Tati-Tati and Muthi Muthi man from north-west Victoria, who 
also has Noongar heritage, said that mental health and identity had been chosen 
as the themes for the summit in response to the “unacceptable levels” of youth 
suicide amongIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians>

Suicide is the leading cause of death for Indigenous people aged 15 to 35 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/08/ten-year-old-aboriginal-girl-kills-herself-in-far-north-western-australia>
 and Indigenous people in that age bracket are three times more likely to 
commit suicide than their non-Indigenous peers.

Kennedy said the national attention paid to the suicide epidemic in remote 
communities,like the recent death of a 10-year-old girl in Western Australia’s 
Kimberley region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/08/ten-year-old-aboriginal-girl-kills-herself-in-far-north-western-australia>
, often overshadowed the situation in cities and towns on the east coast, where 
the suicide rate remained high.

“We have had a lot of youth suicides in Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> recently … in the past 
three months there have been three suicides,” he told Guardian Australia.

“So there are some issues in community that are obviously a hangover from 
colonisation and these sort of things have resulted in communities sometimes 
not being as strong as they need to be to support young people.”

He said the Koori youth summit, which begins on Wednesday and will bring 
together people from metropolitan and regional areas of the state, would allow 
young people to lead the conversation about mental health and develop proposals 
with which to lobby government.

The summit also connects young people with elders and cultural leaders, a 
connection Kennedy said many of the Victorian mob was lacking.

Adam Goodes says he has reached 'closure' on final AFL season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/adam-goodes-says-he-has-reached-closure-on-final-afl-season>
“We are a state that was heavily massacred by settlers and there’s a real 
sense of young people now that [we] really, really need to bring back some of 
those things that have been taken from us,” he said.

“We have seen in the last three years a real push for a sort of cultural 
renaissance where we are really pushing hard to reconnect not only with culture 
but with different ways of thinking about the country and our place in it. Not 
just among Indigenous people, but non-Indigenous people too.”

Maddee Clark, one of the delegates at the summit, told Guardian Australia that 
she hoped the focus on mental health would see mainstream mental health 
organisations make a space for Indigenous people to join their campaigns.

Clark, a 26-year-old queer Bundjalung person from Geelong who is completing 
her PhD in Indigenous studies at Monash University, said the focus would not 
just be on racism but on issues of gender identity and sexuality, which she 
said many in the Koori community were “desperate to talk about”.

“It’s a really valuable couple of days,” she said. “It’s good for people’s 
wellbeing, it’s good for their development and it’s good for them to know that 
they have a place in the community and they are not just isolated – that the 
community supports them too.”
 