
AFL fans are beginning to realise the persistent booing of Adam Goodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> is “dehumanising”, says the 
Collingwood president and commentator, Eddie McGuire, despite another incident 
at the weekend.

Booing of the dual Brownlow medallist surfaced again on Sunday during the 
Sydney Swans’ 97-point win overSt Kilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-kilda> in Melbourne.

Small pockets of the Etihad stadium crowd could be heard jeering when the 
Sydney player gained his first possession early in the game and again after 
each of his three goals.

The continued targeting of the Indigenous champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/29/afl-great-adam-goodes-is-being-booed-across-australia-how-did-it-come-to-this>
 is a thorny problem for football administrators, who want the booing to stop 
but are reluctant to keep drawing attention to the behaviour of a minority of 
fans.

AFL: five things we learned from round 22 | Kathryn Kernohan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/31/afl-five-things-we-learned-from-round-22>
Four weeks ago Goodes took a break from the game after the booing became a 
national issue. All 18 club captains appealed to supporters to stop the 
apparent harassment of the 2014 Australian of the year.

Small-scale booing could be heard on his return in a match against Geelong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/09/adam-goodes-returns-swans-lose-to-cats-but-afl-scores-a-goal-against-racism>
, but fans have generally refrained and McGuire believes the message about the 
treatment of Goodes is finally getting through.

“I get the feeling that the football fans – and I even find it at non-Swans 
games – are starting to be a bit tentative about booing which is a good thing. 
They’re realising ‘Now hang on, there’s a bit more to this,’ ” he said.

“Yes, we want to have the boos for the blokes lining up for goal and jeering 
and all rest of it … but the bullying or dehumanising of what was going on with 
Adam, I think, has started to dissipate. I hope so. We’ll find out in the next 
few weeks. But let’s hope that’s the way it goes.”

McGuire said he had not seen Sunday’s game but heard the jeering had not been 
a major issue.

The Swans chairman, Andrew Pridham, also played down the booing, tweeting that 
St Kilda fans had been “terrific” 
<https://twitter.com/Pridhamhq/status/637922515797409792>. 

Richmond’s Dustin Martin was fined $2000 last week after making a two-fingered 
gesture to the crowd, sparking complaints of a double standard after Goodes 
escaped censure for a “war dance” at a Carlton crowd in May.

But the AFL’s chief executive, Gillon McLachlan, said last week there was no 
comparison.

“I think everyone understands what the two-finger salute is actually supposed 
to mean and what it’s about,” he told 3AW radio.

“The indigenous war dance, whatever people want to call it, it’s come out of 
an under-16-year-old Boomerangs group of kids and it was done in Indigenous 
round and it’s supposed to be one of celebration.

“I don’t think you can draw the links or the parallels.”

Fans took to Twitter during Sunday’s game to decry and downplay the booing.
Craig Radford (@Craig_Radford) 
@adambspencer <https://twitter.com/adambspencer> You're not hearing things. 
First thing the kid in front of me did when we sat down was boo Goodsie.
 <https://twitter.com/Craig_Radford/status/637864705927741440> August 30, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Craig_Radford/status/637864705927741440> Daniel Roitman 
(@danielroitman89) 
Disappointed @stkildafc <https://twitter.com/stkildafc> didn't make a 
statement about fans booing@adamroy37 <https://twitter.com/adamroy37>. Talk a 
big game about inclusiveness, here was your chance
 <https://twitter.com/danielroitman89/status/638124010534891520> August 30, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/danielroitman89/status/638124010534891520>  