
Adam Boulton <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-boulton>, British 
television's longest serving political editor, is to step down from his role at 
Sky News after 25 years.

Boulton, who turns 55 next month, is to become anchor of a new evening show 
based at Sky News' Westminster studio.

He joined Sky News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> as political 
editor when the channel launched in 1989, setting up the fledgling operation's 
lobby reporting team, and has covered five general elections and interviewed 
five prime ministers in his 25 years as political editor. He also chaired Sky's 
Leaders Debate in April 2010.

Sky News said that Boulton's as yet unnamed new show will feature "hard 
hitting interviews, insightful analysis and interactive elements."

The broadcaster did not say when the new show would launch, other than that it 
will debut "later this year".

"I relish the challenge of presenting a new evening show for Sky News," said 
Boulton. "In my career, I have been extremely lucky to have presented flagship 
breakfast, Sunday, and most recently on Boulton & Co, lunchtime shows. The 
opportunity to take on an evening programme was an offer I couldn't duck."

As well as hosting the evening programme, Boulton will take on the additional 
role of editor-at-large and will also present key set piece political events.

"I am enormously proud of the part I have played in building up Sky News' 
political operation and I am delighted I will remain a part of that in my new 
role," he added.

John Ryley, the head of Sky News, called Boulton a "giant in political 
journalism" and said a new political editor will be appointed later this year.

"He was the first television journalist to treat politics as a live, dynamic, 
ever -changing story," he said. "The arrival of Adam challenged the status quo, 
starting the Sky News Westminster operation from scratch and building it into 
the powerhouse that it is today."

Covering the aftermath of the 2010 general election, Boulton infamously lost 
his cool with Alastair Campbell <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okY3WVRnPng>, 
the former Downing Street spin doctor, defending his impartiality on-air by 
shouting "Don't tell me what I think."

Since 2011, he has presented Boulton & Co, which airs for an hour from 1pm 
weekdays.

Prior to working at Sky, Boulton was political editor at TV-am, the ITV 
breakfast segment that was replaced by GMTV at the end of 1992.

As well as TV presenting, Boulton contributes to a range of newspapers and 
magazines and has published books, including Tony's 10 years: Memories of the 
Blair Administration, and Hung Together, about the days after the inconclusive 
2010 general election from which the coalition government emerged.

The departure of Boulton will be followed by another Sky News presenter, Jeff 
Randall, who revealed last summer that he isquitting his business show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/18/jeff-randall-leaving-sky-news>.

Randall, who has fronted Jeff Randall Live on Sky News since late 2007, is to 
finish this Easter to pursue business interests.

BSkyB is currently interviewing for Randall's replacement.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 