
This Christmas there is one programme that shines out above all others – a 
show for which I would happily sacrifice a lifetime of Christmas jumpers, pigs 
in blankets and cards from people I didn't send cards to because I couldn't 
remember their children's names. On Christmas Day morning, between 10am and 
1pm, my radio will be tuned to BBC6 Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music> and I will be listening to Adam and 
Joe's Christmas Special. I can't wait.

I don't think I have ever missed any radio show as much as I have missed Adam 
and Joe's programmes for 6 Music. (The pair have been on hold since last 
January. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/dec/23/adam-joe-leave-6music-sabbatical>
) Unlike any other show I've ever loved – fromHome Truths 
<http://peel.wikia.com/wiki/Home_Truths> to Danny Baker's Morning Edition; 
Kermode and Mayo's film review toGideon Coe and Fi Glover's spell together on 
GLR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2010/oct/06/bbc-london-radio> – 
listening to Mr Buxton and Cornish was like belonging to a club.

It wasn't an exclusive club but it was a very silly one – particularly if you 
were a member of the Black Squadron, a crack team of listeners who tuned in to 
the show's first half hour and played jokes on those too lazy to listen from 
the start.

You could always just dip into Adam and Joe, but it was the regular listener 
that fully appreciated how the Queen somehow got fused with Cilla Blackto 
present a show called Blinda Data <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-tsHU2VMtsg>, 
why random people shout out "Stephen" at gigs and why Adam was so upset by the 
sheer blinding genius ofJoe's Retro Text The Nation jingle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0Nyb1X05O4>.

I doubt if there has ever been a radio show as creative.

More than anything I miss the show because like all great broadcasters Adam 
and Joe felt like friends. Their show became a part of my life: I'd regularly 
listen to the podcast as a soundtrack to long runs. What a ridiculously sight I 
must have been jogging around giggling like a chubby eejit. Had someone been 
curious as to what it was exactly that was causing this rare bout of public 
mirth they would just hear the sound oftwo middle-aged men saying 
"wuzza-wuzza-wuzza" to each other <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tAScIck4QtM>.

My sadness at the pair's absence from the digital airwaves is tempered – of 
course – by anticipation of Joe's film career, as well as Adam's own highly 
enjoyable show Adam's Big Mixtape and newsof his project with The IT Crowd 
writer Graham Linehan 
<http://www.adamandjoe.com/2010/12/12/extras-needed-for-new-adam-buxton-project-in-london-this-monday-13th-dec/>
. But selfishly I really hope they get back together for another extended 
series of radio fun.

For now, though, we have the Christmas special and if it's anything near as 
good as their Glastonbury specials earlier this year (their England v Germany 
commentary was incredible) then we're in for a treat.
 