
"It's a steep curve in the net age," says comedian Adam Buxton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-buxton>, "learning to deal with 
a new type of casual, brutal criticism from people you've never met." He 
remembers, with a queasy smile, somebody once describing him as "a smarmy 
little greased-up dwarf". But the 43-year-old is better placed to deal with 
internet obnoxiousness than most. For several years, he has staged a live 
comedy show calledBug that makes great play of the awful things people say to 
one another online. "Kids, mostly, pushing each other's buttons," as Buxton 
thinks of it, "saying the unsayable, screwing around with how social 
interaction works."

He is best loved, no doubt, for the boyish comedy created with his friend Joe 
Cornish <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joe-cornish> under the banner of 
their double act, Adam & Joe. ButBug has been an enduring solo success for 
Buxton, staged regularly since 2007 at the BFI in London and touring the UK 
this summer. I meet him in a sunny London square, just off the train from his 
home in Norfolk and a few hours before he is due on stage in west London.

Bug is nominally a showcase for quirky music videos, culled from YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> and teed up enthusiastically 
by Buxton, who is something of an aficionado. (He once directed a Radiohead 
promo.) The real fun, though, comes after each clip, when Buxton reads out some 
of the comments that have been posted about the footage. Blunt announcements, 
startling confessions, mean little snipes… Errors of logic are subtly teased 
and bad spelling highlighted, the exchanges transformed into surreal little 
plays.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgx-WBaSNrTQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgx-WBaSNrTQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fgx-WBaSNrTQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"I guess the internet has created an environment where people aren't forced to 
consider the consequences of what they say," says Buxton. "Maybe it's unlocked 
a part of people that in the past they were taught to hide. But, you know, even 
saying something like that nowadays sounds reactionary and snobby. Of course 
everyone has the right to express themselves – and people justgo for it." When 
Bug started, he recalls, he didn't imagine it would last; perhaps expected the 
churn of novel and damning internet commentary to "fizzle out". Nope!

What has fizzled, to the dismay of fans around the country, is his 6Music 
radio show with Cornish. After broadcasting on and off from 2007 to 2011, they 
stopped because Cornish launched a promising second career as a film director, 
responsible for the 2011 British sci-fi thrillerAttack the Block. Is the radio 
show gone for good? "I hope not," says Buxton. "The understanding is that we're 
just on sabbatical while Joe conquers the film world… I'd be very sad if we 
never did any more. Fingers crossed that it all goes wrong for Joe."

Were this final comment posted online it might need a winky emoticon, or 
several exclamation marks, to make clear the sarcasm. As it is, Buxton leans 
forward and says levelly into my voice recorder: "That was a joke."

Adam Buxton presents Bug Special: Radiohead 
<http://www.seetickets.com/event/adam-buxton-presents-bug-special-radiohead/royal-northern-college-of-music/705177>
 at the Royal Northern College of Music, Manchester on 16 May, andBug Fatboy 
Slim Special <http://adam-buxton.co.uk/ad/events/?event_id=68> at Brighton Dome 
on 20 May;adam-buxton.co.uk <http://adam-buxton.co.uk/ad/>
 