
Later this month, a new Adam Curtis 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/2014/02/adam-curtis-interview> film will 
be shown by the BBC. Curtis makes documentaries that are crammed with 
intoxicating ideas and unlikely connections that have earned him a glowing 
reputation, a large cult following and several Baftas.

Yet the new film is not showing on any BBC TV channel. Instead, Bitter Lake 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/adamcurtis/posts/TRAILER-TRASH>, which examines how 
the west’s experience in Afghanistan has affected political storytelling, will 
be available on iPlayer later this month. As one BBC insider says: “He’s one of 
the most talented documentary-makers the organisation has and yet it’s happy to 
allow him not to put his work on television. It’s very strange.”

It is strange, but then strangeness is a theme that is at the core of Curtis’s 
work. The trailer forBitter Lake, which is characteristically puzzling and 
alluring, can be viewed on Curtis’s personalBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> blog. It is instantly recognisable as a 
piece of the auteur-documentarian’s film-making. Weird and intriguing archive 
images and haunting ambient music are overlaid with bold statements presented 
like the titles in a conceptual artwork. “Once upon a time,” the capital letter 
writing says, “politicians told confident stories that made sense of the world. 
But then everything became chaotic and unpredictable.”

It’s a very Curtis-like claim, at once startlingly audacious and shamelessly 
vague. When was this golden era of political sense? During the cold war? Suez? 
The colonial wars? The second world war? The first world war?

Where other film-makers might feel obliged to back up such a contentious 
argument with supporting facts, Curtis has built a formidable career out of a 
more impressionistic and polemical approach to making his case. He dismisses 
much contemporary journalism as a delirious cycle of “disjointed and often 
wildly contradictory fragments of information”. But he is not free of 
contradiction himself. He disparages the emotive nature of a lot of news. “If 
you report things emotionally it immediately depoliticises them,” he has said. 
“No one gets judged, little gets fully understood.”

Yet he says of Bitter Lake: “My aim is to make something more emotional and 
involving – so it reconnects and feels more real.” It’s as though he grants 
himself special dispensation: his emotional reporting is aimed at establishing 
a greater truth, whereas other emotional reporting is a failure to confront the 
truth. In much the same way, Curtis, who performs the role of a kind of 
omniscient narrator in his films, presents himself as someone who is immune to 
the mind control that, he argues, afflicts so much of our culture.

It’s a position that has led to accusations of intellectual arrogance and 
dishonesty. As far as he is concerned, however, his work is simply a critique 
of power and, in particular, the power of ideas. As a consequence, he has often 
been described, or dismissed, as a leftwing ideologue. On the contrary, he 
says, he is inspired by the liberal sociologistMax Weber 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/638565/Max-Weber>, whose outlook 
challenged the “crude, leftwing, vulgar Marxism that says that everything 
happens because of economic forces within society”.

Curtis grew up in a leftwing household. His grandfather had stood for 
parliament as a socialist and his father, also a man of the left, was cameraman 
to the great documentary-makerHumphrey Jennings 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/people/id/453623/>. After a scholarship at 
Sevenoaks independent school, he read human sciences at Mansfield College, 
Oxford. Having begun a PhD at Oxford, where he was teaching politics, he looked 
set on an academic career. But, as he later said: “I very quickly realised I 
hated academia.”

He quit and joined the BBC training course, during which he made a “silly 
film” that compared designer clothes with the design of weapons. He says that 
the film was judged so ridiculous that he was sent to work onEsther Rantzen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/30/new-year-honours-2015-damehoods-rantzen>
’sThat’s Life, where he made films about talking dogs.

He loved the experience. It taught him “trash techniques”: jokes, plays on 
modern culture and the art of emotional storytelling. All of which he would put 
to work in his later films. By his own admission, he didn’t find his 
distinctive voice until his 1989Inside Story film The Road to Terror. It was 
meant to be about the torture and mass executions of the leftwing mujahideen in 
Iran by Ayatollah Khomeini’s forces. But he found that he was unsympathetic to 
the mujahideen and that their stories of torture did not make for gripping 
television. So instead he mixed in another story about the French Revolution. 
By his account, his BBC bosses thought he’d taken leave of his senses and 
wanted to shelve the film. The documentary, and perhaps Curtis’s career, was 
rescued by Alan Yentob, the then controller of BBC2, who loved it.

A series of critically lauded films followed, including the six-part Pandora’s 
Box, about the menace of technocratic rationality, the four-part The Mayfair Se
t, a brilliant essay on the casino capitalists of the Clermont Club, and the 
four-partThe Century of the Self, an elaborate disquisition on how Sigmund 
Freud’s theories were put to use by the public relations industry to exercise 
consumer and political control. Each of them looked at how ideas from the past 
mutated and were manipulated by those in power or seeking power. They were rich 
in archival footage, which was often deployed to create an atmosphere – ironic 
yet unsettling – rather than to illustrate an argument.

“He’s been quite overt in his hatred of the BBC,” says the insider, “and yet 
no one seems to mind. Instead he enjoys a creative freedom at the BBC that 
exists for a minority of one.” Curtis works alone, often buried in the 
archives, unearthing emotive material or researching obscure individuals whose 
influential stories have been overlooked in the grand narratives of history.

His technique reached its critical apotheosis with The Power of Nightmares 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0430484/>, his 2004 three-part series that 
explored the parallels between neoconservatism and Islamism and argued that the 
idea of a globalised network of jihadis was largely a figment of the 
neoconservative imagination. So successful was Curtis in getting his message 
across that when the BBC made another documentary – one that actually grappled 
with the reality of the jihadist threat – its reporters were repeatedly told 
that an organised terrorist network was “an illusion”, sleeper cells a 
“fantasy” and al-Qaida was “made-up”. As the producer ofThe New al-Qaeda 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/4683403.stm> dryly noted: Curtis’s 
“myth-busting polemic had become truth”. But in fact what Curtis had created 
was another myth and one that was viciously exploded on7 July 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/july7>. The bombs that went off in London on 
that day were the product of a terrorist network that supposedly did not exist.

The contradictions of Curtis’s method proved to be the collateral damage. If 
his aim was to reveal the complex web of lies, distortions and fictions that 
motivated the neoconservatives, he did so by superimposing his own creative 
theory as journalistic fact. He had attacked myth-making by making his own 
superbly crafted myths.

A further irony is that Curtis believes our culture has become pessimistic and 
backward-looking, constantly referring to the past because it is too afraid to 
face up to the future. Yet his films continually dredge the past.

To his credit, he has acknowledged this tendency. As he told the curator and 
criticHans Ulrich Obrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/23/hans-ulrich-obrist-art-curator>
: “In some ways I’m just as guilty. What I do is not so different – using all 
sorts of fragments from the past to examine the present.”

Where Curtis’s optimism does shine through, though, is in his willingness to 
embrace new and different forms. He has worked with Massive Attack to create a 
“gilm” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/30/massive-attack-adam-curtis-manchester-festival>
, part gig, part film, and collaborated with Damon Albarn and the theatre 
companyPunchdrunk <http://punchdrunk.com/> to produce an interactive theatrical 
spectacle across five floors of an abandoned Manchester office block.

His interest in the iPlayer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> 
appears to spring from the same sensibility. He says: “It’s a place you can go 
to experiment and try out new ideas.”

But it might also be a place in which, without too much scrutiny, Curtis can 
return to over-familiar territory and diminishing tropes. PerhapsBitter Lake 
will be a return to form. What’s certain is that Curtis possesses an 
extraordinarily fertile mind, a dazzlingly acute eye and a powerful gift as a 
film-maker and communicator. That’s enough to suggest that his rightful place 
is on television.

THE CURTIS FILE

Born Kevin Adam Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis> 
in 1955. His father, Martin Curtis, was a cinematographer who worked with the 
documentary-maker Humphrey Jennings.

Best of times He won his first Bafta in 1992 for Pandora’s Box, the series 
that really sealed his reputation. He won another Bafta forThe Power of 
Nightmares, which was also screened and lauded in an edited version at the 
Cannes film festival.

Worst of times He didn’t much enjoy his stint in academia before he joined the 
BBC. And although he rejected the idea that the 7/7 bombings undermined his 
thesis inThe Power of Nightmares, serious questions were raised about his 
journalistic method.

What he says “It’s always puzzled me that one of the most privileged, pampered 
generations in the history of the world can go from optimism to pessimism so 
quickly. And I still haven’t worked out quite why they’ve done it.”

What others say “Adam Curtis believed that 200,000 Guardian readers watching 
BBC2 could change the world. But this was a fantasy. In fact he had created the 
televisual equivalent of a drunken late-night Wikipedia binge with pretensions 
to narrative coherence.”Ben Woodhams 
<https://benwoodhams.wordpress.com/2011/06/30/going-viral/>, YouTube parodist.
 