
An unexpected delight among the Wikileaks diplomatic cables has been the 
revelation of Prince Andrew's bullish patriotism: "The Americans don't 
understand geography. Never have. In the UK we have the best geography teachers 
in the world!" There's something almost Soviet about the unhesitating 
assertiveness of that last sentence. You suspect that pretty much any subject 
would trigger a similar response. Our supermarket cashiers are unrivalled! 
British modesty is second to none! Al Murray and the beery blast of periodic 
football frenzy aside, this is a voice we are not much used to hearing. English 
patriotism is typically quieter, more private, an intimate, affectionate family 
feeling for a place and its idiosyncrasies.

This hasn't always been the case. English patriotism used to be thunderingly 
imperial and for a while in the 1920s and 30s some of it was genuinely fascist, 
mystical about the English land and folk, antisemitic, eugenicist and openly 
admiring of Hitler's Germany. Those patriots appear in two of the books I read 
as a judge for this year'sGuardian first book award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardianfirstbookaward>. Ned Beauman's 
prodigiously clever and energetically entertaining novel,Boxer, Beetle, is 
astringently funny about the absurdity, dreaminess and strange aggressive 
vitality of the English fascists. They do ask for it, these people. Here's a 
description of one fascist landowner, Gerard Wallop, as seen by the physicist 
Freeman Dyson while a schoolboy working the harvest during the war: "The fat 
young man [Wallop] owned the land . . . and he came and lectured us about blood 
and soil and the mystical virtues of the open-air life. He had visited Germany, 
where his friend Adolf Hitler had organised the schoolkids to work on the land 
in a movement that he calledKraft Durch Freude, in English 'Strength through 
Joy.'"

Partly comical, not entirely. Gerard Wallop, Viscount Lymington, used 
parliamentary questions to make decisive interventions against the possible 
admittance into Britain of refugees from Germany. Because of that fat young man 
it is entirely possible that Jews who might have escaped and lived were left to 
be murdered by the Nazis.

In Alexandra Harris's wonderfully rich work of English cultural history, 
Romantic Moderns, which took the prize this week, Viscount Lymington makes a 
brief appearance as a friend and correspondent of TS Eliot, who was himself 
preoccupied with the decline of English rural life. At Faber, Eliot was 
publishing a number of books on agricultural matters he hoped would be a 
bulwark against this loss of knowledge and community. Eliot's poetry of the 
period also connects itself to "the life of significant soil". Twenty years 
earlier,The Waste Land's polyglot collage had been urban and international and 
obviously frightened by the shadow of its own louche cosmopolitanism. Now in the
Four Quartets, Eliot was centring his spiritual being in his ancestral village 
of East Coker where the ghosts of the related dead were timelessly present.

Harris's book tells the story of English art's journey away from pure 
abstractionism to a tactile, particularising concern with the local and the 
contingent, with "stones and leaves". The prophet of high modernism in the 
visual arts had been the hugely influential Roger Fry, about whom Virginia 
Woolf wrote a warily admiring biography. Soon, though, English artists were 
defining themselves in opposition to his absolutist theories and few were 
painting pictures he would have liked. Perhaps it had something to do with the 
weather. Fry complained about the English climate. "All the trees have 
collected gloomy inky shadows around them and I want clear-cut shapes and 
colours [. . .] No one ought to try to be an artist in England." Fry preferred 
the south of France, its strong, dry light better suited to the analysis of 
solid forms in the manner of CÃ©zanne.

Meanwhile, John Piper, Eric Ravilious and others dwelt in the shadowy 
dampness, the changing clouds and blustery shine of England. The novelists of 
the period also relished good bad weather.Romantic Moderns quotes these 
gorgeous sentences (that themselves quote Tennyson) from Stevie Smith'sNovel On 
Yellow Paper: "How richly compostly loamishly sad were those Victorian days . . 
. How I love those damp Victorian troubles. The woods decay, the woods decay 
and fall, The vapours weep their burthen to the ground, Man comes and tills the 
field and lies beneath, And after many a summer dies the swan. Yes, always 
someone dies, someone weeps, in tune with the laurels dripping, and the tap 
dripping, and the spout dripping into the water-butt, and the dim gas 
flickering greenly in the damp conservatory."

This England is a place of places half-concealed, of private melancholy and a 
richly rotting, layered history.Romantic Moderns explores the shared concerns 
of widely differing artists, from Paul Nash to Evelyn Waugh, Benjamin Britten 
to Powell and Pressburger, all of whom are invested in the particularity of 
English places and stories. What accumulates is the image of an art tradition 
that is gentle and attentive, that does not generalise or reduce, that rejoices 
in eccentricity and difference.Romantic Moderns helps us to recognise the 
contribution that English art has made to a culture which, by and large, finds 
laughable the fat young fascist with his simple-minded theories of blood and 
soil.
 