
Hypernormalisation: Adam Curtis plots a path from Syria to Trump, via Jane 
Fonda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/15/hypernormalisation-adam-curtis-trump-putin-syria>
To be honest, I find the best documentary reporting these days in things that 
don’t really classify as documentaries. Things likeSouth Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/south-park>, movies like The Big Short
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/the-big-short-review-crash-riveting-steve-carell-christian-bale>
 andAmerican Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/16/american-honey-review-mark-kermode>
, and theThis Is England series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/this-is-england>. They are all about 
portraying the real world but they do it in ways that are surprising and 
imaginative. They make you look at things in new ways. Whereas traditional 
documentaries seem a bit stuck. I think this has happened because most of them 
have been moved off TV and into the art house cinema circuit. As a result they 
tend to play to what their audience already know – reinforcing their beliefs. 
Like the fact that bankers are bad. Or climate change threatens the world.

Documentaries shouldn’t just reflect the world, they should try and explain 
why reality is like it is. That’s what The Big Short does: it explains why 
bankers became bad by taking you into the strange, exhilarating world of 
finance that rose up in the past 20 years, and you understand emotionally why 
they did what they did.

American Honey takes you into the feelings of a girl travelling through the 
United States while giddily in love. You see modern America through her intense 
feelings. But again and again the film pulls the rug out from under your feet – 
scenes never play out as you expect. And you begin to look at American society 
in a new and fresh way – unlike the slew of “Trump is a monster” films that 
just reinforce the present liberal isolation from reality.

American Honey review – on the highway to sell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/13/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold>
But the true genius is South Park. Every week they report on the world in a 
really original way. Their recent shows have been all about social media and 
internet trolling – and it is just wonderful. They make you realise how strange 
and absurd that world is. But the show I would nominate is the three-parter 
they did called Imaginationland. It is about how terrorists take over all of 
our imaginations – and then our imaginations run out of control with dark 
horror. So the US government decide to nuke our imaginations. But Kyle from 
South Park confronts the government and makes an epic speech about how what we 
imagine inside our heads is more real, and has had more effect on the world 
throughout history than us as just physical beings.

The whole story is a wonderful attack on the narrow rational utilitarianism of 
our age that both left and right have bought into. It’s saying: you can make 
the world anything you want it to be. At its heart, South Park has a touching 
faith in human beings. That despite their absurdities and flaws, people have 
the capacity to create a better world. In our conservative times that is the 
most radical message of all.
 