
Adam Giles’ deputy has given his support to claims that Four Corners conspired 
to damage the Country Liberal party’s election chances when it aired the Don 
Dale footage but still supports the royal commission established to investigate 
it.

It comes as the opposition leader, Michael Gunner, issues an apology for 
saying Giles was “off the reservation”, claiming he was unaware the phrase had 
racist connotations.

On Friday morning the deputy chief minister of the Northern Territory, Peter 
Styles, backed his leader’s claims that Four Corners had aired its reporton 
mistreatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 of juvenile detaineesto give Labor a “leg up” in the NT election campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/adam-giles-says-abc-report-on-don-dale-juvenile-detention-aired-to-damage-him>
.

Styles said Four Corners had “cherry-picked” information, ignored the victims 
of crime and corrections staff, and suggested the show had breached the ABC 
charter.

Adam Giles says ABC aired report on Don Dale juvenile detention to damage him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/adam-giles-says-abc-report-on-don-dale-juvenile-detention-aired-to-damage-him>
He said he had recently found out some of the videos were shown to NT courts 
and that corrections officers were acquitted.

“I’ve spoken to a number of prison officers and police officers since, and 
when you look at what’s going on in the short bits [Four Corners] has shown, 
they have followed procedure,” Styles told Mix 104.9.

“I’ve also spoken to the commissioner for corrections who said he finds it’s 
appalling and one-sided and hasn’t shown what they probably should have shown.”

Styles dismissed a suggestion he was again changing the CLP message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/08/adam-giles-juvenile-detention-report-northern-territory-royal-commission>
, this time from the “line of attack” that the worst of the incidents happened 
under the former Labor government, to now saying they had been dealt with by 
the courts and the report was a beat up.

He said he and the government welcomed the royal commission but also 
questioned the timing of the episode.

“I’m told they got hold of [the footage] quite some time ago,” he said. “To 
release it just before an election, you’ve got to question the timing.”

When asked how he and Giles could say on one hand that the bulk of the footage 
was from the time of the Labor government, but on the other that the Four 
Corners program was released to damage the CLP, Styles said it was about “the 
whole story” and the fact Four Corners was aired close to the election.

He was also asked why the government supported the royal commission if it 
believed the report was a conspiracy between the ABC and Labor.

“Because a royal commission comes out and looks at the whole story,” he said. 
“They will look at everything. They won’t cherrypick.”

Styles again questioned the timing, defended the corrections staff as 
following procedure, and questioned where the union was.

Natasha Fyles, Labor spokeswoman for corrections, said the CLP was shifting 
blame.

“Now it’s a conspiracy theory, and this is a hallmark of Adam Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-giles>,” she said.


“He went out the next morning and called for a royal commission, and now it’s 
a conspiracy. The whole thing just doesn’t make sense.”

Adam Giles suggests lawyers who spoke to Four Corners had political motives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/adam-giles-suggests-lawyers-who-spoke-to-four-corners-had-political-motives>
Labor had accepted responsibility for what happened under its government but 
Giles had not, she said.

Styles said the government took responsibility and that was why it supported 
the royal commission.

The heated debate followed comments by Giles on Thursday that Four Corners had 
deliberately timed its report to give Labor a “leg up” ahead of the 27 August 
election.

Four Corners said Giles’ accusation was false and outrageous.


Giles told reporters on Thursday: “That’s my opinion.” 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/breaking-news/abc-accused-of-politicising-nt-detention/news-story/9ccbb15f51f51c4a1196534e8f73edbd>

Four Corners had “put a target on the back of myself and my colleagues and 
those in the corrections industry”

“I’ve been particularly targeted,” he said. “I’ve had death threats, other 
colleagues of mine have had death threats over a report of something that was 
done six years ago.”

Giles, who is Indigenous, had accused the program of creating racial tension 
in the Northern Territory, and Labor of using it against him. He also 
criticised Gunner for his “off the reservation” statement.

“Four Corners made me and my government look racist,” said Giles on Facebook. 
“We aren’t. In fact we bust our guts to restore the balance between Aboriginal 
and non-Aboriginal in the NT.

“NT Labor leader Michael Gunner even went so far as to refer to me as being 
‘off the reservation’, on ABC of course. What does that mean, Michael?”

Gunner apologised for the comment, which he said he had used to express that 
Giles was “out of touch” with his claims of political motivation.


“I have since learned that the phrase has racist connotations. I was honestly 
not aware of that,” he said on social media.

“I will never use that phrase ever again. I genuinely apologise to Adam, and 
anyone else hurt by my using the phrase.”
 