
Perri Shakes-Drayton has flown back to the UK to get the left knee she injured 
during Thursday's 400m hurdles final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/15/world-athletics-championships-athletics>
 fully assessed. The news is a painful blow not only to Shakes-Drayton but for 
the chances of Britain's women of winning gold in the 4x400m relay.

That said, the 4x400m relay team of Eilidh Child, Shana Cox, Margaret Adeoye 
and Christine Ohuruogu looked highly impressive as they qualified for Friday's 
final in a time of 3min 25.39sec, exactly two seconds clear of second-placed 
Nigeria. But the usual suspects – Russia, United States and Jamaica – all 
qualified in even faster times, and it promises to be a battle royale on Friday 
evening.

Afterwards Ohuruogu expressed her sympathy for Shakes-Drayton, who finished 
seventh in the 400m hurdles final after injuring her knee on the first bend.

"It is a shame Perri's not here. We really are going to miss her," said 
Ohuruogu, whowon the 400m final in stunning style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/12/christine-ohuruogu-world-championships>
 on Monday night. "But we have to stay here and get the job done. That's what 
we're here for. We wish her a speedy recovery."

Ohuruogu dismissed suggestions that the team would be significantly weakened 
without Shakes-Drayton, adding: "It's a really strong team. I know everybody 
has been looking forward to this and we're ready for tomorrow."

There was more encouraging news for Britain in the morning session as all 
three men qualified for the 200m semi-finals. Particularly impressive wasAdam 
Gemili <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili>, who lowered his 
personal best by 0.13sec in winning his heat in 20.17 – a time that put him 
fifth on the British all-time list.

"I knew I could run faster than 20.30sec which was my previous PB but I didn't 
quite believe it," said Gemili. "I had to look across the track to check. When 
I realised it was me I was over the moon."

James Ellington, who was also victorious in winning his heat in 20.55, said he 
was stunned by Gemili's performance. "That's a ridiculous time," he said. "I 
was taking the glory for the moment and then I saw that time and was like: 
'Jesus, I've got to step up again.' I'm really glad for him. If we get a decent 
lane draw in the semis we'll have a fighting chance."

Meanwhile Delano Williams was also happy after finishing second behind Usain 
Bolt – who he has occasionally trained with this summer at Brunel University – 
in 20.72.

After his first performance in a British vest since switching allegiances from 
the Turks & Caicos Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/24/delano-williams-team-gb-world-championships>
 earlier this summer, Williams said: "I had a bit of a joke with Usain. He's 
actually calling me right now, telling me congratulations. It's been good – 
he's been motivating me through all of this, so thank you to him. Thank you to 
everybody in the GB team here. It's been great running in a GB vest.

"I wasn't really trying to beat him because he would just probably have turned 
it on. I was just taking it really easy and doing my thing."

Bolt, who patted Williams on the back in the mixed zone, said that he had 
recovered from the exertions ofwinning the 100m final on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/11/usain-bolt-100m-moscow-world-championships>
. "I'm not a morning person, but I'm feeling good," he said. "My foot's better, 
I've worked on it over the four days so I'm feeling good."

Tiffany Porter also qualified for the semi-finals by winning her 100m heat in 
12.72sec.

Afterwards Porter – who made it through in the fourth fastest time behind the 
American favourite Brianna Rollins, who ran 12.55, and Australia's Olympic 
champion Sally Pearson, who posted a season's best 12.62 – said she felt she 
could win gold.

"It was just a matter of working off the cobwebs and just focusing on running 
a clean race and qualifying, that's the most important thing and I'm happy I 
was able to do that," she said. "The main focus this whole season has been 
here, the world championships, so hopefully I can put my races together and 
come out victorious."
 