
Earliest TV memory?

I remember having an ironic conversation about The Flumps, which was a 
stop-motion kids show; they were essentially balls of fur with eyes stuck on 
them. It was mid-afternoon pre-school stuff, but I would watch it anyway 
because I was such a waster. I must have been about 11 or 12 watching The 
Flumps, and then went to a party and had a conversation with someone about how 
shit The Flumps were. We didn’t get to the point where we covered the fact that 
maybe part of the reason is because they’re aimed at toddlers and we were 10 
years too old.

Unmissable show?

I’m A Celebrity… Get Me Out Of Here! It’s peculiarly life-affirming; I end up 
really liking all the people in there. I’d love to go on that show. I think 
people think I’m being ironic, but I’m not.

I cried when…

Sometimes you see people that you like so much on TV that it makes you weepy. 
It’s weird. I don’t know what it is. Those ladies onGogglebox who live in 
Brixton; I just think: “I love you so much, I want to be your friend, and I 
want the world to be populated by people like you.”

Bring back… 




Channel 4 used to run lots of late-night shows about video art. There was one 
calledMirrorball, which was profiles of video directors, like Chris Cunningham. 
No one else was bothering to investigate them.

Pitch us a TV show

The show me and Joe always used to pitch was Adam & Joe’s Very Good Time. We 
would just travel round the world and have a very good time. They’d film us in 
first class having a very good time, and then we’d go to Hawaii and we’d have a 
really, really good time. I suppose it would be interesting to go out to 
somewhere like Syria . But I think that would make people very angry for a lot 
of reasons. I’m not saying that us flying around first class everywhere 
wouldn’t also make some people angry, but we at least would be having a very 
good time.

Adam Buxton’s Shed Of Christmas, Tue, 9.30pm, Sky Arts 1
 