
Coalition opposition to Safe Schools LGBTI program 'based in homophobia'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/20/coalition-opposition-to-safe-schools-lgbti-program-based-in-homophobia-say-greens>
Greens MP Adam Bandt has launched a crowdfunding campaign to buy schools 
rainbow gay pride flags in the wake of dramatic changes to theSafe Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/safe-schools> LGBTI anti-bullying 
program.

In a Facebook post on Friday, Bandt said: “Today Malcolm Turnbull 
disgracefully caved into the conservative brotherhood and gutted ‪Safe Schools.”

“We’re working with parents & students from local schools in Melbourne to fly 
the rainbow flag at their school as a powerful symbol of support for LGBTIQ 
young people. Can you chip in to help make this happen?”

The post links to a Greens crowdfunding website 
<https://melbourne.nationbuilder.com/safeschools> which asks for donations of 
between $35 and $500.

On Friday, the Turnbull government announced changes to cut Safe Schools 
lesson content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/turnbull-government-unveils-dramatic-changes-to-safe-schools-program>
, restricting it to secondary schools, shifting the program to a government 
website, and removing all links to other material and sites. Students will also 
require parental consent to participate and schools will need parent-body 
consent before opting to use its materials.

Bandt told Guardian Australia young people coming to terms with their 
sexuality and identity were “hearing hate and slander” from conservative 
opponents of the Safe Schools program.

“By proudly raising a rainbow flag at their school, teachers, parents and 
students are showing LGBTIQ young people that they are supported, accepted and 
loved,” he said.

Bandt said he’d had a “good deal of interest” from students and parents across 
Melbourne who were appalled by the Safe Schools backdown.

I wrote the Safe Schools program Tony Abbott. It's vital and it changes lives 
| Chris Bush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/i-wrote-the-safe-schools-lgbti-program-tony-abbott-its-vital-and-it-changes-lives>
“A number of schools in Melbourne participate in the program and I am hopeful 
that they will get behind parents and students who want to raise the rainbow 
flag in support of Safe Schools.”

Bandt went to Fitzroy high school on Monday and presented the school with a 
rainbow flag, which it will display in support of LGBTI young people.

Burwood Girls high school, in Sydney’s inner west, has raised a rainbow flag 
every year since 2013.

Principal Mia Kumar told Guardian Australia the reason Burwood Girls raises 
the flag is because it “celebrates diversity and we want to create a learning 
environment where all students feel valued and can achieve their best”.

The changes to Safe Schools came two days after one of parliament’s biggest 
opponents of the program, Queensland MPGeorge Christensen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/23/george-christensen-seeks-contributors-to-new-war-on-radical-islam-website>
,accused a professor linked to the anti-bullying program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/george-christensen-accuses-safe-schools-advocate-of-promoting-paedophilia>
 of being an advocate of paedophilia.
 