
The Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> chief minister, 
Adam Giles, has gone back on an earlier commitment to enact the Safe Schools 
program, saying he supported the anti-bullying measures but not those which 
groomed children’s sexuality.

Giles had been addressing a people’s forum debate before Saturday’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/20/northern-territory-election-labor-to-reap-benefit-of-chaotic-clp-rule>
, which largely focused on how Territorians could trust either party to govern.

Giles said a CLP government would not introduce the Safe Schools anti-bullying 
program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/20/coalition-opposition-to-safe-schools-lgbti-program-based-in-homophobia-say-greens>
, but at an untelevised debateorganised by the NT council of social services 
(NTCoss) last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/16/adam-giles-says-former-speaker-did-a-terrible-job-on-abortion-drug-ru486-bill>
 he and opposition leader Michael Gunner had both said they would.

Turnbull government unveils dramatic changes to Safe Schools program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/turnbull-government-unveils-dramatic-changes-to-safe-schools-program>
When asked by Guardian Australia for clarification after Thursday’s remark, 
Giles said the context at the NTCoss was about bullying.

“But the context tonight was about: do you support grooming kids in their 
sexuality. I do not support that and that component of the Safe Schools program 
will not be brought into the Northern Territory while I’m there.”

“The Country Liberals will not be supporting the sexuality component of the 
Safe Schools program but we will support anti-bullying,” he said.

Gunner told the forum a Labor government would introduce the Safe Schools 
program or similar, to address the high rates of suicide in the Northern 
Territory.

He said he did not share concerns voiced elsewhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/george-christensen-accuses-safe-schools-advocate-of-promoting-paedophilia>
 about the content of the program and its related materials.

Speaking after the debate, Gunner said the Territory’s children needed 
certainty and looking after.

“As a leader of our community we need to make sure vulnerable kids in our 
schools are safe from bullying. We know one of the tragic consequences of that 
is suicide and I think whichever government gets elected needs to provide 
protection for our kids who are vulnerable.”

The people’s forum, held at Darwin’s Sky City casino saw questions from 50 
undecided voters on topics ranging from environmental protection, jobs, 
privatisation, child protection, tourism, and trust.

In answer to concerns about unannounced asset privatisation during the last 
term, Giles pledged he would resign if a CLP government sold the Power and 
Water Corporation. In response Gunner said he simply did not believe him.

When asked why people should trust either party, Giles sought to criticise 
Labor for not releasing its costings,despite the full costings having come out 
earlier that day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/labor-win-in-northern-territory-would-mean-delay-or-cuts-of-223m-in-projects>
. In the bizarre exchange Giles repeatedly rejected Gunner’s objections and 
said there had been nothing released to the public.

Earlier on Thursday the treasury department released its analysis of both 
parties’ costings. The release coincided with Labor’s figures and a full media 
briefing. The media had also sought responses to the costings from Giles’s 
office.The CLP had released two pages on Tuesday to a select group of media. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/24/northern-territory-election-voters-forced-to-wait-for-fully-analysed-costings>

Almost a third of the audience remained undecided at the end of the people’s 
forum, but for those who did make up their minds, 58% supported Labor, and 12% 
supported the CLP.

Both sides pledged to work more closely with non-government organisations to 
address troubled youth who were coming into contact with the justice system.

Giles also said governments were reluctant to make tough decisions about child 
protection when it comes to those at risk. He said as soon as he talked about 
the tough decisions he was accused of creating another stolen generation.

“I know there are kids mistreated in the Northern Territory who shouldn’t be 
in the family settings they’re in now. We work as hard as possible to try and 
repatriate those kids in the community and keep them in the family. We work 
very hard to try and keep them in their extended family or cultural context,” 
he said.

He said the royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/03/an-operational-matter-dylan-voller-could-be-restrained-in-chair-again-says-adam-gilesw>
 would look at what he considered was the most important issue of child 
protection policies in the Northern Territory and he would take their advice.

Gunner said he recognised Giles wasn’t trying to create another stolen 
generation but he wanted to have a policy debate.

He pointed to 10,000 notifications each year to the child protection system, 
but said many were not serious enough to trigger a child protection response, 
and said government had to assist families at the early intervention stages and 
that wasn’t happening.

The Northern Territory election will be held on Saturday. 
 