
For the first time in two years, Simonds Stadium was sold out as more than 
28,000 AFL fans turned out to Geelong, about 75km south-west of Melbourne, to 
watch the Cats take on theSydney Swans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-swans> and the return of Adam Goodes 
to the game.

It was hard to tell if they were there owing to the focus on the Swans and 
Goodes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes>over the past fortnight, 
or purely to cheer on their respective teams. But what was clear was the 
message from both teams to the crowd: barrack with respect.

Respect for Goodes but Selwood steals show as Cats beat Swans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/08/bulldogs-power-swans-goodes-geelong-cats>
As fireworks erupted, the players ran together through one banner emblazoned 
with the words “fairness, unity and respect”. Then there was the pre-match 
video from Geelong where players delivered the same message to the gathering 
crowd. On each side of the field behind the goalposts, Cats and Swans 
supporters held up the same sign, one red, one navy blue: “Be a Goodes sport. 
Say no to racism.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fadam-goodes-returns-swans-lose-to-cats-but-afl-scores-a-goal-against-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c7dd350d88a635fcd160eafcf912c768efb1f05%2F0_137_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Goodes%20returns%3A%20Swans%20lose%20to%20Cats%20but%20AFL%20scores%20a%20goal%20against%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fadam-goodes-returns-swans-lose-to-cats-but-afl-scores-a-goal-against-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Goodes%20returns%3A%20Swans%20lose%20to%20Cats%20but%20AFL%20scores%20a%20goal%20against%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fadam-goodes-returns-swans-lose-to-cats-but-afl-scores-a-goal-against-racism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c7dd350d88a635fcd160eafcf912c768efb1f05%2F0_137_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Cats fans show their support for Adam Goodes during Saturday’s match. 
Photograph: Michael Dodge/AFL Media/Getty Images 
It would have been difficult for Goodes not to have felt under pressure. But 
he should have felt more welcomed than nervous, with an overwhelming show of 
support for him despite thefew critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/30/shane-warne-denies-adam-goodes-booing-is-racist-and-twitter-reacts>
 who weighed in. Goodes felt compelled to sit out last week’s game as crowd 
taunts and cruel commentary peaked, but since then,expressions of solidarity  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/01/scg-afl-adam-goodes-swans>
towards the former Australian of the year have come in thick and fast.

The crowd, though not perfect, largely took heed of the call to be good sports 
on Saturday night. The bulk of any disappointment felt by the two-time Brownlow 
medallist and Indigenous ambassador would be owing to the result and not the 
audience, with Sydney ultimately going down to Geelong by 32 points.

Adam Goodes returns to AFL: Geelong Cats v Sydney Swans – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/live/2015/aug/08/adam-goodes-returns-to-afl-geelong-cats-v-sydney-swans>
There were a significant few hoping to rile up the crowd: on a ground 
dominated by Geelong fans seeing their team play on home turf, at times cries 
of “sook” and “harden up” could be heard as Goodes approached the boundary.

Kylie Wilmot, a Swans supporter who stuck out in the sea of navy blue, told 
Guardian Australia the sporadic taunts directed at Goodes were disappointing, 
but conceded: “The response to Goodes has been vastly better than it has been 
over the past few weeks. I’m just so happy to see him back out there, I don’t 
think it’s good for any supporter of any club to have seen someone as 
hardworking as Goodes sitting out.”

Lisa Cork, also barracking for the Swans, said she had noticed Cats fans 
gently turning on their own with pleas to “shush” at the rare times their peers 
had resorted to boos, even though their booing may not have been a dig at 
Goodes directly.

Stan Grant: I can tell you how Adam Goodes feels. Every Indigenous person has 
felt it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
“A few people have reacted like that,” she said.

As the game began, a subdued, almost eerie atmosphere came over the ground, 
according to members of the Melbourne branch of the official Sydney Swans cheer 
squad. “It’s subdued out there, it’s tense,” said Debbie Budge. “You can tell 
the Swans are nervous.”

Her cheer buddy, Steve Pola, agreed. The Swans seemed nervous and overly eager 
to pass the ball to Goodes, he said. “It’s a strange atmosphere ... [but] 
Geelong are a polite crowd, a respectful crowd,” he said.

The tension lingered for the first quarter but lifted as the game entered the 
second, at which point the Swans were dominating in possessions and leading the 
Cats. A goal from Goodes late in the first quarter helped boost the team and 
their fans, and the crowd reaction as he scored was aswould be expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/live/2015/aug/08/adam-goodes-returns-to-afl-geelong-cats-v-sydney-swans#block-55c5cf1be4b0901d8d6f249d>
 from a Geelong home game.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fadam-goodes-returns-swans-lose-to-cats-but-afl-scores-a-goal-against-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b35f34d5fc29e5add866f73aaf350fede9ed770%2F0_37_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Goodes%20returns%3A%20Swans%20lose%20to%20Cats%20but%20AFL%20scores%20a%20goal%20against%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fadam-goodes-returns-swans-lose-to-cats-but-afl-scores-a-goal-against-racism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Goodes%20returns%3A%20Swans%20lose%20to%20Cats%20but%20AFL%20scores%20a%20goal%20against%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F09%2Fadam-goodes-returns-swans-lose-to-cats-but-afl-scores-a-goal-against-racism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b35f34d5fc29e5add866f73aaf350fede9ed770%2F0_37_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Adam Goodes walks off at half time as fans hold signs showing support for the 
Indigenous Sydney Swans player. Photograph: Michael Dodge/AFL Media/Getty Images
That some people, however, were less than impressed with Goodes, was 
impossible to ignore. Some maintained a strong level of antagonism towards him. 
A few used derogatory language to describe him, though all rejected any 
suggestion their views were associated with racism.

When pressed, their reasoning revolved around a belief that Goodes was an 
attention seeker, which seemed odd since it was the crowd and their booing, not 
Goodes, that ensured all attention was on him for the past few weeks.

“He’s brought the game into disrepute,” said Geelong supporter Daniel Kent. 

“He’s always trying to make it all about him. There are 71 other Aboriginal 
players and you don’t see them getting booed or making it about race if they 
do.”

But Brett Mollison was at the Swans versus West Coast match a couple of weeks 
back when thesaga began 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/29/afl-great-adam-goodes-is-being-booed-across-australia-how-did-it-come-to-this>
 as the booing of Goodes reached a crescendo, and, in a show of support for his 
teammate,Lewis Jetta threw an imaginary spear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/26/lewis-jetta-sticking-up-for-adam-goodes-with-war-dance-celebration>
 at the crowd. Mollison said it was awful to witness the way Goodes was treated 
throughout that game.

“The booing was unlike anything I’ve heard,” he said. “I wanted it to be over. 
It was terrible. I just wanted to crowd to shut up and be respectful.”

For most the part, however, the crowd on Saturday night was fair, he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fit-was-just-a-game-afl-star-adam-goodes-returns-to-the-sydney-swans-for-geelong&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F9%2F1439134092167%2FKP_384146_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20booing%20over%3F%20AFL%20star%20Adam%20Goodes%20returns%20to%20the%20Sydney%20Swans%20at%20Geelong%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fit-was-just-a-game-afl-star-adam-goodes-returns-to-the-sydney-swans-for-geelong>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20booing%20over%3F%20AFL%20star%20Adam%20Goodes%20returns%20to%20the%20Sydney%20Swans%20at%20Geelong%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fit-was-just-a-game-afl-star-adam-goodes-returns-to-the-sydney-swans-for-geelong&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F9%2F1439134092167%2FKP_384146_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Adam Goodes returns to the Sydney Swans at Geelong.Link to video  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/aug/10/it-was-just-a-game-afl-star-adam-goodes-returns-to-the-sydney-swans-for-geelong>
Goodes may not have been proud of his team’s performance. Their second half 
was a mess. But supporters believe he should be proud of theconversation about 
racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/03/let-this-conversation-over-adam-goodes-inspire-us-to-push-for-a-final-settlement>
 that has resulted from his speaking out and the awareness that has been raised 
about the ongoing pain and harm racism leaves in its wake.

As the journalist Stan Grant explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
 in a comment piece for Guardian Australia: “To Adam’s ears, the ears of so 
many Indigenous people, these boos are a howl of humiliation. A howl that 
echoes across two centuries of invasion, dispossession and suffering.”

And the chairman of Tony Abbott’s Indigenous Advisory Council, Warren Mundine, 
was so affected by the experience of Goodes that he shared the impact of racism 
on his own life in a piece for the Spectator, while highlighting Goodes’ 
charitable work with Indigenous people and the broader community.

“Goodes’ professional achievements and charitable activities are easily on par 
with Ita Buttrose, Geoffrey Rush, Lee Kernaghan and other winners from the 
sports and entertainment industries,”Mundine wrote 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/australia/australia-features/9596932/sledging-takes-its-toll/>
.

“For Goodes’ sake I hope the booing stops. But if it doesn’t, he should feel 
no less proud of his achievements. And Australians should be no less proud of 
him.”

Grant and Mundine were just two among an army of supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/aug/05/adam-goodes-flashmob-melbourne-federation-square-video>
 who felt empowered to call racism out as a result of the experience of Goodes. 
But the real test of the way Australians respond to the views of Indigenous 
people will not come from Goodes’ return to the game he is so respected for 
playing.

Rather, what happens from here on in, and the way AFL management responds, 
will reveal whether Australians and those in positions of power have learned 
anything from Goodes. Certainly, the AFL and its chief executive, Gillon 
McLachlan, have had their share of critics over the past fortnight for what 
some have describedas a refusal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/31/adam-goodes-booing-afl-head-gillon-mclachlan-says-fans-cant-be-told-how-to-behave>
 to call out fans behaving badly.

Future behaviour will be the real indication of whether people have simply 
temporarily toned it down or have truly begun to change their ways.
 