
Former Sydney Swans player Adam Goodes has given his first interview since his 
retirement to Georgia Mantle, an Indigenous student at Sydney University.The 
full interview can be read at Honi Soit 
<http://honisoit.com/2015/10/whats-next-for-adam-goodes/>.

After struggling at the start of the year, you appeared to find some of your 
best playing form towards the end of this season. What do you think inspired it?

There came a point this year when I knew that it was going to be my last 
season. I don’t know, I think when you know it’s going to be your last, you 
just really want to play the best you possibly can, and it was just — not that 
you train harder, or smarter, or go about it differently — I just think that 
knowing and playing on the edge and knowing that this is going to be your last 
couple of weeks, that you just really want to enjoy it and you really want to 
go out there and do your best. Getting into that mindset really helped me get 
to that level.

So you were always planning to retire at the end of this season? How long have 
you known?

I probably knew about two months before the season finished.

Is everything that has happened to you within the game in relation to racism 
connected to why you decided to retire or is that just one reason?

All the booing and everything, that was another piece of the puzzle that made 
my decision [to retire] quite easy

I think it’s one of many reasons. You know obviously my stand on racism is 
that it’s unacceptable and that we should always stand up to it. I think going 
into this season, you know, I’m 35 years old, I played a couple of games in the 
reserves this year to get my fitness back, so I think there was a lot of 
factors. And obviously with all the booing and everything, that was another 
piece of the puzzle that made my decision quite easy.

After the booing and the repercussions of that, you didn’t make any media 
appearances and stopped playing for a period of time. What was that period like 
for you? What were you doing to make sure you were OK and how were you dealing 
with that experience?

I just needed to be around people who really understood how it felt to be in 
that position. For me, I just needed that support from those people so, it 
wasn’t until the day after that West Coast Eagles game that it really hit me, 
and I was really down and out and I didn’t want to go training on Monday. I 
just figured that, for me to get the best out of myself and do the right thing 
by myself, I really just needed to step away and find out what I really wanted 
to do and hopefully getting back to where my people are from and getting out 
bush could really re-energise me and help heal those wounds. Yeah that’s what I 
did, I went out country and it was amazing. It was just great to be out there.

To be honest, I didn’t want to come back. But you know I did. And I felt 
better when I did. I just needed that support and the love of everyone at my 
football club and my partner, my family — that made it a little bit easier to 
come back. Obviously the booing didn’t stop, but I was able to be a lot 
stronger mentally and physically to deal with that for the last couple of 
months, knowing that it was going to be my last couple of months.

Following up on something you said, the importance of going back to country 
and being with community: when you’re away from your country and your mob, how 
do you still connected to that while you’re still on the field? Especially when 
you are going through a lot of emotional things?

Yeah you just have to be true to yourself, know where you come from, make sure 
that your relationships with family members back in country, back home, are 
really strong so that connection is always there. Whenever you are feeling down 
or feeling a bit shitty, you do tell someone, you do have conversations with 
those people, because you need to let people know how you’re feeling. And for 
me, I’m a big meditator, so when I meditate, I meditate about country and how 
I’m feeling when I’m back there and use that as the strength.

When you say things about people, it can be quite confronting and the load 
that you can bear can be quite heavy

You’ve taken such a stance on racism and supporting Indigenous communities and 
people for a big portion of your career, some people consider that quite a 
political move. Do you think it is a responsibility of all sports people to 
take a stance like that, or do you think it’s something more personal that you 
just felt you needed to do?

No, no, it’s definite personal thing. I don’t think there’s too many 
Aboriginal people out there who are successful that don’t want to help make 
gains for our people. And it definitely is a personal choice. I don’t put that 
responsibility on anybody else, because it has to be your own personal choice, 
it has to be you that wants to do it and have the skills to do it as well. You 
need to be able to talk strongly about these issues but you also need to be 
strong enough to handle the criticism that you’re going to cop as soon as you 
step into that role. Unfortunately, when you do say things about people, it can 
be quite confronting and the load that you can bear on your shoulders can be 
quite heavy.

How does all the media scrutiny/attention affect you, not only in your 
personal life, but when you’re out on the field and playing, because it’s 
sometimes hard to separate those things?

It is. I think media has a very important role to play, and unfortunately some 
people in the media can have very positive and negative effects on a large 
amount of people. I guess that’s where you need good leaders in the industry to 
help steer the conversation so that one side doesn’t get too heavily outweighed 
by comments that aren’t true. So for me, you can’t control the media, you have 
to work with media to get your message out there and you just hope that there’s 
enough good honest reporting and people in the media that can get that job done.

After the announcement came out that you were retiring, there was also the 
announcement that you declined to take part in the lap of honor, or to be 
considered for the Madden medal. What was the motivation behind those decisions?

I was done. I was done a couple of months before that, I knew when I was 
finishing. I didn’t want, once I’d finished footy, to be part of any other 
things that I had a choice in. At the end of the day, it’s my choice to do the 
lap. At the end of the day, it was my choice not to be nominated for the Madden 
medal. I had my last football responsibility at the club Best and Fairest and 
that’s what I was looking for. It was my supporters, my members, at that event, 
and you know it was a very safe environment for me to go to and give my sendoff 
to the people that mattered.

Now that you’ve finished football, what else does the future hold for you? 
What can you see yourself doing?

I can see myself doing a lot of the same, now I’ve got a lot more time on my 
hands. I’m looking forward to the exciting times going forward, I’m actually 
jumping on a plane today at 12:30pm, I’ll be overseas for two months and I’ll 
be back for Christmas. I’m really excited about that. I’m also still going to 
keep up the fight for saying no to racism and making sure that we get 
constitutional recognition for our mob, and still going to be fighting hard for
White Ribbon <http://www.whiteribbon.org.au/>, and really helping men take 
responsibility when we try to stop domestic violence against our women and our 
communities.

With your work with Recognition, I feel, and you may agree, that there is a 
little bit of a divide within our community as to whether recognition, in terms 
of constitutional recognition, is really the best thing for our community. A 
lot of Indigenous people have taken a stand against it, and a lot of people 
like yourself still support it. What do you think? Why is it that you 
personally support the constitutional recognition over something like a treaty?

Well that’s the conversation right there. I support Treaty as well because 
that would give our mob and our people so many more benefits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fadam-goodes-i-needed-to-go-to-my-country-to-help-heal-the-wounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98b6a4869e25c95579e8ee6fa11fa2017edf80e%2F669_0_1796_2694%2F1796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Goodes%3A%20I%20needed%20to%20go%20to%20my%20country%20to%20help%20heal%20the%20wounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fadam-goodes-i-needed-to-go-to-my-country-to-help-heal-the-wounds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Goodes%3A%20I%20needed%20to%20go%20to%20my%20country%20to%20help%20heal%20the%20wounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Fadam-goodes-i-needed-to-go-to-my-country-to-help-heal-the-wounds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98b6a4869e25c95579e8ee6fa11fa2017edf80e%2F669_0_1796_2694%2F1796.jpg>
 Adam Goodes with his mother Lisa Sansbury, unveiling the Sydney Swans’ first 
ever Indigenous Round guernsey in May. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
I think the movement right now—and I don’t want to downplay what Treaty is 
when we’re trying to compare it to Recognise, because I don’t think we should 
compare it to Recognise—and the support that we have from both sides of 
government, is constitutional recognition. I just think that it’s a really 
important thing that we change this document. This document has so many things 
in it that don’t work for our people, and the biggest thing obviously is that 
it doesn’t recognise us, and there’s still parts of it which are racist to 
minorities in this country.

I think if the movement right now, for me and both sides of government; was 
supporting Treaty, and they wanted to really make sure this happened for our 
people, then I think that there would not be one person in Australia – 
Aboriginal or non-Indigenous – that shouldn’t get behind that. I just hope that 
when people say Recognise isn’t what we need right now, I think that we should 
just think about what we’re trying to do at Recognise, and the way we need to 
change this language in this document so that we can then go forward and get 
Treaty, and get as much land back as we possibly can, or acknowledgement of 
land, at least.

So for you personally, would you say that getting constitutional recognition 
is really only the start, and it’s a way then to push or more?

The reason why I became an ambassador for Recognise is as soon as I found out 
what they were doing, and what we were trying to change, it was a no-brainer 
for me. I wasn’t brought up on my own country, I don’t have language, I have a 
strong connection to my country now, but Treaty to me has not been something 
that I’ve been a part of, I haven’t been a part of that discussion. But being a 
part of the Recognise movement, I can just see that we can get a real big win 
on the board by changing that constitution, and making sure that this document 
acknowledges us and our people and our language and our culture forever by 
putting it into our constitution. I don’t want it to be ever compared as 
“constitution versus treaty”, because it never should be compared like that. I 
understand why our mob and the community feel that Treaty is a higher priority, 
I get that, but I just think that we can get a real big win with our 
constitutional recognition, and I’ll be supporting both of those things—and I 
am supporting both of those things.






I think it should be a responsibility of every male to take a stance against 
domestic violence

You mentioned your support of the White Ribbon program about taking a stand 
against domestic violence. Do you feel that’s a responsibility of you as a man, 
to stand up and say you’re completely against violence against women?

I think it’s the responsibility for everyone to take in our community, but I 
think men in our community are the ones that are committing these crimes 
against their families, their daughters, their sisters. I think the reason I 
got involved in White Ribbon is there are so many people I know who have gone 
through domestic violence and sexual harassment, and I just wanted to do 
something to help them and to help my future daughters, my nieces, my 
goddaughters, my aunties going forward, so they wouldn’t have to go through 
that.

The statistics are disgusting in our community, and I think it should be a 
responsibility of every male to take a stance against it and to make sure we 
don’t do those horrible things. Because women are more than the people who 
raise our children, they are fantastic leaders in their own rights in our 
community, and we want to give them the same safe environment, as we would 
expect.


 