
On a sultry night in Brazil the expectant supporters of Team GB finally had 
every excuse to go nuts. The first British gold medal of the Games is safely in 
the bag but Adam Peaty’s storming success in the 100m breaststroke carries far 
more significance. Not for 28 years has a British male collected Olympic 
swimming gold, a long watery drought if ever there was one.

And how spectacularly did the dam finally burst, courtesy of another of those 
buccaneering displays the bullish Peaty now specialises in. He did not so much 
see off the assembled field in the aquatics centre as swamp them with his sheer 
class and irresistible power. As he swept into the final 25 metres, his own 
world record about to obliterated, even the illustrious, sepia-tinted ghosts of 
Adrian Moorhouse, Duncan Goodhew and David Wilkie were left trailing in his 
wake. His final time of 57.13 is more than a second quicker than anything he 
achieved prior to Rio.

Adam Peaty makes light work of pressure as hard work pays off in Rio pool | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-his-own-world-record-again-in-golden-olympic-swim>
Talk about rising to the occasion. Peaty and his coach Mel Marshall had felt 
57.3 secs was the fastest he could possibly swim; to go lower was an almost 
impossible possibility. “Twenty eight years is a very long time...it was always 
in the back of my mind,” he confirmed, referring to Moorhouse’s 1988 feat. 
“Going into the actual race I wasn’t even thinking about that; I was so calm 
and composed. But now I’ve achieved it, it’s an absolute honour. It’s 
definitely the best feeling I’ve ever had.”

There is certainly something fresh and wonderfully uncomplicated about the 
turbo-charged 21-year-old from Uttoxeter, particularly at a turbulent time in 
his sport’s history. For Team GB it hardly be a healthier pick-me-up, a 
tantalising invitation to others to do likewise. Within minutes, the Welsh 
swimmer Jazz Carlin had secured silver in the women’s 400m freestyle to make it 
a truly memorable evening for British swimming. Already there is the promise of 
a weightier haul than in London four years ago when British won just three 
medals in the pool – a silver and two bronze. There is a very different feel 
now.

In Peaty’s case, however, there are strong echoes of Rebecca Adlington’s 
emotional triumph in Beijing in 2008: a down-to-earth Midlands background, a 
fearless attitude in the pool, refreshingly honest on dry land. Like Adlington, 
now a mentor of his, Peaty had a slight phobia about water as a youngster: he 
apparently used to scream the house down when his parents tried to put him in 
the bath so they took him the swimming-pool instead. “I didn’t even want to 
shower when I was younger,” he revealed after the medal ceremony. “That’s how 
scared I was.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fadam-peaty-wins-great-britains-first-gold-of-rio-2016-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Peaty%20wins%20Great%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20first%20gold%20of%20Rio%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fadam-peaty-wins-great-britains-first-gold-of-rio-2016-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Peaty%20wins%20Great%20Britain%E2%80%99s%20first%20gold%20of%20Rio%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fadam-peaty-wins-great-britains-first-gold-of-rio-2016-video-highlights&media=>
Adam Peaty wins Great Britain’s first gold of Rio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-wins-great-britains-first-gold-of-rio-2016-video-highlights>
Famously, he decided to get serious about his sport four years ago when he 
watched his pal, Craig Benson, racing at the Olympics. Peaty realised it was 
time to buck up his ideas. With World, European, Commonwealth and now Olympic 
titles behind him at the age of 21 all that dedication has paid off handsomely. 
“My family knew how much it meant to me so words weren’t really necessary after 
the race. You could tell everything from the hug we gave each other. For all 
these years they’ve believed in me from the start.”

No-one will be more delighted than his 74-year-old grandmother, Mavis 
Williams, who has been entertaining the Twittersphere in her new role as 
#OlympicNan. From asking her window-cleaner to put up union flag bunting on her 
bungalow to suggesting she was “so proud I could burst” Mavis could soon 
threaten Dame Edna Everage’s status as the world’s most endearing senior 
citizen.

His nursery manager mum, Caroline, has also been a pivotal figure, having 
endlessly risen at 4am to drive Peaty to the pool to train – and taken him back 
in the evening – despite her aversion to driving. Her poolside presence in 
Brazil was a major achievement in itself, given she had never previously flown 
or been further than France. As her son put clear water between himself and his 
nearest pursuer, South Africa’s Cameron van der Burgh, the British-accented 
cheers around the 15,000 capacity venue were impossible to miss.

There was almost as much delight for Carlin, 25, who swam another fine race to 
finish second behind the inevitable winner, Katie Ledecky of the United States. 
It was the gutsiest of swims in the most illustrious of company, Ledecky 
carving another large chunk off her own world record to clock a time of three 
minutes 56.46 secs. Later in the evening there was also another gold for the 
uniquely prolific Michael Phelps asthe US won the men’s 100m relay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/michael-phelps-usa-swimming-katie-ledecky-rio-2016>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fadam-peaty-breaks-world-record-again-on-memorable-eveningfor-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F928a67440f5c4cffde4e69f2eeb889cd1c6f6bcd%2F0_96_2290_1375%2F2290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Peaty%20wins%20first%20Olympic%20gold%20and%20breaks%20world%20record%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fadam-peaty-breaks-world-record-again-on-memorable-eveningfor-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Peaty%20wins%20first%20Olympic%20gold%20and%20breaks%20world%20record%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fadam-peaty-breaks-world-record-again-on-memorable-eveningfor-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F928a67440f5c4cffde4e69f2eeb889cd1c6f6bcd%2F0_96_2290_1375%2F2290.jpg>
 Jazz Carlin with her silver medal after finishing second in the final of the 
women’s 400m freestyle. Photograph: Stephen McCarthy/Sportsfile via Getty Images
Elsewhere, James Guy had just enough energy left in a depleted tank to qualify 
for the final of the 200m freestyle, having earlier revealed he and his 
room-mate Peaty had struggled to sleep the previous night. The adrenalin and 
excitement generated by their first Olympic swims kept both men awake and Guy 
only just squeezed into the final in eighth place, with China’s Sun Yang the 
fastest swimmer in the semi-finals. There was also a world record time of 55.48 
secs in the women’s 100 metre butterfly for Sweden’s dominant Sarah Sjostrom, 
as well as boos for the controversial Russian Yulia Efimova before and after 
her 100m breaststroke semi-final.
 