
I was first approached to do BUG: The Evolution of the Music Video after I 
hosted the final two Antenna nights at the BFI Southbank. Antenna was a 
showcase where fans could watch music videos in a massive cinema with really 
good sound. I'd never seen anything like it before and was delighted that 
they'd asked me to host it. With BUG, I thought we'd change the format a bit, 
show fewer videos, and break it up with more stupidity â€“ which is, of course, 
what I do.

Three years later and we're on our 20th show. I'm not a big anniversary person 
so can rule out a huge Glastonbury-style celebration. Plus, Stevie Wonder's 
pulled out, Gorillaz refuse to do it because I'm regularly rude about Damon, 
and Bowie's just not answering my texts.

Still, as usual, we will have an excellent selection of videos and, hopefully, 
Cyriak <http://www.cyriak.co.uk> will be our special guest. He's not really a 
music video guy but he does amazing, trippy Flash animations. He often marries 
them to his own soundtracks, so he sort of fits into the music and video remit 
for us. We don't have to be too prescriptive about who's in the show as long as 
there's some vague connection.

Over the 20 shows, one part of my silliness that has really taken off is the 
YouTube comments section. YouTube has become a gathering place for the addled 
and insane to vent to their extremely disrespectful opinions about other 
people's hard work. Naturally, I gravitate towards this and read out some of 
the more unhinged comments left under our featured videos. I'm so desperate to 
find the stupidest and least insightful diatribes that in the past I've 
actually spent more than six hours sifting through comments for just one video.

We'd really like to do a BUG Radiohead special. Garth Jennings [Son of Rambow 
director and a previous guest] and I put together some videos and webcasts for 
their last album, so it would be great to work with them again.

Right now, I'm preparing a pilot for a television version. We've got interest 
from a number of broadcasters and I think it would make a great online show. 
I'd love BUG to carry on in another form even if it were just a digest of the 
live shows.

Adam's favourite music videos:

Let Forever Be: the Chemical Brothers (directed by Michel Gondry) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hmpxsk3dHaA>
It's not been shown at BUG because it's too old. I love the way he transforms 
video effects into real situations. I think it's about the best video I've ever 
seen. It continues to astound me with how clever and visually successful it is.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ferbd9cZpxps%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ferbd9cZpxps%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ferbd9cZpxps%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
70 Million: Hold Your Horses (directed by L'Ogre)

We showed this film in which the French band recreate classical paintings. I 
felt that it was a quintessential BUG video. Made for not much money but with 
real attention to detail. Beautifully lit, with a sense of humour and a great 
song as well. As good as it gets.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPacuWUMuDxw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPacuWUMuDxw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPacuWUMuDxw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Hibi No Neiro: Sour (directed by Who-Fu)

It's a so-called crowdsourcing video by a Japanese act. They choreographed 80 
fans who perform on webcams. Then they lined up the pictures to create these 
startling images. I showed this to Radiohead and although they're 
super-critical they all agreed this video was amazing.

As told to James McIrvine
 