
Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ Adam Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adam-driver> has confirmed that evil 
mask-wearing tyrant Kylo Ren turned to the dark side after being neglected by 
his parents Leia Organa and Han Solo.

Interviewed for the DVD release of JJ Abrams’ blockbuster space opera reboot, 
Driver said he imagined the youngBen Solo 
<http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Kylo_Ren> being lured into evil after 
struggling to cope with his nascent Force powers.

“If you really imagine the stakes of him, in his youth, having all these 
special powers and having your parents kind of be absent during that process on 
their own agendas, [being] equally as selfish,” said the Girls star. “He’s lost 
in the world that he was raised in, and feels that he was kind of abandoned by 
the people that he’s closest with. He’s angry because of that, I think, and he 
has a huge grudge on his shoulders.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1yZfwPIH3W8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1yZfwPIH3W8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1yZfwPIH3W8&media=>
Ade Edmondson may join Star Wars: Episode VIII
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/04/ade-edmondson-may-join-star-wars-episode-viii>
Abrams said Leia and Han had been caught off guard by the evil Supreme Leader 
Snoke’s move to target their son as a potential dark side disciple.

“It’s more than just having a ‘bad seed’ as a kid,” he said. “Snoke had 
targeted this kid and knew that this kid was going to be incredibly powerful in 
The Force and wanted him as an ally.

“So this mother and father had a target as a son, someone who’s watching their 
boy, and these parents aren’t there enough to guide him.”

Audiences saw a glimpse of Ren’s bitterness towards his father during a scene 
in The Force Awakens in which the First Order villain berates Daisy Ridley’s 
Rey for her affection for the veteran space scoundrel.

“Han Solo. You feel like he’s the father you never had,” Ren tells Rey during 
a Force interrogation, before adding: “He would have disappointed you.” He 
later stabs Solo through the chest with a lightsaber and watches him fall into 
space, thereby completing his journey towards the dark side.
 