
BBC 6Music's biggest stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/20/george-lamb-6music-adam-and-joe>
, Adam Buxton and Joe Cornish, are taking a sabbatical from the digital radio 
station.

The award-winning pair, who present the Saturday morning Adam and Joe Show, 
are going on indefinite leave because of other work commitments. Cornish, who 
worked on the screenplay ofSteven Spielberg's new movie, the Adventures of 
Tintin <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0983193/>, is about to direct a film.

Their departure is a blow for the station, which has an average weekly 
audience of 624,000 listeners andrecently announced a reshuffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/02/george-lamb-leave-6music-daytime>
 that saw Lauren Laverne replace George Lamb in the weekday morning slot.
Cornish and Buxton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/may/24/adam-buxton-joe-cornish> were 
moved an hour later in the Saturday morning schedule, to 10am.

The Adam and Joe Show won radio programme of the year at the Broadcasting 
Press Guild awards <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/apr/04/television1> 
last year. It was nominated for four Sony Radio Academy Awards this year but
missed out on a prestigious gold, winning silver in three categories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2009/may/12/sony-awards-media-monkey-chris-evans>
.

A station spokesman said Danny Wallace would fill in for the pair during the 
absence but was unable to confirm a return date for Buxton and Cornish.

Bob Shennan, the controller of 6Music as well as BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 2, said: "We look forward to 
welcoming Adam & Joe back to 6Music early next year as they remain absolutely 
committed to the network.

"We are happy to have someone as brilliant as Danny Wallace keepingtheir seats 
warm at the Big British Castle whilst they are away."

They will present a pre-recorded Boxing Day programme.

"Thank you to everyone who has listened and particularly everyone who has 
contributed to the show," Cornish told listeners in their last live broadcast 
on Saturday. "But we will be back."

"Obviously we are going to miss you listeners," added Buxton. "Take care, we 
love you, bye!"

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 