
Just 18 minutes into his appearance at the Leveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, the Guardian 
editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger, had already been asked where he stood on 
privacy and the public interest, prior notification and whether subterfuge for 
journalists was ever justified.

This was obviously not enough for Adam Boulton, the veteran broadcaster at Sky 
News, who turned to Twitter to harrumph: "The incompetence of #Leveson beggars 
belief. Why on earth has #womanontheleft been called in to simper at 
@arusbridger? <https://twitter.com/#!/adamboultonSKY/status/159308523367440385>"

Can anyone remember the last time a man was accused of "simpering"?

No, me neither.

It's one of those words, like "game", "feisty", "sassy", and oh so many more, 
which are rarely used for anyone male. The onlineMacmillan dictionary even 
helpfully provides an example 
<http://www.macmillandictionary.com/dictionary/british/simpering> for its 
definition ("trying to be friendly and pleasant in a way that appears silly and 
not sincere"), with: "She spoke in a simpering tone."

The Collins thesaurus offers coy, flirtatious, coquettish, kittenish and "a 
simpering little ninny".

There's previous here, of course, proved by the fact that Carine Patry 
Hoskins, the lawyer leading the questions to Rusbridger, is known as 
"womanontheleft" in the first place.

The appearance of a youngish, attractive woman during the appearance of Hugh 
Grant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hughgrant> last year caused such a 
flutter that #womanontheleft trended on the social media site before the actor 
had sat down. The fact that she was said to be "flirting" with Grant meant that 
her profile was sought out and linked to. She was even Photoshopped into a 
scene from one of Grant's films.

As Helen Lewis Hasteley wrote on her New Statesman blog 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/helen-lewis-hasteley/2011/11/twitter-inquiry-woman-lawyer>
, it "all got a bit weird" when Sky, part-owned by News International, 
broadcast a news story on the phenomenon.

To her credit, Patry Hoskins simply ignored the fuss, refusing interview 
requests and simply carrying on with her job, for which she is amply qualified.

So it's left to the rest of us to point out the irony of the treatment meted 
out to the only high-level female lawyer in an inquiry that has been asked to 
investigate sexism and the press.

A collection of women's groups urged Lord Justice Leveson to tackle the way 
women are sexualised and trivialised in the mediain a submission made just 
after Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/dec/29/leveson-inquiry-should-address-media-sexism>
.

"Leveson will not be doing his job properly unless he addresses this constant 
portrayal and treatment of women as sex objects," said Anna van Heeswijk, the 
campaigns manager.

No one is saying that the treatment meted out to the lawyer is akin to that 
afforded to the female victims of serious crimes such as rape; or even, 
perhaps, to the that endured by the singerCharlotte Church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/charlotte-church>, who had paparazzi lenses 
trained up her skirt and an online clock counting down to 16, the age she could 
legally have sex.

Nor is anyone claiming that Boulton is in the same league as Andy Gray and 
Richard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/26/richard-keys-resigns-sky-sports>
, those former Sky presenters, who departed last year for their attack on a 
female official. (Twitter wags couldn't help pondering whether Patry Hoskins 
"knew the offside rule".)

Yet should any lawyer, who has trained long years for her job, be criticised 
simply for not ... what? Being macho enough?

Boulton didn't offer any further explanation of his criticism. He didn't 
criticise what she asked, simply the way she asked it. "It's not exactly Perry 
Mason is it or even examaining [sic] Kelvin [MacKenzie], And we still waiting 
for M'Lud to intervene, 
<https://twitter.com/#!/adamboultonSKY/status/159313851576365057>" he went on.

Let's hope that when Leveson does intervene he will look at the use of 
language in the media that belittles the role of women such as Patry Hoskins as 
well as the other serious issues he has to contend with.
 