
Quinoa, red and green lentils and couscous: I have barrels of the stuff. Is 
there a simple way of cooking the lot together?
Gerald Straker, Hertford

I'm afraid the short answer to this question is no, because they all take 
different times to cook. And, even if you cook them separately, I wouldn't 
suggest serving them together.

But all is not lost … Although they are all bland bowls of starch on their 
own, they are very easy to perk up and are obviously a healthy and welcome 
change from potatoes and rice. Let's start with couscous. I always soak mine in 
a stock so it immediately retains the flavour of the liquid. Then I add 
something with lots of flavour such as roasted red peppers, skinned and finely 
diced, sauteed courgettes, onions and garlic, all finely diced. This can be 
eaten hot or cold.

Quinoa takes a good 25 minutes to cook usually, and I find sweating a few 
onions and bacon or garlic off first, then adding the quinoa and an appropriate 
amount of chicken or vegetable stock gives a more palatable result. Again, a 
few roasted or sauteed veg not only add flavour but also help break up the 
texture, which can be a little solid.

Lentils are incredibly versatile. Puy are my favourite. Try cooking them with 
finely diced carrots, onions, celery and garlic. When cooked, add a little 
reduced red wine and some Dijon mustard. I love to serve these with guinea fowl 
or crisp duck confit.

Red lentils make a comforting dhal. Cook them in a covered container in the 
oven with chopped onions, ginger, garlic and sweet potatoes. Add some spices 
(coriander, cumin, turmeric and a little cayenne) and a tin of chopped 
tomatoes, and cook until everything is soft. Stir with a wooden spoon, check 
the seasoning and stir in some fresh coriander. Great with lamb.
 