
Adelaide United face a tough Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> assignment after 
being drawn with reigning champions Jeonbuk Motors and Chinese Super League 
giants Jiangsu Suning.

Defending A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> champions 
United were placed in the toughest group for the 2017 tournament at the draw 
held in Kuala Lumpur on Tuesday night (AEDT).

Adelaide revival proves shortlived as Brisbane run out comfortable winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/adelaide-revival-proves-shortlived-as-brisbane-run-out-comfortable-winners>
Korean football giants Jeonbuk won the 2016 ACL last month, a decade after 
claiming their first title and five years after coming runners up in 2011.

Big spenders Jiangsu Suning, the home of Socceroos centre-back Trent 
Sainsbury, are currently sitting second in China’s top tier behind only 
Guangzhou Evergrande and also have Brazilian stars Alex Teixeira and Ramires on 
their books.

The Reds will also face a yet-to-be-confirmed play-off winner.

The Wanderers discovered just one of their opponents after being drawn 
alongside top Korean outfit FC Seoul, whom they faced in both their previous 
Asia campaigns and defeated in the 2014 semi-final on the way to their historic 
title.

Tony Popovic’s side will also face a play-off winner and a yet-to-be-named 
Japanese side.

“We are extremely excited to be drawn with our old semi final rivals FC Seoul 
in the the group,” Wanderers chief executive John Tsatsimas said. “We look 
forward to consolidating our position once again in the coming months against 
the most well regarded in Asia.”

Brisbane also learned their qualifying route and will host a one-off play-off 
against either Filipino club Global FC or Singaporean outfit Tampines Rovers at 
Suncorp Stadium on January 31.

Should they win, the Roar will play a final qualifying match away to Tim 
Cahill’s former Chinese Super League side Shanghai Shenhua on February 7, the 
final hurdle to a Group E berth alongside J-League title-winners Kashima 
Antlers, Thai champions Muangthong United and another play-off winner.

The draw also lays out a tough schedule for Australian teams, with the last 
group fixtures coming at the same time as the A-League finals.

Should either the Wanderers or the Reds make the A-League grand final on May 7 
they would have to host a match within three days of the decider.

Teams must finish in the top two of their group to qualify for the knockout 
rounds.


GROUP F

 * FC Seoul (Korea)

 * Japan 2nd club

 * Western Sydney Wanderers (Australia)

 * Play-off 3 winner 
Group H

 * Adelaide United (Australia)

 * Jiangsu Suning (China)

 * Jeonbuk Motors (Korea)

 * Play-off 2 winner
 