
Fake It ’Til You Make It

Tim Grayburn has clinical depression. His partner, Bryony Kimmings, is a 
theatre-maker. Together, they’ve made Fake It ’Til You Make It, an exploration 
of depression, how it affects those who have it, and those who love them. A 
coproduction between Melbourne’s TheatreWorks and London’s Southbank centre, 
Australia is getting the world premiere season of this work that promises to be 
brave, funny, clever and perhaps a bit heart wrenching. While mental illness 
affects so many it is still something we too rarely touch on in theatre. The 
fringe is always good for the silly and the slight: it’s good to see something 
that promises to come with some bite.

Fake It ’Til You Make It 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/fake-it-til-you-make-it-by-bryony-kimmings-and-tim-grayburn/9b37e69a-cddd-453e-8196-a213eb83f32b>
, Royal Croquet Club – The Black Box, until 15 March

Hot Brown Honey

The fringe is filled with burlesque circus variety shows: you can see them 
with stars, with bathtubs, with naked men. The newest addition to that lineup 
promises to be the most political. Hot Brown Honey, created by Lisa Fa’alafi, 
and Candy B and Busty Beatz, puts the minds and the bodies of women of colour 
centre stage. These women want to destroy the way their lives and cultures have 
been reduced to stereotypes, and they want to show the audience who they are as 
complex and talented artists, Australians, women, and political people. It 
should be confrontational, challenging, but most of all incredibly fun.

Hot Brown Honey 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/hot-brown-honey/28ecf6db-2fa4-4eb5-ba07-48fa7c7af0c8>
, Royal Croquet Club – Ukiyo, until 15 March

Pale Face Cold Blood

From artist Mina Mokhtarain, Pale Face Cold Blood is a physical theatre piece 
about an Iranian translator and the violence she witnessed on Manus Island. Set 
in a boxing ring, the play explores how Australia’s policies of offshore 
detention impact those who work there, and how they struggle to deal with the 
ramifications of this back on mainland Australia. This is a big and ambitious 
topic for the young Melbourne theatre-maker to be tackling, and she’ll be doing 
so in the intimacy of Tuxedo Cat – one of the smallest venues in the fringe. It 
will be close, and it will be personal.

Pale Face Cold Blood 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/pale-face-cold-blood/3f63eb04-90e6-45fc-9595-5969c1799e7d>
, Tuxedo Cat – Mayall Room, 16 - 22 February
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fadelaide-fringe-2015-eight-shows-to-push-your-buttons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F16%2F1424052627476%2Ff097a5f9-02c4-4347-b2f3-501e4bf9d3a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20fringe%202015%3A%20eight%20shows%20to%20push%20your%20buttons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fadelaide-fringe-2015-eight-shows-to-push-your-buttons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20fringe%202015%3A%20eight%20shows%20to%20push%20your%20buttons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fadelaide-fringe-2015-eight-shows-to-push-your-buttons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F16%2F1424052627476%2Ff097a5f9-02c4-4347-b2f3-501e4bf9d3a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Shotspeare: ‘we happy few, we band of boozers.’ Photograph: Maike Schulz/PR 
Shotspeare presents Romeo & Juliet

Shakespeare is one thing. Late night fringe Shakespeare where the performers 
promise to get progressively drunker as the night goes on is a different 
matter. During the fringe, the American company Shotspeare will be performing 
Romeo & Juliet in one hour, with five actors, one member of the audience, and 
the significant help of drinking games. Anyone who thinks Shakespeare is sacred 
should be giving this one a miss; for the rest of us this is possibly just what 
the Bard ordered.

Romeo & Juliet 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/shotspeare-presents-romeo-and-juliet/e0efafb1-1f82-42ad-b9fe-2811db8a1423>
, Garden of Unearthly Delights – Umbrella Revolution, unti 15 March

Adrienne Truscott’s A One-Trick Pony (or Andy Kaufman is a Feminist 
Performance Artist and I’m a Comedian)

Adrienne Truscott made her Adelaide fringe comedy debut last year with her One 
Lady Rape Comedy About Rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/14/adrienne-truscott-nuditys-a-very-inexpensive-and-effective-costume>
, a stand-up show where she proved rape jokes can be funny, as long as they’re 
pointed at the male comedians who make rape jokes. While this show is described 
as “not about rape” and “possibly [with] pants”, Truscott is sure to still be 
exploring exactly what stand-up comedy can do, and how far she can push her 
audience while still bringing them along for the ride.

Adrienne Truscott’s A One-Trick Pony 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/adrienne-truscotts-a-one-trick-pony/d3d95459-caa0-4ac3-9d01-ec69757b14d9>
, The Garden of Unearthly Delights – The Spare Room, 2–14 March

Zoe Coombs Marr is DAVE 

No matter how well you try to curate your own program at Adelaide, see much 
comedy and chances are you’ll end up in a show that makes you squirm: and not 
in a good way. Dave promises to be that comedian. The alte- ego of Sydney 
comedian Zoe Coombs-Marr, Dave is a beer-guzzling, sexist-joke-telling, good 
old Australian bloke who just wants to tell it like it is. He’s every bad 
comedian you’ve seen and possibly enough to ruin comedy for you forever. Here 
though, laughing at him rather than with him shouldn’t be a problem.


Zoe Coombs Marr 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/zoe-coombs-marr-is-dave/967ba589-367b-45fd-97a7-467460942168>
, Tuxedo Cat – Rivers Studio, 20 February to 15 March

Umit Bali: Flight Plan

Emerging comedian Umit Bali arrived in Australia from Fiji when he was 13. He 
spent his teenage years not only as an immigrant, but also an illegal 
immigrant. He’s no longer one but Flight Plan is about what it means to try to 
fit into a new country, while also knowing there is a government who would like 
to deport you if they knew you were here. As the national conversation 
continues as to who can call Australia home, Bali is tackling that conversation 
head on in a way few other comedians can.

Umit Bali 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/umit-bali-flight-plan/5119c137-f10f-46b1-8126-645f12d8ca34>
, Producers Nook, 28 February to 6 March

White Rabbit Red Rabbit

White Rabbit Red Rabbit has been travelling the world since 2011, but this is 
the first time it has come to Adelaide. When the play travels, it is just as a 
script: no actor, no director, and certainly no playwright. Author Nassim 
Soleimanpour is a conscientious objector from Iran, and as such he is not 
allowed to leave the country. White Rabbit Red Rabbit travels in his place, 
each performance done by a new actor who has never seen the script before: they 
pick it up on stage and discover the story along with the audience. It’s a leap 
of faith by both performer and audience, working together to allow 
Soleimanpour’s voice to be heard around the world when he physically cannot 
travel to show his work himself.


White Rabbit Red Rabbit 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/white-rabbit-red-rabbit/4a52171f-7f62-4a15-bc84-7047760a229e>
, Royal Croquet Club – The Rastelli, 24 February to 15 March

• Adelaide fringe 2015  <http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/>is at venues 
citywide until 15 March
 