
Adobe <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> has pulled an update for 
its Creative Cloud desktop application for Mac computers after users complained 
that it was deleting important files from their machines without reason or 
warning.


During the installation of the update, which could happen automatically if set 
to do so, the Adobe program deleted the first folder on a user’s machine, as 
listed alphabetically.

Adobe said in a statement 
<http://blogs.adobe.com/adobecare/2016/02/12/creative-cloud-desktop-on-mac-update-issue/>
: “In a small number of cases, the updater may incorrectly remove some files 
from the system root directory with user writeable permissions.

“We have removed the update from distribution, and are in the process of 
deploying a new update which addresses the issue. When prompted for the update, 
Creative Cloud members should install it as normal.”

The issue was brought to light by users of backup software Backblaze 
<https://www.backblaze.com/blog/adobe-creative-cloud-update-bug/>. Part of the 
Backblaze backup system was stored within a folder on a Mac’s root directory 
named “.bzvol” and therefore was highly likely to be the first folder on the 
system which the Adobe update would delete.


Backblaze’s suggested solution was to create a folder called 
“.adobedontdeletemybzvol” on the user’s system that was higher in alphabetical 
order than the crucial .bzvol directory. The company later rolled out an update 
for its software that automatically created a dummy directory “.aBackblaze” for 
the Adobe updater to delete without issue.

Other users found the Adobe update would delete a folder required for the 
proper functioning of OS X’s autosave and versioning functions for documents, 
while any folder that started with a space on the root directory would likely 
fall victim to the update’s deletions.

Head of social for Backblaze Yev Pusin said 
<https://www.backblaze.com/blog/adobe-creative-cloud-update-bug/>: “It’s 
difficult to tell exactly which data may have been removed, but you can open 
the root directory on your Mac and try to look towards the top for any folders 
that are empty. This would have occurred to only one folder (that we know of) 
so the topmost hidden folder or the first folder with a space as the first 
character would have been affected.”

Adobe said a fixed version of the update should be immediately available.

 * 2015 was the year that Adobe’s Flash finally began to die 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/29/2015-adobe-flash-die-google-firefox-amazon>

 * Google to ban Adobe Flash-based advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/10/google-ban-adobe-flash-advertising>

 * Flash hit by another zero-day vulnerability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/14/flash-hit-by-another-zero-day-vulnerability>



 