
Our children will always know where they came from. They have pictures, 
presents and letters from their birth family. They will always be part of their 
life. We can't and won't change that. They also have a "life story" book, which 
helps us tell the story of why and how they came to be with us. It has photos 
of all the people they have lived with in their short lives. This will help 
them know where they came from and help create a secure base for their future. 
We all need to know our backgrounds, and for us it is part of the bond of trust 
that we are trying to build with our children that we are honest with them, 
even if that's hard for us and we sometimes want to pretend there's no one else 
but our family.

As part of the commitment to openness in adoption, we met with our children's 
birth mother. It was a painful meeting reminding us that we share our children 
(and how much we wish they were our birth-children), and incredibly sad that 
their birth mother cannot care for and keep them safe. The meeting was 
ostensibly to get and give "closure" and give us permission to claim our new 
children. Unexpectedly, we laughed as well as cried during the meeting, and the 
photos for the children's life story book shows us all smiling together. Our 
children's birth mother seems to be a vulnerable young woman who probably 
needed better parenting herself; after the meeting she told her SW (Social 
Worker) that she wished we were her parents.

The sharing of our children continues through regular letters to and from the 
BM (Birth Mum), although, at the moment, she has not felt able to write to the 
children so it's a bit of a one-way street. We hope that in time she will be 
able to write to them so that they can know more about her as they grow up. 
Letters are great for finding out those things most of us just know - what time 
was I born? What was the weather like? Did I look like Winston Churchill?

As the children grow older, we will have to tell them, in an age appropriate 
way, why they can't be with their birth family, and why we became their mummy 
and daddy. It's going to break their hearts and ours, but they will want and 
need to know as we help them put the pieces together. At the moment, no one 
knows their story not even our parents and siblings - it's the children's story 
and they need to hear it first. We try to talk about their BM when there's the 
right moment, but it's more like practising for us as the children are too 
little to understand. Her name can sometimes be an unwelcome intrusion on a 
happy a moment, but we can't magic our children's early years away. Sometimes, 
when you're dealing with the rubbish stuff like an inconsolable child in the 
middle of the night, or you are on your fifth dirty nappy in an hour, whilst 
knowing that at some point your child may reject you in favour of a birth 
family who couldn't or wouldn't care for them, you wish you could do a 
vanishing trick!

For the moment though, we have two delightful children who seem to be 
adjusting well to being with us and bonding with us. We hope all the giggles, 
tantrums, and hugs are a good foundation for the future, and that laughter 
really is the best medicine.

â€¢ Anthony Watt is writing a regular blog on his experiences of adopting 
children. He writes under a pseudonym.
 