
When did I last get butt-naked with a painting in the line of duty, I ask 
myself. There's just the two of us here: me, and a work byLuc Tuymans 
<http://www.luctuymans.com/catalogueraisonne/> called, propitiously enough, 
Allo!

I'm off to bed. We're in my cabin on a boat called the Roi des Belges ("King 
of the Belgians"). Tuymans is Belgian too. To be honest, this is the only 
cabin. It's after midnight and the crew – let's call them "room service" – 
aren't about. The tide's up. Where's my cocoa?

I'm sailing through the night on the Roi de Belges, the riverboat shuddering 
and creakingon the roof of the Queen Elizabeth Hall on London's South Bank 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2012/jan/15/architecture-design>
. Rain slaps at the windows and the wind howls. The Roi des Belges is named 
after the boatJoseph Conrad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/dec/01/classics.josephconrad> captained 
on his journey up the Congo river in 1890 – a trip that became the inspiration 
for his most famous work,Heart of Darkness 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jan/23/heart-of-darkness-conrad-review>, 
which itself inspiredFrancis Ford Coppola 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/francis-ford-coppola>'s 1979 Vietnam war movie 
Apocalypse Now 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/may/26/apocalypse-now-review>. For one 
colonialist misadventure, read another.

The tub is also A Room for London <http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/>, a 
collaboration between Artangel and Living Architecture, working with theartist 
Fiona Banner 
<http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/hearts-of-darkness/mar-2012-fiona-banner>. I 
had been invited on board – followingDavid Byrne 
<http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/hearts-of-darkness/feb-2012-david-byrne>, 
Jeremy Deller 
<http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/hearts-of-darkness/mar-2012-jeremy-deller>, 
actor Brian Cox (who read Orson Welles's original screenplay of Conrad's story 
to a live audience here a few weeks ago 
<http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/hearts-of-darkness/mar-2012-fiona-banner>) and 
others. Creative types are invited to stay on the boat, to write and to 
perform, and the public can rent the joint for the night.

This is more nautical-themed hotel suite than boat. But it is shipshape, with 
high-thread-count bed linen. It isn't the first time I've set sail across the 
concrete Sargasso of the South Bank either; last timeI floundered in a rowing 
boat <http://www.guardian.co.uk/arts/audio/2008/may/27/art> on the flooded 
sculpture court of the Hayward Gallery, courtesy of the Austrian collective 
Gelitin in the Hayward's2008 Psycho Buildings show 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/arts/audio/2008/may/27/art>.

Tuymans' painting, like me, is a stowaway. Allo! was painted especially for 
the Roi des Belges, and the artist has gone on to paint a whole series of 
related works since this one-off commission. Tuymans's art has frequently 
returned to the troubled history of Europe. He has painted the gas chamber, 
Hitler and his sidekicks, the rotten history of Belgium's colonial past and its 
relationship with Africa – in particular Belgium's role in the assassination of
Patrice Lumumba 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/jan/17/patrice-lumumba-50th-anniversary-assassination>
, the first post-independence prime minister of the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, in 1961. Tuymans filled the Belgian pavilion at the Venice Biennale in 
2001 with a cycle of paintings related to this.Belgium officially apologised 
for its role in Lumumba's assassination 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/1805546.stm> a year later.
 Off the wall … Luc Tuymans's Allo! 
Invited to think about Heart of Darkness, and in particular a passage in which 
the monstrous and haunted ivory-trader Mr Kurtz (theMarlon Brando 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/marlonbrando> part in Apocalypse Now) speaks 
with admiration about two paintings he has made, Tuymans took a different tack. 
He alighted instead on the 1942 movie version of anovel by Somerset Maugham, 
The Moon and Sixpence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2002/aug/13/classics.fromthearchives3>, first 
published in 1919. Tuymans's painting also involves a bar in Antwerp, a parrot, 
and thestory of Gauguin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/sep/27/paul-gauguin-tate-modern-exhibition>
, retold at several removes.

Instead of Gauguin, who travelled to Polynesia in search of an idealised 
tropical paradise, Tuymansbased his painting on the last scene in the movie 
version of Maugham's book <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8W_K3TjSJZk>, which 
recasts Gauguin as an English painter, Charles Strickland (played by George 
Sanders), who leaves his family and ends up dying of leprosy in the jungle, 
where he has covered the walls of his hut with giant paintings before going 
blind. These, only glimpsed at the end of the film, are filled with images of a 
Gauguin-like paradise.

Propped against the shutters in my cabin, Tuymans's painting leans among piles 
of books, which come supplied with the room. I sit and drink with it; dance 
around the cabin in front of it and get undressed with it. When I'm not scoping 
out the hotel windows of the Savoy on the far bank of the river with my 
binoculars, I look at it from the comfort of my bed. This is the life. I have 
only the painting and the weather to distract me.

Handled with Tuymans's characteristic short stabs and paddled-about marks, the 
painting, which isn't very big, is an accumulation of touches which creep up to 
and shrink away from a schematic pencil under-drawing. The more you look, the 
more variety there is. Approaching his subject, Tuymans keeps a distance, like 
someone visiting the sick, hovering near the door in case they might catch 
something.

His paintings have always had a feel of being infected by something – mostly, 
Tuymans's own sensibilities and lapses of concentration. The smaller his 
paintings are, the more concentrated the image, reduced to a kind of essence. 
Getting up really close, my face inches away from the canvas, I sniff the 
painting in the dark.

It's a fantasy to imagine that this sort of intimacy comes close to the 
artist's own relationship to the work, even though it is very different from 
the theatrical encounter with a spotlit painting on a gallery wall, with a 
gallery attendant present to stop anyone behaving inappropriately. What's 
appropriate, anyway, in your nightshirt?
 Adrian Searle with Allo! Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris 
I glance at the painting from under the duvet, the boat creaking and groaning 
in the wind. I give it a sideways look at 4am. I peer at it balefully at dawn 
and over breakfast. How long can you really look at a painting? And the room 
itself – cabin, barque or Premier Inn deluxe – is beginning to get to me.

Who knows what the writers invited to stay here spend their hours thinking 
about? London. Old Mother Thames. Conrad. History. When the shops will open.
Jeanette Winterson has stayed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2012/feb/22/jeanette-winterson-live-webchat>
,Juan Gabriel Vásquez 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2012/jan/24/live-webchat-juan-gabriel-vasquez>
 andSven Lindqvist <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LYVbfJTEA2A>. Michael 
Ondaatje 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/feb/17/my-hero-michael-ondaatje-teju-cole>
 is coming later this summer. I dance about the cabin, waving my arse first in 
the direction of the Houses of Parliament, then the London Eye, then 
Cleopatra's Needle and finally St Paul's. If anyone were to cross Waterloo 
Bridge and look up, they'd be horrified. But the few pedestrians around are 
heads down under their brollies.

I don't quite know what came over me. Speaking to Tuymans before this trip to 
nowhere, he told me: "Gauguin was a typical stockbroker. He'd fuck anything 
that moves." Tuymans said his painting is his joke on modernism, dealing with 
fake ideas of the new, the exotic and the colourful. The title relates to a bar 
in Antwerp, near the red light district, where the owner keeps a parrot that 
cries Allo! when anyone comes in for a drink and a bit of tapas. The painting's 
colours – a coral red, blue, dirty yellows – are based on the parrot, that 
living bit of exoticism in the Spanish-themed bar.

He morphs this into his own painting, otherwise based entirely on a movie 
still from the final scene ofThe Moon and Sixpence 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0035078/>, when the Doctor – a man with a heavy 
German accent who has gone in search of Strickland – discovers his hut and the 
fantastical paintings it contains. Seconds later, the painter's native wife 
sets fire to the hut.

Everything emerges from a darkness that is not quite black, except for a 
ghostly shadow that seems to be Tuymans's own. More a weight or looming 
coalescence of darkness than a recognisable silhouette, it is a blot on the 
image. This, Tuymans says, "is probably where Kurtz comes in". Oh that Tuymans, 
he's such a tease. His art always depends on the power of suggestion. Most art 
does. If Tuymans says a painting is about some evil little moment, you are 
briefed and ready to see it, especially at 3am. It's a wonder I didn't jump 
ship there and then and get the night bus home. If Tuymans is Kurtz, then I'm 
the one in search of him.

The vegetation, the darkness, the woozy patterning and the odd shapes between 
the figures in what Tuymans calls the "mock-Gauguin" backdrop he is repainting 
from the movie still are as important as the naked figures that swoon across 
it. The Doctor walks in front of this backdrop, turning away from us. The 
shadows in the folds of his clothing threaten to climb all over him, and the 
way the light catches the back of his blue suit is as much a thin, slithery 
sound as it is a mass of flickering contours. The naked women beyond look stark 
and overlit, bleached out by movie lights. This is moments before the hut goes 
up in an enormous conflagration, but the whole painting looks on the verge of 
eclipse.

What's background? What's foreground? Allo! is a painting of a movie still, 
and also a painting of a painting that was made only to be seen in a movie. And 
Allo! was made for a room that is also a mock-up of Conrad's riverboat. All 
this is hard to get your head around in the middle of the night, looking for 
Kurtz on a South Bank rooftop. Allo! is a weird thing to spend the night with. 
But then, so am I. The horror! The horror!
 