
Egged in Oxford, branded a Tory in Manchester, and kettled by students in 
Glasgow:Aaron Porter <https://www.theguardian.com/education/aaron-porter>, the 
outgoing NUS president, may have been the nominal leader of 7 million British 
students, but for many he was a hate figure. So how can Liam Burns, elected as 
his successor, avoid being as divisive?

1 Don't dismiss direct action

Student occupations are not for everyone, and it may be that NUS's greatest 
strength lies in lobbying. But Burns needs to remember that those occupying 
universities and marching through city centres are his allies, not his enemies. 
The NUS co-ordinateda 50,000-strong rally in November 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/blog/2010/nov/10/demo-2010-student-protests-live>
, but Porter's engagement with subsequent protests was limited, and at times 
critical, even though they captured the imagination of not just students, but 
the anti-cuts movement as a whole.

2 Deliver what you promise

Burns won't be able to keep all factions happy. But he'll impress even his 
harshest critics if he makes only promises he can keep. The turning point for 
Porter came when,in a speech to the UCL occupation last November 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/nov/28/student-leader-apologises-over-dithering>
, he pledged legal and financial support for occupiers across the country, and 
support for a march on the day of the parliamentary vote on fees. Barely a week 
later,both commitments were in tatters 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/dec/06/student-protests-nus-vote>.

3 Engage individual students, and not just their unions

Even away from the politics, NUS has an image problem. Porter told a student 
paper <http://www.varsity.co.uk/news/3029> that NUS is "a members' 
organisation, and our members are students' unions". Burns needs to find ways 
of making students believe NUS is interested in them, and that they should be 
interested in NUS. At the moment, it's viewed as bureaucratic, removed from 
student life and having an electoral process that isÂ far too opaque.
 