
Hamid Karzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai> has called on 
Nato to destroy insurgent sanctuaries in Pakistan, escalating a war of words 
sparked by allegations the Taliban are receiving official Pakistani support 
made in this week's leak of US military intelligence documents.

The Afghan president said the war on terrorism was not based in Afghanistan, 
"but rather this war is in the sanctuaries, funding centres and training places 
of terrorism which are outsideAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

"Whether we are able to destroy these sanctuaries or not is another question. 
We will try what we can … our international allies have this ability, but the 
question is why they are not doing it?"

His comments mark a return to the fiery language directed against Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> not seen for many months from the 
Afghan leader, who has been working hard to forge better ties with Islamabad.

In Washington Barack Obama held a special meeting of national security 
advisers to discuss Afghanistan and Pakistan. Among those taking part were the 
defence secretary, Robert Gates, the secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, the 
head of the CIA, Leon Panetta and, by video conferencing, the US commander in 
overall charge in Afghanistan, General David Petraeus. The meeting was 
scheduled before the Wikileaks disclosures about failures in the Afghanistan 
war and the allegedly duplicitous role of the Pakistan intelligence agency.

The leak has dominated the news agenda in the US all week. Focus in the last 
24 hours has switched from concern about the failures of the war to whether the 
lives of Afghan informers have been put at risk.

Earlier this week Rangeen Dadfar Spanta, Afghanistan's national security 
adviser, called on the west to change its policy towards Pakistan in light of 
the Wikileaks revelations.

David Cameron added fuel to the fire by telling an audience in India that 
Pakistan must not be allowed "to promote the export of terror, whether to India 
or whether to Afghanistan or anywhere else in the world."

The Afghan government has long claimed Pakistan is playing a double game, 
supplying a vital land route for Nato equipment into Afghanistan while 
tolerating theTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> in and around 
the city of Quetta. Afghan security officials have frequently accused 
Pakistan's spies in the Inter-Services Intelligence agency of involvement in 
attacks inside Afghanistan.

Although Kabul says the leaked US intelligence documents back up its claims, 
Karzai criticised the publication of sensitive information.

"I heard this yesterday … that names of certain Afghans who co-operate with 
the coalition Nato have been also revealed in these documents," he said. "This 
indeed is extremely irresponsible and shocking because, whether those 
individuals acted legitimately or illegitimately by providing information toNato
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> forces, they are lives. And the lives 
are in danger now."

Though his remarks are a return to normal for a politician whose public 
denunciations of Pakistan have angered the US for years, some analysts believe 
the Wikileaks revelations are a setback for Karzai, spoiling his efforts to 
reach an understanding with Pakistan's top leadership. Karzai has had several 
meetings recently with the chiefs of the Pakistani army and the ISI, prompting 
concern from his opponents that he is preparing to sell out to a neighbour 
seeking a degree of control over affairs inside Afghanistan.

Ahmed Rashid, a respected Pakistani analyst of the Afghan conflict, argues in 
this week's Spectator the leak has inconvenienced all sides. He writes: "A few 
months ago Hamid Karzai would have been thrilled to have confirmation that 
American officers are speaking openly about how divisions of Pakistani 
intelligence are helping the Taliban. But after spending eight years 
criticising the ISI, he recently decided to cosy up to them."
 