
Ashraf Ghani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, the Afghan 
president, is struggling to placate furious tribal elders in Kandahar after one 
of his top aides punched a senior leader in the face.

 Ghani visited Kandahar, the provincial capital and Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>’s second biggest city, on 
Thursday on a trip intended to bolster support for his national unity 
government in one of the mostvolatile regions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/09/taliban-attack-kandahar-airport-afghanistan-dozens-dead>
 of the country.

 Instead, he found himself embroiled in an embarrassing debacle when a fight 
broke out during an event with tribal elders between Naseem Sharifi, his head 
of protocol, and Haji Sayed Jan Khakrezwal, the respected head of the Kandahar 
provincial council.

'My liver is bleeding': life inside an Afghan psychiatric hospital – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/feb/05/my-liver-is-bleeding-life-inside-an-afghan-psychiatric-hospital-in-pictures>
 Witnesses and reporters looked on in shock as the heated exchange, which 
involved a deeply offensive obscenity, broke out between the two men, who had a 
longstanding feud. It ended when Sharifi struck Khakrezwal in the face.

 Ghani immediately sacked Sharifi and said in a statement he was “deeply 
saddened” by the incident. He said the dignity and pride of the Kandahar elders 
was as valuable to him as his own.

 However, the incident has left deep resentment among the Kandahar tribal 
leaders, whose support in one of the country’s most strategically important 
cities is vital to Ghani’s struggling government.

“Sacking his chief of protocol is not enough,” said Naqibullah Hakimi, an 
influential elder from the Popalzai tribe, one of the biggest and most powerful 
of the Pashtun tribes of southernAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. “He has to be prosecuted and 
jailed for this kind of insult and disrespect.”

The Guardian view on Afghanistan: a bad year for Ashraf Ghani | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/30/the-guardian-view-on-afghanistan-a-bad-year-for-ashraf-ghani>
 He said that only the fact that Ghani had been at the meeting had prevented 
immediate bloodshed.

 Kandahar, a largely rural and tribal province on the border with Pakistan, is 
a heartland of the Taliban, which Nato troops fought for years to control.

 Without the backing of the tribal elders, Ghani’s government, already under 
strain because of theworsening security situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/28/john-nicholson-nominated-commander-counterterrorism-afghanistan>
, would struggle to retain its authority in the south where the Taliban has 
made increasing inroads.

 Haji Nimatullah Sherdelai, from the Noorzai tribe, said the insult to 
Khakrezwal would make it difficult to continue to support the government.

 “Our people are already very upset and telling us to cut off from the 
government,” he said. “Looking at all the shortcomings of the government and on 
top of all the other difficulties, this happens. Our tribe’s members are 
already distancing themselves.”

 