
The Kabul government has finally unveiled its full list of cabinet nominees, 
following months of delays and missed deadlines.

Abdul Salaam Rahimi, the chief of staff for President Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, announced the list of 25 
candidates on Monday, as well as nominees for director of the Afghan 
intelligence service and governor of the central bank.

Salahuddin Rabbani, the former head of the country’s high peace council, is 
nominated for foreign minister, Sher Mohammad Karimi, the military chief of 
staff, is nominated for the post of defence minister and former general 
Noor-ur-Haq Ulomi is nominated for interior minister. The current intelligence 
chief, Rahmatullah Nabil, is nominated to retain his position.

The 25 names include three women – nominated to head the ministries of 
information and culture, women’s affairs and higher education. All must now 
receive approval from parliament.

Ghani was inaugurated in late September as part of a unity government with his 
main rival, Abdullah Abdullah. He quickly fired his entire cabinet and the 
three-month delay in naming their replacements has spawned public anxiety and 
anger toward his administration.

Ghani repeatedly appealed for patience while missing numerous self-imposed 
deadlines. Critics have asserted that the Afghan Taliban have used the ensuing 
vacuum and the perception of governmental weakness to regroup and regain 
momentum.

Meanwhile elsewhere in the country, a police commander and two officers were 
killed by a roadside bomb. Ghulam Jilani Farahi, the deputy police chief for 
Zabul province, said that the explosion killed Khan Mohammad, police chief for 
the Mizan district, along with his two police bodyguards at about 10am on 
Monday.
 