
Afghanistan is bracing for an upsurge in violence as spring begins with a new 
maverick force emerging: militants associating themselves withIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>.

Isis claimed responsibility for a suicide bombing in the eastern city of 
Jalalabad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/18/suicide-blast-kills-33-outside-a-bank-in-afghanistan-city-of-jalalabad>
 on Saturday, which appears to be the first major attack in Afghanistan by 
insurgents aligning themselves with the group which has been wreaking havoc 
across Syria and Iraq.


Ahmad Zia Abdulzai, spokesman for the provincial governor, said a suicide 
bomber on a motorcycle detonated a vest rigged with explosives in front of the 
state-run New Kabul Bank, which has been the target of attacks in the past, 
killing at least 33 people and injuring more than 100.

In a statement, a group calling itself the Province of Khorasan – Islamic 
State’s name for the region it strives to conquer – named the suicide bomber as 
Abu Mohammad Khorasani. On social media, Isis supporters shared a photo of the 
purported suicide bomber, masked and flanked by a Kalashnikov rifle.

The Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani, seemingly taking his cue from media 
reports,named Isis as the perpetrators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/18/afghanistan-suicide-bombing-kills-dozens-jalalabad-islamic-state>
. Ghani made his comments to local journalists on a trip to the northern 
province of Badakhshan, where he went to mourn victims of other recent violence.

The surfacing of an Isis-aligned splinter group has caused anxiety among 
Afghans, though officials disagree about the level of the threat.


During his recent trip to Washington DC, where he also lobbied the US for 
continued military and financial support, Ghani called Isis “a terrible threat”.


However, former spy chief Amrullah Saleh said in an interview 
<http://gandhara.rferl.org/content/afghanistan-spy-cheif-islamic-state/26955589.html>
 with Radio Free Afghanistan that Isis, known as Daesh throughout the Arab 
world, would not be able to spread roots in Afghanistan, “because whatever 
Daesh has been doing in Iraq and Syria, the Taliban have been doing the same in 
Afghanistan for the past 20 years”.

Borhan Osman, an analyst with Afghanistan Analysts Network who has tracked the 
emergence of Isis inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>
, said the group might benefit from frictions within the Taliban.

“[Isis] has not built a solid, actual political presence in Afghanistan so 
far,” Osman said, “but if the Taliban quasi-monopoly is broken, that will help 
[it] to build networks and their brand.”

With or without Isis, this year’s fighting season threatens to be the most 
deadly since the US-led invasion in 2001.

At least 23 Afghan soldiers were killed last week when Taliban militants 
overran their military posts in Jurm district. The Taliban answered Ghani’s 
promises to “defend our soil” with defiance.


“If they try to do an operation, we are ready to defend ourselves,” Zabiullah 
Mujahed, a spokesman for the group told the Guardian.


Even a supposedly safe haven like the northern city of Mazar-I Sharif has 
suffered a rare bout of violence. On 9 April, four gunmen stormed the 
provincial prosecutor’s office in the city, taking hostages and leaving at 
least 10 people dead.


Casualties have risen drastically since foreign troops began drawing down from 
a peak of nearly 150,000 troops in 2011.


With more than 10,000 civilian casualties, last year was the bloodiest on 
record for ordinary Afghans.In a new report 
<http://unama.unmissions.org/Default.aspx?tabid=12254&ctl=Details&mid=15756&ItemID=38675&language=en-US>
, the UN documents an 8% increase in civilian casualties from ground 
engagements in the first three months of 2015, compared to the same period last 
year.

The research shows that, as foreign troops have largely receded from the 
battlefield and limited aerial support to the Afghan security forces, fighting 
has drawn closer to residential areas. As a result, the proportion of women and 
children among casualties is at an all-time high.


“The continuing use of suicide attacks in densely populated areas, that are 
certain to kill and maim large numbers of Afghan civilians, may amount to a war 
crime,” Nicholas Haysom, the UN’s head of mission in Afghanistan, said in a 
statement on Saturday.


The Taliban traditionally launches an offensive in the spring, when snow 
recedes from the mountains. As they advance, the fighting uproots thousands of 
civilians.


“People are being displaced in much higher numbers than last year,” said Pia 
Jensen, programme manager for emergency response with People in Need, an NGO. 
“Militants come down and attempt to recruit people. They grab young guys and 
force families to feed them, or to give one of their sons to the fight.”


She said residents are being pressured by an influx of militants from Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/07/afghans-leave-pakistan-peshawar-massacre-crackdown-khyber-pakhtunkhwa>
, where a long-standing military campaign in North Waziristan has pushed over 
300,000 people across the border. More than 50,000 undocumented Afghans have 
also left Pakistan since December after harassment from authorities, according 
to the International Organisation for Migration. There are likely a substantial 
number of potential insurgents among the displaced, said Jensen.
 