
Putting old differences aside, Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and Pakistan are fighting the 
same enemy. That seemed to be the message as the leaders of the two countries 
met in Kabul, pledging to work together to fight terrorism.

“I assure you, Mr President, that the enemies of Afghanistan cannot be friends 
of Pakistan,” Pakistan’s prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, said in a press 
conference on Tuesday during his first visit to Kabul since the inauguration of
Ashraf Ghani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani> as Afghan 
president.

Sharif came to the Afghan capital after Ghani’s government worked for months 
to reboot relations withPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>. 
The visit also followed a recent meeting in Qatar between people connected to 
the Afghan government and the Taliban political leadership, which raised hopes 
of restarting peace talks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fafghanistan-and-pakistan-thaw-relations-with-pledge-to-fight-terrorism-together%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431447507724%2F3e704dd0-3f41-4a9e-996d-e9e78024b528-1734x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghanistan%20and%20Pakistan%20thaw%20relations%20with%20pledge%20to%20fight%20terrorism%20together&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fafghanistan-and-pakistan-thaw-relations-with-pledge-to-fight-terrorism-together%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghanistan%20and%20Pakistan%20thaw%20relations%20with%20pledge%20to%20fight%20terrorism%20together&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fafghanistan-and-pakistan-thaw-relations-with-pledge-to-fight-terrorism-together%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431447507724%2F3e704dd0-3f41-4a9e-996d-e9e78024b528-1734x2040.jpeg>
 The former Afghan president Hamid Karzai. ‘We want a friendly relationship but 
not to be under Pakistan’s thumb,’ he said. Photograph: S Sabawoon/EPA 
Reconciliation with Pakistan has been top of Ghani’s agenda since his 
inauguration in September. The Afghan president has called for cooperation on 
intelligence matters and previously hosted Pakistan’s army chief, General 
Raheel Sharif (no relation to the prime minister), who was also part of 
Tuesday’s delegation along with intelligence chief, General Rizwan Akhtar.

Ghani has also sought to soothe Pakistani concerns about Indian influence in 
Afghanistan. Relegating India to the periphery of his foreign policy, Ghani has 
sent a group of army cadets to an academy in Pakistan as opposed toIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, where Afghan soldiers are normally 
trained, and suspended a request for Indian weapons.

For his part, Sharif vowed on Tuesday to help target militants hiding out in 
border areas, and to work more closely to fight regional terrorism.

“Any effort by any militant or group to destabilise Afghanistan will be dealt 
with severely and such elements will be outlawed and hunted down,” Sharif said.

After years of accusing each other of nurturing terrorists to fight across the 
border, both countries now have relatively new leaders. And the mutually 
friendly tone sounds sincere, said Scott Smith, director for Afghanistan and 
central Asia at the United States Institute for Peace.

“The thaw in relations between the two governments is definitely real,” said 
Smith. “The question is how long it will last.”

Domestically, Ghani’s foreign policy shift has been highly controversial and 
marks a stark departure from his predecessor,Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, who tried to strong-arm 
Pakistan and attempted to engage with the Taliban without consulting Islamabad.

People close to the former president are dismayed by what they see as a 
servile, one-way relationship, in which Ghani concedes too much without getting 
anything in return.

In an interview with the Guardian in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/09/hamid-karzai-if-we-give-up-control-of-our-foreign-policy-pakistan-taliban-ashraf-ghani-india>
, Karzai warned Ghani not to bow to Pakistani pressure.

Hamid Karzai: Afghanistan should not give up control of its foreign policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/09/hamid-karzai-if-we-give-up-control-of-our-foreign-policy-pakistan-taliban-ashraf-ghani-india>
 “We want a friendly relationship but not to be under Pakistan’s thumb,” 
Karzai said.

 Karzai’s opinion is one to take seriously. The former president still holds 
influence and his public tirades might stoke discontent among people already 
impatient after more than a year of political gridlock.

To convince Afghans that he is not selling the country short, Ghani will need 
some tactical concessions from Pakistan.

“That’s where things can go wrong,” Smith said. “If he doesn’t get enough soon 
enough, then he will be vulnerable to his domestic critics.”

The change at the helm in Kabul does seem to have convinced Pakistan to engage 
in friendlier relations.

Abdul Qadir Baloch, a retired general now serving as the minister for states 
and frontier regions, said last year’s election of Ghani had finally pushed 
Pakistan’s leadership to drop support for the AfghanTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>.

“The Taliban should understand that difficult days are ahead for them,” he 
said. “The pressure is coming and they will not have anyone to look to for 
help.”

Baloch said the years when Afghan insurgents enjoyed security and sanctuary 
inside Pakistan were at an end and that both countries were now “on the same 
grid, on the same wavelength”.

He said: “They are to be killed and arrested wherever they are. This side will 
kill them, that side will kill them.”

However, with the launch of their annual spring offensive, the Taliban has 
made recent inroads in several Afghan provinces. And while Pakistani 
politicians swear to fight the insurgency side by side with their Afghan 
partners, the country’s military is accused of continuing to foment turmoil 
across the border.

Since last summer, military bombardments in North Waziristan have pushed more 
than 300,000 refugees into Afghanistan. Following a Taliban massacre in 
December at a school in Peshawar, about 70,000 moreundocumented Afghans have 
left Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/07/afghans-leave-pakistan-peshawar-massacre-crackdown-khyber-pakhtunkhwa>
, according to the International Organisation for Migration 
<http://www.iom.int/>. Most have left after harassment from the authorities.

Still, Pakistan’s government claims to have done away with a distinction they 
have been accused of making for decades between so-called “good Taliban”, who 
fought against a detested Kabul regime and their western and Indian allies, and 
the “bad Taliban” fighting for a full-blown sharia state in Pakistan.

Baloch said there was now “no question of good or bad”. “We don’t have any 
good, and they don’t have any good. We have bad and they have bad. We have 
understood that now,” he said.

 