
The Afghan president has condemned the killing of David Gilkey, a veteran news 
photographer and video editor for National Public Radio, and the Afghan 
journalist Zabihullah Tamanna.The men died in an insurgent ambush on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/05/npr-journalist-david-gilkey-zabihulla-tamanna-killed-afghanistan>
, while on assignment in southern Afghanistan.

Journalist David Gilkey and interpreter Zabihulla Tamanna killed in Afghanistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/05/npr-journalist-david-gilkey-zabihulla-tamanna-killed-afghanistan>
Gilkey and Tamanna were travelling with an Afghan army unit near Marjah in 
Helmand province on Sunday afternoon when the convoy came under fire and their 
vehicle was struck, the network’s spokeswoman, Isabel Lara, said in a 
statement. Two otherNPR <https://www.theguardian.com/media/npr> journalists, 
Tom Bowman and the producer Monika Evstatieva, were traveling with them and 
were not hurt.

President Ashraf Ghani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani> called 
the attack cowardly and “completely against all the principles and values of 
Islam and humanity, and against all international laws”.

In a statement from the presidential palace, Ghani was quoted as saying that 
the Taliban did not distinguish between the military, civilians and 
journalists, and that they killed Gilkey and Tamanna as the two were reporting 
on the war. He offered condolences to the families of the two journalists.

Later on Monday, Ghani travelled to Helmand to assess the security situation 
in the rich opium poppy field region, which gives the world most of its heroin, 
controlled by the Taliban.

The US embassy in Kabul and Gen John W Nicholson, commander of the US-Nato 
mission inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, also 
offered condolences.

“David and Zabihullah, in particular, spent years in Afghanistan tirelessly 
endeavoring to tell the story of the Afghan people,” Nicholson said in a 
statement. “We have the utmost respect for their work as well as those others 
that endure the hardships that come with reporting from conflict zones.”

John Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, the US secretary 
of state, called the killing of Gilkey and Tamanna “a grim reminder of the 
danger that continues to face the Afghan people, the dedication of Afghan 
national defense and security forces to securing their country, and of the 
courage of intrepid journalists – and their interpreters – who are trying to 
convey that important story to the rest of the world”.

The deputy spokesman for the 215th army corps in Afghanistan’s southern 
Helmand province, Maj Abdul Qader, told the Associated Press the vehicle Gilkey 
and Tamanna were travelling in came under sustained Taliban attack not far from 
the main army base in Marjah. He said their Humvee was “only 300m to 400m from 
the army base when suddenly they came under attack”.

The Humvee was hit by a rocket-propelled grenade, he said. A total of five 
people were in the Humvee at the time – Gilkey, Tamanna, a heavy machine gun 
operator who was on the roof of the vehicle, as well as an Afghan army soldier 
and driver.

The driver and the machine gunner were also killed, Qader said. The attack 
lasted 30 to 40 minutes, he said, during which time army helicopters were 
called in to provide air support.

“The bodies were taken to the army base immediately after the attack, and then 
transported by helicopter to the corps command,” he said. Later, Gilkey and 
Tamanna’s bodies were taken to Camp Bastion, the main army base in Helmand, 
formerly under the command of US marines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fafghanistan-npr-journalists-killed-david-gilkey-ashraf-ghani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51ad9c2f599cd110e00eddc49b346fe5778b6dce%2F0_179_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghanistan%20president%20condemns%20killing%20of%20NPR%20journalists%20in%20ambush&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fafghanistan-npr-journalists-killed-david-gilkey-ashraf-ghani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghanistan%20president%20condemns%20killing%20of%20NPR%20journalists%20in%20ambush&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fafghanistan-npr-journalists-killed-david-gilkey-ashraf-ghani%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51ad9c2f599cd110e00eddc49b346fe5778b6dce%2F0_179_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 David Gilkey is pictured at Kandahar airfield in Afghanistan. Photograph: 
Handout/Reuters 
Gilkey had covered conflict and war in Iraq and Afghanistan since the 9/11 
attacks on Washington and New York and was committed to helping the public see 
the wars and the people caught up in them, NPR’s senior vice-president of news 
and editorial director, Michael Oreskes, said in a statement.

“As a man and as a photojournalist, David brought out the humanity of all 
those around him. He let us see the world and each other through his eyes,” 
Oreskes said.

Tamanna, 37, was a freelance journalist who often worked as a translator for 
NPR, Lara, the spokeswoman, said in an email. Known as Zabi, he had many years 
of experience working as a reporter, cameraman and photographer for local and 
international news organizations in Afghanistan.

He worked in Kabul as a photographer for China’s Xinhua news agency and also 
reported for Turkey’s Anadolu News Agency. He leaves a wife and three young 
children, two boys and a girl.

The Afghan Journalists’ Safety Committee described him as one of the country’s 
most experienced journalists. He had a degree in law and political science from 
Kabul University and aside from his work in daily news, he worked as a legal 
adviser to a local media consultancy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fafghanistan-npr-journalists-killed-david-gilkey-ashraf-ghani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0a2b8af63accfd8e53874e784fc400c05242dd%2F0_0_3870_2322%2F3870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghanistan%20president%20condemns%20killing%20of%20NPR%20journalists%20in%20ambush&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fafghanistan-npr-journalists-killed-david-gilkey-ashraf-ghani%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghanistan%20president%20condemns%20killing%20of%20NPR%20journalists%20in%20ambush&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fafghanistan-npr-journalists-killed-david-gilkey-ashraf-ghani%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb0a2b8af63accfd8e53874e784fc400c05242dd%2F0_0_3870_2322%2F3870.jpg>
 Zabihullah Tamanna, third right, talks with Afghan refugees in Jalalabad. 
Photograph: Parwiz Sabawoon/AFP/Getty Images 
Veteran correspondent Phillip Reeves, who recruited Tamanna to the network, 
called him “a great colleague”.

“He was a lovely man, with a great eye for a story and deep wisdom about his 
country,” Reeves said in a statement. “He clearly loved his family.”

Gilkey covered both national and international news for the radio network and 
its website and had made numerous trips to Afghanistan and Iraq, according to 
NPR’s website.

His work has been recognized with numerous awards, including the prestigious 
George Polk award and a national Emmy. The White House News Photographers 
Association named Gilkey its still photographer of the year in 2011. In 2015, 
he became the first multimedia journalist to receive the Edward R Murrow Award 
for his coverage of international breaking news, military conflicts and natural 
disasters.

Twenty-seven journalists have been killed in Afghanistan since 1992, according 
to the Committee to Protect Journalists, not counting Gilkey and Tamanna. 
Worldwide, nearly 1,200 journalists have died since 1992, according to CPJ’s 
website.

In addition to Iraq and Afghanistan, Gilkey covered the conflict between 
Israel and Hamas in Gaza, the devastating earthquake that shook Haiti in 2010, 
the fall of apartheid in South Africa, famine in Somalia, and war in Rwanda and 
the Balkans.

“The things to do were amazing and the places to see were epic,” Gilkey once 
said of his work. “But the people – the people are what made it all worth the 
effort.”

Gilkey’s first journalism job was with the Boulder Daily Camera in Colorado, 
where he covered local assignments for the paper and overseas assignments for 
Knight Ridder, according to NPR. He later joined the Detroit Free Press until 
he began working for NPR in 2007.
 