
Pakistan’s capital city has become the venue for direct talks between the 
Taliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> and a senior member of the 
Afghan government, raising hopes of a political breakthrough even as Kabul was 
hit by two separate suicide attacks.

Few details were made public about the first known talks between the two 
sides, held in the hugely symbolic location of Islamabad. A tweet from the 
office of the Afghan president,Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, said that members of the 
officially sanctioned high peace council had gone for “negotiations with the 
Taliban” on Tuesday. Pakistan’s foreign office spokesman said he knew nothing 
about the talks.
ارګ (@ARG_AFG) 
A delegation from the High Peace Council of Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> has traveled to Pakistan for 
negotiations with the Taliban.
 <https://twitter.com/ARG_AFG/status/618386083911331840> July 7, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ARG_AFG/status/618386083911331840> 
Intelligence officials said the two sides would break the ice over iftar, the 
sunset meal that for Muslims marks the end of a day’s fast during the month of 
Ramadan. Formal talks would then take place on Wednesday at an unnamed 
location, with Chinese diplomats invited to attend as observers, one official 
said.

China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is increasingly worried about 
instability and Islamist insurgency on its south-west flank and has been 
playing a growing role in efforts to broker a settlement between the Afghan 
government and the Taliban. A meeting between Afghan and Taliban officials took 
place under Chinese auspices in the western city of Urumqi in May.

The Pakistani intelligence official said there was a chance that US officials 
would also attend some of the Islamabad meetings. The official said there were 
three men on the Taliban team, but refused to reveal their names. A Taliban 
spokesman said he had no information about the talks and was unable to comment.

Although the high peace council is meant to operate independently of the 
government, the four-man Afghan team included the deputy foreign minister, 
Hekmat Karzai, a nephew of the former president Hamid Karzai, who has been a
fierce critic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/09/hamid-karzai-if-we-give-up-control-of-our-foreign-policy-pakistan-taliban-ashraf-ghani-india>
 of Ghani’s efforts to improve relations with Pakistan.


Pakistan’s prime minister, Nawaz Sharif, said the talks were “a major 
breakthrough”. During a visit to Norway, he said: “I hope there will be a 
positive outcome, which will certainly be very helpful for peace and stability 
in Afghanistan.”

In Kabul, a suicide car bomber targeted a Nato vehicle, injuring three people. 
Later, a guard was killed at an office of the Afghan spy agency when three 
insurgents attempted to storm the building.

Most observers agree that only a political settlement can significantly reduce 
the violence, but Ghani has been severely criticised at home for his attempts 
to enlist the help ofPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> to 
bring the Taliban to the peace table.

 Many Afghans hold Pakistan responsible for backing the Taliban in the first 
place and say Ghani’s concessions have failed to win results. Ghani’s 
government was particularly criticised for signing anintelligence-sharing 
agreement with Pakistan’s spy agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/19/afghan-backlash-over-governments-security-deal-with-pakistan>
, the Inter-Services Intelligence directorate (ISI), which is widely hated in 
Afghanistan.

Hasan Askari Rizvi, a veteran Pakistani security analyst, said the fact the 
discussions were being held in Islamabad would help Ghani deal with his furious 
domestic critics.


“Ghani is under a lot of pressure from the Afghan parliament and the Afghan 
bureaucracy who are all against Pakistan,” he said. “The fact talks are being 
held in Islamabad will enable him to say the Pakistanis are trying to help.”

Afghan officials have met members of the Taliban in the past but the movement 
has never acknowledged them as anything more than informal contacts. After 
Pakistan’s national security adviser revealed details of the Urumqi talks, the 
Taliban’s spokesman insisted no one involved had been authorised to speak on 
behalf of the movement.

In recent weeks Pakistan has warned of the limits of any negotiation, given 
that the Taliban is increasingly split, with field commanders unwilling to 
accept orders from a leadership based outside Afghanistan.

Further complicating any potential peace process is the rise of an offshoot of 
Islamic State in Afghanistan, which has succeeded in attracting the support of 
disillusioned Taliban fighters.

Recent media reports have suggested that even the Islamist warlord Gulbuddin 
Hekmatyar, a veteran of campaigns against Soviet troops in the 1980s and the 
more recent Nato intervention, has renounced the Taliban leader, Mullah Omar, 
in favour of Islamic State.

Rizvi said the pressure from rival militant groups could help push the Taliban 
towards a deal. “Already the Taliban is divided between fighting and talking. 
Those who believe in fighting will defect, which may force some groups to talk 
and go for an accommodation,” he said.
 