
Violence and threats against Afghanistan’s journalists by the country’s 
government and security forces are increasing,Human Rights Watch (HRW) says in 
a new report. 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2015/01/21/afghanistan-media-under-attack> 

It cites figures showing that 2014 was the most violent year on record for 
Afghan journalists with attacks up by 64% from 2013.

An already fragile media freedom has been jeopardised still further by 
intimidation and violence from both state and non-state figures, combined with 
a lack of government protection and waning international support.

The report, ‘Stop reporting or we’ll kill your family’: threats to media 
freedom in Afghanistan, 
<http://hrw.pr-optout.com/Tracking.aspx?Data=HHL%3d8%2c4487-%3eLCE593719%26SDG%3c90%3a.&RE=MC&RI=3225911&Preview=False&DistributionActionID=70611&Action=Follow+Link>
 documents harassment, intimidation and attacks on journalists along with the 
Afghan government’s failure to investigate and prosecute those responsible.

“Afghan officials, warlords and insurgents have threatened, assaulted and 
killed dozens of journalists since 2002 without any fear of prosecution,” said 
HRW’s deputy Asia director Phelim Kine.

“President Ashraf Ghani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani> needs 
to back-up his campaign promises to protect media freedom by bringing to 
justice anyone who abuses members of the press.”

HRW, in conducting more than 30 interviews with journalists, editors, 
publishers and media directors, discovered that many Afghan journalists 
self-censors by steering clear of reporting on sensitive issues.


Journalists working outside the country’s main cities are especially 
vulnerable to reprisals because they lack the protection provided by larger 
Afghan media organisations and international presence.

Throughout 2014, the Taliban explicitly threatened the media, most recently in 
the group’s statement on 13 December that journalists seen as supporting 
“western values” would be targeted for attack.

Female journalists face particularly formidable challenges. Social and 
cultural restrictions limit their mobility in urban as well as rural areas, and 
increase their vulnerability to threats and attacks, including sexual violence.


Kine said: “Afghanistan’s new government will need to address the security 
threats from all sides before journalists will have confidence that they can go 
to work without risking their lives”.

Source: HRW <http://www.hrw.org/news/2015/01/21/afghanistan-media-under-attack>
 