
Two things this week have made the hellishness of military violence painfully 
clear. The first,WikiLeaks' Afghanistan war logs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/afghanistan-the-war-logs>, describes 
in detail the horror of civilian casualties and "friendly fire" incidents. The 
second, from the same theatre, isSean Smith's chilling video of American 
marines in southern Helmand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/30/afghanistan-sean-smith-frontline-report>
. Faced with these portraits of war, empathy for the people caught up in it has 
been unavoidable.

But empathy alone is not enough. If you're not a pacifist, you accept that war 
is vile, but at times an inevitable part of life on Earth. The question is when 
and how it can be morally justified. Hence the importance of the just war 
tradition. Thinkers like the theologian Thomas Aquinas sought a way of 
containing war, by thinking through the desperate feelings that combat does and 
should evoke. The aim is to keep a steady view on the demands of natural 
justice, even when the fog of war threatens to blur everything.

The war logs <https://www.theguardian.com/world/war-logs> in particular afford 
us a steady view on this current conflict, and what's as unsettling as the 
tragedy they reveal is the possibility that we lost sight of those demands, at 
least on occasion. The crucial issue is whether that's happened. An answer can 
be found by thinking about the relationship betweenjus ad bellum and jus in 
bello â€“ the justification for the war itself, and the principles that should 
operate during the conduct of war. Both matter.

Let's assume the war in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is justified, and focus on the 
jus in bello. One of Aquinas's major contributions was the notion of 
proportionality: how to assess the bad consequences of otherwise well-intended 
military action. Michael Walzer, a leading modern just war theorist, notes that 
simply not to intend the death of civilians is not enough. That's "too easy". 
Instead, there must be a positive commitment to saving civilian lives, rather 
than just killing no more than is militarily necessary. "Civilians have a right 
to something more," he concludes. "And if saving civilian lives means risking 
soldiers' lives, the risk must be accepted."

This highlights a further painful question: how much extra risk must soldiers 
bear in order to save civilian lives? It's not a balance that can be determined 
ahead of time. Individual cases must be considered, as the Afghanistan war logs 
afford, and again give rise to concern.

It's with the use of heavily armed drones that this comes into particularly 
sharp focus. In Wired for War, Peter Warren Singer notes that "going to war" 
has become not so different from "going to work" for many robot operators, in 
the sense that the risk they face is virtually zero. They might be destroying a 
target at 4.30pm from the office, and be home by 6pm to read the kids a bedtime 
story.

Soldiers on the ground in Afghanistan face grave risks. That too is 
devastatingly obvious. But their sacrifice is undermined whenjus in bello is 
not considered in the round. For what distinguishes war from mass murder is 
precisely respecting the rights of civilians. Has due care been taken? Have all 
feasible precautions been made to protect non-combatants, even when the Taliban 
and al-Qaida erode the distinction between civilians and military by placing 
combat facilities in residential areas? What the war logs confirm is that 
remote aerial bombardments cannot always verify targets.Jus in bello is under 
threat.

This isn't just an abstract argument. As civilians die, so conflict deepens 
interminably. To ignore the just war tradition now is to run the real danger 
that automated 21st-century conflict will turn into perpetual war.
 