
The Afghan war logs story has proved to be a global journalistic phenomenon. 
The Guardian, the New York Times and Der Spiegel last week made history by 
simultaneously releasing stories about this huge classified US military archive.

The logs hold 92,000 field reports, many of them ugly and grim. The three 
papers mined revelations about the cruel toll on civilians in the nine-year 
conflict, and about futile firefights which have cost the lives of so many 
western soldiers.

The media trio did this work while WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>, a hitherto little-known 
organisation, simultaneously posted virtually the entire raw archive online, 
holding back only a small number of files which it thought might endanger local 
informants.

The project appeared to take the Pentagon by surprise. As the revelations 
swamped the world's headlines, calls grew for investigations into the civilian 
killings. There were diplomatic storms over allegations of Pakistan backing for 
the Taliban. Damage control efforts by the White House did not improve until 
the weekend. We then saw the spectacle of generals, with gallons of innocent 
civilian blood on their hands, orating that WikiLeaks had potentially failed to 
do enough to protect local Afghans.

Some media organisations, who had not got the story themselves, then joined 
in. One disappointed paper deliberately provided the Taliban with a to-do list: 
it drew their attention to specific Wikileaks documents they might inspect in 
order to take reprisals. The low point was perhaps reached by Channel 4 News, 
which respectfully quoted a "spokesman" for the bearded murderers, as he 
uttered promises of revenge on alleged informants. It felt like PR for the 
Taliban.

There are, however, legitimate questions about how we got this unprecedented 
story, and how we handled it. We have no secrets to hide about how it was done: 
and indeed, it was perhaps a transformative moment in modern journalism, worth 
a bit of study.

Did we serve as agents for WikiLeaks, a group called "information vandals"? No 
we didn't. What actually happened was that my Guardian colleague Nick Davies, 
in an inspired moment, tracked down nomadic WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, 
in Brussels, about a month ago.

In six hours of intensive talks, Davies established three things that could 
never have happened before the internet age.

One, that the US army had built a huge database with six years of sensitive 
military intelligence material in it. Two, that many thousands of US soldiers 
had access to this electronic archive, and some had been able to download 
copies.

And three, WikiLeaks now had one copy which it proposed to publish immediately 
online, via a series of uncensorable global servers.

Many of WikiLeaks' supporters believe in the hacker creed – that everything 
residing in other people's computers is fair game, particularly if it helps 
subvert the world's oppressive empires and corporations. Davies eventually 
persuaded Assange to let the Guardian examine the material first. Other media 
organisations were included from the start.

There were some things as professional journalists that we were clear about. 
We would all write independently. That's why the New York Times, for example, 
had a different emphasis from the Guardian on Pakistani intelligence 
activities. WikiLeaks didn't have any role in writing any of our articles. And 
secondly, it went without dispute from the outset that we would not, if we 
could help it, publish raw data that might endanger individuals back in 
Afghanistan.

Wikileaks was in a rather different position. Assange says that they 
subsequently responded to a White House request in advance, passed back via the 
New York Times, to redact informant material. They asked the Pentagon for 
assistance, but got no response. As a result, he says, WikiLeaks did their best 
with their own resources.

Meanwhile, a secret "bunker" was set up on the fourth floor of the Guardian's 
London office at Kings Place. Behind locked doors, our own database was 
improvised by developer Harold Frayman to enable us to interrogate what had 
arrived as an enormous spreadsheet. Eric Schmitt, from New York, and John 
Goetz, from Der Spiegel in Berlin, flew over a team of almost a dozen that 
ended up working on the project in the Guardian, including librarians to decode 
hundreds of baffling military acronyms, and a data visualiser, Alastair Dant, 
to produce cutting-edge interactive maps.

We traditional journalists and war correspondents had a crash course in 
computer-assisted reporting. A painful early discovery was that Excel 
spreadsheets, the basic tool of many businesses, didn't like this particular 
job. It transpired that Excel will only handle 65,000 rows at a time. We'd 
"lost" 26,000 other files without realising it.

I suspect we'll go faster next time, as we hone our electronic skills.

David Leigh is the Guardian's investigations editor

How others saw the Wikileaks expose

Jay Rosen, NYU professor of journalism 
<http://journalism.nyu.edu/pubzone/weblogs/pressthink/2010/07/26/wikileaks_afghan.html#reactions>

If you go to the WikiLeaks Twitter profile, next to "location" it says: 
Everywhere. Which is one of the most striking things about it: the world's 
first stateless news organisation. In media history up to now, the press is 
free to report on what the powerful wish to keep secret because the laws of a 
given nation protect it. But WikiLeaks is able to report on what the powerful 
wish to keep secret because the logic of the internet permits it. This is new. 
Also, can we agree that a news organisation with a paywall wouldn't even be in 
contention?

Alexis Madrigal, a senior editor for TheAtlantic.com 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2010/07/wikileaks-may-have-just-changed-the-media-too/60377/>

While the impact of the documents and newspaper reportage on the war in 
Afghanistan will take a while to suss out, the publication of these documents 
will be seen as a milestone in the new news ecosystem. This story – and the 
organisation behind it – is obviously singular. It's being described as one of 
the largest leaks in US military history. (Though it's worth noting that the 
value of the information is not totally clear yet.) But it also fits into a 
broader trend. Traditional media organisations are increasingly reaching out to 
different kinds of smaller outfits for help compiling data and conducting 
investigations.

Farhad Manjoo, Slate's technology columnist <http://www.slate.com/id/2262066> 

Is radical transparency compatible with total anonymity? If we don't know who 
the leaker is, why he's leaking, and how he came upon his information, can we 
really know the full story the document tells? More importantly, how can we 
know that the information is authentic? Look deeply into WikiLeaks' efforts at 
radical transparency and you find complete opacity; WikiLeaks wants to shine a 
light on the world, but only by keeping itself shrouded in secrecy. Consider 
the Afghanistan war logs. The fact that the leaker wants to minimise harm 
suggests that he, like most whistle-blowers, has some sort of agenda. That 
agenda is a part of the story, and it could provide valuable context for all of 
this data. If WikiLeaks really is legally bound to never release the identity 
of its leakers, can't it still find out, for itself, the identity of its 
sources – if only as a way to more thoroughly check out their leaks. Perhaps 
this would put WikiLeaks in some kind of legal or physical jeopardy; maybe 
Julian Assange [below] or his staff could be jailed or harassed for not 
identifying their sources. According to Assange, though, that's already the 
case. These risks he takes to protect his sources are probably one of the main 
reasons the leakers trust WikiLeaks with their information. Given the site's 
track record, would many leakers balk if WikiLeaks began asking them simple 
questions? Let me offer a few suggestions: Who are you, how did you find this 
document, and why are you leaking it now?

Jeff Jarvis, from buzzmachine <http://www.buzzmachine.com/>

The Afghan war logs story is a case study in what Alan Rusbridger would call 
the mutualisation of journalism. I'd call it collaboration. The leakers and 
their medium – that is, their mediator, Wikileaks – did what they did and the 
paper's journalists added value: digging through the data, giving it 
perspective, editing out dangerous pieces, getting reaction, and then giving it 
audience and attention. When you don't add value and someone else can perform 
the task as stenographer or leaker or reporter – and you can link to it – then 
that means you save resources and money. This means journalists need to look at 
where they add maximum value.
 