
It may have surprised David Cameron to find his comments to the Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/10/david-cameron-afghanistan-nigeria-possibly-most-corrupt-countries>
 about Nigeria and Afghanistan making headlines, but the current Afghan and 
Nigerian leaderships are fully aware that their countries are riddled with 
corruption, and have been fighting to turn around the pervasive culture since 
their respective elections.

No 10 is delighted that Muhammadu Buhari, Nigeria’s president, and Ashraf 
Ghani, the president of Afghanistan, are attendinga summit in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/cameron-to-propose-global-anti-corruption-agency-at-summit>
 specifically because they have acknowledged the fight against corruption is 
central to their respective countries’ economic revival.

While both leaders have been internally and internationally challenged about 
the extent to which their verbal commitments are being acted upon, both 
countries claim that they have devoted huge energy to trying to change the 
accountability of their administrations. Neither country would directly comment 
on Cameron’s remarks.

Transparency International downgraded Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> on its corruption index in 
2015, ranking it 166th, above only Somalia and North Korea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fafghan-nigerian-leaderships-well-aware-corruption-problems%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5be894863bcb9900dddf029ed0499d306d6e4a81%2F0_374_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghan%20and%20Nigerian%20leaderships%20well%20aware%20of%20corruption%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fafghan-nigerian-leaderships-well-aware-corruption-problems%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghan%20and%20Nigerian%20leaderships%20well%20aware%20of%20corruption%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fafghan-nigerian-leaderships-well-aware-corruption-problems%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5be894863bcb9900dddf029ed0499d306d6e4a81%2F0_374_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 David Cameron in a meeting with Muhammadu Buhari. Photograph: Stefan 
Rousseau/PA 
Ghani, who has been in office since 2014, told an EU delegation in Kabul this 
week: “The administrative corruption is still a big challenge. We are firmly 
committed to fighting it and bringing reforms to ensure good governance and 
rule of law.

“Corruption is a national shame … we will soon be mounting a national campaign 
to engage our public in the fight against corruption,” he added, according to 
Xinhua. Ghani said the government was considering a proposal to establish a 
specialised anti-corruption justice centre.

Last month Franz-Michael Mellbin, the EU’s envoy to Afghanistan, said 
international donors felt corruption was getting worse. “What we need to be 
convinced about is that steps are being taken, that the country is moving in 
the right direction,”he said 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/afghan-president-ashraf-ghani-starts-new-body-to-fight-corruption-1461594413>
. “The biggest problem we face is impunity – the feeling people can get away 
with it and nothing happens and that needs to change.”

Billions locked in poverty by public sector corruption, report shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/index-perceived-corruption-billions-locked-in-poverty-by-public-sector>
Nigeria, where Buhari was elected president in March 2015, ranked 136th on 
Transparency International’sindex <http://www.transparency.org/cpi2015>. 
Although a series of high-profile prosecutions have started, critics say there 
have been few convictions and there is some evidence that prosecutors are 
targeting only members of the previous administration.

In a speech last week, the justice minister, Abubakar Malami, said corruption 
was endemic. “A patronage culture has evolved around a powerful elite that is 
in control of oil revenues and would do anything to maintain the status quo,” 
he said. “With weak systems of accountability, this has created a situation 
where corruption has become embedded and accepted as part of life inNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>.”

Malami added: “In Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/nigeria-calls-on-anti-corruption-summit-to-back-registers-of-ownership>
, ‘grand corruption’ has had a particularly destructive impact with a huge 
level of illicit asset flight and the illegal transfer of a large proportion of 
natural resource revenue out of Nigeria to offshore bank accounts or for 
investment in opaque economies.

“Building accountability and effective anti-corruption regime, actions and 
reforms have faced considerable political resistance that has resulted in 
limited progress, inconsistent policy and practice, complex structural 
arrangements and a highly politicised environment.”
 