
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> is confident the 
US will stump up billions of extra dollars for its army and police on top of 
the main chunk of a $4.1bn (Â£2.6bn) annual budget that is expected to be sealed 
at a Nato summit this month, an Afghan diplomat has said.

With foreign combat troops already heading home, and all due to be all gone by 
the end of 2014, there is little hope the impoverished country will be able to 
hold off the hardenedTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> 
insurgents without outside financial help.

Nato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> nations fighting in Afghanistan 
have informally agreed that they will top up $500m of Afghan government cash to 
reach $4.1bn annually, the amount western diplomats and the Afghan government 
say is sufficient to support 228,000 soldiers and police.

The deputy foreign minister, Jawed Ludin, said of the sum: "We are pretty 
confident that we will get that." But he added that while the money would cover 
the slimmed-down force numbers scheduled for 2017, it would cost more than that 
to pay for the much larger force expected to be securing the country in two 
years' time.

"The $4.1bn is the cost not of 352,000 [soldiers and police] but of the 
reduced size, which is 228,000," Ludin told journalists at a briefing in Kabul. 
"The United States will be paying for the gap between 2014 to 2017."

The speed of the reduction will depend on conditions across the country, which 
few experts believe will improve rapidly. The US embassy declined to comment on 
Ludin's remarks.

Afghanistan's own contribution could also go up, if finances allowed, Ludin 
said. If planned major copper and iron ore mines start production on schedule 
this decade, it could revolutionise the national budget.

The main funding deal is expected to be announced at a summit in Chicago on 
May 20-21, at which Nato heads of state will gather to agree their commitments 
to Afghanistan, along with other major non-military donors, such asJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, regional powers and international 
organisations.

Pakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> was issued a last-minute 
invitation to the gathering after signs that the country could be moving to 
reopen its Afghan border to Nato military supplies.

The route was closed nearly six months ago after US cross-border air strikes 
killed 24 Pakistani soldiers, forcing an expensive and logistically challenging 
rerouting of truck convoys through Russia and central Asia.

A spokesman for Pakistan's president, Asif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>, said he would consider 
the invitation, which the spokesman added was not linked to any reopening of 
the supply lines, the Associated Press news agency reported.

Ludin said there had been some "positive signs" from Pakistan that the border 
could soon reopen. "It may be resolved today or tomorrow, but as it stands, 
it's still unresolved," he said.

Last-minute summit planning was slightly overshadowed by suggestions that the 
top US and Nato commander in Afghanistan, General John Allen, could leave the 
country before his tour of duty ends. Allen is under initial consideration to 
become head of US-European command this winter, Reuters cited an anonymous US 
official as saying.

"Allen is one of the most widely respected leaders in the military. No one 
would bat an eye if he were nominated," the official told Reuters, adding that 
the plans were preliminary and could change.

If Allen does leave Kabul early, he would be the fourth successive commander 
of forces there to fail to see out his posting.Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> replaced General David 
McKiernan after taking office, as he sought a new strategy for the war.

General Stanley McChrystal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stanley-mcchrystal> then resigned in 
summer 2010 after Rolling Stone magazine quoted the commander and his aides 
making disparaging and "contemptuous" remarks about senior administration 
officials, including the president himself. McChrystal's successor, General 
David Petraeus, was appointed head of the CIA last summer.
 