
The Afghan government is finalising a peace deal with the insurgent leader 
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, possibly paving the way for a political return for one of 
the most notorious figures of Afghanistan’s modern history.


Some details remain unresolved, but a confidential draft agreement, seen by 
the Guardian, sheds light on concessions the Afghan government is willing to 
grant insurgents at a time when attempts at reconciliation with the Taliban are 
floundering.

Central to the deal is legal immunity from past crimes, including terrorist 
attacks. It raises questions about whether forgiveness will bring stability, or 
make Afghan politics even more toxic.

Hekmatyar, who heads the Hezb-i-Islami militant group, was a prominent Pashtun 
commander during the anti-Soviet resistance and the pre-Taliban civil war, 
during which he indiscriminately shelled Kabul. Before disappearing into hiding 
in 1997, following the Taliban takeover, he racked up an almost unparalleled 
record of human rights abuses.

According to the draft deal, the government led by Ashraf Ghani will offer 
Hekmatyar amnesty for past offences, as well as safe havens inside Afghanistan 
for him and members of his movement.According to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/12/world/asia/afghanistan-gulbuddin-hekmatyar.html?_r=0>
, residences, guards and vehicles for this purposecould amount to $4m (£2.8m)  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/12/world/asia/afghanistan-gulbuddin-hekmatyar.html>
 a year.

The government will also release an “agreed list” of Hezb-i-Islami prisoners, 
and will help resettle 20,000 refugees from Pakistan, many of whom are thought 
to be Hekmatyar’s followers. While the government cannot on its own have 
Hekmatyar removed from international terror lists, a central demand of his, it 
promises to use “all resources and efforts” to remove penalties imposed on him.

For his part, Hekmatyar pledges to cut ties to terrorist groups, and abide by 
the Afghan constitution. He also appears to have relinquished a longstanding 
demand that international forces leaveAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> before signing a peace deal.

If successful, Hekmatyar will not be the first alleged war criminal to 
reintegrate into post-2001 Afghan politics. Abdul Rashid Dostum, an Uzbek 
leader who was accused of suffocating Taliban prisoners in shipping containers, 
is now first vice-president. Abdul Rasul Sayyaf, whose followers committed 
ethnic massacres and who mentored 9/11 mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammad, was a 
presidential candidate in 2014.

Afghanistan executes six Taliban prisoners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/08/afghanistan-executes-six-taliban-prisoners-ashraf-ghani>
The amnesty inscribed in the deal has concerned human rights experts, who say 
Hekmatyar’s crimes are too abhorrent to be forgotten. His followers were behind
a 2013 suicide bombing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/17/world/asia/kabul-car-bomb-attack.html> 
killing 16, including six Americans. They have been accused of throwing acid in 
faces of women they thought dressed immodestly, ofsubmitting refugees in 
Pakistan to torture 
<https://books.google.com.af/books?id=4g5-vtpSzvUC&pg=PA255&lpg=PA255&dq=hekmatyar+torture+refugee+camps&source=bl&ots=9c59DR_uBu&sig=5At7BBor0Dn0czcqfLtohB9bnIE&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi6meDG2NbMAhUE7iYKHcdjAzsQ6AEIIzAC#v=onepage&q=hekmatyar%20torture%20refugee%20camps&f=false>
.

“What could Hekmatyar possibly offer that would justify turning a blind eye to 
his past atrocities? Nothing,” said Patricia Gossman, senior Afghanistan 
researcher with Human Rights Watch. Attempts to “achieve stability by embracing 
the very people responsible for the worst crimes of the past few decades are 
misguided”, she said. “This impunity is not merely a symptom of the weakness of 
the Afghan state, but an underlying cause of it.”

Yet, representatives of ethnic groups who suffered at the hands of Hekmatyar 
struck a more conciliatory tone. “This is not the Hezb-i-Islami of 20 years 
ago,” said Zahir Sadaat, a Tajik MP from Panjshir.

Abdul Satar Khawasi, a Tajik MP from Parwan, said: “They are not that powerful 
anymore. If Hekmatyar came to Kabul, it would help the peace process, and help 
bring peace and stability to Afghanistan”. However, both agreed that the 
government should not give powerful positions to Hekmatyar.

While Hekmatyar’s political importance has waned over the years, a peace deal 
could, as one western official put it: “be a litmus test of actual 
reconciliation – can the Kabul elite absorb a big new player? Can the refugees 
resettle peacefully? It’s an important moment.”
 