
Afghanistan’s president will meet world powers at a major conference in 
Brussels in a bid to secure financial aid from the international community up 
to 2020 to rebuild the war-ravaged nation.


The meeting on 4 and 5 October will try to drum up support from an 
international community suffering from aid fatigue as it grapples with 
conflicts in Syria and Iraq plus the worst migration crisis since the second 
world war.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry, and the UN secretary general, Ban 
Ki-moon, are among those who will join hosts Afghan presidentAshraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani> and EU president Donald Tusk.

Deadly US drone strike in Afghanistan not disputed but victims' identities are
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/deadly-drone-strike-afghanistan-isis-civilians>
Financial support is “crucial” in order “to bring about a new strategic shift 
towards stabilisation and possibly peace” inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, despite the country not having 
“been in the headlines for many years”, officials said before the conference.

“Nobody can afford for Afghanistan to destabilise again,” a senior EU official 
added.

More than 70 countries and 25 international organisations will attend the 
event, which comes just before the 15th anniversary of the US-led invasion of 
Afghanistan after the 9/11 attacks.

Afghanistan is still struggling to negotiate peace with the Taliban and other 
militant groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/14/afghanistan-ready-to-sign-truce-with-insurgent-group-hezb-i-islami>
 who continue to wage a bloody insurgency.

The Brussels conference follows up from a meeting in Tokyo in 2012 where the 
international community agreed to provide four billion euros a year in funding 
until the end of 2016.


Afghanistan ready to sign truce with notorious insurgent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/14/afghanistan-ready-to-sign-truce-with-insurgent-group-hezb-i-islami>
It also comes two years after the London Conference on Afghanistan at which 
then newly-elected president Ashraf Ghani vowed to build a more self-reliant 
Afghanistan.

Ghani said last week in Kabul that “in Brussels, your government will 
represent all of you women, men, all of you. In Brussels the world is going to 
reiterate their economic commitments again”.

He added: “We are taking Brussels very seriously. After we return from 
Brussels we have to work together, this is the importance of it.”

The international community will make pledges for the next four years but 
officials would not be drawn on the level of funding in comparison to the four 
billion euros a year agreed in Tokyo.

“The pledging exercise remains a difficult one and very fluid until the last 
moments,” one EU official said. “The three billion mark is passed, but we don’t 
know where we’ll end up.”

'Butcher of Kabul' pardoned in Afghan peace deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/butcher-of-kabul-pardoned-in-afghan-peace-deal>
The EU itself will sign a state building contract of 200 million euros for 
2017-2018 at the conference, honouring its commitment to an annual budget for 
that amount for Afghanistan.

But payouts will depend on whether Afghanistan meets its political and 
financial reform commitments, as well as political transparency.

The conference comes after Nato countries agreed at a summit in Warsaw in July 
to maintain troop numbers in Afghanistan and uphold a pledge of $5 billion a 
year for local security forces for the next four years.


EU officials expressed some optimism about Afghanistan’s human development. 
Under the country’s new unity government, “the speed of reforms has 
significantly increased when compared to previous administrations”, said an EU 
official.

“The Afghan government has by and large delivered on our expectations and 
exceeded them,” he added.

A recent diplomatic success for the country was the signing of a peace accord 
on 22 September withthe Islamic organisation Hezb-i-Islami, led by former 
premier Gulbuddin Hekmatyar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/butcher-of-kabul-pardoned-in-afghan-peace-deal>
.

The country has also made progress in areas of women’s rights, anti-corruption 
measures and revenue collection.

EU officials denied the pledges would have conditions attached, after the leak 
of an EU memo in March that suggested financial pledges would be made in return 
for Afghanistan accepting 80,000 asylum-seekers deported from EU countries.
 