
Human rights groups have urged the whistleblowing website WikiLeaks to remove 
thousands of names from the leakedAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> war logs over fears of "deadly 
ramifications" for the people identified.

Five human rights organisations including Amnesty International and the Open 
Society Institute, have written to WikiLeaks to express their concerns about 
the biggest leak inUS military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military>
 history, according to the Wall Street Journal.

The email says: "We have seen the negative, sometimes deadly ramifications for 
those Afghans identified 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703428604575419580947722558.html?mod=WSJEUROPE_hpp_MIDDLESecondNews>
 as working for or sympathising with international forces. We strongly urge 
your volunteers and staff to analyse all documents to ensure that those 
containing identifying information are taken down or redacted."

Erica Gaston, Afghanistan specialist at the Open Society Initiative, confirmed 
the group were alarmed by the failure ofWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> to redact the names.

"We are worried about the ramifications. Unama has released its report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/10/afghanistan-civilian-deaths-up-un>
 today on the protection of civilians and one of the startling trends is that 
assassinations have skyrocketed in the last year," she told the Guardian.

"The Taliban have announced they are going through these documents for names, 
and in the past when they have identified those in contact with the 
international military they have targeted them and killed them. That is our 
number one concern.

All of us who have reached out to WikiLeaks applaud greater transparency and 
accountability. But all of us who have worked on the ground in Afghanistan know 
that you need to make sure sources and civilians are not put in harm's way by 
your work. In cases of releasing documents sometimes it is still possible to 
have the transparency but redacting to the names involved."

The signatories to the letter also include the International Crisis Group and 
the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC).

"We fear the names could create new targets" 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5iLMaOZR59oHl0PAjKQfkTgZmQJ9w>
, Nader Nadery, the president of the AIHRC, told the French news agency AFP.

The WikiLeaks editor, Julian Assange, replied to the letter by asking the 
groups concerned to help WikiLeaks redact the names. He also threatened to 
expose Amnesty if it refused to provide staff to help with the task, according 
to the Wall Street Journal.

Last week the Pentagon stepped up its pressure on WikiLeaks to delete the files
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/06/wikileaks-pressure-pentagon-military-files>
.

Assange said WikiLeaks had tried to comply with a private White House request 
to redact the names of informants before publication, but the US authorities 
had refused to assist.

Assange expressed his frustration on the WikiLeaks Twitter feed yesterday. 
"Pentagon wants to bankrupt us by refusing to assist review.Media won't take 
responsibility. Amnesty won't. What to do?" 
<http://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/20664647314> he tweeted.

WikiLeaks posted more than 76,900 records of incidents and intelligence 
reports about the Afghan war on its website last month, providing a devastating 
portrait of the failing war. Some of the documents contain details of Afghans 
who have dealt with the coalition.

WikiLeaks withheld around 15,000 reports to protect informants.

The Guardian, the New York Times and the German weekly Der Spiegel were shown 
the documents before they were leaked andpublished edited extracts with details 
of the individuals removed <https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-war-logs>. 
Yesterday thereaders' editor of the Guardian, Chris Elliott, explained the 
steps the paper had taken before publishing extracts of the documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/aug/09/afghanistan-war-logs-readers-editor>
.

The spat between Assange and the human rights groups appears to mark a major 
falling out. Last year he won Amnesty's award for new media work for exposing 
extrajudicial killings in Kenya.
 