
The Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, has sent his top spy, 
diplomat and defence chief to Pakistan for a last-ditch attempt to rescue a 
relationship which he once promised would hold the key to peace but now 
threatens his credibility as a leader.

Ghani invested huge amounts of energy and political capital in repairing ties 
with Pakistan, a neighbour widely reviled inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and often blamed for fomenting 
war because the Taliban find safe haven in its mountainous border regions and 
major cities.

Although the effort drew heavy criticism, Ghani could point to solid – if slow 
– progress, including thefirst official peace talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/08/afghanistan-and-taliban-peace-talks-end-with-promise-to-meet-again>
 between the Taliban and the Kabul government, held in a Pakistani resort town.

Kabul: death toll rises in deadliest 24 hours Afghan capital has seen in years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/afghanistan-35-killed-in-deadliest-24-hours-capital-kabul-has-seen-in-years>
But this weekend Kabul was devastated by a string of complex attacks that 
killed over 50 people and injured hundreds inthe capital’s bloodiest day for 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/afghanistan-35-killed-in-deadliest-24-hours-capital-kabul-has-seen-in-years>
.

Afghans were outraged, and in a powerful speech in the aftermath of the 
bombings, Ghani warned that they would spell the end of his rapprochement if 
Islamabad did not respond strongly. “We hoped for peace, but war is declared 
against us from Pakistani territory,” hetold the country 
<http://president.gov.af/en/news/translation-of-remarks-by-president-ashraf-ghani-at-press-conference#>
, in a televised address that won an unusual amount of praise across the Afghan 
political spectrum.

“I ask the government and people of Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> to imagine that a terrorist attack 
just like the one in Kabul ... took place in Islamabad and the groups behind it 
had sanctuaries in Afghanistan and ran offices and training centres in our big 
cities. What would have been your reaction?”

Now at stake are not only Afghan hopes of peace, but also Ghani’s own 
credibility, after months of promising that considerable concessions to a 
much-resented neighbour were part of a strategic negotiation rather than a 
naive giveaway.

Ghani had sent officer cadets to train in Pakistan, shared intelligence 
information and helped hunt down Pakistani insurgents who had taken refuge on 
Afghan soil, including six involved ina horrific attack on a Peshawar school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/17/five-arrested-in-afghanistan-over-peshawar-school-massacre>
.

Afghans say they want the same help chasing down the men behind the weekend 
attacks, which targeted military and police bases but mostly killed civilians.

Ghani also loosened ties with Pakistan’s great regional rival, India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, shelving a request for heavy 
weaponry from the country in February.

“He’s gambled a lot, but with very little to show for it so far, and almost 
all of his political capital is used up on this side of the border,” said Kate 
Clark from the Afghanistan Analysts Network, adding that Pakistan would 
probably struggle to allay Afghan suspicion without taking direct action against
Taliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> insurgents.

Clark said: “They [the Kabul government] have been given reassurances before, 
and come back with security cooperation agreements before, and little has 
changed. That may be one of the problems this time. The normal things have been 
tried with no success.”

Ghani warned Islamabad that the decisions it made in coming weeks would affect 
bilateral ties for years, after Afghanistan “made all sincere efforts” in 
pursuit of peace with little return.

The US has also urged the two countries to continue cooperation. “It is in the 
urgent interest of both countries to eliminate safe havens and to reduce the 
operational capacity of the Taliban on both sides of the border,” State 
Department spokesman John Kirbysaid after the attacks 
<http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/dpb/2015/08/245836.htm#AFGHANISTAN>.


Taliban capacity inside Pakistan may offer Ghani the only grim hope for real 
change. Pakistani officials and military commanders who once nurtured links to 
the Afghan Taliban now worry about how insecurity is spreading across the 
border.

Clark said: “As one senior Afghan official said, Afghanistan and Pakistan 
don’t have an ‘exit strategy’ from each other. It’s not like they can go home. 
They are neighbours and they have to live with each other.”

At the site of a deadly truck bombing in Kabul on 7 August, two locals put 
that message in blunter terms, holding up aposter above the wreckage 
<http://www.stripes.com/news/taliban-attacks-could-be-negotiating-ploy-analysts-say-1.362434>
 that read: “Pakistan, if we burn, you burn with us.”
 