
The Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, has promised US lawmakers his 
country will be able to pay for its own security forces within a decade, during 
a trip to Washington designed to shore up American financial and military 
support.

“We don’t want your charity,” Ghani told a joint session of Congress the day 
after the White Houseagreed to maintain twice the anticipated level of US troops
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/24/us-troop-levels-afghanistan-2015>
in Afghanistan this year to assist with continued attacks from Taliban 
insurgents.

“We have no more interest in perpetuating a childish dependence than you have 
in being saddled with a poor family member who lacks the energy and drive to 
get out and find a job,” added Ghani. “We are not going to be the lazy uncle 
Joe.”

But the scale of the financial challenge was underlined in comments made 
before he left for Washington, in which he acknowledged his government is 
currently able to pay only $750,000 of the more than $4bn needed every year to 
sustain the Afghan security force. A decrease in foreign funding after 2016 
could forceAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to 
shrink its armed forces.

In the event of a withdrawal of military aid, Afghanistan’s security forces 
have planned on slashing its personnel by a third to about 230,000. However, 
with a rekindled insurgency in several provinces around the country, Afghan 
leaders fear they might not yet be ready for that scenario.

Last year saw the highest number of casualties among Afghan forces since the 
beginning of the war, bringing the total number of military casualties past 
10,000. In comparison, the US has lost about 2,350 troops since the beginning 
of the war in 2001. Last year, army lieutenant general Joseph Anderson,the 
second-in-charge coalition commandercalled the Afghan fatality rates “not 
sustainable”. 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2014/11/05/afghanistan-taliban-anderson-isaf-/18549665/>

Ahead of his trip to the US, Ghani suggested to western officials that he 
wanted the US to maintain 10,000 troops in Afghanistan for the next decade,
according to Associated Press 
<http://hosted2.ap.org/APDefault/*/Article_2015-03-21-AS--Afghanistan-US/id-eecca55cb2ce4998b98fb61673d83971>
.

But scepticism is growing in Washington due to continued corruption reports by 
US auditors, whose latest inspection report warned 
<http://www.sigar.mil/pdf/quarterlyreports/2015-01-30qr.pdf> that “coordination 
of assistance to Afghanistan remains an elusive goal”.

Ghani spoke frankly about the problem on Wednesday, but offered little new 
detail on how it would be tackled.

“Nearly 40 years of conflict has produced a country where corruption permeates 
our government,” he told Congress in a speech lasting over an hour. “Until we 
root out this cancer, our government will never win the trust of our people or 
your taxpayers.”

The Afghan president, who worked in the US for the World Bank and knows the 
country well, spent much of his speech paying tribute to American taxpayers, 
soldiers and politicians, who he thanked more than a dozen times.

“We owe a profound debt to the 2,350 servicemen and women killed and the more 
than 20,000 who have been wounded in service to your country and ours,” he said.

He also addressed US concerns about women’s rights, which have grown again 
recently in the wake of the death of a woman who was beaten by a mob after 
being falsely accused of burning a Qur’an.


Thousands march in Kabul demanding justice for woman killed by mob
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/24/farkhunda-thousands-march-in-kabul-demanding-justice-for-woman-killed-by-mob>
But Ghani’s speech seemed principally aimed at urging patience among American 
lawmakers and reminding them that internal security threats were also threats 
against US national security.

“Although we may be poor, we are very proud. Our goal of self-reliance is no 
pipe-dream told to pacify partners who are tired of hearing the promises that 
we later fail to keep,” he said.

“Ending corruption and impunity are the precursors of self-reliance, but the 
true test will be whether we can restore the fiscal basis of public 
expenditure.”

“We are determined to create the wealth that would not make us dependent,” 
added Ghani. “During this decade, we can assure you that we will be able to pay 
both for our security and delivery of our [public] services.”

 