
Ahmed Wali Karzai's house is a mansion in a blocked-off street in downtown 
Kandahar City, guarded by plain-clothed police and barely visible behind blast 
barriers.

This was where the president's half-brother, the most powerful man in southern 
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, held court and was 
killed last Tuesday by one of his lieutenants, for reasons that remain a 
mystery.

For a decade this, not the governor's palace, was arguably the real centre of 
power in the shadowy world of politics in Kandahar. Ahmed Wali was suspected of 
being a drug kingpin and accused of being a CIA proxy, but his killing has 
unsettled this ancient hub of southern Afghanistan, and deepened the sense of 
uncertainty.

The streets of Kandahar were as bustling as ever on Wednesday, with farmers 
hauling in harvests of melons, but under the surface there is anxiety about the 
future. Ahmed Wali's presence, both malign and benevolent, hovered above 
Kandahar. He was rumoured to be involved in everything from a dispute over car 
registration that benefited taxi drivers to the targeted assassinations that 
plague the city.

People here are already unsettled by the prospect of the transition from 
international to Afghan forces. Land prices are down in Aynomina, a wealthy 
residential district modelled on Californian gated communities, with 10ft 
boundary walls instead of white picket fences.

On Monday the Taliban intimidated mobile phone companies into closing their 
networks for two nights in a row. Such shutdowns, a show ofTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> strength, are common in the rural 
districts but unprecedented in what had been the relatively secure confines of 
the city.

"A lot of positive changes have occurred over the last 12 to 18 months, and he 
was part of that progress," said Brigadier General Kenneth Dahl, the senior 
Nato officer responsible for development and governance in the south. "It's 
clearly a setback."

There is widespread speculation in the city that Tooryalai Wesa, the region's 
governor, an Afghan-Canadian technocrat, will leave his post now that his 
friend and protector is gone. "I don't think he will stay much longer," one of 
the governor's close relatives confirmed.

A vacuum has opened in Kandahar as Ahmed Wali's erstwhile rivals and allies 
scramble for advantage. His most likely successor is either the former governor 
Gul Agha Sherzai or Ahmed Wali's brother-in-law, Aref Noorzai. Both are 
controversial figures due to accusations of corruption and links with militias. 
Neither appears popular in the city. There is particular resistance to Sherzai. 
Ghulam Haider Hamidi, the reformist mayor of Kandahar City, said: "If Gul Agha 
comes back I will leave the country the next day. We are trying to convince 
Wesa to stay."

An important hub of power in the city and the main bastion against Taliban 
influence is Camp Gecko, the CIA headquarters that was once the seat of power 
of Taliban leader Mullah Omar. The CIA had a turbulent partnership with Ahmed 
Wali but it was an important part of the West's strategy against the Taliban in 
Kandahar. "The second day after the Taliban fled Ahmed Wali brought a group of 
men to guard Mullah Omar's compound for the Americans," said Sayed Jan 
Khakrezwal, a former mujehadin commander who was close to Ahmed Wali. For the 
next two years, Khakrezwal said, he and other commanders would vouch for their 
men and send them to Ahmed Wali, who would supply them to the Kandahar Strike 
Force, a paramilitary unit working in tandem with the CIA.

Western officials often winced at Ahmed Wali's excesses and influence but they 
decided to work with him for pragmatic reasons. The future of this strategy is 
now in doubt.

"We were willing to take the risk of supporting someone who seemed to be 
corrupt in order to facilitate them being part of the solution, rather than 
part of the problem," said Dahl.

Ahmed Wali's assassin, Sardar Mohammed, also had CIA ties. He had spent two 
years with the Kandahar Strike Force, before leaving in 2007 to command a force 
of police and several checkpoints in the area around Ahmed Wali's hometown of 
Karz, according to friends and relatives.

Conspiracy theories abound in Kandahar around Ahmed Wali's death. Some point 
to feuds within the family that have already led to a number of deaths. Others 
point to Sardar Mohammed's links with the CIA. Members of the Karzai family 
have also made unsubstantiated accusations that Mohammed was a Taliban sleeper 
agent, a claim most observers in Kandahar doubt.

Ahmed Wali's killer does seem to have been personally troubled, however. A 
close friend, another Karzai-linked police commander who would eat with him at 
Ahmed Wali's house, said Mohammed had been addicted to alcohol and a purified 
form of heroin known locally as "glass".

Recently Mohammed had money problems, his friends and relatives say, and he 
had become involved in a dispute with the prosecutor's office over missing 
weapons.

He had asked Ahmed Wali to support him on this issue and papers he handed to 
Ahmed Wali before shooting him related to the case.

"Two days before the killing Sardar told me 'If they arrest me, please bring 
food for my wife and children'," his police friend said. "He was very anxious."

Mohammed's motives may never be known. The consequences of his actions, 
however, are tangible in Kandahar's streets, where fear for the future is 
fuelled by uncertainty over who will fill Ahmed Wali's shoes.

â€¢ This article was amended on 22 July 2011. Due to an editing error one 
sentence incorrectly stated that Brigadier Kenneth Dahl suggested Sardar 
Mohammed had CIA ties. This has been deleted.
 