
"This is a country ruled by kings. The king's brothers, cousins, sons are 
all-powerful. This is Afghanistan. It will change but it will not change 
overnight." The speaker, Ahmed Wali Karzai, was, as the quote implies, very 
much more than the head of Kandahar's provincial council. The half-brother of 
the president Hamid, he was suspected of protecting the drug cartels, although 
no one ever got the evidence to prove it. Millions of dollars of US military 
spending flowed through his hands. He rigged elections and got Taliban 
prisoners freed.Nothing moved on his patch without his say so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/12/ahmed-karzai-modern-afghan-warlord>
.

So when Ahmed Wali was gunned down on Tuesday by a family retainer, reactions 
were mixed.Hamid Karzai cried in public at his half brother's funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2011/jul/12/afghanistan-hamid-karzai-brother-assassination-video>
. But some hope that his death could be an opportunity to establish what 
Kandahar has long lacked â€“ decent government. The city is not only the 
powerbase of the Karzai family, but the focus of Barack Obama's surge of 33,000 
soldiers. And the ripples cast by the assassination spread well beyond.

Without his younger half-brother, Hamid Karzai is more vulnerable to a palace 
coup. The president has not just lost his enforcer in the south, but one of his 
"go to" men. Even if the brothers Karzai manage to fill the gap,the 
assassination should ring alarm bells in Washington and London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/12/ahmed-wali-karzai-killing-sparks-fears>
.

A lot is riding on the theory that when US troops withdraw, the Afghan 
National Army (ANA) will hold the territory that has been captured. US generals 
love to talk in numbers. The man in charge of the training programme, Lt 
General William Caldwell says that by November the combined strength of the 
Afghan army and the police with be 305,600. Let us set aside for a moment the 
observation that out of that number, there is still only one battalion, 600 
men, capable of planning and executing operations on their own. Set aside too, 
that Afghan soldiers are widely believed to be underfed.

At best, US and ISAF trainers are building a disembodied force, operationally 
independent from the machinations of the Karzais, the warlords, drug barons and 
tribal elders. Ahmed Wali's murder shows not only thatit is unlikely that the 
ANA will be able to keep the Taliban out of Kandahar when US troops depart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jul/13/ahmed-wali-karzai-kandahar-awk>
. It also shows that the strategy of fighting an insurgency on behalf of a 
corrupt ruling oligarchy which is hated by its people (in the areas where 
allegiance matters most) is fatally flawed, too. Ahmed Wali became both too big 
for the CIA to jettison and the source of fundamental doubts about what US 
troops are leaving behind. At this rate, the legacy of occupation could well be 
either a return of the Taliban or civil war.
 