
Adam Goodes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> was finally given 
a send-off worthy of his storied AFL career on Saturday evening when the 
two-times Brownlow medallist was acclaimed by fans in a half-time lap of honour 
during the Sydney Swans’ round-three clash with Greater Western Sydney.

Cheers rang out at a near full Sydney Cricket Ground as club great Goodes and 
fellow retiree Mike Pyke walked around the Swans’ home ground, waving to fans 
who gave the pair a standing ovation.

Adam Goodes says he has reached 'closure' on final AFL season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/07/adam-goodes-says-he-has-reached-closure-on-final-afl-season>
Goodes, 36, called it a day at the end of the Swans’ 2015 campaign after a 
club record 372 games but his journey towards retirement was overshadowed by 
persistent booing from fans during his final season as a player.

The Indigenous player bowed out following Sydney’s semi-final defeat to North 
Melbourne last year and the timing of his announcement deprived Swans fans of 
an opportunity to give him the farewell he richly deserved.

Goodes opted not to take part in the AFL’s 2015 grand final parade to honour 
retired players.

Normally he and Pyke would have gone on a lap of honour at Sydney’s first home 
game of this season – against Collingwood – butthat plan was shelved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/09/adam-goodes-farewell-delayed-to-avoid-potential-flashpoint-with-collingwood-fans>
 due to fears Magpies fans would hijack the celebration.

It was in a match against Collingwood at the MCG in 2013 that Goodes pointed 
out a teenage Magpies fan who called him an ape. The incident prompted some 
opposition fans to jeer him in subsequent games and eventually led to a 
national debate on racism.

Goodes, a proud Adnyamathanha man, was named Australian of the Year in 2014, 
but the jeering intensified, reaching a crescendo midway through last season, 
when Goodes reacted to kicking a goal against Carlton in late May by mimicking 
a spear-throwing gesture towards Blues fans who had targeted him throughout.

The tipping point for a fatigued Goodes came after he had again been subjected 
to abuse during a game against West Coast, during which team-mate Lewis Jetta 
showed his support by performing an Indigenous war dance.

Goodes, who at the time was said to be “sick and tired” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/29/afl-adam-goodes-given-extended-leave>
 of his treatment by opposition fans, took time out from the game and sat out 
the round 18 match against Adelaide.

Earlier this week, Goodes said he had achieved “great closure” over the saga, 
and creditedAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> chief Gillon McLachlan 
for the role he and league had played in it.


McLachlan, who was at the SCG on Saturday, had issued an apology to Goodes in 
March this year, saying that no player should have had to have gone through 
what he did and that the AFL should haveacted sooner on the racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/18/afl-boss-apologises-to-adam-goodes-saying-league-shouldve-acted-sooner-on-racism>
.
 