


This latest attack in Ivory Coast  – claimed by al-Qaida in the Islamic 
Maghreb (AQIM) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/mali-attack-highlights-global-spread-extremist-violence>
 – will underline why Africa is increasingly spoken of as the “new front” in 
Islamist militancy. This may be exaggerated, but the threat is undoubtedly 
growing on the continent, and well beyond its Mediterranean coastline.

Ivory Coast has thus become the latest link in a chain of violence-hit 
countries – from Nigeria, where theIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> affiliate Boko Haram is still a force 
despite recent government efforts, to Somalia, where al-Shabaab extremists 
appear resurgent.

In January it was a hotel in the centre of Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina 
Faso, that was attacked. In November it was a similar establishment in Bamako, 
Mali.Both strikes were claimed by AQIM, the local affiliate of the veteran 
global organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/mali-attack-highlights-global-spread-extremist-violence>
.

The deadly efficiency of Isis and how it grew on the global stage | David 
Kilcullen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/12/the-deadly-efficiency-of-isis-and-how-it-grew-on-the-global-stage>
Other militant operations in the last year have targeted tourists and hotels 
in Tunisia, Turkey, Egypt and elsewhere. Many of these have been claimed by 
Isis or subsidiary groups. The rivalry between al-Qaida and Isis is one reason 
for the recent upsurge of violence. Both organisations want to claim north and, 
increasingly, westernAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> as their 
own sphere of influence. The stakes are high. AQIM is currently the most 
tenacious and effective of al-Qaida’s affiliates. If it fades definitively from 
the scene, so would its parent organisation. The pre-eminence of Isis would be 
unchallenged.

Luxury hotels have long been frequent targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/20/pakistan> of Islamic militants 
because they are vulnerable and full of westerners and westernised locals. 
Trial documents and interrogations of AQIM extremists in west Africa have 
revealed the difficulties groups have sometimes had in finding suitable targets 
and arranging logistics. Hotels are an easy option, often patronised by 
individuals who can be depicted as “unbelievers”, or representatives of the 
so-called Crusader-Zionist alliance so hated by the extremists, and usually 
poorly protected too. Seen as “dens of iniquity and immorality”, portals of 
decadence, they are an easy sell as a target to impressionable young extremist 
by more senior militants.

Planners in this case may also have been attracted by the idea of striking 
Grand-Bassam, the former capital of hated French colonialists. History that 
many in the west have forgotten is not always seen as so distant elsewhere, 
particularly by Islamic militants. France, with its strong secular stance and 
recent military interventions in west Africa, is a target for more contemporary 
reasons, too.

The most recent series of strikes in Mali, Burkina Faso and elsewhere appear 
aimed at destabilising a swathe of territory to allow further exploitation by 
extremists. This is in line with established jihadi strategic thinking.Ivory 
Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> is recovering from a 
vicious civil war. It also comprises large, almost equal sized Muslim and 
Christian communities. It is undeniably fragile.

There is much else fuelling Islamist violence in the broad belt from Nigeria 
to Somalia, of course. Flows of weaponry from Libya and elsewhere, uncontrolled 
criminality, hugely lucrative drug and people trafficking networks, as well as 
demographics and desertification. And there is, of course, the new energy 
surging through the global extremist movement following the emergence of Isis 
as a major force in 2014.This wave of violence  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/22/paris-mali-when-will-terror-attacks-end>
looks set to intensify in the months, possibly years, ahead – both in Africa 
and further afield.
 