
Members of the African Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> 
have backed a Kenyan proposal to push for withdrawal from the international 
criminal court, repeating claims that it unfairly targets the continent.

Chad’s president, Idriss Déby, who was elected African Union chairman at the 
two-day summit in Addis Ababa, criticised the court for focusing its efforts on 
African leaders.

“Elsewhere in the world, many things happen, many flagrant violations of human 
rights, but nobody cares,” Déby said at the close of the summit late on Sunday, 
which had an official theme of protecting human rights.

No legally binding decision was made, and the decision to leave the ICC’s 
founding Rome statute can be decided by individual nations. The decision was a 
“proposal … for the AU to develop a roadmap for the withdrawal of African 
nations”, a Kenyan presidential statement read.

The war crimes trial of the former Ivory Coast president Laurent Gbagbo began 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/former-ivory-coast-president-on-trial-for-unspeakable-crimes>
, rekindling a bitter row across Africa over the international justice system.

Set up in 2002 as the last resort to try war criminals and perpetrators of 
genocide never tried at home, the ICC has opened inquiries involving nine 
nations, all but one of them African: Kenya, Ivory Coast, Libya, Sudan, 
Democratic Republic of Congo, Central African Republic (twice), Uganda, Mali
and, most recently, Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/icc-inquiry-alleged-war-crimes-south-ossetia-russia-georgia>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fafrican-union-kenyan-plan-leave-international-criminal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa02d432c57d633a1986a3533603ae18e4eb3e902%2F0_240_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=African%20Union%20members%20back%20Kenyan%20plan%20to%20leave%20ICC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fafrican-union-kenyan-plan-leave-international-criminal-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=African%20Union%20members%20back%20Kenyan%20plan%20to%20leave%20ICC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fafrican-union-kenyan-plan-leave-international-criminal-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa02d432c57d633a1986a3533603ae18e4eb3e902%2F0_240_5184_3112%2F5184.jpg>
 The trial of former Ivory Coast president Laurent Gbagbo, centre, began in the 
Hague last week. Photograph: Peter Dejong/AP 
The AU, and particularly Kenya, has accused the court of unfairly targeting 
Africans for prosecution. Cases includeda failed case to Kenya’s president, 
Uhuru Kenyatta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/05/crimes-humanity-charges-kenya-president-dropped-uhuru-kenyatta>
, anda faltering case against his deputy, William Ruto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/oct/25/kenyan-deputy-president-william-ruto-icc>
, for allegedly masterminding deadly post-election violence in 2007-09 in which 
about 1,200 people died.

Seventy years after Nuremberg, global justice is still a work in progress | 
Philippe Sands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/20/nuremberg-trials-global-justice-law>
“We refuse to be carried along in a vehicle that has strayed off course to the 
detriment of our sovereignty, security and dignity as Africans,” Kenyatta said 
in a statement.

In November 2015, Ethiopia’s foreign minister, Tedros Adhanom, speaking for 
the AU at an annual meeting of the 123 countries that have signed up to the 
Hague-based ICC’s founding statute, said it was “no longer a court for all”.

About one-third of the court’s member states are in Africa. While some leaders 
criticised the court, others said that was a mistake. “Leaving the ICC with no 
credible mechanism for justice for mass crimes in sight would be an error of 
colossal proportions,”Kenya’s Daily Nation said in an editorial 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/oped/Editorial/-Leaving--ICC-/-/440804/3055908/-/7lhjgl/-/index.html>
.

“It is far better for member states to stay in the court and advocate reforms, 
rather than bolting and leaving millions on the continent unprotected by an 
international court which can step in when national institutions fail.”

On Monday the trial of Gbagbo continued, with defence lawyers accusing the 
current Ivorian president, Alassane Ouattara, of seizing power by force aided 
by the former colonial ruler France after disputed 2010 elections.

Former Ivory Coast president on trial for 'unspeakable' crimes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/former-ivory-coast-president-on-trial-for-unspeakable-crimes>
“Ouattara and his supporters wanted to seize power by force and the battle of 
Abidjan was, simply put, the very implementation of this strategy,” the defence 
lawyer Emmanuel Altit told the ICC.


Gbagbo and his co-accused, Charles Blé Goudé, a firebrand militia leader, have 
denied four charges of crimes against humanity when 3,000 people were killed 
after theIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> vote. 
Their highly anticipated trial opened on Thursday and is set to last three to 
four years.

Gbagbo declared himself the winner of the election in late 2010, which was 
contested by western powers including France and the US, and theUnited 
Nations-backed Ouattara.

It led to a bitter standoff, with Gbagbo holed up in the fortified 
presidential palace and Abidjan – the country’s main city and commercial 
capital – turned into a warzone.

The ICC chief prosecutor Fatou Bensouda has alleged that Gbagbo, aided by the 
military, police and a youth militia group organised by Blé Goudé, tried to 
cling to power by “all means necessary”.


But Altit countered on Monday that there had been a deliberate campaign to 
make Gbagbo “out to be some of kind demon” and “paint Ouattara as the good guy”.

He said: “This is nothing more than a political narrative that has been heated 
up and re-served.”
 