
Africa will continue to be held back if we do not immediately invest in 
research and development. African governments who have not met the 1% target 
pledged at theAfrican Union heads of state summit in 2006 
<http://www.au.int/en/sites/default/files/EX%20CL%20DEC%20236%20-%20277%20%28VIII%29%20_E.pdf>
 should increase their spending on research.

Pledges have been made, but in most cases they haven’t been translated into 
concrete actions. This is partly because African governments struggle with 
conflicting priorities such as preventing disease outbreaks and providing 
education and proper sanitation.


But science could have solutions for these challenges – if we invest in it. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fafrican-governments-must-invest-in-science-and-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443090548834%2F6503a6d8-0a4c-4abb-9448-cc610f78c5c5-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=African%20governments%20must%20urgently%20invest%20in%20science%20and%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fafrican-governments-must-invest-in-science-and-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=African%20governments%20must%20urgently%20invest%20in%20science%20and%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fafrican-governments-must-invest-in-science-and-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443090548834%2F6503a6d8-0a4c-4abb-9448-cc610f78c5c5-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Mauritian president Ameenah Gurib-Fakim 
The African economies are some of the world’s fastest growing, averaging 5% 
annually. For this growth to continue, local solutions and innovations need to 
be applied to all sectors, especially healthcare and education. Economic 
progress can only be sustained when the population is fed, educated, healthy 
and happy.


Countries that have invested in education, science and technology have managed 
to break the cycle of poverty. The UKspends 1.7% 
<http://theconversation.com/infographic-how-much-does-the-world-spend-on-science-14069>
 of GDP on scientific research, while America spends 3% (government and private 
sector investment). African countries are lagging behind in development because 
their investment in science remains low.

The recent Ebola outbreak in west Africa highlighted the disconnect between 
policy and research. Itrevealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/sep/17/ebola-seven-things-tackle-outbreak>
 the absence of strong and credible institutions, the lack of trained doctors 
and nurses and the outdated and underdeveloped medical and research systems.


The shortage of clinical scientists, epidemiologists and diagnostics 
laboratories to survey and curtail the disease have had a devastating impact. 
Perhaps the silver lining to the Ebola cloud has been thepromising trial data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/31/ebola-vaccine-trial-proves-100-successful-in-guinea>
 of a new vaccine that will hopefully reduce the number of lives lost to this 
dreadful disease.

A better understanding of the threats of climate change requires reliable, 
credible data

The impacts of climate change also hang like a Damocles sword over a region 
that has contributed below3% of the planet’s carbon dioxide 
<http://unfccc.int/files/press/backgrounders/application/pdf/factsheet_africa.pdf>
 emissions from energy and industrial sources. A better understanding of the 
threats of climate change requires reliable, credible data to strengthen 
decision-making and ensure that the continent is able to adapt and mitigate the 
risks. Among the risks facing small island states like Mauritius are flash 
floods, droughts and unusual temperature spikes. Mauritius has experienced one 
suchflooding in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/apr/01/flash-floods-leave-11-dead-in-mauritius-capital-video>
 with fatal losses.

Science, technology and innovation can provide answers to these threats and 
challenges and yet has never been centre stage in our decision-making processes.

One of the consequences to this oversight has been brain drain. Many talented 
Africans have left to greener pastures in the west. The need to provide an 
enabling environment, and to prevent this drain of talent, is high on 
government agenda. InMauritius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mauritius>, 
the government is enacting policies and providing incentives like a 10-year tax 
holiday for those who return.


Higher Education in Africa: Our continent needs science, not aid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/02/higher-education-in-africa-science-not-aid>
Currently, it is tough for African scientists who have chosen to stay behind. 
They are forever fighting to secure funding to further their ideas and research 
activities.

Research <https://www.theguardian.com/education/research> priorities are set 
outside the continent without any alignment to the needs of the continent. As a 
result, more funding is being spent on HIV and Aids, as well as malaria and 
tuberculosis, and not enough is spent on neglected tropical diseases.

We need to ensure that funding from international partners complements 
government funding. Investing local funding will ensure that the research done 
inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> helps to meet the 
continent’s pressing needs. It would also help to ensure the sustainability of 
programmes after donor funding has dried up. Then trained young scientists can 
also be assured of a brighter future.

In September we launched the Alliance for Accelerating Excellence in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/10/alliance-for-accelerating-excellence-in-science-in-africa-malaria-gates-foundation-wellcome-trust-dfid>
 (AESA). AESA is a new initiative created by theAfrican Academy of Sciences 
<http://www.aasciences.org/index.php/news-a-events/433-aesa-launched> and the 
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) Agency, with the support of 
the UK Department for International Development, the Wellcome Trust and the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. It aims to support the training of scientists 
and drive Africa’s research agenda. It also seeks to help scientists grow their 
careers and access the funding they need to conduct research in order to 
overcome Africa’s developmental challenges. Thelaunch of AESA on earlier this 
month 
<http://www.nrf.ac.za/media-room/news/launch-alliance-accelerating-excellence-science-africa-aesa>
 is a promising step in the right direction.

15 steps closer to quality higher education in Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/10/15-steps-closer-to-quality-higher-education-in-africa>
African governments must join hands with strong and credible international 
partners to invest in local research. Without funding and the necessary 
regulatory environment and policies, the benefits of the scientific results 
emanating from research work won’t be harvested.


 President Ameenah Gurib-Fakim is a biodiversity scientist and the president 
of Mauritius.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 
 