
In our Africa’s children series, we set out to chronicle the lives of babies 
born within months of one another in 10 countries.

Below are some organisations that support children across Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. Where specified, the money will 
directly benefit the local community of the child we have featured.



South Africa

The Zoe Sarojini Education Trust <http://www.zoetrust.org/>, which works to 
support the schooling of children living in poverty in South Africa, has kindly 
agreed to accept donations to pay for the education of Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi 
and his younger sister, Akhanyile. Any further money raised will go to support 
the schooling of other children living in poverty in South Africa.

How to donate: please add ‘Siya’ as the reference for your donation 
<http://www.zoetrust.org/donate-to-the-zoe-trust/>

Uganda

Tusitukire Wamu <http://www.twgbwaise.com/> (United We Stand), based in 
Kampala, offers support to families in the local area living with HIV, and are 
in direct contact with Wyclif Kukiriza and his family.

How to donate <http://www.twgbwaise.com/howyouhelp.htm>

Malawi

The Gumbi education project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/values/getinvolved/story/0,,1166414,00.html>, set 
up by Guardian readers in 2002, educates children in some of the poorest areas 
of Malawi.

How to donate: contributions can be made via Cheryl Mulgrue, Guardian 
Newsdesk, Guardian, London N1 9GU

Sightsavers <http://www.sightsavers.org/> works with children and adults in 
developing countries like Malawi to eliminate avoidable blindness and promote 
inclusion for people with disabilities.


How to donate  <http://www.sightsavers.org/>

Alternatively, some charities offer the opportunity to sponsor a child in some 
of the countries in Africa that we’ve covered. ThroughActionAid 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/sponsor-a-child?gclid=CNqYi5XcyccCFWjmwgodfDYBeg> 
you could sponsor a child in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South 
Africa, Uganda or Zambia.World Vision 
<http://www.worldvision.org.uk/child-sponsorship/?gclid=CIvX2N7cyccCFSsCwwodXtkElg>
 gives you the chance to sponsor a child in Malawi, Tanzania, Uganda or Zambia.
Plan UK <http://www.plan-uk.org/sponsor-a-child/> offers opportunities for 
child sponsorship in Ghana, Kenya, South Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. And
SOS Children’s Villages 
<http://www.soschildrensvillages.org.uk/sponsor-a-child/africa> have 
sponsorship opportunities for all the African countries that we visited.

 