
7.07pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYF3e5ZCDi70&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYF3e5ZCDi70>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYF3e5ZCDi70&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYF3e5ZCDi70&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYF3e5ZCDi70>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYF3e5ZCDi70&media=>
close 
7.03pm BST 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_T0VOe9PGo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_T0VOe9PGo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_T0VOe9PGo&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_T0VOe9PGo&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_T0VOe9PGo>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH_T0VOe9PGo&media=>
close Samantha Reid (@SamanthaAlice19) 
“@lukeyoung <https://twitter.com/lukeyoung>: Party on platform 3 with @
africaexpress <https://twitter.com/africaexpress> twitter.com/LukeYoung/stat… 
<http://t.co/07NdxGJK>” @cardiffstudents <https://twitter.com/cardiffstudents>
 <https://twitter.com/SamanthaAlice19/status/243738478276395009> September 6, 
2012 <https://twitter.com/SamanthaAlice19/status/243738478276395009> 
Updated at 7.10pm BST

7.01pm BST 
Spoek Mathambo (@SPOEK_MATHAMBO) 
Just posted a photo instagr.am/p/PPZplCShSX/ <http://t.co/MIreDBIW>
 <https://twitter.com/SPOEK_MATHAMBO/status/243748066799284225> September 6, 
2012 <https://twitter.com/SPOEK_MATHAMBO/status/243748066799284225> Kano 
(@TheRealKano) 
Photo: This ain’t no normal train. #CharterBitch 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23CharterBitch> #africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> (Taken with Instagram) 
tmblr.co/ZXbXnxStnUKb <http://t.co/EsON0AFw>
 <https://twitter.com/TheRealKano/status/243755321414262784> September 6, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/TheRealKano/status/243755321414262784> 
Updated at 7.02pm BST

6.45pm BST 
CasparLlewellynSmith (@CasparLS) 
#africaexpress <https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> arrives in 
Cardiff, Jupiter and co play on the platform. Elderly woman to friend: "and 
they've got a free bar on board!"
 <https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243739309226729473> September 6, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243739309226729473> CasparLlewellynSmith 
(@CasparLS) 
Reeps explaining beatboxing to Baaba Maal on the #africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> twitter.com/CasparLS/statu… 
<http://t.co/OkaOy2SC>
 <https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243732579348516865> September 6, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243732579348516865> CasparLlewellynSmith 
(@CasparLS) 
Baaba rehearsing on the #africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> twitter.com/CasparLS/statu… 
<http://t.co/2hFKCqiM>
 <https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243732759422578688> September 6, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243732759422578688> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7FsqakBw0QU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7FsqakBw0QU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7FsqakBw0QU&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7FsqakBw0QU&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7FsqakBw0QU>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7FsqakBw0QU&media=>
close 
4.46pm BST 

Some very calm and collected reviews from people at last night's Africa Express
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> show ...

4.46pm BST 
Krysta Louise (@Kryskayella) 
Manchester rocked tonight! If you were not there for the @africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/africaexpress>- you missed the gig of a LIFE TIME! Well 
done everyone involved!! Xx
 <https://twitter.com/Kryskayella/status/243502113949372419> September 6, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/Kryskayella/status/243502113949372419> Viv Slack 
(@vivslack) 
If you were in Manchester tonight and not watching Damin Albarn & his 100 
crazy friends at#AfricaExpress <https://twitter.com/search/%23AfricaExpress> 
you missed the gig of the decade!
 <https://twitter.com/vivslack/status/243483789488160768> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/vivslack/status/243483789488160768> Abby Hardie 
(@abbyhardie) 
absolutely insane night at @africaexpress <https://twitter.com/africaexpress> 
in Manchester, genuinely incredible and gutted its over!
 <https://twitter.com/abbyhardie/status/243511724307795968> September 6, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/abbyhardie/status/243511724307795968> 
3.49pm BST 

Caspar Llewellyn Smith: En route to Cardiff, a half hour stop in Crewe, where 
the doors of the rehearsal coach are opened for an impromptu gig - with Jack 
from Bombay Bicycle Club and other Africa Express crew dancing on the platform, 
and a handful of platform staff watching. As we're rolling through the 
beautiful Malverns, some of the same members of the Noisettes plus Cubain, the 
Africa Express horn section, Diabel Cissohko and more practice in the rehearsal 
carriage. The train manager, Steve Finn, pops his head into one compartment to 
ask if he can get two staff lists signed by all the acts on the train as a 
memento of the trip. "This is the best thing we'll ever do," he announces. 
"Next week we're [Direct Rail Services] back to transporting nuclear waste."

3.24pm BST 

Here's a video <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=okAHlQrFqXQ>, by Caspar 
Llewellyn Smithof the Africa Express train stopping at Crewe
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokAHlQrFqXQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokAHlQrFqXQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokAHlQrFqXQ&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokAHlQrFqXQ&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokAHlQrFqXQ>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DokAHlQrFqXQ&media=>
close 
Updated at 6.46pm BST

12.02pm BST 

Caspar Llewellyn Smith:  And here's a link to my review of last night 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/sep/06/africa-express-review>.

11.55am BST 

Caspar Llewellyn Smith:

The head teacher at the primary school is asking the packed hall - the 
children in their blue and yellow uniforms with the sloagn "Aim High" sitting 
reasonably hushed in serried rows - "What does impromptu mean?" A couple of 
hands shoot up. She explains that we're going to get an unscheduled performance 
from four musicians, two from the UK, two from Africa (Senegal to be precise).

"We are very privileged – because I think they were up very very late, doing a 
concert," she adds. But do they show it? Toby from the Noisettes plays 
percussion, bandmate Dan is on acoustic guitar, Ilong Ba is playing lead and 
Mamadou Sarr is singing and dancing. Five minutes in and Mamadou decides to 
overrule the head, encouraging all the children not just to clap but to leap to 
their feet and dance with him, and soon the teachers are busting spectacular 
moves too.

The morning's been organised with the help of Drake Music 
<http://www.drakemusic.org/>, a charity that removes disabling barriers to 
music, and we're here because the school has a high percentage of disabled 
children. With the sun streaming through the windows, it feels like the perfect 
way to start the day.

There's supposed only to be time for one more song, another improvised number 
with Mamadou playing the djembe that involves chanting "the Africa Express!" 
and making train noises. But then Ian Birrell further defies the head and asks: 
"Do you want one more?" And the screams of approval would shame some young 
teens spotting One Direction.
 I ask one of the children, six-year old Alice, what she liked about it and 
she grins, before deciding: "The clapping!"

(Dan's view: "That's one way to work off a hangover").

Now it's off to the station to hook up with the rest of the collective, very 
many of whom have been playing similar shows this morning - at another primary 
school, a theatre space for disabled children, an African Caribbean centre for 
older people and a centre for asylum seekers - before the train rolls on and 
out of town.

Next stop at Cardiff at 16:37 ...

This video <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qp4aMae7l8M> was filmed with the 
permission of Ladybarn primary school.

Updated at 12.30pm BST

11.22am BST 

Thursday, Caspar Llewellyn Smith: 

It's 10am and Toby from the Noisettes has only had an hour's sleep, but 
there's time for him to rush back into the Holiday Inn Express to grab a banana 
for breakfast before a minibus takes him and a couple of Baaba Maal's band to 
Ladybarn primary school in Burnage.

He's still stoked following last night's show at the Ritz. I've written a 
review for tomorrow's paper, which we can link to later, but it only really 
scrapes the surface of how much fun, and more, it was. The chaos backstage was 
somehow alchemised into a series of often jaw-dropping performances.

(Oh, and Ian Birrell from Africa Express has just mentioned that last night saw
Damon Albarn <https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn> playing a Blur 
song at an A.E show for the first time: Tender, with the choir comprising 
Martina Topley Bird, Mim Suleiman, Kyla La Grange, Nelly from Okwess 
International, Terri Walker and more).

Rio Ferdinand, a supporter of Africa Express, was meant to make the gig but 
some last-minute hitch prevented it. His loss.

 (As I say in my review, special guest Peter Hook joined Spoek Mathambo for 
the latter's cover of Control; as I came off stage I asked him how it was: 
"Fucking wild!" And he'd made it, though then had to leg it soon as to relieve 
a babysitter).
Ian Birrell (@ianbirrell) 
Damon doing beautiful @africaexpress <https://twitter.com/africaexpress> 
version of Tender with singers from Congo, Ethiopia, Tanzania, USA & London. 
Stunning....
 <https://twitter.com/ianbirrell/status/243463727633027072> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/ianbirrell/status/243463727633027072> 
7.57pm BST 
Jon Priest (@trinitybob) 
@africaexpress <https://twitter.com/africaexpress> twitter.com/trinitybob/sta… 
<http://t.co/Ug82aXUB>
 <https://twitter.com/trinitybob/status/243420822675537920> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/trinitybob/status/243420822675537920> 
Updated at 6.50pm BST

7.48pm BST 

And so the music has started, and while it's probably a good idea to keep the 
setlist quiet so as not to spoil it for those who'll come to the shows in 
Cardiff (tomorrow), Bristol and London, things are kicking off with Afel 
Boucoum, the Malian guitarist, and his band, and soon up Kyla la Grange, 
Bassekou Kouyate, Jack from Bombay Bicycle Club, the Krar Collective, Spoek, 
Carl Barat ... many more... And I intend to go watch.

Updated at 8.28pm BST

7.44pm BST 

Oh, and I might have said: even though Baaba Maal is an Arsenal fan, he told 
me earlier that he'll welcome any special guests in the audience tonight... 
while it being Manchester, there was also chance of a special guest on stage, 
and it looks as if hopes of Spoek Mathambo enlisting the help of the fellah who 
originally played on Control for his cover of it (remember:this is one of the 
greatest videos eve <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKfwSFI8LhQ>r) tonight will 
be realised ...
CasparLlewellynSmith (@CasparLS) 
Tonight's special guest just about visible... She's lost control, eh 
#africaexpress <https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> #music 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23music> twitter.com/CasparLS/statu… 
<http://t.co/f8X5MCJb>
 <https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243409943573721088> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243409943573721088> 
Updated at 7.49pm BST

7.39pm BST 

Caspar Llewellyn Smith

So I've arrived in Manchester, an hooked up with the Africa Express and its 
passengers. It's slightly like walking into a party that's half done, where 
everyone's a bit drunk and even slightly tired ... but straight from the 
station there were coaches to the Ritz, and as showtime nears, the energy is 
cranking up. That is, I'm on the balcony of the venue, and have just been 
talking to Damon Albarn, who might look just that bit fatigued... but his eyes 
sparkled when he talked about events like the pop-up show in Carlisle earlier. 
Plus folk have now been fed: clearly one highlight of the trip has been the 
catering - just now the Ethiopian group the Krar Collective were enthusing 
about the Ethiopian food.

So ... right now, Johan from The Very Best is spinning Oliver Twist, D'Banj's 
huge Afrobeat smash ... and the crowd is starting to arrive.
CasparLlewellynSmith (@CasparLS) 
And an hour until show time at the Ritz #africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> #music 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23music> twitter.com/CasparLS/statu… 
<http://t.co/xtns31t8>
 <https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243402268886585345> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/CasparLS/status/243402268886585345> 
Updated at 8.26pm BST

6.36pm BST 

As the train pulls in to Manchester, here's an exclusive film, by Renaud 
Barret and Florent de La Tullaye 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/video/2012/sep/05/africa-express-exclusive-behind-scenes-video>
, makers of the amazingBenda Bilili <http://www.bendabilili.co.uk/>. 

6.29pm BST 
Kano (@TheRealKano) 
Photo: Me and @bashy <https://twitter.com/bashy> on train to Manny 
#AfricaExpress <https://twitter.com/search/%23AfricaExpress> (Taken with 
Instagram)tmblr.co/ZXbXnxSp-WQK <http://t.co/kEL3AQot>
 <https://twitter.com/TheRealKano/status/243380486410493953> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/TheRealKano/status/243380486410493953> 
4.33pm BST 

Guest post from Thandiswa – Impressions of Africa Express

I’ve been to a lot of festivals and sometimes at festivals you wish that at 
the end all the musicians would come together and jam. But being on the Africa 
Express is like a dream really; to be stuck on a train with a lot of musicians 
just messing around. It’s amazing. I’ve never had an experience like that 
before.

I didn’t really know a lot of people when I arrived, I just knew a few of the 
African vocalists, like Rokia Traore andFatoumata Diawara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fatoumata-diawara>. And I still don’t know 
everybody’s names. Last night, after the show, everybody just went to the bar 
and started jamming different things. I messed around with this guy from the 
states who plays the violin; his name is Marquise.

Last night was my first day but everybody else had already been together for a 
couple of days. So when I came to the show I wasn’t expecting to be doing 
anything. And then every now and then someone would come to me and say “Why 
don’t you go on stage and join in this one?” It’s a little bit daunting, 
because I’m not the kind of person who does that usually. I’m quite nervous. 
But the energy here is so good. I didn’t feel like anybody was going to judge 
me, even if I messed up.

I love trains. I love to see the changing landscape. It’s not like a plane 
where you don’t know where you’re going, you just kind of wake up there. And 
the way that the train is set up too. There are lots of places to hang out, and 
there’s the rehearsal space. And people are kind of coming together in little 
groups and messing around. Just now I was playing with Bassekou [Kouyate]. I 
love the sound of his little banjo thing. I was just kind of thrown into that. 
You know…Oh do you wanna just come and jam ha ha!!!

But I love that whole idea of just messing around and just playing, we call it 
playing. It’s not really work, it’s just playing. There isn’t enough of that 
when you’re a professional musician. Cos what you always end up doing is just 
your own thing. You go to a festival, do your thing and you leave. So this is a 
great way of experimenting with meetings and meeting new people. This is 
awesome.

You know, growing up, and visualizing Europe, I never imagined that there’s 
space. Because that’s the thing that most people talk about, is the lack of 
space. But when you get on the train and you see all this landscape, there’s 
space. And I think it makes you realise that we’re all the same really, and the 
world is one place. It’s not about borders, or languages or where you come 
from. We’re all part of the human race, we’re all part of one thing. Which is 
another exciting thing about the train. All these people from different 
experiences and different places in the world, coming together, and seeing what 
happens.

Updated at 4.35pm BST

3.33pm BST 
Guardian music (@guardianmusic) 
People of Carlisle ... Prepare for #africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> to fill your train station 
platforms with riotous noise
 <https://twitter.com/guardianmusic/status/243332995757531137> September 5, 
2012 <https://twitter.com/guardianmusic/status/243332995757531137> Ian Birrell 
(@ianbirrell) 
Wonder if we should do more @africaexpress <https://twitter.com/africaexpress> 
gigs at stations?twitter.com/ianbirrell/sta… <http://t.co/8nWbhAdM>
 <https://twitter.com/ianbirrell/status/243341660174569472> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/ianbirrell/status/243341660174569472> AF3KAN BOI 
(@AfrikanBoy) 
Carlisle train station performing with the full @africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/africaexpress> band! #YAMMM 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23YAMMM> twitter.com/AfrikanBoy/sta… 
<http://t.co/6chbV1TQ>
 <https://twitter.com/AfrikanBoy/status/243400498873503744> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/AfrikanBoy/status/243400498873503744> BBC Africa 
(@BBCAfrica) 
#africaexpress <https://twitter.com/search/%23africaexpress> @bbcafrica 
<https://twitter.com/bbcafrica> @krarcollective 
<https://twitter.com/krarcollective> @africaboy <https://twitter.com/africaboy> 
Another#video <https://twitter.com/search/%23video> of Carlisle station's party 
yfrog.us/mbsk6monsocdlq… <http://t.co/iT8Fmit3>
 <https://twitter.com/BBCAfrica/status/243347524893675520> September 5, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/BBCAfrica/status/243347524893675520> 
Updated at 8.29pm BST

3.25pm BST 
 Africa Express setlist Glasgow Photograph: Guardian 
12.21pm BST 

Welcome to the second part of our ongoing coverage of the Africa Express train 
journey. The train - carrying 80 plus acts from Africa and beyond - left 
Manchester earlier today, but not before our travelling correspondent Tim Jonze 
managed to send this report

Tim Jonze: “Ladies and Gentlemen, we are now entering Scotland,” announces 
Africa Express founder Ian Birrell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/aug/26/ian-birrell-emergence-new-africa>
 over the train's tannoy system. At which point a pack of stowaway bagpipers 
who boarded at Carlisle start marching down the carriages while the musicians 
grab the nearest item they can (bottles, cigarette lighters, pens) and start 
tapping out rhythms on them. As the pipers march from carriage to carriage 
there are some pretty confused looking faces. But then, by now, we're all 
pretty used to looking confused.

Take the last 24 hours. It all started with another rave up on a train 
platform – this timePlatform 1 in Middlesbrough 
<http://www.gazettelive.co.uk/news/teesside-news/2012/09/04/delight-as-damon-albarn-and-africa-express-role-into-middlesbrough-gallery-84229-31762473/>
. Then there was the train ride itself – authorRichard Milward 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/author/richard-milward/> and his mate hitching a ride, 
songs being shaped in every carriage (including a lovely, ghostly affair by 
Kyla La Grange, Maximo Park, Richard Russell and Bassekou Kouyate). As that's 
going on a heated debate as to the merits of Joey Barton breaks out between The 
Reverend (mainly pro), Jordan Rizzle Kick (fairly against) and an interjecting 
Paul Smith (intensely against). It's almost drowned out, though, by some of the 
Rave Carriage's finest sounds: Kyla has relocated over here to hook up withThe 
Very Best 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jul/14/very-best-johan-karlberg-esau-mwamwaya>
, Seye andBaaba Maal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/26/baaba-maal-africa-express-interview>
. Before thatFatoumata Diawara 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/fatoumata-diawara> sang to a spellbound 
audience – the music transporting you far away from the sheep-filled fields 
outside the window.

As we roll up to Glasgow there's another announcement on the train:

“We should warn you that there are apparently quite a few teenage girls on the 
platform. We think they're here for Africa Express but it might possibly be for
Rizzle Kicks <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rizzle-kicks>.”

The lads allow themselves a cheeky smile.

There's no time for pop-up shows here. We head to the hotel and straight back 
out to the venue. There's a problem: The Arches is so packed they now need to 
make use of both stages, whereas Africa Express had only prepared for one. It's 
lucky, then, that Africa Express have a rather flexible definition of the word 
“prepared” – let's face it, half the artists on the train don't seem to know 
which city they're going to next or what they're going to play in three 
minutes' time. Control freakery isn't an issue.

The gig is, once again, fantastic 
<http://www.scotsman.com/lifestyle/music/news-and-features/gig-review-africa-express-damon-albarn-co-glasgow-arches-1-2506806>
. What is lost in focus – it was great to see all the musicians piling on one 
huge stage last night in Middlesbrough – is made up for in variety. You can 
skip from Kraar Collective with Afrikan Boy to Spoek Mathambo with drumming 
genius Seb Rochford and then back to Carl Barat and Jon McClure covering the 
Clash's Train In Vain (which sounds rather traditional on paper before you 
glance up and spot Amadou on guitar).

It's these contrasts that make the whole thing so exciting. But perhaps there 
are no contrasts quite as big as when the same bagpipers who marched through 
our train are spotted onstage, attempting to blend their traditional Scottish 
sounds with Jupiter's Congolese rhythms. Madness.

Updated at 2.59pm BST
 