
Africa played no part in the invention of cinema. For decades, in Tarzan 
movies, it was the subject of fake Hollywood fantasies. And yet, when Africans 
made films about themselves, the results were astonishing. There are scores of 
great African movies. Here are 10 of the best:

Cairo Station <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/87894/cairo.station> 
(Egypt, 1958)

If Alfred Hitchcock had been Egyptian and bisexual, and had himself played 
Norman Bates,Psycho <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/34630/psycho> might 
have been something like this. Sweaty, musical, melodramatic and political,
Cairo Station <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/87894/cairo.station> stars 
ballsy writer-director Youssef Chahine as a homicidal newspaper seller in 
Cairo's vast railway station. In the 1950s, movies such as Rebel without a 
Cause andAll That Heaven Allows 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/94875/all-that-heaven-allows> were about 
repression as a ticking time bomb, but Chahine's film about sexual desire with 
no outlet was one of the biggest cinematic bombs of the decade.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ff9CCztrkJsU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ff9CCztrkJsU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ff9CCztrkJsU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9CCztrkJsU&feature=player_embedded>

Sambizanga <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/95749/sambizanga> (1973, 
Congo/Angola)

I've only seen this film once, but will never forget images as bold, as 
well-lit as Caravaggio paintings. It's a modern, radical account of a woman 
going from prison to prison, looking for her husband. The setting is Angola, 
but it was filmed in Congo. Director Sarah Maldoror studied in Moscow, worked 
on the classicThe Battle of Algiers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36100/battle-of-algiers>, then grabbed 
African cinema by the scruff of the neck, forcing it to engage with feminism, 
loss and movie aesthetics. Wow.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTVXWIBmjkSg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTVXWIBmjkSg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTVXWIBmjkSg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TVXWIBmjkSg&feature=player_embedded>

Chronicle of the Year of Embers (Algeria, 1975)

Here's cinema as a history painting, as epic as Bertolucci's 1900 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/132798/1900>. If our movie memories 
weren't Hollywood-skewed, we'd think of Chronicle of the Years of Embers as a 
classic but, despite winning the Palme d'or in Cannes in 1975,Mohammad 
Lakhdar-Hamina <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mohammed_Lakhdar-Hamina>'s film 
has fallen into the shadows. Which is what it's about, in a way. An Algerian 
peasant from a tiny village is drawn into the de-colonial struggle. A deranged, 
homeless soothsayer (played by the director himself) jokes and japes at 
history. A cast of thousands, fascinating politics, bravura staging.

The Wind (Mali, 1983)

A Romeo and Juliet story. The star-crossed lovers take drugs, try to pass 
exams, get involved with student politics. The Wind, by Africa's greatest 
living directorSouleymane Cissé 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Souleymane_Ciss%C3%A9>, has the flavour of 60s 
hippy movies from America, but his story casts long shadows. She's from a 
modern Malian military family; his roots are tribal, magical. Against this 
fresco of African life they try to find erotic, sincere, funny moments 
together. The imagery is gorgeous, the music modernist and unforgettable, the 
ending is mythic.

Hyenas (Senegal, 1992)

Don't know where to start with African film? Try this gobsmacking film by 
Senegal's punk master-directorDjibril Diop Mambéty 
<http://www.revuenoire.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=3570%3Aqlimage-va-ou-le-ventq-entretien-avec-djibril-diop-mambety&catid=11%3Aarticles&Itemid=13&lang=en>
. The story (from a Friedrich Dürrenmatt play) tells of a woman who, jilted by 
her lover, goes abroad, gets as rich as the world bank, then returns home, half 
made of gold. Yes, it's that surreal. What does the woman find when she gets 
back? An avaricious, vacuous Africa, in love with TV soap operas and fridges. 
The twist in the story shocks, but what's really daring is that the village 
where Mambety sets the tale, where he pins his nation to the wall, is … his 
hometown. Mambéty was Africa's Orson Welles.

Guelwaar (Senegal, 1993)

In the same year as Hyenas, Africa's founding father filmmaker Ousmane Sembène 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2007/jun/12/guardianobituaries.obituaries> made 
this gripping, state of the nation film. A Catholic and a Muslim die on the 
same day. The Islamic villagers claim the body of their guy, and bury him at 
once, as is the Islamic custom. But they got the Catholic's body. And he was a 
dissident. And was probably killed by the authorities for arguing against 
accepting foreign aid for Senegal. Sembène takes this brilliant scenario (based 
on a true story) and turns it into a chess game of multiple characters, an 
engrossing drama about African religion and, underneath that, a film about 
African pride. The final scene is astonishing (and seriously challenging for 
anyone who has given money to African charities) and the four songs by Baaba 
Maal are the film's soul.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fs60M2sY1Eao%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fs60M2sY1Eao%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fs60M2sY1Eao%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s60M2sY1Eao&feature=player_embeddedhttp://>

The Silences of the Palace 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76856/silences-of-the-palace> (Tunisia, 
1994)

There are so many flashbacks in African films, it's as though the continent is 
always remembering. Former film editorMoufida Tlatli 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2001/jun/22/artsfeatures> makes this film all 
about flashbacks. A young woman at the end of French rule in Tunisia begins to 
realise that her beautiful mother's servitude in colonial times was sexual as 
well as economic. Where some of the above films are full of attack, this one is 
more dreamlike, but no less political. And if Tlatli's career wasn't already 
interesting enough, in the Arab spring, after the fall of the Tunisian 
government, she became culture minister in the new provisional government. The 
film was co-written by another great Tunisian director, Nouri Bouzid.

Keita, The Heritage of the Griot (Burkina Faso, 1996)

One of the world's poorest countries, Burkina Faso is also one of the world's 
most cinephile countries. Dani Kouyaté's winning film shows a bright, modern 
boy learning the Darwinian facts of history. But then a traditional storyteller 
tells him the mythic version – a 13th-century tale about the Mande people.
Kouyaté's father 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/may/02/sotigui-kouyate-obituary>, a 
real-life Griot, plays the storyteller and brings the magic-realist version of 
history alive. How does the boy reconcile the two versions? How do we live life 
as both poetry and prose? This gentle film has near-universal zing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FikQWscrpCao%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FikQWscrpCao%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FikQWscrpCao%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ikQWscrpCao&feature=player_embedded> 

Waiting for Happiness 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/95294/waiting.for.happiness> (Mauritania, 
2002)

The first knock-out African film I saw in the new millennium was this 
burnished mood-piece. It pictures Mauritania as a kind of limbo, where everyone 
is waiting, watching, dreaming of going to France or elsewhere. A boy tries to 
install an electric light. A rootless man's shirt is the exact same material as 
his curtains and sofa. As these people drift and dream we see, through their 
eyes, street scenes of utter beauty, and we hear, through their ears, Malian
Oumou Sangaré <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/apr/20/worldmusic>'s 
gorgeous score.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUJx5dsoMGqw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUJx5dsoMGqw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUJx5dsoMGqw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UJx5dsoMGqw&feature=player_embedded>

District 9 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2009/sep/03/district-9-review> 
(South Africa, 2009)

I don't need to say much about South African wunderkind Neill Blomkamp's 
ET-in-the-slums-of-Joburg roller coaster, except that it was the best African 
sci-fi film since Souleymane Cissé's masterpieceYeelen/Brightness 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yeelen>, made more than 20 years earlier.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDyLUwOcR5pk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDyLUwOcR5pk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDyLUwOcR5pk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on a mobile? Click here to view clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=DyLUwOcR5pk>

The Africa Express is a train with over 80 African and Western musicians on 
board that will be touring the UK for a week from 3 September. The Guardian is 
its media partner. Follow life on board atguardian.co.uk/music/africa-express 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/africa-express>
 