
Carelessness on the part of the traditional powers, or evidence of a new 
order? The significance of the fact that four of Africa's five representatives 
in Germany next summer have never previously been to World Cup finals has been 
endlessly debated, but at last the Nations Cup, which opens with the hosts 
Egypt against Libya this afternoon, will provide some sort of arbitration.

There is no thought in Nigeria that they may be a power on the wane. "We paid 
for underrating Zimbabwe and Angola," said their coach Augustine Eguavoen. "We 
now have the chance to prove ourselves again."

They will be stringently examined by Ghana, Senegal and Zimbabwe in "Group D 
for Death". "We know Nigeria and Senegal want compensation for their World Cup 
disappointments," said Ghana's coach Ratomir Dujkovic. "We will be careful."

His own side occupies a curious middle ground in the old-new dialectic. Ghana 
were arguably the first African footballing superpower, winning four 
continental titles between 1963 and 1982, but their appearance in Germany will 
be their first in a World Cup finals. "That's strange," Dujkovic acknowledged. 
"But before there were always cliques within the squad, and I have imposed a 
Balkan discipline."

Like Nigeria, Cameroon appear to regard their failure to qualify for the World 
Cup as little more than a blip. "We're still the favourites," said Aston 
Villa's Eric Djemba-Djemba. The Indomitable Lions would have reached Germany 
had an injury-time Pierre Wom√© penalty in their final qualifier against Egypt 
not come back off the woodwork. "It's a bit like we got shot and everybody died 
after the penalty," Djemba-Djemba said. "But God always has the last decision.."

Given that their group includes Togo and Angola, the two most surprising World 
Cup qualifiers, they have a clear opportunity to make a point.

The Ivory Coast look the most likely of the debutants to have staying power 
beyond Germany. They went into decline after winning the Nations Cup in 1992 
but, since the government paid off three witchdoctors who claimed credit for 
that success with $2,000 and a bottle of whisky, the only way has been up.

The former African Footballer of the Year Kalusha Bwalya has claimed that 10 
of the 16 sides are capable of winning the tournament, and though that may be 
overstating it the battle between traditional and emerging powers leaves this 
the most open Nations Cup in history.
 