
Terrorism has strained traditional American notions of individual 
responsibility. While such attacks fortunately remain rare in our country (data 
shows that out of14,000 murders 
<https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2014/crime-in-the-u.s.-2014/tables/table-1>
 in the United States, afew dozen per year 
<http://sanford.duke.edu/articles/law-enforcement-ranks-anti-government-extremism-most-prevalent-terrorist-threat>
 are motivated by religious or political ideologies of any persuasion), 
violence by a Muslim is often attributed to the entire American Muslim 
community. Sometimes, it is accompanied by calls for sending them home or
clamping down 
<http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/11/20/donald-trump-says-hed-absolutely-require-muslims-to-register/>
 on them invarious ways 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/03/22/politics/ted-cruz-muslim-neighborhoods/>. Even 
before police identified Ahmad Khan Rahami as the person suspected of setting 
off the bomb that exploded in New York on Saturday night, social media was 
awash with anti-Muslim slurs and threats. ATwitter campaign 
<https://mic.com/articles/154532/dear-muslims-spreads-support-for-muslims-in-wake-of-nyc-bombing-but-bigots-hijacked-it#.NcyB4Nnqw>
 launched to support Muslims was hijacked to spread fear and hatred instead.


Already reeling from the divisive and bitter rhetoric that has marked the 
current presidential campaign, Muslim Americans are bracing for the backlash. 
My own Facebook page is flooded with warnings not to leave home and tips for 
staying safe if one does venture out, especially directed to those of us who 
look “Muslim” – like the twoyoung Brooklyn mothers 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/bigot-ripping-muslim-women-hijabs-hateful-attack-article-1.2785475>
 in headscarves who were attacked earlier this month while out walking their 
infants in strollers. Their fears are hardly misplaced. According to a recent 
analysis by California State University, acompilation of official hate crime 
data 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3110202-SPECIAL-STATUS-REPORT-v5-9-16-16.html>
 from 20 states shows that in 2015 anti-Islam incidents increased by 78.2% and 
anti-Arab incidents jumped by 219%, “the most precipitous rise since 2001”. 
Another study shows thatmosques have been attacked 
<https://www.cair.com/press-center/press-releases/13313-mosques-targeted.html> 
at rates not seen since the 2010 controversy over building an Islamic cultural 
center near Ground Zero.

Increased monitoring and visits by law enforcement officers is another 
consequence often faced by Muslim communities in the wake of a terror attack. 
While investigative needs no doubt require police to question those who knew 
any person suspected of a violent crime, too often these nets are cast so wide 
that neighborhoods and communities – rather than individuals – become targets. 
This too creates fear among Muslim Americans and a sense that they are 
collectively regarded as suspects rather than citizens. While calls for 
profiling might create a splash in the news, study after study has shown that 
it is an ineffective tool for keeping us safe.

We do not yet know much about the motives of the person or people responsible 
for the weekend’s attacks. We do know that it is profoundly unfair to hold 
Muslim America collectively responsible for the violent acts of a few. It is 
also exactly what terrorist groups want: to sow fear and provoke governments 
and people to overreact. Our elected officials have been commendably restrained 
in their reaction to the most recent attacks. We would do well to pay attention 
to those like Governor Mark Dayton of Minnesota (which also saw a knife attack 
over the weekend) who called on Americans to “rise above this tragic incident 
and to remember our common humanity, our shared citizenship, and our shared 
desires to live together peacefully.” That is the type of collective 
responsibility we should all embrace.
 