
Edgar Wright will swap long-gestating Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> comic book movie Ant-Man for the 
science fiction adventure filmGrasshopper Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/may/14/review-grasshopper-jungle-by-andrew-smith>
, based on the popular young adult novel by Andrew Smith,according to the 
Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.authorandrewsmith.com/Author_Andrew_Smith/Grasshopper_Jungle.html>.

Smith's novel centres on a group of Iowan teenagers who accidentally unleash 
an unstoppable army of "horny, hungry, six-foot-tall praying mantises that only 
want to do two things", according to a synopsis on the author's website. The 
book, published in the US in February, is described as a coming-of-age story 
that "brilliantly weaves together everything from testicle-dissolving 
genetically modified corn to the struggles of recession-era, small-town 
America". The film's insect-centred storyline will inevitably see it compared 
to Ant-Man, but the project otherwise looks like fresh territory for the 
director ofShaun of the Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/99960/shaun.of.the.dead>, Hot Fuzz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/116979/hot.fuzz> and last year's The 
World's End <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-world-s-end>.

Wright left Ant-Man in June after eight years of development, due to creative 
differences with Marvel. The superhero origins tale, which retains stars Paul 
Rudd and Michael Douglas, will now shoot next month with Yes Man'sPeyton Reed 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0715636/> taking over as director.

Deadline reported last week that Wright's next film will be Baby Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/23/edgar-wright-baby-driver-ant-man>
, a "collision of crime, action, music and sound", which the film-maker 
originally intended to follow his 2010 comic-book movieScott Pilgrim Vs the 
World <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scott-pilgrim-vs-the-world> into 
production.

It is not known if Wright's regular collaborators Simon Pegg and Nick Frost 
will appear in either of the two new films.
 