
Q I am at my wits' end. There is so much talk by the government about getting 
mothers back to work, but for me the reality is that employers and employment 
agencies are not interested in a mother with a career gap.

Before I had my child in 2002, I had worked my way up in the IT industry over 
a period of 10 years from trainee programmer to project manager running a team 
of 25 professionals. I was earning more than Â£45,000 a year and was well 
respected, as my career history demonstrates.

In preparation for returning to work, in November 2006 I sat and passed a much 
sought after project management qualification. Since the start of 2007 I have 
applied for an average of 15 positions a week, and have in that time had 
interviews at only four companies. Most applications are made via IT agencies, 
and I often follow up my applications with phone calls to the agent contact.

Time and time again I get the same hidden message (and sometimes quite open 
message) that my career gap renders me unemployable. I am made to feel that 
having taken time off to care for my child up to school age has negated my 10 
years' experience and success.
MK

A I'm not surprised you are frustrated - just reading your email makes me (and 
I'm sure very many other women) want to stomp round to these IT firms and tell 
them to get their acts together and stop wasting all the amazing talent to 
which they have access.

You have done everything right: updated your skills before heading back to 
work, used specialist recruiters and followed up every application. Short of 
taking a job you could do with one hand tied behind your back - just because 
that's all that's on offer - I'm not sure what else you should be doing.

Except, of course, that's what lots of women have to do after they have 
children. Whether it's because they want to work part time, or because they've 
been out of the workplace for a few years, they end up taking roles that don't 
fully utilise their skills or potential because employers don't appear able or 
willing to recruit in a way that doesn't penalise mothers.

And then everyone is amazed that the gender pay-gap doesn't shrink and the top 
layers of management are stuffed full of men. Like it's a big mystery of some 
kind!

Anyway, I'm sure this isn't news to you, even if it is to the people handing 
out jobs. And luckily there are a growing number of people working to make 
things easier for mothers returning to work. You might try talking to an 
organisation such asWomen Like Us <http://www.womenlikeus.org.uk/home.aspx>, a 
recruitment consultancy specifically for mums, particularly those who wish to 
work flexibly. It's been expanding fast and can offer advice and career 
coaching for those who've had career breaks.

You might also try approaching a not-for-profit organisation such as Equalitec 
<http://www.equalitec.org.uk/equalitec_main/index.cfm>, which aims to assist in 
the recruitment and advancement of women in IT, or looking for work via sites 
such aswomenintechnology 
<http://www.womenintechnology.co.uk/content_static/home.asp>, where employers 
tend to be more supportive of those who have taken career breaks but want to 
return to work.

I would also suggest investigating the possibility of joining a women's 
network or mentoring scheme, if that's possible (I'm not sure where you are 
based, but try a web search for your area). If nothing else it's a good way to 
meet other people in similar situations and find out how they have managed to 
overcome them.

Additionally, you might try to sidestep the recruitment agencies by writing 
directly to women in positions or at companies you admire, and asking for their 
advice. Perhaps it isn't an orthodox approach, but personal connections can 
really kick-start a career - which is why returning after a break, when your 
network of contacts has broken down, can be so difficult. (Although you 
certainly shouldn't be scared of calling up old colleagues and persuading them 
out for lunch. Not only can they tell you honestly where the gaps in your 
skills set lie, they will also put the word about in the right circles that 
you're looking for work.)

So, more hard work ahead I'm afraid. But it will be worth it when you finally 
land the job you deserve. Just don't forget to offer similar mentoring to other 
women once you've found your new role.
 