
The practice of indicating suitable ages for goods bought by or for children 
is rarely the subject of controversy. Apart from the children themselves, who 
always desire whatever happens to lie in the age bracket above, most adults 
find such advice helpful in avoiding potentially dangerous or inappropriate 
items.

But publishers' plans to introduce age ranging guidance onto children's books 
have met with fierce opposition from authors including Philip Pullman, Anne 
Fine and Michael Rosen, following areport 
<http://books.theguardian.com/news/articles/0,,2282938,00.html?gusrc=rss&feed=10>
 of the growing protest last week on theguardian.com.

In a letter to the Bookseller magazine, to be published this Friday, over 80 
authors and illustrators have described the plans as "ill-conceived, damaging 
to the interests of young readers."

Reasons adduced for the objections include the claim that children easily feel 
"stigmatized" and may discard books classified as too young, and that it will 
feed into a child-rearing culture that is already "over-prescriptive".

Commenting on the protest, Rosen, the UK's children's laureate, told the 
Guardian that the trend of breaking up childhood into layers was becoming 
"inhumane".

"Of course if something was actually physically dangerous for, say, a child 
below the age of three, then age stamping it would be fine.

"But in a context where our entire concept of education is reduced to one of 
development, where we have become totally obsessed with marking which 'level' 
our children are at, extending age classification to recreational literature is 
a tragic idea, really."

So far few voices have come out in favour of the publishers' plans, which 
according to Rebecca McNally, publishing director of Macmillan's children's 
division, are aimed at increasing consumer confidence and sales.

"We've written to our authors and had a positive response," she told the 
Guardian last week.

Meg Rosoff, one of few children's authors so far publicly to have expressed 
firm support for the idea, also published anarticle 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/books/2008/05/hay_festival_ranging_and_ragin.html>
 on the Guardian's books blog, arguing that age banding would be extremely 
helpful for parents.

"Of course the age-ranging system is imperfect, but it's an excellent start in 
breaking down the gulf between booksellers and book buyers."

The debate is set to continue on Friday after the authors' letter is published 
in the Bookseller magazine. An additional article byPhilip Pullman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman> will also be published in the 
Guardian Review on Saturday.
 