
Wrinkles, grey hair and niggling aches are normally regarded as an inevitable 
part of growing older, but now scientists claim that the ageing process may be 
reversible.


Scientists to 'reset' blood proteins in attempt to slow ageing process
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/22/scientists-to-reset-blood-proteins-in-attempt-to-slow-ageing-process-calico>
The team showed that a new form of gene therapy produced a remarkable 
rejuvenating effect in mice. After six weeks of treatment, the animals looked 
younger, had straighter spines and better cardiovascular health, healed quicker 
when injured, and lived 30% longer.

Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, who led the work at the Salk Institute in La 
Jolla, California, said: “Our study shows that ageing may not have to proceed 
in one single direction. With careful modulation, ageing might be reversed.”

The genetic techniques used do not lend themselves to immediate use in humans, 
and the team predict that clinical applications are a decade away. However, the 
discovery raises the prospect of a new approach to healthcare in which ageing 
itself is treated, rather than the various diseases associated with it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh56hDCji1QM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh56hDCji1QM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh56hDCji1QM&media=>
The findings also challenge the notion that ageing is simply the result of 
physical wear and tear over the years. Instead, they add to a growing body of 
evidence that ageing is partially – perhaps mostly – driven by an internal 
genetic clock that actively causes our body to enter a state of decline.

The scientists are not claiming that ageing can be eliminated, but say that in 
the foreseeable future treatments designed to slow the ticking of this internal 
clock could increase life expectancy.

“We believe that this approach will not lead to immortality,” said Izpisua 
Belmonte. “There are probably still limits that we will face in terms of 
complete reversal of ageing. Our focus is not only extension of lifespan but 
most importantly health-span.”

Wolf Reik, a professor of epigenetics at the Babraham Institute, Cambridge, 
who was not involved in the work, described the findings as “pretty amazing” 
and agreed that the idea of life-extending therapies was plausible. “This is 
not science fiction,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fageing-process-may-be-reversible-scientists-claim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2f927b4de9475803e6873b71533935919759000%2F145_22_949_569%2F949.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ageing%20process%20may%20be%20reversible%2C%20scientists%20claim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fageing-process-may-be-reversible-scientists-claim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ageing%20process%20may%20be%20reversible%2C%20scientists%20claim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fageing-process-may-be-reversible-scientists-claim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2f927b4de9475803e6873b71533935919759000%2F145_22_949_569%2F949.jpg>
 On the left is muscle tissue from an aged mouse. On the right is muscle tissue 
from an aged mouse that has been subjected to “reprogramming”. Photograph: Salk 
Institute 
The rejuvenating treatment given to the mice was based on a technique that has 
previously been used to “rewind” adult cells, such as skin cells, back into 
powerful stem cells, very similar to those seen in embryos. These so-called
induced pluripotent stem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/mar/01/stem-cells-breakthrough> (iPS) 
cells have the ability to multiply and turn into any cell type in the body and 
are already being tested in trials designed to provide“spare parts” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/nov/26/muscular-dystrophy-therapy-breakthrough>
 for patients.

The latest study is the first to show that the same technique can be used to 
partially rewind the clock on cells – enough to make them younger, but without 
the cells losing their specialised function.

“Obviously there is a logic to it,” said Reik. “In iPS cells you reset the 
ageing clock and go back to zero. Going back to zero, to an embryonic state, is 
probably not what you want, so you ask: where do you want to go back to?”

The male contraceptive pill: how close are we? – Science Weekly podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2016/dec/14/the-male-contraceptive-pill-how-close-are-we-science-weekly-podcast>
The treatment involved intermittently switching on the same four genes that 
are used to turn skin cells into iPS cells. The mice were genetically 
engineered in such a way that the four genes could be artificially switched on 
when the mice were exposed to a chemical in their drinking water.

The scientists tested the treatment in mice with a genetic disorder, called 
progeria, which is linked to accelerated ageing, DNA damage, organ dysfunction 
and dramatically shortened lifespan.

After six weeks of treatment, the mice looked visibly younger, skin and muscle 
tone improved and they lived 30% longer. When the same genes were targeted in 
cells, DNA damage was reduced and the function of the cellular batteries, 
called the mitochondria, improved.

“This is the first time that someone has shown that reprogramming in an animal 
can provide a beneficial effect in terms of health and extend their lifespan,” 
said Izpisua Belmonte.

Crucially, the mice did not have an increased cancer risk, suggesting that the 
treatment had successfully rewound cells without turning them all the way back 
into stem cells, which can proliferate uncontrollably in the body.

The potential for carcinogenic side-effects means that the first people to 
benefit are likely to be those with serious genetic conditions, such as 
progeria, where there is more likely to be a medical justification for 
experimental treatments. “Obviously the tumour risk is lurking in the 
background,” said Reik.

The approach used in the mice could not be readily applied to humans as it 
would require embryos to be genetically manipulated, but the Salk team believe 
the same genes could be targeted with drugs.


“These chemicals could be administrated in creams or injections to rejuvenate 
skin, muscle or bones,” said Izpisua Belmonte. “We think these chemical 
approaches might be in human clinical trials in the next ten years.”

The findings are published 
<http://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(16)31664-6> in the journal Cell.

 * This article was amended on 16 December 2016. A previous version 
erroneously gave Wolf Reik’s affiliation as the University of Cambridge. This 
has now been corrected to the Babraham Institute, Cambridge.
 