
The approach of the fall art sales brings with it almost unprecedented 
disputes over provenance. FromFrans Hals  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/23/art>to Ross Bleckner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/alec-baldwin-sues-art-dealer-over-190000-painting>
,Mark Rothko <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rothko> to Agnes Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/22/agnes-martin-the-artist-mystic-who-disappeared-into-the-desert>
, the sheer number of authentication disputes heading to court is placing 
pressure on the art world to reform its standards for certifying work.


Agnes Martin: the artist mystic who disappeared into the desert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/22/agnes-martin-the-artist-mystic-who-disappeared-into-the-desert>
Last week, the prestigious London Cork St gallery head James Mayor sued the 
directors of the foundation that represents the estate of the Taos, New 
Mexico-based abstract painter Agnes Martin.


The dispute pits Mayor against one of New York’s top dealers, Pace Gallery’s 
Arne Glimcher 
<http://www.phaidon.com/agenda/art/articles/2012/november/08/ten-questions-for-pace-gallerys-arne-glimcher/>
, who represents Martin’s estate and also heads the authentication committee 
that decides what is included in the artist’s catalogue raisonnée – the 
catalogue that includes all of the artist’s known work.

Mayor claims the foundation failed to provide sufficient explanation for 
excluding some works submitted by Mayor clients.

“They’re not saying these are fakes, they’re saying, ‘We’re not 100% 
convinced,’” says the art authenticatorRichard Polsky 
<http://richardpolskyart.com/>. Still, the Martin estate’s refusal to include 
the works is tantamount to declaring them fake.

The question of authentication, Polsky believes, is becoming a profound 
problem for the art world. “Art has become such a commodity, and there’s so 
much money at stake, that [if] a painting that belongs to you or as a dealer 
you may have sold is declared essentially worthless, you’ll do anything to turn 
the decision around.”

The timing of the latest dispute to hit the headlines is significant. A major 
retrospective of Martin’s work recently opened at the Guggenheim 
<https://www.guggenheim.org/exhibition/agnes-martin> in New York and the value 
of her work has soared in recent years.

According to the Mayor Gallery’s complaint, it sold certain paintings to 
individual collectors in the belief (and representing) that the works were by 
the artist. The prices for the works ranged from $2.9m, for Day & Night in 
2010, to $240,000 for an untitled work in 2009, among many others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fagnes-martin-painting-provenance-art-world-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff29643f8cd8cc1a4ec71d8f979fe477f292c497c%2F0_0_3000_2020%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Agnes%20Martin%20paintings%20at%20center%20of%20wave%20of%20disputes%20over%20provenance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fagnes-martin-painting-provenance-art-world-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Agnes%20Martin%20paintings%20at%20center%20of%20wave%20of%20disputes%20over%20provenance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fagnes-martin-painting-provenance-art-world-market%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff29643f8cd8cc1a4ec71d8f979fe477f292c497c%2F0_0_3000_2020%2F3000.jpg>
 In this courtroom sketch, Domenico De Sole, a chairman of the board at 
Sotheby’s, gestures towards his fake Mark Rothko painting, at a civil trial in 
New York at Manhattan federal court. Photograph: Elizabeth Williams/AP 
The gallery subsequently submitted the work for authentication pursuant to the 
authentication committee’s examination agreement. In each case, the committee 
apparently rejected works. Mayor claims the decisions were reached with an 
inadequate level of interest or responsiveness.

The dispute comes on the heels of several recent clashes. Earlier this month 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/27/arts/design/a-dubious-old-master-unnerves-the-art-world.html>
, it was revealed that Sotheby’s auction house sold Frans Hals’s Portrait of 
Man for $10m in 2011, a work which rival Christie’s had passed on because its 
experts were not satisfied with the provenance and attribution. The painting 
has since been declared a fake and a refund issued to the buyer.

In September, the actor Alec Baldwin sued New York dealer Mary Boone  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/alec-baldwin-sues-art-dealer-over-190000-painting>
after he was sold a Ross Bleckner painting, Sea and Mirror, under the 
impression, he claims, it was a work he had first seen and admired in 1996. 
Baldwin said something about the $190,000 work made him uneasy. Besides, it 
smelled new – and the actor says that in fact, the painting was a version made 
in 2010. The dispute is now headed to court.

Earlier in the year, in an epic case, the former Gucci CEO Domenico de Soles 
sued the world-famous but now defunct Knoedler Gallery,for selling him a fake 
Mark Rothko painting for $8.3m 
<http://www.artnews.com/2016/01/28/domenico-de-sole-who-paid-8-3-m-for-fake-rothko-takes-the-stand-in-knoedler-trial/>
. That was settled out of court after it became clear that Knoedler hadbeen 
selling dozens of abstract expressionist “masters” created by a Chinese artist 
in the New York borough of Queens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/22/forged-art-scandal-new-york-artist-china-spain>
.

In that case, several experts had authenticated the painting, despite the fact 
that in something of a giveaway, theKnoedler Gallery director, Anne Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/feb/02/fake-rothko-trial-reduces-tragic-art-to-farce>
, had hung a Jackson Pollock in her office that was not only signed on the 
front (something the artist never did) but also had the artist’s name spelled 
“Pollok”.

An expert called to testify at the trial explained that without provenance, 
authenticating art would be a little like watching Elvis Presley against 
several Presley imitators – one intuitively knows which is real and which is 
fake.

Alec Baldwin sues art dealer over $190,000 'original' that wasn't
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/alec-baldwin-sues-art-dealer-over-190000-painting>
But the problems posed by authentication are only likely to get worse, warns 
Polsky. Over the past several years, estate boards that once authenticated 
works byAndy Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol>, 
Jean-Michel Basquiat and the pop master Roy Liechtenstein have shut up shop.

The move came after the Warhol Foundation spent a reputed $7m defending its 
decision to deny the authenticity of a self-portrait owned by the UK collector 
Joe Simon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/18/artnews.art>. Not only 
did the Warhol Foundation refuse to authenticate the work, but it stamped 
“denied” on the back, rendering the painting – considered by others to be 
genuine – virtually worthless.

 But with the approach of the November sales, new questions of authenticity 
are unlikely to bring to cheer to an art market that has already seen sales 
volume decline since peaking in 2014.

Part of the problem, Polsky believes, is a lack of industry standards. “Every 
authentication board is different and every catalogue raisonnée is different. 
People may not like it if you turn something down, but if at least if you’re 
open and honest with people about why, they probably won’t sue you or feel that 
you’ve been treated unfairly.”
 