
Eugenie Bouchard’s hopes of rehabilitation at the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> came to a swift end on 
Wednesday as Agnieszka Radwanska sent the Canadian out of the tournament with a 
6-4, 6-2 defeat in the second round.

Australian Open 2016: day three, Djokovic, Kyrgios, Radwanska in action – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/20/australian-open-2016-day-three-djokovic-kyrgios-radwanska-live>
The 21-year-old Bouchard, who had a long lay-off late last year after 
sustaining a concussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/06/eugenie-bouchard-withdraws-from-us-open-following-locker-room-accident>
 when she slipped and fell in a dressing room at the US Open, crumbled under 
the lights of Rod Laver Arena after racing into a 4-2 lead in the first set.

She lost six straight games to gift the set and an early break in the second 
to the Polish fourth seed, and was then powerless to mount a challenge as her 
forehand misfired and the mistakes started piling up.

At 5-2 Bouchard was presented with one last chance to rally, having won three 
break points as Radwanska served for the match. But the world No37 squandered 
them all in a run of four unforced errors – she made 37 in total during the 
match – ending her participation at the tournament that was the springboard for 
her sensational 2014.

Bouchard made the semi-finals at Melbourne Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/23/li-na-eugenie-bouchard-australian-open>
 and theFrench Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/05/maria-sharapova-french-open-final-simon-halep>
 that year before going one better atWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/petra-kvitova-crushes-eugenie-bouchard-second-wimbledon-title>
, prompting pundits and former players to declare her a future grand slam 
champion.

Reaching a peak of No5 in the rankings, she made the Australian Open 
quarter-finals last year before the wheels fell off with first-round exits at 
the French Open and Wimbledon. A more promising run to the fourth round of the 
US Open ended with her dressing room fall. She laterdecided to sue the US 
Tennis Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/15/eugenie-bouchard-sues-us-tennis-association-fall-us-open>
 and was unable to complete a match for the rest of the year.

Though speaking of new beginnings in Australia after hiring the coach Thomas 
Hogstedt, Maria Sharapova’s former mentor, Bouchard appeared to arrive with 
other baggage. Her encouraging run to the final of the Hobart International was 
ended with a6-1, 6-2 loss against Alizé Cornet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/alize-cornet-defeats-eugenie-bouchard-to-win-hobart-international>
, and she complained of being distracted by “personal family issues” at home.

However, she tried to remain upbeat after her loss to Radwanska. “If I lose 
every match I’m still happy to be out there doing what I love,” she said. “I 
just want to play as much as possible. I kind of almost want to play catch-up.”
 