
Agriculture is now the fastest growing subject at UK universities, with a 4.6% 
increase in student numbers last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/environment-minister-addresses-the-national-farmers-union-conference>
, according to the environment minister Elizabeth Truss. There are now more 
than 19,000 people studying it and related subjects.

As a farming graduate, this sudden growth doesn’t surprise me. I studied at 
Harper Adams University (HAU), which specialises in agri-food and rural 
studies. In 2013-14,96% of students who graduated from HAU and its associated 
colleges <http://www.harper-adams.ac.uk/careers/> were employed or in education 
six months after completing their course.

Why farming is the fastest growing university subject - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2016/mar/31/why-farming-is-the-fastest-growing-university-subject-in-pictures>
You may have thought a degree in agriculture is solely designed for farmers. 
But the degree is actually extremely diverse. Graduates who don’t go on to 
farms could be employed by food retailers and suppliers. They can go on to work 
in research and technology, consultancy, education, marketing or the media.

Once you’ve graduated, you could work on home soil or abroad, managing a 
family estate, or even working for the government.Check out the Bright Crop 
<http://www.brightcrop.org.uk/> website to see the range of options.

I’m from a farming background – I was born and bred on a family farm in the 
hills of north Wales. After my A-levels, I began my four-year course in 
agriculture and spent the third year working on a large mixed livestock farm in 
the Scottish Borders.

I graduated in September 2015 and a month later, to my amazement, I was named 
agricultural student of the year at the British Farming Awards 
<http://www.harper-adams.ac.uk/news/202667/joe-parry-wins-agricultural-student-of-the-year-2015#.VvRIGqPcvIU>
.

The majority of my fellow students were either from a country or a farming 
background, or had an interest in food, animals or engineering. This led to a 
very close-knit community. The farm at HAU is on the campus, which made me feel 
at home - I’d often go for walks and visit the animals.

I have fond memories of my time as a student farmer, along with some rather 
hazy ones from the student union bar. There’s nothing better than an early 
morning crop walk to cure a hangover.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fagriculture-uk-fastest-growing-subject-career-student-farmers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb185f22ab9bc5c05e73828f232e00b40e4356e52%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Agriculture%20is%20UK's%20fastest%20growing%20subject%20%E2%80%93%20and%20a%20smart%20career%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fagriculture-uk-fastest-growing-subject-career-student-farmers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Agriculture%20is%20UK%27s%20fastest%20growing%20subject%20%E2%80%93%20and%20a%20smart%20career%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fagriculture-uk-fastest-growing-subject-career-student-farmers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb185f22ab9bc5c05e73828f232e00b40e4356e52%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Joe Parry and his award for student farmer of the year 2015. Photograph: Joe 
Parry 
My course helped me prepare for taking over the family business. In my 
opinion, further education is critical for young farmers to be able to run an 
efficient and profitable business. Degree modules such as agricultural business 
development taught me how to put business plans together, calculate gross 
margins, and forecast cash flows.

University guide 2016: league table for agriculture, forestry & food
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-guide-2016-league-table-for-agriculture-forestry-food>
Kenna Murdoch, 23, a Harper Adams University graduate in agriculture and 
marketing, doesn’t come from a farming background and chose agriculture because 
she had an interest in how food is produced. “University helped me launch a 
rewarding career as an agricultural advisor for poultry and eggs at Tesco,” she 
says.

For Harri Gardner, 23, who studied agriculture and business management at 
Aberystwyth University and also doesn’t come from a farming family, studying 
the subject was a way to enter industry. “The university experience at 
Aberystwyth was great academically, and it’s in a perfect location with great 
facilities.”

Rosie Miller, 24, an agriculture graduate from Harper Adams University, says: 
“The knowledge and skills gained during my degree have been vital to start my 
career in farm animal nutrition.”

Young farmers: why agriculture is booming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/04/young-farmers-why-agriculture-is-booming>
Despite the rise in undergraduate numbers, there is still a numbers shortage. 
BBC Countryfile recently devoted a whole episode to young people in agriculture 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b074bs69>. Adam Henson, a farmer and 
Countryfile presenter, believes that to maintain its existing workforce, 
British agriculture needs to recruit 60,000 newcomers over the next decade,a 
number that has been echoed elsewhere (pdf) 
<http://www.hse.gov.uk/aboutus/meetings/hseboard/2010/310310/pmarb1033.pdf>.

There are many challenges facing today’s farmers, such as climate change, 
market volatility and reliance on subsidies. Meanwhile, farming is an ageing 
occupation,with the average UK farmer now aged 59 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/315103/auk-2013-29may14.pdf>
.

But, to my mind, these challenges provide opportunities. We need to ensure 
that young people are encouraged to enter the sector – and they need to be 
provided with the means and the knowledge to do so.

After all, we farmers are the custodians of the countryside, producing food 
for the planet and maintaining the environment we live in. The world will 
always need food, so why not consider a degree in agriculture?

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.

 