
It’s 200 years since unceasing storms sweeping over Lake Geneva ruined Mary 
Shelley’s sailing jaunts and gave birth to a literary genre 
<http://www.bl.uk/romantics-and-victorians/articles/mary-shelley-frankenstein-and-the-villa-diodati>
 – when Lord Byron suggested to her and the other guests at the Villa Diodati 
that they pass some time by writing ghost stories. To celebrate the birth of
Victor Frankenstein’s monster 
<https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/s/shelley/mary/s53f/>, the Royal Society of 
Literature <http://rsliterature.org/library/rsl-review/> has been asking 
fellows to reveal their scariest moments in literature.

For Hilary Mantel, it’s the moment in Jane Eyre 
<https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/b/bronte/charlotte/b869j/chapter20.html> when 
Rochester pauses outside a locked door in the dark, low corridor of Thornfield 
Hall’s fateful third storey and asks: “You don’t turn sick at the sight of 
blood?” He leaves Jane locked into an attic room – complete with antique 
tapestry and a cabinet decorated with the 12 apostles, “an ebon Crucifix and a 
dying Christ” – where she must tend to a wounded man, dipping her hand again 
and again into a basin that gradually becomes a mixture of blood and water. As 
a 10-year-old reader, Mantel says she “didn’t know that if your name is in the 
title, you can’t die part way through the book. I doubted Jane would make it to 
see ‘streaks of grey light edging the window curtains’. But dawn comes – and we 
still don’t know who or what is beyond the wall.”

Adam Foulds, by contrast, declares himself unmoved by the “special effects 
department of the gothic imagination”. It is people and “what they can do to 
each other” that he finds truly terrifying. He cites a moment inDenis Johnson’s 
Angels <https://www.nytimes.com/books/00/07/09/specials/johnson-angels.html> 
when Jamie is being drugged and abused by two men, and – through her eyes – we 
see a knife. “I’ve never been more desperate to read on to know that a 
character survives,” Foulds says, “or, for that matter, to tear into a 
fictional world to rescue someone.”

As someone who has “never understood the point of subjecting yourself to 
terror when it can be avoided”, Kamila Shamsie found herself blindsided by
Richard Adams’s Watership Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/richard-adams-watership-down-interview>
. To an 11-year-old, a book about rabbits seemed safe enough – but she wasn’t 
counting on General Woundwort, who she says is “truly the most terrifying 
creature I’ve ever encountered in fiction”.

That I was living in a military dictatorship at the time of first reading 
might have had something to do with how much space he took up in my imagination 
with his unyielding personality, his ‘enforcers’ and – creepiest of all – the 
rest of the warren, too traumatised to flee even when the opportunity arose.

Bernardine Evaristo picks Stephen King’s Misery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/jul/30/rereading-stephen-king-misery>
 – the only novel that has ever given her nightmares – while Susan Hill goes for
Robert Louis Stevenson’s Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/13/dr-jekyll-mr-hyde-stevenson>. 
But this selection of terrifying tales got us thinking about our own scariest 
moments. As someone of Shamsie’s persuasion when it comes to horror, I had such 
nightmares readingColson Whitehead 
<http://www.colsonwhitehead.com/Biography.html>’s zombie novel, Zone One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/13/zone-one-colson-whitehead-review>
, that I couldn’t even finish it. So let us know the moments that have set the 
pages quivering in your hands, but – please – be gentle …
 