
Barely a day after his apprehension following a dramatic shootout, the suspect 
believed responsible for attacks in New York andNew Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey> this weekend was charged with 
bombing, property destruction and use of weapons of mass destruction – but not 
with terrorism or material support, as was expected.

New York and New Jersey bombings: who is suspect Ahmad Khan Rahami?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-terrorist-suspect-new-york-area-bombings>
Ahmad Khan Rahami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> left 
12 fingerprints on one of the bombs he planted and purchased materials for his 
bombs under his own name on eBay, according to federal charging documents 
released late on Tuesday.

The charges, filed in federal court in lower Manhattan, suggest that 
investigators were unable to connect Rahami to a terrorist group, though the 
documents quote a journal on his person referring to jihad and prominent jihadi 
figures.

According to a criminal complaint by FBI special agent Peter Frederick Licata, 
Rahami was responsible for bombs constructed out of a pressure cooker and 
placed in Manhattan’s Chelsea neighborhood on Saturday, as well as pipe bombs 
in New Jersey’s Seaside Park and Elizabeth, the latter of which is where Rahami 
resided. The bombs injured at least 29 people, and caused significant property 
damage.

The criminal complaint alleges that Rahami left copious fingerprints on one of 
two bombs in Manhattan, on 27th Street, as well as on materials in the backpack 
containing the Elizabeth bombs. Licata’s review of surveillance footage near 
the other bomb location, on 23rd Street, found a positive identification of 
Rahami “pulling a small suitcase” two minutes before the detonation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361e88a9091d4d0555d8e82c0d3e4c44af1769cc%2F0_170_2000_2497%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20over%20New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20over%20New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361e88a9091d4d0555d8e82c0d3e4c44af1769cc%2F0_170_2000_2497%2F2000.jpg>
 Photo provided by the Union County prosecutor’s office showing Ahmad Khan 
Rahami, who he is in custody. Photograph: AP 
According to the complaint, Rahami prepared for the bombings for months. 
Between 20 June and 10 August, Rahami allegedly purchased materials for the 
pipe and pressure cooker bombs under his own name through eBay, including 
citric acid, circuit boards, ball bearings and electric igniters, ingredients 
found in the 27th Street device.

Responding to the allegations that Rahami bought materials for the bombs on 
eBay, the company said: “We’ve been proactively working with law enforcement 
authorities on their investigation. The types of items bought by the suspect 
are legal to buy and sell in the United States and are widely available at 
online and offline stores.”

Also, an unidentified telephone service provider cooperating with the FBI 
indicated that it shipped two cellphones, used as detonators, to a store in 
Perth Amboy, New Jersey, near a residence Rahami claimed. Both phones were used 
in the Seaside Park and Chelsea bombs.

Another phone used in the Chelsea bombs, the complaint alleges, “was 
subscribed in the name of a family member” of Rahami’s, although no one else 
has been charged as an accomplice. An unspecified family member’s phone, now in 
the possession of the FBI, contains videos showing Rahami in a backyard in 
Elizabeth showing Rahami “igniting incendiary material” two days before the 
bombings.

The bombs themselves, while powerful, failed to kill anyone and appeared to 
investigators to demonstrate minimal technical sophistication, leading some to 
believe their designs emerged from al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula’s 
English-language web magazine Inspire. Although the Manhattan bombs reportedly 
used high-powered explosive – with one placed in a dumpster, a curious choice 
for a lethal device – they were “something any 12-year-old could do if he had 
access to Christmas lights, a phone and ball bearings,” a US official told the 
Guardian.

Legally, a charge of use of weapons of mass destruction does not necessarily 
have to involve chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons.

If the bombs were crude, the hunt for Rahami, an Elizabeth, New Jersey, 
resident who worked at his family’s fried-chicken spot, and the circumstances 
of his capture have proven extraordinary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1550d24424b09186daa214695cbc6f5062671ccd%2F0_175_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20over%20New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ahmad%20Khan%20Rahami%20charged%20over%20New%20York%20and%20New%20Jersey%20bombings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1550d24424b09186daa214695cbc6f5062671ccd%2F0_175_750_450%2F750.jpg>
 The alert sent to mobile phones about the bombing suspect. Photograph: 
Screengrab 
On Monday morning, the New York police department used an 
emergency-notification system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-explosion-suspect-mobile-alert-ahmad-khan-rahami>
, typically employed for information on disasters or severe weather, to 
broadcast onto mobile phones an alert for Rahami.


Hours later, as Rahami lay sleeping in the vestibule of a bar on East 
Elizabeth Avenue in Linden, New Jersey, the bar owner contacted local police, 
who recognized Rahami. Using a handgun, Rahami shot and wounded one officer 
attempting to arrest him and wounded another with a bullet fragment during a 
chase that ended with Rahami shot and wounded himself several blocks west.

By Tuesday, Rahami was out of surgery and facing initial charges 
<http://ucnj.org/prosecutor/press-releases/prosecutor/2016/09/19/man-charged-with-attempted-murder-of-linden-police-officers/>
, in New Jersey’s Union County, of five counts of attempted murder of police 
officers. The New York Times firstreported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/21/nyregion/ahmad-khan-rahami-suspect.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share>
 that a notebook found on Rahami’s person contained writings praising the 
American al-Qaida propagandist Anwar al-Awlaki and the 2009 Fort Hood killer, 
army major Nidal Malik Hasan.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffather-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Father%20of%20bombing%20suspect%20says%20he%20contacted%20FBI%20in%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffather-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Father%20of%20bombing%20suspect%20says%20he%20contacted%20FBI%20in%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffather-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video&media=>
Rahami’s father says he contacted FBI in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/20/father-ahmad-rahami-bombing-fbi-2014-video>
According to the criminal complaint, the notebook refers to US “slaughter 
against the mujahideen be it in Afghanistan, Iraq, Sham [Syria], Palestine… 
Inshallah [God willing] the sounds of the bombs will be heard in the streets. 
Gun shots to your police. Death To Your Oppression.”

Investigators were reportedly attempting to interrogate a stable but still 
critical Rahami on Tuesday morning outside the boundaries of the so-called 
Miranda warning, which protects against self-incrimination. Statements someone 
makes outside of Miranda cannot be used against them at trial, but can be used 
for intelligence purposes, to include determining any connection Rahami had to 
established terrorist groups.

Ahmad Khan Rahami's father contacted FBI in 2014 over terrorism worry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-father-fbi-terrorism-bombing>
Adding to the saga, Rahami’s father told reporters on Tuesday that he had 
tipped the FBI off to his own son. Mohammed Rahami said he contacted the bureau 
after his son was doing “really bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-father-fbi-terrorism-bombing>
” following a violent outburst in 2014, but later recanted. Still, the 
admission that the FBI had Rahami brought to their attention presented a 
complication for the bureau, which came under sharp criticism fordropping a 
preliminary investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/omar-mateen-fbi-boston-marathon-tsarnaev>
 into Orlando shooter Omar Mateen for lack of predication.

“In August 2014, the FBI initiated an assessment of Ahmad Rahami based upon 
comments made by his father after a domestic dispute that were subsequently 
reported to authorities,” the bureau confirmed in a statement.

“The FBI conducted internal database reviews, interagency checks, and multiple 
interviews, none of which revealed ties to terrorism.”

The FBI did not clarify if it interviewed Rahami himself. A US official 
confirmed that Rahami was not on any US watchlist.

Rahami is alleged to have taken a trip to Afghanistan and Pakistan, according 
to published reports, though the timeline is unclear. The criminal complaint 
does not make any mention of a foreign trip.
 