
Amid the confusion of breaking news reports following Ahmed Wali Karzai's 
assassination, I mentioned the name of the alleged assassin, Sardar Mohammed, 
to someone close to the murdered man. The reaction was a gasp of disbelief.

Mohammed, who commanded a force of men who ran checkpoints close to Ahmed 
Wali's hometown of Karz, had worked for the Karzai family for years and was 
from the same Popolzai tribe and district. The fact that he was allowed to 
bring his weapon into Ahmed Wali's presence shows just how trusted he was. It 
seems likely that there was a personal motivation behind the attack, despite 
the Taliban claim of responsibility. Kandahar is a hotbed of long-running 
personal vendettas.

Isaf [the International Security Assistance Force) now has a chance to push 
for more inclusive politics in Kandahar, if it is sufficiently deft and willing 
to engage directly with those Ahmed Wali had marginalised. But his death leaves 
a massive hole in the fabric of Kandahari power politics, and shows the dangers 
inherent in a strategy that relies on individual powerbrokers.

Ahmed Wali was the linchpin of the south's pro-Karzai network, a pan-tribal 
alliance brought together by money and mutual security. There is now no clear 
successor to Ahmed Wali, and certainly no one who can combine his vast 
financial influence, iron-fisted methods and closeness to the president.

Any figure other than a Popolzai might upset the delicate balance between the 
pro-government elements of Kandahar's various tribes, and while two of the 
president's other brothers, Qayum and Shah Wali, are seen as potential 
candidates who could step into the role of the president's powerbroker in the 
south, they lack Ahmed Wali's long experience of hard-nosed backroom dealings.

There is also speculation that this might open the door for Gul Agha Sherzai, 
a former governor of Kandahar, to return. Sherzai represents the Barakzai tribe 
and his considerable rivalry with Ahmed Wali in the early years eventually led 
him to be pushed out with the consolation prize of Nangahar province in eastern
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. Yet relations 
between Sherzai and the president are said to have improved in recent years, 
and Sherzai has also earned the respect among the internationals for his 
steady-handed, if rather venal, handling of Nangahar, a key territory bordering 
Pakistan.

Ahmed Wali was never popular in Kandahar among the ordinary locals. Street 
vendors and school teachers alike would blame him for the criminality and 
corruption that has rocketed since 2001. But the Kandaharis I spoke to have 
shown no joy at his death, only apprehension for what the future mightÂ bring.

Matthieu Aikins is a freelance journalist living in Kabul
 