
A parked car transformed into a collection box to allow members of the public 
to donateLego <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> bricks to Ai 
Weiwei will open its roof on Thursday in Australia, at theNational Gallery of 
Victoria <http://www.ngv.vic.gov.au/> in Melbourne. 

The Danish toy company’s refusal to sell the artist bricks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/25/artist-ai-weiwei-accept-offers-lego-around-world>
 had left him without the materials to make a planned major installation for an 
exhibition opening in December.

Give Ai Weiwei your Lego bricks so he can show what corporate politics looks 
like | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/give-ai-weiwei-your-lego-bricks-so-he-can-show-what-corporate-politics-looks-like>
The artist and his studio have responded to a torrent of offers to donate 
bricks, with plans to park a fleet of collection box cars in cities across the 
world. The first has already appearedoutside the artist’s studio in Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/ai-weiweis-lego-collection-points-are-you-donating-bricks>
, its roof just open wide enough to allow bricks to be posted through – though 
a photograph posted later in the day showed a pretty miserable haul.

The second will be at the Melbourne gallery, which has already been inundated 
with offers of bricks, and is confident theirs will be an instant success. The 
car will be parked in the gallery’s sculpture court, roof open ready for 
donations.


When news broke that Lego <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> had 
refused to sell Ai bricks on political grounds, offers came from admirers and 
fellow artists around the world to donate their own blocks – even in some cases 
those belonging to their children (after, it is hoped, the children had been 
consulted).

In a tweet to the Guardian, Ai vowed to find a way to accept them – and more 
collection points in other cities will follow. The artist’s studio has posted 
on Instagram that it would like “to rent, borrow or buy second-hand a BMW 5S 
Series sedan, of which the color can vary, as a Lego container”.
Ai WeiWei (english) (@aiww_en) 
Yes, I will find a way to accept. https://t.co/S7vW7hw76s 
<https://t.co/S7vW7hw76s>
 <https://twitter.com/aiww_en/status/658243931629617152> October 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/aiww_en/status/658243931629617152> 
The cars must be free of any advertising, have clear windows and a sunroof 
that can be fixed open with a 5cm opening and should be parked and locked in a 
central city location, preferably with an arts or cultural context. The car 
should remain in place for a month, and the studio will be responsible for 
collecting the bricks.

The piece, the artist says, has now changed in nature, becoming a a work 
defending “freedom of speech and political art”.

Victorians turn out to back Ai Weiwei on free speech, one Lego brick at a time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/28/victorians-turn-out-to-back-ai-weiwei-on-free-speech-one-lego-brick-at-a-time>
The director of the Melbourne gallery, Tony Ellwood, who was in the artist’s 
Beijing studio as the controversy erupted, said: “We have received many offers 
of donations of Lego in the past days. People have shown generosity, creative 
spirit and enthusiasm to become engaged in this project, and we are pleased to 
be the first international collection point.

“The project began by celebrating those who stand for human rights and freedom 
of speech, and has inspired a groundswell of support that has developed into 
this inspiring project which has engaged the wider community.”

Ai has used Lego blocks in several earlier pieces, notably in a massive floor 
mosaic with portraits of political activists and prisoners, including Edward 
Snowden, Chelsea Manning and Nelson Mandela, which he installed in the prison 
island of Alcatraz in California.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F27%2Fai-weiwei-lego-collection-car-scheme-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6659bfb4be6b20a06ff84a2912b29f8ed1e19b55%2F0_0_3000_2050%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ai%20Weiwei%3A%20supporters%20urged%20to%20fill%20collection%20cars%20with%20Lego%20bricks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F27%2Fai-weiwei-lego-collection-car-scheme-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ai%20Weiwei%3A%20supporters%20urged%20to%20fill%20collection%20cars%20with%20Lego%20bricks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F27%2Fai-weiwei-lego-collection-car-scheme-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6659bfb4be6b20a06ff84a2912b29f8ed1e19b55%2F0_0_3000_2050%2F3000.jpg>
 Ai Weiwei’s Trace installation last year at Alcatraz in San Francisco, US. 
Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images 
However when his studio tried to buy bricks for the Melbourne project, he was 
told that they wouldn’t sell them, as they “cannot approve the use of Legos for 
political works”.

A Lego spokesman told the Guardian: “We respect any individual’s right to free 
creative expression, and we do not censor, prohibit or ban creative use of Lego 
bricks.”

However, “as a company dedicated to delivering great creative play experiences 
to children”, it would not active engage with or condone projects with a 
political agenda, such as by making bulk sales.
 