
The Chinese dissident artist Ai Weiwei has closed down his exhibition in 
Copenhagen in protest at a newlaw that allows Danish authorities to seize 
valuables from asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/danish-parliament-approves-plan-to-seize-assets-from-refugees>
.

The 58-year-old, who is currently on the Greek island of Lesbos undertaking 
research on Europe’s refugee crisis, told the Guardian: “My moments with 
refugees in the past months have been intense. I see thousands come daily, 
children, babies, pregnant women, old ladies, a young boy with one arm.

“They come with nothing, barefoot, in such cold, they have to walk across the 
rocky beach. Then you have this news; it made me feel very angry.

“The way I can protest is that I can withdraw my works from that country. It 
is very simple, very symbolic – I cannot co-exist, I cannot stand in front of 
these people, and see these policies. It is a personal act, very simple; an 
artist trying not just to watch events but to act, and I made this decision 
spontaneously.”

Danish parliament approves plan to seize assets from refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/danish-parliament-approves-plan-to-seize-assets-from-refugees>
An earlier post on his official Instagram  <https://www.instagram.com/aiww/>and
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/Ai-Weiwei-Camps-1529936073966084/> accounts 
read: “Ai Weiwei has decided to close his exhibition, Ruptures, at Faurschou 
Foundation Copenhagen, Denmark. This decision follows the Danish parliament’s 
approval of the law proposal that allows seizing valuables and delaying family 
reunions for asylum seekers.” The exhibition opened in March 2015 and had been 
due to close in mid-April.

Denmark’s parliament adopted reforms on Tuesday aimed at dissuading migrants 
from seeking asylum by delaying families being reunited and allowing 
authorities to confiscate migrants’ valuables.

The law has provoked international outrage, with many human rights activists 
criticising the delay for family reunifications as a breach of international 
conventions.

Jens Faurschou, owner of the Faurschou Foundation in Copenhagen, told the 
Guardian: “When I woke up today I did not expect to get that call, but I was 
not surprised by his [Ai’s] reaction.


“He had been watching the news during the night and wanted to react. I didn’t 
try to dissuade him. This is not so much about which country does more or less 
for refugees, it is the symbolic importance of the new law. This [kind of 
thing] is spreading over Europe, and we inDenmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark> are taking the lead in this by 
making this law.

“From Ai Weiwei’s side, the important thing is to get a debate and to use his 
voice,” said Faurschou. “He is becoming a European; he is taking part in what 
goes on here. He did that inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

“People would say he has no influence, but when he focused on the scandal of 
the earthquake in 2008, today China is doing something about corruption. He has 
a voice and he uses it. I really admire him for that.”

Ai said: “I have had a lot of criticism from Danish people. But I am not 
pointing the finger at them, other countries have disgusting policies too.

“I made a statement that our very established society cannot make exceptions, 
but instead lowers our standards of human rights and gives unfortunate people 
no support, morally or financially. It is a very bad judgment.

“They come to this land with very little help; they just want basic human 
dignity, no bombs, no fear. They sacrifice everything to come to a land where 
nobody understands them and they call them potential criminals. It makes me 
very angry.

Denmark’s selfish stance does nothing to help the global refugee crisis | 
Michala Bendixen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/27/denmark-selfish-global-refugee-crisis-immigration>
“I am pointing at all those governments who are not really facing up to this 
humanitarian crisis. And are not solving the problem, how to end this tragedy. 
It has not ended, it still continues. No nation can separate themselves.”

China’s most prominent contemporary artist, Ai helped design the Bird’s Nest 
stadium for the Beijing Olympics and has has had his works exhibited around the 
globe, but his art has often irked China’s authorities.


He was detained in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/apr/03/ai-weiwei-detained-chinese-police>
 for 81 days over his advocacy of democracy and human rights as well as other 
criticisms of the government in Beijing. Following the detention, he was placed 
under house arrest and his passport taken away. The document was only returned 
last July, enabling him to travel overseas.

Ai’s show in Copenhagen includes some of his most important work, including 
Sunflower Seeds, made from 100m handmade porcelain sunflower seeds. The show 
also featured several of the artist’s sculptures made of wood from Buddhist 
temples torn down during China’s cultural revolution.

Earlier this month, he announced plans to create a memorial on Lesbos to 
highlight the plight of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/01/ai-weiwei-sets-up-studio-on-greek-island-of-lesbos-to-highlight-plight-of-refugees>
, after meeting some of the many migrants there who risked their lives to reach 
Europe.

Agence France-Presse contributed to this report

 