
Western governments should challenge China on human rights and stand up for 
their principles, dissident artistAi Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> has said – lamenting the 
repression faced by Chinese activists but declaring that Beijing’s “business 
partners” in the rest of the world should not fear making it worse.


One of the world’s most famous living artists, Ai has long run foul of Chinese 
authorities, culminating in 81 days of detention in 2011 amid a wider crackdown 
on political dissent. He was subsequently banned from travelling overseas for 
more than four years and his passport was confiscated.

“It doesn’t matter it will hurt me or not, you have to do what you think is 
right,” Ai said during anevent at the Council on Foreign Relations 
<http://www.cfr.org/culture-and-foreign-policy/conversation-ai-weiwei/p38445> 
in New York. “You have to believe they have to listen. You know, they have to 
care about their business partner … or they have to respect.”

He encouraged western governments to maintain pressure on China, even with the 
potential that it may lead to harsh treatment for activists. In recent years 
more and more foreign politicians have been willing toforgo discussions of 
human rights issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/23/osborne-to-hail-chinese-regions-enormous-potential-amid-news-of-latest-deadly-unrest>
 in order to forge closer economic ties with Beijing.

Since Xi Jinping took power in 2012 China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has launched a wide-ranging crackdown 
on civil society, with hundreds of lawyers and activists arrested or jailed as 
the authorities have become less tolerant of any speech challenging the 
Communist party line.

“If you touch any political issues there’s no such thing as rule of law,” Ai 
said. “It’s getting really very bad, I should say, the situation. It’s almost 
no space.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440781834237%2FKP_407338_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ai%20Weiwei%20on%20Beijing%3A%20'It's%20a%20prison%20for%20freedom%20of%20speech'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ai%20Weiwei%20on%20Beijing%3A%20%27It%27s%20a%20prison%20for%20freedom%20of%20speech%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440781834237%2FKP_407338_crop_640x360.jpg>
Ai Weiwei on Beijing: ‘It’s a prison for freedom of speech’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/video/2015/sep/08/ai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech>
He lamented the fact that even the lawyers who defended the “basic rights of 
their clients” had become targets of the authorities.

“You just defend some people being wrongly accused, you can be put in jail,” 
Ai said. “And many of them are being falsely accused without trial, they’re 
still in jail.”

Xia Lin, a lawyer who previously defended Ai and other activists, was 
sentenced to12 years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/china-lawyer-for-ai-weiwei-jailed-for-12-years-in-severe-retaliation>
 in September on fraud charges. Many saw the conviction as revenge for 
defending high-profile political clients.

More than 200 lawyers and activists were detained 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2016/07/one-year-since-chinas-crackdown-on-human-rights-lawyers/>
 in a nationwide sweep last summer, with certain law firms apparently targeted 
because of their client lists.

Ai’s more recent work has turned away from critiques of the Chinese government 
and focused instead on Syrian refugees and a series ofLego portraits of 
celebrated human rights crusaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/24/artist-ai-weiwei-banned-by-lego-to-build-artwork-australian-exhibition>
 from around the world.

At a recent exhibition in Reading prison where author Oscar Wilde was once 
held, Ai contributeda piece that detailed his detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/05/inside-review-a-momentous-artangel-project>
, where he had to ask permission to scratch his head or sip water, and guards 
stood over him as he showered and slept.

He has compared the conditions he experienced to those faced by refugees in 
Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/ai-weiwei-chinese-artist-eu-refugees-turkey-immoral-humanitarian-crisis-lesbos>
, saying that although he experienced extreme and violent treatment in China, 
he “could never have imagined conditions like this”.
 