
Ai Weiwei drew on the words of prominent Australian human rights campaigners 
to create his newest art installation, the centrepiece ofAndy Warhol–Ai Weiwei 
<http://www.ngv.vic.gov.au/exhibition/andy-warhol-ai-wei-wei/>, a major 
exhibition at the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne. And at the show’s 
official opening on Thursday, the Chinese artist returned the favour, 
announcing he will gift the artwork in perpetuity to the NGV.

Built from Lego <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> – or rather 
knock-off building blocks produced in China after the Danish toy company denied 
Ai the right to use their brand in his work – Letgo Room (2015) is emblazoned 
with diverse quotes about freedom, human rights and censorship, and colourful, 
Warhol-style portraits of the people behind them.

These include the domestic violence spokesperson Rosie Batty, the formerly 
jailed al-Jazeera journalist Peter Greste, the Aboriginal rights activist Gary 
Foley and Wikileaks founder Julian Assange, who Airecently met  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/17/ai-weiwei-and-julian-assange-post-selfie-on-instagram>
at the Ecuadorian embassy in London.

Several of those included in the work attended Thursday night’s launch party, 
where Ai mingled with champagne-swilling crowds, posing for selfies in the NGV 
galleries, gardens and gift shop and taking his own pictures,swiftly posted to 
his Instagram feed <https://www.instagram.com/aiww/?hl=en> which has 180,000 
followers.
Debbie Kilroy (@DebKilroy) 
Big night at opening of @aiww <https://twitter.com/aiww> installation 
@NGVMelbourne <https://twitter.com/NGVMelbourne> Rosie & I styling up 
#rosiebatty <https://twitter.com/hashtag/rosiebatty?src=hash> 
#StopViolenceAgainstWomen 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/StopViolenceAgainstWomen?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/dI1axs0of0 <https://t.co/dI1axs0of0>
 <https://twitter.com/DebKilroy/status/674862110199812097> December 10, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/DebKilroy/status/674862110199812097> 
It is only the second international exhibition Ai has been able to attend 
since the Chinese governmentreturned his passport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/22/ai-weiwei-free-to-travel-overseas-again-after-china-returns-his-passport>
 after holding it for four years. This is also the first time the artist has 
seen one of his super-sized Forever Bicycles sculptures installed. His passport 
was seized when Ai was arrested at Beijing airport in 2011 in a Communist 
crackdown. He was detained for 81 days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fai-weiwei-donates-lego-human-rights-artwork-to-national-gallery-of-victoria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091a76d38a0296c70462a0c8593163b87db999ae%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ai%20Weiwei%20donates%20'Lego'%20human%20rights%20artwork%20to%20National%20Gallery%20of%20Victoria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fai-weiwei-donates-lego-human-rights-artwork-to-national-gallery-of-victoria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ai%20Weiwei%20donates%20%27Lego%27%20human%20rights%20artwork%20to%20National%20Gallery%20of%20Victoria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fai-weiwei-donates-lego-human-rights-artwork-to-national-gallery-of-victoria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091a76d38a0296c70462a0c8593163b87db999ae%2F0_0_4096_2727%2F4096.jpg>
 Ai Weiwei speaks to the Australian media in front of his work Forever 
Bicycles. Photograph: Tracey Nearmy/AAP 
Another commission for the Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> show references this 
period, during which a fresh bunch of flowers was placed in a bicycle basket 
outside Ai’s studio for each day he was still in detention, photographed and 
then posted to social media. The new work, Blossoms, is a bed of white 
porcelain flowers, made by the same traditional Chinese craftspeople who 
contributed to Ai’s Sunflowers installation at the Tate Modern in 2010. The 
roses carpet a room hung with Andy Warhol’s famous 1960s flower paintings, and 
images blow up from Ai’s Instagram feed.

Ai Weiwei interview: 'In human history, there's never been a moment like this'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/10/ai-weiwei-interview-in-human-history-theres-never-been-a-moment-like-this>
The NGV exhibition highlights the close stylistic and thematic links between 
the two men – Ai first discovered Warhol’s work in the 1980s when he lived in 
New York – and a second “Lego” piece shows the Chinese artist holding, dropping 
and breaking one of his own porcelain urns in a overtly Warholesque triptych.

Speaking to Guardian Australia the day before the show opened, Ai drew 
parallels betweenLego’s corporate stance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/give-ai-weiwei-your-lego-bricks-so-he-can-show-what-corporate-politics-looks-like>
 and the restrictive Chinese government, who he said were equally unwilling to 
change their respective party lines. “They have to stand by them because losing 
even one piece can collapse the whole structure,” he said.

By contrast, he was overwhelmed by the international donation drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/28/victorians-turn-out-to-back-ai-weiwei-on-free-speech-one-lego-brick-at-a-time>
 that saw 20 museum collection points around the world set up for people to 
drop off their Lego, including many children. “It’s important to think about 
building together,” Ai said.

The Andy Warhol–Ai Weiwei show will run in Melbourne until 24 April 2016, 
before travelling to the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh, which 
co-commissioned the show with NGV. The Letgo Room, however, is here to stay.
 