
Sixteen Air France workers have gone on trial in connection with their alleged 
role in chaotic scenes last year, when two executives from the struggling 
airlinehad their shirts torn off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/air-france-workers-storm-meeting-protest-executives-job-losses-paris>
 outside a company meeting.


The “case of the ripped shirts” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/06/air-france-protest-job-losses-francois-hollande-paris>
 made headlines last autumn when the airline’s human resources chief, Xavier 
Broseta, was pursued half-naked by staff after a work council meeting about job 
cuts.

He first tried to flee a crowd of workers in a committee room at the airline’s 
headquarters near Charles de Gaulle airport outside Paris. His shirt was ripped 
to pieces as he struggled through a crowd outside the building, and then, naked 
from the waist up with only a tie hanging round his neck, he scaled an outside 
fence to escape.

Another executive, Pierre Plissonnier, in charge of the long-haul flight 
division, also had his shirt and jacket ripped after he came to the aid of 
other executives.

The protests took place last October as the airline’s management unveiled a 
plan to cut 2,900 jobs.

Five men are accused of violence towards the executives as well as a security 
guard and bodyguards. Four of the accused work for the airline’s cargo arm, the 
other is an employee of Air France industries. The five accused risk up to 
three years in prison and a €45,000 (£34,000) fine. Investigative website
Mediapart 
<https://www.mediapart.fr/journal/economie/260516/echauffourees-air-france-le-dossier-fragile-de-laccusation>
 said defence lawyers deny the charges.

Eleven others are on trial for criminal damage for forcing open metal barriers 
outside the building. After beginning briefly on Friday, the trial was 
adjourned until September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fair-france-workers-in-court-shirt-ripping-incident%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d0f6df1e2a515ffc2096a48240c9fc29a4c202f%2F0_145_3984_2391%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Air%20France%20workers%20in%20court%20over%20shirt-ripping%20incident&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fair-france-workers-in-court-shirt-ripping-incident%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Air%20France%20workers%20in%20court%20over%20shirt-ripping%20incident&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fair-france-workers-in-court-shirt-ripping-incident%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d0f6df1e2a515ffc2096a48240c9fc29a4c202f%2F0_145_3984_2391%2F3984.jpg>
 Xavier Broseta (right) and Pierre Plissonnier flee Air France headquarters at 
Roissy airport, Paris, in October. Photograph: Solal/Sipa/Rex Shutterstock 
Defence lawyers say the case rests on video footage of a moving crowd that is 
unclear and accounts from witnesses in the chaotic crowd. AirFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> sacked four workers over the chaotic 
scenes, accusing them of “serious misconduct”.

Trade unionists and Air France workers staged a demonstration outside the 
court in Bobigny on Friday morning, contesting the airline’s decision to take 
the men to court.

The high-profile trial comes as the government is locked in an escalating 
standoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/union-revolt-francois-hollande-france-euro-2016-strike>
with the hardline CGT union, which has for days blockaded oil refineries, fuel 
depots and nuclear sites in an attempt to choke off the country’s fuel supply 
and force ministers to abandon plans for labour reforms.

In this climate of rising tension across France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, the Air France trial is likely to 
attract a large number of demonstrators. Unions supporting the Air France 
workers on trial say the company had fostered an atmosphere of confrontation. 
The men on trial have become a symbol of opposition to what unions call a legal 
crackdown on striking workers.

There was outrage earlier this year at a French court’s decision to send eight 
Goodyear tyre factory workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/french-unions-and-mps-condemn-jail-sentences-for-goodyear-bossnappers>
 to prison for nine months after they held two managers hostage in a meeting 
room for 30 hours in a high-profile “bossnapping” incident in Amiens in 2014.

The Air France incident came amid rising tensions at the flag-carrier as the 
airline, facing intense competition from global rivals, sought to persuade its 
pilots to adopt more flexible working practices.

Air France, which employs 52,000 people, is struggling to compete with rivals 
and had prepared a restructuring plan involving 2,900 redundancies – 1,700 
ground staff, 900 cabin crew and 300 pilots – before 2017. That plan has been 
reviewed but job cuts and a restructuring will go ahead.

A two-week strike by Air France pilots in September 2014 crippled the airline 
and cost €416m in turnover.

When the images went round the world last year of the half-naked executives, 
the president, François Hollande, said it was unacceptable and bad for the 
country’s image.
 