
Last year, as Nasa retired its space programme and China announced its 
intention to put man back on the moon, the cosmic French electronic duoAir 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/air> were holed up in their Parisian studio 
plotting their own lunar return. Nicolas Godin and Jean-Benoît Dunckel first 
landed with the 1998 hit albumMoon Safari 
<http://en.aircheology.com/Discographie/Albums/Moon-Safari/Moon-Safari>, which 
went platinum in the UK and for a short while seemed to define the musical 
zeitgeist. Space and travel have been recurring themes in their stylish, 
sumptuous ambient electronica, from breakthrough single "Sexy Boy", whosevideo 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lC6vZOgYduk> depicted a monkey flying to the 
moon, to 2004's"Surfing on a Rocket" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=siJlPtWkmzw>, both great slices of future-pop.

They've also composed elegant soundtracks for Sofia Coppola's Lost in 
Translation and The Virgin Suicides, although not all of their six albums have 
been as stellar. Three years ago they builttheir own studio in Paris 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/video/2009/oct/07/air-studio-paris>, which 
they conceived as "aStar Wars spaceship with the equipment of Stevie Wonder". 
So when a contemporary score was needed for a rediscovered colour print of
Georges Méliès's <http://www.earlycinema.com/pioneers/melies_bio.html> landmark 
1902 movieLe voyage dans la lune, it would have been lunacy to ask anyone else.

"It's crazy, huh?" says Godin. "It's like a loop. Fifteen years later we find 
ourselves still on the moon… although this is a very different piece of music."

Méliès, a Parisian like Godin and Dunckel, was one of cinema's early 
innovators, using his background in stage magic and illusions to pioneer 
techniques such as stop-trick, time-lapse and dissolves; he was essentially the 
founder of special effects. He made a staggering 531 films between 1896 and 
1913, and the 14-minuteLe voyage dans la lune is his most famous. Influenced by 
Jules Verne'sFrom the Earth to the Moon and HG Wells's The First Men in the Moon
, it was the first science-fiction film, and the image of a spaceship landing 
in the eye of the man in the moon has inspired artists ever since, from the 
Smashing Pumpkins'"Tonight, Tonight" video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOG3eus4ZSo> to Noel Fielding's Moon character 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Of6iA94pmsM> in The Mighty Boosh.

I meet Air <https://www.theguardian.com/music/air> on a crisp January 
afternoon at their studio full of vintage synths (including a Memory Moog that 
used to belong to Mötley Crüe) and lined with Air's gold and platinum discs, in 
the neighbourhood of Belleville, a stone's throw from the Père Lachaise 
cemetery where Méliès is buried. After the phenomenal success that followedLe 
voyage dans la lune, Méliès's studio collapsed, and during the first world war 
the French army melted down more than 400 of his original prints to make boot 
heels. In the 1920s he was declared bankrupt and then began running a toy shop 
in Montparnasse station. In 1932 he was belatedly given a place at Le Maison du 
Retrait du Cinéma, the film industry's retirement home in Orly. He died in 1938.

Le voyage dans la lune <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7JDaOOw0MEE> is so 
ingrained in the French public consciousness that Air can't even remember when 
they first saw it. "It's such a national treasure that it feels like something 
you always knew," explains Godin. "It's like it's part of your life."

But that celebrated image was always black and white, as the colour version of 
the film was thought to be lost for ever until an anonymous collector handed a 
copy to the Filmoteca de Catalunya in Barcelona in the early 1990s. It was in 
such a poor state that it took eight years to restore before it was ready to be 
unveiled in public. Air only became aware of the rediscovered print when they 
were asked to create the soundtrack. "The first we heard of it was when they 
asked us to do it, because it was lost, destroyed. Nobody alive had seen it in 
colour," says Godin. "It was something that only a few specialists knew 
existed."

There was no original soundtrack, as films were silent. If there had been, Air 
say they would not have touched it. "If there was an original score, it would 
be horrible to make new music and destroy a piece of art," says Godin. "I would 
hate it if someone did that to one of my records. When a piece of art is done, 
it's done. But the fact that there was no original score was too good an 
opportunity to miss."

"We're really lucky because Georges Méliès did a semi-finished piece of art," 
adds Dunckel. "He did a silent movie because he didn't know sound was coming to 
movies."

They were given a mere three weeks to complete the soundtrack, as it had to be 
ready for the premiere at the Cannes film festival. But the tight deadline 
actually helped because they didn't have time to feel the pressure of working 
on such a celebrated piece of cinematic history. "That rush helped us not to 
worry too much. You just needed to concentrate on the music because it had to 
be ready for Cannes."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJw3h-JrsRWg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJw3h-JrsRWg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJw3h-JrsRWg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The warm colours of the hand-coloured print add a more human, almost 
psychedelic feel to the film – "Méliès saw the future, he saw people going to 
the moon, but after seeing the film in colour I think he also saw the 60s," 
says Godin. "It looks like the cover ofSgt Peppers 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Sgt.+Pepper&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&prmd=imvns&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=B78WT6hVj4mFB9vNvZkD&ved=0CEIQsAQ&biw=1763&bih=1039>
" – but also gives the film a new emotional depth which Air wanted to reflect. 
They composed in front of a screen, working directly to the film, scene by 
scene.

They also wanted to create a raw, organic feel to the sound; to work like 
Méliès used to work. "Which I think we do," says Godin. "Like Méliès, we built 
our own studio, we write everything ourselves, play everything, make all the 
decisions ourselves."

But that didn't mean being faithful to the music of early cinema. "That music 
doesn't reflect space – it reflects Charlie Chaplin. Man has also been to the 
moon since then, so we have experience that we didn't have at the time."

The soundtrack opens with the sound of timpani, and percussion plays a much 
more dominant role than on previous Air soundtracks, providing punctuation to 
the action. "The moon for me is rocks, caverns and mountains," says Godin. 
"Which is why we had big timpani on almost every song. On each album, we fall 
in love with a different instrument and on this album it was the timpani."

The colour print of the film also highlights the more lighthearted parts of 
the film, especially the chorus girls from the Folies Bergère. "That's actually 
too much for me – it's a bit too burlesque," says Godin, although he agrees 
that it captures the exhilarating mood of turn-of-the-century Paris. "In 1902 
Paris was the place to be. Which is hard to admit because now it can feel like 
a museum. People come from all over the world to see Paris, but it's like 
they're coming to look around a museum, to see palaces and old streets. We are 
becoming very conservative in our traditions."

Invigorated by their work on the soundtrack, which is not only a return to the 
moon but a real return to form for Air, the duo decided to expand it into their 
seventh album, with the addition of vocal tracks fromAu Revoir Simone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2007/feb/16/popandrock4> and Victoria Legrand 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/dec/07/new-band-beach-house> (from Beach 
House) that further explore their own visions of space. What they didn't know 
at the time was that Martin Scorsese's new family epicHugo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142805/hugo> also pays loving homage to 
Méliès, with Ben Kingsley playing the cinemagician. "I went to seeHugo," says 
Dunckel, "and was really surprised that so much of the movie was dealing with 
the life of Georges Méliès."

Finally, Méliès is getting the wider recognition his pioneering work deserves. 
"I think this soundtrack can help the movie travel further," nods Dunckel, 
"because it's a different piece of art." "It feels like a collaboration with 
Méliès," says Godin. "I feel like he was in the band while we were recording. 
When I was coming to the studio I felt like I was in a time shuttle… it was a 
very strange experience."

And just as strange is that, 14 years on from Moon Safari, Air are still 
floating in space.
 