
An Air France executive who was forced to flee shirtless from a staff meeting 
after he wasattacked by protesting workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/air-france-workers-storm-meeting-protest-executives-job-losses-paris>
 has described his ordeal as “the price to pay for democracy”.

Xavier Broseta, the airline’s vice president of human resources, was pushed to 
safety over a fence – minus his shirt and jacket – at the airline’s offices in 
Paris on 5 October after 100 workers angered by a redundancy programme forced 
their way into a meeting of the airline’s senior management.

Broseta, who has received more than 1,000 messages of support from around the 
world, including from French trade unions, said: “It is sometimes the price to 
pay for democracy … and we have to get used to the fact that the world is 
crazy.”

The executive said in an interview with newspaper Le Parisien 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/economie/le-drh-d-air-france-revient-sur-l-agression-dont-il-a-ete-victime-25-10-2015-5217631.php>
 that he bore no grudges, despite an attack that saw him and Pierre 
Plissonnier, vice-president of the airline’s Orly airport hub, escape with 
their clothes torn to shreds. However, Broseta said he was still smarting from 
the experience, adding that he would never watch the video footage from the day 
when he was “the face of France, but what a face”. He said: “Certain acts are 
just not admissible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fair-france-executive-xavier-broseta-describes-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3df9471a81b54a5b6d54e3ea9a810b311c61a2b1%2F0_205_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Air%20France%20executive%3A%20shirt-shredding%20attack%20was%20'price%20to%20pay%20for%20democracy'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fair-france-executive-xavier-broseta-describes-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Air%20France%20executive%3A%20shirt-shredding%20attack%20was%20%27price%20to%20pay%20for%20democracy%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fair-france-executive-xavier-broseta-describes-attack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3df9471a81b54a5b6d54e3ea9a810b311c61a2b1%2F0_205_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 Pierre Plissonnier, centre, and Xavier Broseta, right, with a police officer. 
Photograph: Jacques Brinon/AP 
Broseta confirmed an injured security guard, who lost consciousness for a few 
minutes after he was throttled in the melee, has left hospital but has not 
returned to work. Six Air France workershave been arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/12/air-france-protests-five-workers-arrested-after-shirt-ripping-scenes>
 in relation to the attacks.

Air France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> workers had stormed a 
meeting of the airline’s works council aimed at finalising a restructuring plan 
involving 2,900 redundancies by 2017. The proposed job losses involve 1,700 
ground staff, 900 cabin crew and 300 pilots.

The Air France protesters were desperate, frightened people, not a violent mob 
| Philippe Marlière
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/06/air-france-protesters-workers-hollande>
Undaunted by his experience earlier in the month, Broseta insisted that the 
carrier needed to reduce costs and warned that Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary 
could afford to buy Air France as easily as he can buy a pack of cigarettes.

He said: “Every airline in the world has lower costs than ours. If we are not 
strong enough, we shall be gobbled up.” If the pilots and then the cabin and 
ground staff accepted the latest proposals, this would “reduce the number of 
job cuts”, and create a “virtuous dynamic” that would lead to further 
recruitment fairly quickly.

A French opinion poll 
<http://www.sudouest.fr/2015/10/10/violences-a-air-france-une-majorite-de-francais-comprennent-sans-approuver-2150597-705.php>
 found that the majority of French people surveyed said they could understand 
the workers’ violence, even if they did not approve of it. Poll findings 
divided along predictable lines, with company bosses less sympathetic.


French political leaders, including the president, François Hollande, 
described the violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/06/air-france-protest-job-losses-francois-hollande-paris>
as unacceptable.
 