
A violent Air France protest in which striking workers stormed a board meeting 
andripped the shirts from executives’ backs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/air-france-workers-storm-meeting-protest-executives-job-losses-paris>
 has been denounced by François Hollande as unacceptable and bad for France’s 
image.

After pictures of bare-chested executives fleeing over a fence with their 
clothes torn to shreds made front pages across the world, the French president 
said: “Social dialogue matters, and when it’s interrupted by violence and 
disputes take on an unacceptable form, it can have consequences for the image 
and attractiveness [of the country].”

Hollande called for responsible talks between management and union leaders and 
compromise and negotiation at France’s loss-making carrier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fair-france-protest-job-losses-francois-hollande-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d0f6df1e2a515ffc2096a48240c9fc29a4c202f%2F0_154_3984_2391%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Air%20France%20protest%20scenes%20unacceptable%2C%20says%20Hollande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fair-france-protest-job-losses-francois-hollande-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Air%20France%20protest%20scenes%20unacceptable%2C%20says%20Hollande&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fair-france-protest-job-losses-francois-hollande-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d0f6df1e2a515ffc2096a48240c9fc29a4c202f%2F0_154_3984_2391%2F3984.jpg>
 Pierre Plissonnier and Xavier Broseta, whose shirt was ripped clean off, are 
escorted away by police following clashes with angry workers after 2,900 
redundancies were announced. Photograph: Solal/Sipa/Rex Shutterstock 
The troubled airline, which employs 52,000 people, is struggling to compete 
with its global rivals and is finalising a controversial restructuring plan 
involving 2,900 redundancies – 1,700 ground staff, 900 cabin crew and 300 
pilots – between now and 2017.

Earlier, the French transport minister, Alain Vidalies, said the images of an 
Air France human resources manager with his shirt ripped off amounted to a 
caricature ofFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> that was 
unhelpful to the airline’s future.

 “I think the best French response would be to respond to those abroad who see 
a caricature, that these events are not France, and that we can get back on 
track by talking.”

Air France protests – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/oct/05/air-france-protests-job-losses-charles-de-gaulle-airport-paris>
 He said there was no question of renationalisation for the airline. “It’s not 
the taxpayer who is going to pay.” The French state holds a 17% stake in the 
airline.

A legal investigation has been opened after Air France lodged a complaint over 
aggravated violence, saying seven people were injured, including a security 
guard who was seriously hurt.


Air France-KLM’s human resources manager, Xavier Broseta, had his shirt ripped 
off and, wearing just his tie and trousers, had to clamber over a wire fence to 
safety after hundreds of striking workers stormed the board meeting on Monday 
in protest at the planned job cuts. Another executive, Pierre Plissonnier, who 
is responsible for the long-haul flight division, had his shirt and jacket torn.
 