
Three Air France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> workers have been 
given suspended sentences for “organised violence” after being found guilty of 
an attack on two airline executives whose shirts were ripped off their backs in 
a protest over proposed job cuts.

Pictures of angry workers chasing their bosses, forcing one to scramble 
shirtless over a wire fence outside the company headquarters, went around the 
world in October last year.

The Air France protesters were desperate, frightened people, not a violent mob 
| Philippe Marlière
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/06/air-france-protesters-workers-hollande>
Air France eventually dropped the restructuring plan, which would have cost 
2,900 jobs, but the French prime minister, Manuel Valls, described the 
attackers as “rogues” and called for them to be given severe sentences. Valls 
said the scenes damaged France’s image.

Two other workers who faced the same charge were acquitted. Ten other former 
and current employees from the company were fined €500 for damaging the 
company’s property after they broke down a gate at the airline’s headquarters. 
The protests were led by the CGT, a French trade union confederation.

Wednesday’s judgment followed a full trial in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/27/air-france-fracas-15-go-on-trial-over-job-cuts-protest>
. Pierre Plissonnier, director of long-haul operations at the airline, told the 
hearing he had felt humiliation after seeing pictures of himself with his 
clothing ripped to shreds.

The court was shown film footage in which one worker could be heard threatening
Xavier Broseta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/26/air-france-executive-xavier-broseta-describes-attack>
, a human resources boss, before his shirt was ripped off.

The image that dominated media coverage showed Broseta, bare chested with his 
shirt in threads, trying to scale a fence to escape after being chased out of a 
meeting at the airline.

The defence lawyer Lilia Mhissen said during the court hearing two months ago 
that she hoped the accused would “not be judged on the basis of video clips 
that last a fraction of a second” but on the bigger picture.

At least two of them had “clearly acted to protect Mr Broseta and Mr 
Plissonnier”, she said. “If they had got all of the video images … the story 
would have been different.”

Air France, which employs 55,000 people, scrapped the restructuring plan but 
still faces tensions with pilots and flight crews, who staged strikes in late 
July.

Air France-KLM returned to profit last year after seven years of losses but 
faces stiff competition from Asian and Gulf airlines as well as new low-cost, 
long-haul alternatives.

The airline has seen drop in bookings by Japanese, Chinese and American 
clients as a result of the wave of terrorist attacks in France since January 
2015.
 