
A suspicious device that forced an Air France plane en route from Mauritius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mauritius> to Paris to make an emergency 
landing in Mombasa was a false alarm, the airline’s chief executive officer has 
said.

Flight AF463, with 459 passengers and 14 crew members on board, had left 
Mauritius at 9pm local time (1700 GMT) on Saturday and was due to arrive inParis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> Charles de Gaulle at 5.50am (0450 
GMT).

After the suspicious device was discovered, the plane landed at Moi 
international airport in Mombasa before 1am.

The Air France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> chief executive, 
Frédéric Gagey, told a news conference a decision was made to land at the 
closest airport able to handle a Boeing 777 aircraft after a passenger found 
the object in the toilets.

 “All the information available to us at the moment indicates that the object 
was not capable of creating an explosion or damaging a plane, but was rather a 
mixture of cardboard, sheets of paper and a timer,” he said. “It was a false 
alarm.”

He added that those on board were evacuated via the emergency slides. Gagey 
congratulated the crew for their cool-headed reaction to divert the plane. He 
said a safety check had been carried out in the toilets before the flight and 
denied any security failure.

A Kenyan police official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the device 
looked like a cardboard box with a stopwatch taped to it. He said six 
passengers were being questioned in relation to it, including the man who 
raised the alarm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fair-france-flight-makes-emergency-landing-in-kenya-after-bomb-alert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F165f305fa660599eb65a13ea1fc16d4254241c48%2F7_0_2753_1652%2F2753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Air%20France%20bomb%20scare%20on%20plane%20to%20Paris%20was%20a%20false%20alarm%2C%20says%20chief%20executive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fair-france-flight-makes-emergency-landing-in-kenya-after-bomb-alert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Air%20France%20bomb%20scare%20on%20plane%20to%20Paris%20was%20a%20false%20alarm%2C%20says%20chief%20executive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fair-france-flight-makes-emergency-landing-in-kenya-after-bomb-alert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F165f305fa660599eb65a13ea1fc16d4254241c48%2F7_0_2753_1652%2F2753.jpg>
 Passengers who were on board an Air France Boeing 777 aircraft that made an 
emergency landing are seen on a bus as they are escorted to hotels from Moi 
international airport in Mombasa. Photograph: Joseph Okanga/Reuters 
An Air France spokesman said the passengers on the aborted flight were all 
being accommodated in a nearby hotel and they would depart from Mombasa at 6pm 
on Sunday on a new aircraft dispatched from Paris, arriving in the capital at 
7am on Monday.

The Kenyan Airport Authority had posted a statement on Facebook on Sunday 
morning in which it described the suspect package as a bomb that “has been 
taken to safe destination for detonation in the morning”, but later deleted the 
post and replaced it as one referring only to a “suspicious object”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassenger-crew-air-france-af463-emergency-landing-bomb-alert-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Passenger%20describes%20Air%20France%20emergency%20landing%20after%20bomb%20alert%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassenger-crew-air-france-af463-emergency-landing-bomb-alert-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Passenger%20describes%20Air%20France%20emergency%20landing%20after%20bomb%20alert%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpassenger-crew-air-france-af463-emergency-landing-bomb-alert-video&media=>
Passenger describes Air France emergency landing after bomb alert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/20/passenger-crew-air-france-af463-emergency-landing-bomb-alert-video>
A Kenyan police spokesman, Charles Owino, said of flight AF463: “It requested 
an emergency landing after a device suspected to be a bomb was discovered in 
the lavatory. An emergency was prepared and it landed safely and all passengers 
evacuated. Bomb experts from the navy and the CID were called in and took the 
device.”

The plane was still in Mombasa airport early on Sunday morning, he added. 

A passenger who identified himself as Benoit Lucchini, from Paris, told 
journalists: “The plane just went down slowly, slowly, slowly, so we just 
realised probably something was wrong. The personnel of Air France were just 
great, they were just wonderful. So they keep everybody calm. We did not know 
what was happening. So we secured the seatbelt to land in Mombasa because we 
thought it was a technical problem but actually it was not a technical problem. 
It was something in the toilet, something wrong in the toilet, it could be a 
bomb.”

Steven Ciaran, 30 an Irishman working on Réunion island, said he had been 
sitting at the back of the plane watching a film when he noticed the rushed 
movement of cabin crew preparing emergency drills. They told him it was a 
technical problem and created a calm environment among the passengers, he said.

“I was very distressed because I could see we were far from the destination,” 
said Ciaran. “I thought the plane had difficulty and not that it had anything 
to do with terrorism.”

Scheduled flights to Mombasa were initially disrupted but normal operations 
later resumed.

Flight AF463 is the third Air France plane to be diverted in recent weeks. Two 
flights from the US to Paris were diverted on 18 November after bomb threats 
were received but no bombs were found. France has been in a state of emergency 
since the 13 November attacks in Paris that left 130 people dead and hundreds 
wounded.

Islamic State extremists claimed responsibility for the attacks in Paris as 
well as for the 31 Octobercrash of a Russian passenger plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crashes-in-sinai-egyptian-pm-says>
 in the Sinai desert that killed all 224 people on board.Moscow says the crash 
was caused by a bomb on the plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/egypt-plane-crash-bomb-jet-russia-security-service>
 and has demanded that Egypt increase security at all its airports.

 