
An apparent mid-air miscommunication between pilot and co-pilot in response to 
a technical problem causedAirAsia flight QZ8501 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/airasia-flight-qz8501> to plunge into the 
Java Sea last December, Indonesian investigators have said.

The Airbus A320-200 was en route to Singapore from the Indonesian city of 
Surabaya on the morning of 28 December when it lost contact with air traffic 
control 42 minutes after takeoff.


AirAsia crash: pilots' confusion recalls 2009 Air France disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/01/airasia-crash-pilots-2009-air-france-disaster>
The plane wreckage and bodies of the passengers were later pulled from the 
Java Sea in waters off Kalimantan, the Indonesian part of Borneo island. Seven 
crew members and 155 passengers were on board.

Using a toy airplane to demonstrate the erratic flight path, investigators 
said the crew lost control of the plane.


Their findings indicate the pilot was dealing with a repeated technical 
problem with the Rudder Travel Limiter (RTL), leaving the co-pilot to take 
control of the plane.


Electrical interruption to the RTL happened three times in the space of 13 
minutes, eventually causing the autopilot to disengage.

With the loss of the autopilot function, the co-pilot was left to fly the 
plane manually, and it was at that point that there was a miscommunication 
between the captain and co-pilot, investigators said.

According to information gleaned from two black boxes and a cockpit recording, 
the pilot instructed the co-pilot to “pull down”, an order that was taken 
literally, sending the plane soaring up to 38,000 feet.


“[The pilot] said, ‘Pull down, pull down.’ But when you pull down [the gear 
controls] the plane goes up. To make the plane go down you need to push, so 
this order was confusing,” said accident investigator Nurcahyo Utomo.

The report said the plane went into a “prolonged stall condition that was 
beyond the capability of the crew to recover”. At one point the two men 
appeared to be pushing their controls in opposite directions, it added.

The findings <http://kemhubri.dephub.go.id/knkt/ntsc_aviation/aaic.htm> from 
an almost year-long investigation by Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety 
Commission are the first official explanation of what caused the Airbus to 
crash.

One recommendation made on Tuesday was for AirAsia to have a more standardised 
terminology to avoid such accidents from happening again.

“To AirAsia we recommend that pilots have a standard callout or terminology to 
communicate so there is no misinterpretation and all pilots are trained in 
procedures of how to take control,” said Utomo.


The reason the co-pilot had initially taken control of the plane was because 
the captain was trying to fix a problem with the RTL, an issue that 
investigators revealed had occurred 23 times on that specific plane since 
January 2014.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fairasia-flight-plane-8501-tail-java-sea-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AirAsia%20plane's%20tail%20recovered%20from%20Java%20Sea%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fairasia-flight-plane-8501-tail-java-sea-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AirAsia%20plane%27s%20tail%20recovered%20from%20Java%20Sea%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fairasia-flight-plane-8501-tail-java-sea-video&media=>
AirAsia plane’s tail recovered from Java Sea in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/jan/10/airasia-flight-plane-8501-tail-java-sea-video>
The problem was related to a cracked solder joint caused by exposure to 
extreme temperatures. In the months leading up to crash the problem had been 
occurring more frequently on the plane, including on a flight three days 
earlier between Surabaya and Kuala Lumpur.

Before the crash, Malaysian airliner AirAsia had a sound safety record.


 The region’s aviation safety record has been undermined by a series of fatal 
crashes. In June, an Indonesian military plane careered into the side of a 
building in Medan, Sumatra, killing more than 140 people. Since August three 
separate fatal plane crashes in Sulawesi and West Papua have killed 64 people.

AirAsia’s chief executive, Tony Fernandes, said 
<https://twitter.com/tonyfernandes/status/671608954317701120> on Tuesday that 
“there is much to be learned here for AirAsia, the manufacturer and the 
aviation industry”.


He added: “We will not leave any stone unturned to make sure the industry 
learns from this tragic incident.”
 