
A military vessel has located the fuselage of the AirAsia passenger jet that 
crashed more than two weeks ago off the coast ofIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>, raising hopes that more bodies 
will be found.

The main section of flight QZ8501 was discovered less than two miles from where
its tail was retrieved last weekend at the bottom of the Java Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/airasia-planes-tail-lifted-from-seabed>
, Indonesian officials said on Wednesday.

“A marker was placed on the engine. Beside the engine is the fuselage, the 
wing and a lot of debris,” Ony Soeryo Wibowo, an investigator with the National 
Transportation Safety Committee (NTSC), said.

The plane lost contact with air traffic control in bad weather on 28 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/28/indonesia-to-singapore-airasia-flight-loses-contact-with-air-traffic-control>
, less than halfway into a two-hour flight from Surabaya to Singapore. All 162 
people on board were killed.

So far 50 bodies have been recovered, with most brought to Surabaya for 
identification. Searchers believe more will be found in the plane’s fuselage.

Divers will check the wreckage for bodies on Thursday, said Fransiskus Bambang 
Soelistyo, head of the National Search and Rescue Agency.

On Wednesday, Indonesian investigators began examining the black box flight 
recorders recovered from the Airbus A320-200. They hope the devices could 
provide clues to the cause of the disaster in the next few days.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fairasia-black-box-flight-recorder-indonesia-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F12%2F1421076889547%2Fcrop_KP-67139_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AirAsia%20QZ8501%20black%20box%20flight%20recorder%20brought%20back%20to%20Indonesia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fairasia-black-box-flight-recorder-indonesia-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AirAsia%20QZ8501%20black%20box%20flight%20recorder%20brought%20back%20to%20Indonesia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F12%2Fairasia-black-box-flight-recorder-indonesia-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F12%2F1421076889547%2Fcrop_KP-67139_640.jpeg>
Both the flight data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/12/airasia-flight-qz8501-black-box-confusion>
 andcockpit voice recorders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/13/divers-recover-airasia-cockpit-voice-recorder>
 were found to be in relatively good condition and were sent to the Indonesian 
capital, Jakarta, for analysis.

“In one week, I think we will be getting a reading,” Mardjono Siswosuwarno, 
head investigator for the NTSC, said.

The black boxes – which are actually orange – contain data that should prove 
crucial for investigators piecing together the sequence of events that led to 
the plane plunging into the sea.

The flight data recorder took only 15 minutes to download, but investigators 
will now need to analyse up to 25 hours of data and several thousand flight 
parameters covering flying speed, altitude, fuel consumption, air pressure 
changes and inputs to the aircraft’s controls.

“We are feeling relieved but there is still a lot of work ahead of us to 
analyse it,” said Siswosuwarno.

Investigators were also expected on Wednesday to begin downloading data from 
the cockpit voice recorder, which retains conversations on the flight deck and 
between the pilots and air traffic controllers.

As is standard procedure, the NTSC will file a preliminary report, which will 
be made public, to the International Civil Aviation Organisation within 30 
days. A final report on the crash is not expected to be published for at least 
a year, Siswosuwarno said.

After the recovery of the two black boxes, Indonesia is expected to scale back 
its search and rescue operations in the Java Sea.

But government officials sought to reassure victims’ families that efforts to 
retrieve the remains of their loved ones would continue.

“We understand if the search becomes smaller … but the bodies have to be 
found,” said Frangky Chandry, whose younger brother was on the plane.

“We want to bury our family. That’s what we want.”
 