
Hopes of finding AirAsia flight 8501’s black boxes were raised on Wednesday 
after divers and an unmanned underwater vehicle spotted the missing plane’s 
tail in the Java Sea, the first confirmed sighting of any major wreckage 11 
days after it disappeared with 162 people on board.

Powerful currents and murky water continue to hinder the operation, but 
searchers managed to get a photograph of the debris after it was detected by an 
Indonesian survey ship, the National Search and Rescue Agency chief, Henry 
Bambang Soelistyo, told reporters.

One image appears to show an upside down “A’’ painted on a piece of metal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420614065036%2Fe1e55fac-265a-4c6b-adcc-e88d7f505eb8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AirAsia%20flight%3A%20first%20pictures%20released%20of%20plane%20wreckage%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AirAsia%20flight%3A%20first%20pictures%20released%20of%20plane%20wreckage%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420614065036%2Fe1e55fac-265a-4c6b-adcc-e88d7f505eb8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Image released by Indonesia’s National Search and Rescue Agency. Photograph: 
BASARNAS/AFP/Getty Images 
The find is particularly important because the cockpit voice and flight data 
recorders, or black boxes, are located in the aircraft’s tail.

Smaller pieces of the plane, such as seats and an emergency door, had 
previously been collected from the surface.

“Today we successfully discovered the part of the plane that became the main 
aim since yesterday,” Soelistyo said. “I can ensure that this is part of the 
tail with theAirAsia mark on it.”

He stressed the top priority remained recovering further bodies along with the 
black boxes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420614116665%2F0090c189-862a-453f-b253-4d93578801aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AirAsia%20flight%3A%20first%20pictures%20released%20of%20plane%20wreckage%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AirAsia%20flight%3A%20first%20pictures%20released%20of%20plane%20wreckage%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420614116665%2F0090c189-862a-453f-b253-4d93578801aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Wreckage of AirAsia flight QZ850. Photograph: BASARNAS/AFP/Getty Images 
So far, 40 bodies have been found, including one on Wednesday, but time is 
running out.

After two weeks, most corpses will sink, said Anton Castilani, head of the 
country’s disaster identification victim unit, and there are already signs of 
serious decomposition.

Officials are hopeful many of the more than 120 bodies still unaccounted for 
will be found in the fuselage.

The Airbus A320 went down on 28 December, halfway through a two-hour flight 
between Indonesia’s second-largest city of Surabaya and 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/29/missing-airasia-qz8501-plane-likely-sea-indonesian-rescue-chief>
 Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/29/missing-airasia-qz8501-plane-likely-sea-indonesian-rescue-chief>
, killing everyone on board.

It is not clear what caused the crash, but bad weather is believed to be a 
contributing factor.

Just before losing contact, the pilot told air traffic control he was 
approaching threatening clouds, but was denied permission to climb to a higher 
altitude because of heavy air traffic. No distress signal was issued.


Finding the black boxes will be key to the investigation. They provide 
essential information including the plane’s vertical and horizontal speeds 
along with engine temperature and final conversations between the captain and 
co-pilot. The ping-emitting beacons still have about 20 days before their 
batteries go dead, but high surf had prevented the deployment of ships that 
drag “ping” locators.

Sonar-equipped ships involved in the massive international hunt have also 
identifiedwhat they believe to be the fuselage of the plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/03/airasia-flight-qz8501-airline-was-not-allowed-to-fly-route-says-indonesia>
. Several other large plane parts have been found though no visual confirmation 
has yet been received.


The search area for bodies and debris was expanded this week to allow for the 
strong currents that have been pushing debris around, said the Indonesian 
search and rescue operation coordinator, Tatang Zainudin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420615373595%2Fbc5aa118-955c-475e-9e24-4d3f97182c16-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AirAsia%20flight%3A%20first%20pictures%20released%20of%20plane%20wreckage%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AirAsia%20flight%3A%20first%20pictures%20released%20of%20plane%20wreckage%20under%20water&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjan%2F07%2Fairasia-flight-qz8501-tail-section-of-plane-found-on-seabed-say-officials%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F7%2F1420615373595%2Fbc5aa118-955c-475e-9e24-4d3f97182c16-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A member of the Russian search and rescue team on an Indonesian air force 
helicopter. Photograph: Beawiharta, Pool/AP 
The water at the Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> site 
is shallow, but this is the worst time of the year for a recovery operation to 
take place due to seasonal rains that have created choppy seas and blinding mud 
and silt from river runoff.


“Because the Java Sea is such an enclosed basin, and there’s not really big 
currents passing through it, everything just stays there for quite a while and 
the waves make it so that the sediment doesn’t slowly just sink to the bottom,” 
said Erik van Sebille, an oceanographer at the University of New South Wales in 
Sydney, Australia. “It continuously keeps churning it up.”

He said the conditions also made it particularly dangerous for divers because 
the water was dark and murky, making it easy to cut themselves on jagged 
wreckage or even become snared and trapped. During the dry season, he added, it 
would likely be easy to see the plane under water from the sky.
 