
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> has refused to admit 
liability for multiple serious injuries suffered by a group of guests who fell 
two storeys when the balcony of their holiday rental in Brighton collapsed 
beneath them.

Four friends had to have hospital treatment, including one impaled on an iron 
railing, when what was advertised as a “balcony with sea view” sheared off, 
sending the guests tumbling into the basement footwell. They had rented the 
£217-a-night flat for a birthday celebration in July through the booming 
accommodation website, which is at the forefront of the fast-growing sharing 
economy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86ace154d2346628da75b9550008d8a03a52241b%2F0_450_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb%20denies%20liability%20after%20guests%20plunge%20two%20storeys%20from%20balcony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%20denies%20liability%20after%20guests%20plunge%20two%20storeys%20from%20balcony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86ace154d2346628da75b9550008d8a03a52241b%2F0_450_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Alexander Browning is taken to hospital after incident. Photograph: Alexander 
Browning 
One shattered her pelvis in three places and another broke her back and 
suffered arterial bleeding and head injuries.

The San Francisco website, through which they made the booking, has been 
valued at $25bn (£20bn) and takes up to 12.5% of rental fees. It told them last 
month it could not be held liable for the accident or the injuries and has no 
duty of care towards them.

The group of young professionals have spent weeks in hospital and said they 
have racked up thousands of pounds in costs through lost work, medical bills, 
psychological counselling and physiotherapy.

But four months since the accident, neither Airbnb nor the property owner have 
offered to help cover their costs or admit liability. The customers are now 
threatening legal action. Their lawyer, Jenny Kennedy at Anthony Gold 
solicitors, is also seeking to contact the owner of the property.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b6085be1e491dc7c096c90cd47fcf6a00837c3c%2F0_50_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb%20denies%20liability%20after%20guests%20plunge%20two%20storeys%20from%20balcony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%20denies%20liability%20after%20guests%20plunge%20two%20storeys%20from%20balcony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b6085be1e491dc7c096c90cd47fcf6a00837c3c%2F0_50_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
 Claire Corfield was trapped beneath a large piece of the balcony after it 
collapsed. Photograph: Jessica Paterson 
“We want acknowledgement of suffering, a recognition of responsibility and 
liability and coverage of rehabilitation and ongoing costs,” said Alexander 
Browning, 30, a lawyer from London who smashed his head, broke his wrist in 
four places and suffered facial injuries.


“It should be easy for a company with a valuation of $25bn. None of this has 
happened. They have done the opposite and expressly said: ‘We are a platform, 
we are not responsible.’ That makes me feel pretty angry.”

Airbnb bills itself as “a trusted community marketplace” but Harry Dee, who 
was impaled through his back on a railing which missed his vital organs by an 
inch and spent hours in surgery and a week in hospital, said: “They don’t seem 
to care at all.

“You see Airbnb trying to sell this social-minded [approach], but it’s a load 
of crap. We have asked them for help. I would have liked my missing wages 
accounted for. But they just didn’t do anything at all.”


Dee had to move out of his rented flat in Brighton because he is a 
self-employed carpenter and could no longer afford it.

A spokeswoman for Airbnb said: “As soon as we were aware of the incident, we 
reached out to the guest to provide support,” but declined to comment further.

Monika Payne, who was listed on Airbnb as the host, told the Guardian: 
“Because the insurers are still conducting their investigations we having 
nothing to say at this time.”

Airbnb has suggested the group make a claim through the “host protection 
insurance”, which is billed as providing up to $1m cover for each booking, 
including for bodily injury. The victims’ lawyer has been told by a third-party 
insurance administrator that the case is being considered by lawyers for 
Airbnb. The insurer for the building, which is held in freehold, is expected to 
deny liability.

“The safety of our community is our number one priority and problems for 
guests and hosts are incredibly rare,” Airbnb’s spokeswoman said.

Airbnb insists it does not provide accommodation but operates as a platform on 
which independent hosts provide rooms for guests. It says it is not party to 
any bookings.

Earlier this year, Patrick Robinson, Airbnb’s head of public policy in Europe, 
told a UK parliamentary committee 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/business-innovation-and-skills-committee/the-digital-economy/oral/26885.html>
: “We try to ensure that all of our customers are protected, that in the event 
that things go wrong, we are there to help and support them beyond what we are 
required to do legally.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63d7d4e98231e58911ed079b4e2051be70824765%2F0_215_5459_3277%2F5459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb%20denies%20liability%20after%20guests%20plunge%20two%20storeys%20from%20balcony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%20denies%20liability%20after%20guests%20plunge%20two%20storeys%20from%20balcony&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fairbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63d7d4e98231e58911ed079b4e2051be70824765%2F0_215_5459_3277%2F5459.jpg>
 A woman uses a computer to visit home rental website Airbnb, which has been 
valued at $25bn. Photograph: Javier Soriano/AFP/Getty Images 
Airbnb has become one of the fastest-growing businesses in the gig economy, 
offering people with spare rooms the chance to rent them out on a nightly 
basis. Global bookings are predicted to hit £12bn this year, up from £42m in 
2010. In London, there have been warnings that the website is reducing the 
housing supply, while Berlin levied a €100,000 (£85,000) fine for anyone 
renting out more than half of their home for less than two months without a 
permit.

The group had gathered at the apartment on a warm Friday evening before a day 
on the beach. They had sung Happy Birthday to their friend Tom and toasted him 
with prosecco and cake. Five of them were stood on the balcony.

“One second they were there and the next second they were gone,” said Ben 
Mason, 30, a recruitment consultant and the only person on the balcony who did 
not fall. “They just dropped. I looked down and it was just dark and rubble. I 
thought they were all dead.” His fiancee, Jessica Paterson, was among them.

“Harry had landed on the fence and was staggering around. Jess and Alex were 
tangled among themselves. Claire [Corfield] was beneath a large piece of the 
balcony. We removed as much of the rubble as we could and checked pulses. Ali 
and Jess started to come around. I had to help Mike [Claire’s husband] lift the 
rubble off Claire because it was so heavy. It was totally horrendous.”

Paterson broke her pelvis in three places, suffered three transverse fractures 
of her back, laceration to her liver and a collapsed lung. She was in hospital 
for almost two weeks and on crutches for three months. She has been told she 
will not be able to give birth naturally. She suffers from low moods and 
fatigue.

“It has been traumatic,” she said. “On the day we were supposed to be going on 
honeymoon to Costa Rica we had a day out in Portsmouth in a wheelchair.”

Corfield cut an artery requiring five units of blood, broke her shoulder 
blade, a bone in her back, her eye socket, nose and cheekbone. She has been off 
work for two and a half months and struggles with memory and concentration.

“I would like an apology from them,” she said. “It doesn’t feel fair that we 
have been through all this trauma and to feel that no one cares.”
 