
Sleeping in other people’s beds has turned out to be a goldmine for rental 
startup Airbnb. The controversialSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> company has raised 
another half a billion dollars from investors at a price that values the 
company at $30bn.

The company is expected to file a notice with the securities and exchange 
commission (SEC) on Thursday, according to Fortune, whichfirst reported the news
 
<http://fortune.com/2016/09/22/exclusive-airbnb-raises-555-million-in-new-funding/?xid=soc_socialflow_twitter_FORTUNE>
.

At $30bn, Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> is worth more 
than Hilton Hotels.

The company signed off on a $1bn debt deal to fund new services in June. 
Executives have told investors the firm will be profitable in 2016, though it 
operated at a loss of about $150m last year.


What happens when tech firms end up at the center of racism scandals?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/30/tech-companies-racial-discrimination-nextdoor-airbnb>
Airbnb’s business model depends on local authorities allowing it to operate 
outside of the laws that control hotels. The strategy is a controversial one: 
in New York City and San Francisco it isembroiled in legal disputes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/29/technology/airbnb-sues-san-francisco-over-a-law-it-had-helped-pass.html>
 with municipal governments. The latter voted to fine the company $1,000 a day 
for every unregistered host.

But the service is popular with users and often undersells hotels or has rooms 
available during events and conferences where bulk sales have filled all the 
conventional hotels. The hotel industry, upset with the interruption to its 
regular course of business,has asked Washington to intervene 
<http://thehill.com/policy/technology/288553-hotel-lobby-cheers-scrutiny-on-airbnb>
.

A source told Fortune that the company’s cash on hand was plentiful, but that 
it viewed the new money was “insurance” against future endeavors. With $1.55bn 
in the bank, its insurance policy would seem large enough to support a serious 
expansion or a major legal pushback.

Early-round investors are poised to benefit greatly from the company’s size 
increase; Sequoia Capital and Ycombinator were the company’s “seed round” 
investors. More recently, Airbnb’s success has attracted financial 
institutions, notably JP Morgan Chase. Peter Thiel’s Founders Fund is also an 
investor.
 