
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> is planning a number of 
product and policy changes aimed at fighting discrimination on the short-term 
rental platform, but some critics say the reforms don’t go far enough and will 
allow for continued racial prejudices.

Airbnb – which has faced widespread backlash over hosts refusing to rent to 
black guests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/airbnbwhileblack-hashtag-highlights-potential-racial-bias-rental-app>
 – released a 30-page report on Thursday outlining new nondiscrimination 
policies and systems designed to address user complaints.

The changes, which include the creation of a “permanent, full-time team” 
dedicated to addressing bias and promoting diversity, make Airbnb the latest 
technology company to announce reforms in the wake of ahigh-profile scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/30/tech-companies-racial-discrimination-nextdoor-airbnb>
 surrounding racist andabusive behaviors of users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/twitter-vows-act-more-swiftly-banning-leslie-jones-abuser-milo-yiannopoulos>
.

The San Francisco-based company faced intense scrutiny after black users began 
sharing stories of rejection using the hashtag #AirbnbWhileBlack. Some have 
said they were able to get bookings after theychanged their photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/airbnb-service-black-people-noirbnb-noirebnb>
 to white people.

Research has backed their claims, with one Harvard University study 
<http://www.benedelman.org/publications/airbnb-guest-discrimination-2016-09-04.pdf>
 concluding that guests with “distinctively African American names” are 16% 
less likely to be accepted than identical guests with white-sounding names.

CEO Brian Chesky called 
<http://blog.airbnb.com/an-update-on-the-airbnb-anti-discrimination-review/> 
discrimination “the greatest challenge we face as a company”, and Airbnb hired 
former US attorney general Eric Holder and former ACLU official Laura Murphy to 
work on the problem.

The report, written by Murphy, said that through Airbnb’s new “Open Doors” 
initiative, “if a guest is not able to book a listing because they have been 
discriminated against, Airbnb will ensure the guest finds a place to stay”. The 
program will involve 24/7 personalized responses from “specially trained” 
employees.

It’s not clear how the firm would guarantee a spot, but Airbnb said if there 
were no similar listing on the market, the company would “identify an 
alternative accommodation option”.

The firm said it would also expand an “Instant Book Listings” program that 
allows guests to immediately reserve a room without host approval.

“Instant Book reduces the potential for bias because hosts automatically 
accept guests who meet these objective custom settings they have put in place,” 
the report said.

The firm also vowed to diversify its workforce. Like Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/03/apple-diversity-report-race-gender-facebook-google>
,Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/14/facebook-diversity-report-silicon-valley-employment>
,Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/01/twitter-staff-african-american-diversity>
 and other Silicon Valley firms, Airbnb’s critics have argued that its poor 
diversity record contributes to its failures to address discrimination.

The staff <http://www.wired.com/2016/03/airbnb-diversity-isnt-just-works/> is 
reported <http://blog.airbnb.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/EEO-1-2015-2.pdf> 
to be roughly 63% white, 22% Asian, 7% Hispanic and 3% black. The report claims 
that nearly 10% of its US employees are from “underrepresented populations” and 
that it intends to increase that figure to 11% by 2017.

The company said it will also now mandate that candidate pools for 
senior-level positions include women and minorities.

Academics have repeatedly argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/30/tech-companies-racial-discrimination-nextdoor-airbnb>
 that an easy fix to weed out discrimination would be eliminating Airbnb 
profile photos and names from the selection process, so that verified users 
could book a stay before hosts are aware of their race. In the report, Murphy 
notes that anonymous tools have helped people avoid prejudice when applying for 
mortgages and jobs, for example.

While the company said it would “experiment with reducing the prominence of 
guest photos in the booking process”, the report said “profile photos are 
essential to Airbnb’s overall mission of building a community”.

Jamila Jefferson-Jones, associate professor of law at the University Missouri, 
Kansas City, who haswritten 
<http://urbanlawjournal.com/shut-out-of-airbnb-a-proposal-for-remedying-housing-discrimination-in-the-modern-sharing-economy/>
 about Airbnb discrimination, said it would be insufficient to simply 
deemphasize photos.

“If someone is able to see the picture of the potential guest prior to whether 
they accept the booking, I think it’s still problematic,” she said, noting that 
black guests with names like hers will continue to face discrimination.

Rashad Robinson, executive director of Color of Change – which has criticized 
Airbnb 
<http://act.colorofchange.org/sign/Airbnb-racism-discrimination-housing/?> and 
has met with the firm to discuss discrimination – said the company now appears 
to be taking the matter much more seriously.


“When we approached Airbnb … the engagement was not at a high level. In many 
ways, we felt like they did not see this as a problem or saw this as something 
they could wish away,” said Robinson, noting that black members of his 
organization’s board had personal experiences with discrimination on the 
platform.

“This has been a very different engagement … and we’re hoping that that this 
does address the problem,” he said.

If the startup can find a way to effectively combat bias while keeping photos 
in place, Robinson said he would support the changes.

“Results are results. The metric of success here is less discrimination and 
dehumanizing treatment of black folks and other people of color.”
 