
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> blocked a Harvard 
professor from using its service after he uncovered evidence of racial 
discrimination, prompting accusations that the startup’s policies stifle 
critical research.

The Airbnb bias row shows prejudice matters – and not just to its victims | 
Claire Hynes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/airbnb-bias-prejudice-sharing-sites-discrimination-black-lgbt-travellers>
After the Guardian contacted Airbnb about the suspension of Ben Edelman, an 
associate professor at Harvard Business School, a spokesman said it had 
reinstated his account.

Emails show that Edelman, who is one of the most prominent researchers cited 
in the debate aboutracism on Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/airbnbwhileblack-hashtag-highlights-potential-racial-bias-rental-app>
, was suspended because he had created test accounts tostudy 
<http://www.benedelman.org/publications/airbnb-guest-discrimination-2016-09-16.pdf>
 how black guests face higher rates of rejection than white users.

“This is not research the company favors,” Edelman said, adding that he was 
concerned about the “overarching threat they hold over everyone who wants to do 
this kind of research”.

This month, Edelman discovered that the $30bn technology company suspended him 
for violating a policy against users having multiple accounts. His wife was 
also suspended, presumably because they use the same IP address – though she 
played no role in his research.
Ben Edelman (@bgedelman) 
To show discrimination at @Airbnb <https://twitter.com/Airbnb>, I created 20 
test accounts of varying races. In response, A suspended my personal account 
and wife's too.pic.twitter.com/zd4p4b2LDL <https://t.co/zd4p4b2LDL>
 <https://twitter.com/bgedelman/status/798568523341713408> November 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bgedelman/status/798568523341713408> 
Edelman said the company ignored his pleas to the site’s customer service 
department. The professor said his account was also suspended over the summer 
and only reinstated after a journalist asked Airbnb about it.

Academics and regular users were only able to expose discrimination on the 
site by creating fake accounts to test how hosts responded to users of 
different races.

Earlier this year, black Airbnb users started sharing discrimination stories 
<http://fusion.net/story/297087/airbnbwhileblack-racism-sharing-economy/> on 
social media with the viral hashtag#AirbnbWhileBlack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/05/airbnbwhileblack-hashtag-highlights-potential-racial-bias-rental-app>
. Some of them showed how a host rejected their request but thenimmediately 
approved them 
<http://www.complex.com/life/2016/05/airbnb-racist-airbnbwhileblack> when they 
created fake accounts with white profile photos.

Edelman’s research demonstrated that the problem wasn’t isolated. In 2015, he 
created 20 test accounts that were identical except half used “distinctively 
African American names” while half had white names. The study, which involved 
thousands of listings across five US cities, found that black users were 16% 
less likely to be accepted than identical guests with white names.

The professor said that the suspension policy was particularly unfair if it 
were used against black guests who created fake white accounts to test whether 
a specific host rejected them due to their race.

“Not only are they facing discrimination trying to use Airbnb, but then when 
they try to prove it, they are banned.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fairbnb-while-black-discrimination-harvard-researcher-banned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904dacc83072e8c057e87458b8747fe4688548e0%2F613_414_1183_1183%2F1183.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb%20blocked%20discrimination%20researcher%20over%20multiple%20accounts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fairbnb-while-black-discrimination-harvard-researcher-banned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%20blocked%20discrimination%20researcher%20over%20multiple%20accounts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fairbnb-while-black-discrimination-harvard-researcher-banned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904dacc83072e8c057e87458b8747fe4688548e0%2F613_414_1183_1183%2F1183.jpg>
 Ben Edelman was banned from Airbnb for creating a test account to research 
racial bias on the site. Photograph: Courtesy of Ben Edelman 
In a statement, an Airbnb spokesman said the suspension was a mistake: 
“Multiple accounts are often an indicator of suspicious activity or fraud, so 
our system automatically suspends these accounts when they are detected. We’ve 
since reinstated the account and we’re eager to work with researchers who share 
our commitment to building a community that’s fair for everyone.”

Housing rights organizations and government agencies have long used “testers” 
to uncoverracial biases of landlords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/29/racism-black-people-experience>
 – sending black and white renters to property owners who may be refusing to 
rent to people of color.

President-elect Donald Trump faced a federal lawsuit in the 1970s 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/09/29/495955920/donald-trump-plagued-by-decades-old-housing-discrimination-case>
 after New York City testers found that black renters were told there were no 
vacancies in Trump buildings while white people were offered units.

Given the long history of housing discrimination and testers, Airbnb should 
embrace academics and research projects, Edelman said.

Critics have also pointed out that Airbnb and other technology companies 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/15/opinion/mark-zuckerberg-is-in-denial.html?rref=collection%2Fcolumn%2Fzeynep-tufekci&action=click&contentCollection=opinion&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1&pgtype=collection&_r=0>
 often refuse to publiclyshare data with independent researchers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/27/airbnb-panel-democratic-national-convention-survey>
, allowing the corporations to avoid the kind of scrutiny that more 
traditionally regulated industries face.

The suspensions also raise questions about Airbnb’s priorities. Although the 
site has banned the professor for doing an innocuous study involving fake 
accounts,studies 
<http://sf.curbed.com/2016/1/20/10844934/study-shows-airbnb-rakes-in-millions-from-illegal-rentals>
 have shown how Airbnb has consistentlyfailed 
<http://abc7.com/news/study-claims-la-loses-millions-due-to-airbnb-rentals/1272479/>
 to restrict users who violate local housing laws andrun illegal hotels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/27/airbnb-new-york-city-housing-stock-reduction-study>
 that aren’t properly taxed or regulated.

Airbnb hires former attorney general Eric Holder to fight discrimination
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/airbnb-hires-eric-holder-racial-discrimination-bias>
“They’re super diligent about banning me for my terrible test accounts. 
Meanwhile, the guy running an illegal hotel without the right smoke detector or 
fire escape, they are looking the other way,” said Edelman. “That’s pretty 
ironic.”

Opponents have argued that the proliferation of illegal Airbnb hosts has 
exacerbated gentrification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/05/building-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world>
 anddisplacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/13/airbnb-cities-urge-government-crackdown-elizabeth-warren>
 byturning affordable housing into hotels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/22/airbnb-san-francisco-wanted-posters-chinatown>
, but that the company has resisted tougher regulations to protect the profits 
it gains from these users.

In September, in response to the #AirbnbWhileBlack backlash, the startup 
announced it had adoptednew nondiscrimination policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/airbnb-discrimination-policy-changes-racial-discrimination>
 and systems to address user complaints. CEO Brian Chesky had previouslycalled 
<http://blog.airbnb.com/an-update-on-the-airbnb-anti-discrimination-review/> 
discrimination “the greatest challenge we face as a company” and hired formerUS 
attorney general Eric Holder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/airbnb-hires-eric-holder-racial-discrimination-bias>
 to work on the problem.

Edelman and other professors say the new policies don’t go far enough 
<http://www.benedelman.org/news/091916-1.html>. They have argued 
<http://law.umkc.edu/news/airbnb-and-discrimination/> that if the corporation 
changed its system so that hosts would not see a potential guest’s name or 
profile picture prior to the booking, Airbnb would operate like traditional 
hotels and hosts would not be able to discriminate.
 