

The European head of Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> 
has disputed claims that the company is driving up property prices and 
exacerbating London’s housing crisis.

Olivier Grémillon, the Europe managing director of Airbnb, said short-term 
home rental websites are not to blame for problems in the capital.

“There have been a few studies done by academics which said no, it doesn’t 
really increase the price of housing,” he said. “There is a housing shortage in
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, [but] is it because of Airbnb? 
No. There are a lot of other reasons why prices are high.”

Airbnb: from homesharing cool to commercial giant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/18/airbnb-from-homesharing-cool-to-commercial-giant>
Grémillon said the company regularly looks at regional data to determine 
whether Airbnb’s activities are affecting local economies.

“We look into the data, we see if there [is] something there and if there is, 
we try to address [it], whether it’s on the tax side, whether it’s on the 
regulation [or] the communication of the regulation,” he said.

Earlier this month, Iain Wright, the chair of the business, innovation and 
skills committee, wrote to the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, highlighting the 
negative consequences of temporary lettings operations run by companies such as 
Airbnb, including their potential to drive up prices.

Wright said “many landlords appear to be operating illegally” by letting 
properties formore than 90 days a year 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/help/article/1379/responsible-hosting-in-the-united-kingdom>
, which requires a special permit.

The British Hospitality Association has claimed 
<http://www.bha.org.uk/bha_news/bha-goes-head-to-head-with-airbnb/> that Airbnb 
gives landlords a competitive advantage, helping them circumvent tax, food and 
health and safety regulations.

Grémillon said it was understandable that competitors were raising concerns in 
light ofthe company’s rapid UK growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/18/airbnb-from-homesharing-cool-to-commercial-giant>
. “The fact that it creates a reaction is normal,” he said. “[But] I don’t 
think the regulation will be tightened or should be tightened.

“We all need to do a better job of communicating the regulation so people know 
what the regulation is.”

Airbnb reported an 85% increase to 1.6 million guest arrivals across the 
country between June and August, compared with 860,000 over the same period 
last year.

Grémillon said Airbnb was holding talks with London boroughs to address 
concerns, but described existing regulations in the capital as “pretty fair and 
clear,” saying the 90-day rule was easy to understand.

“Is it the best regulation, business wise, that we have globally? No, not 
necessarily,” he said. “But there’s been some thinking behind it.”
 