
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb>, the startup that has 
fought tooth and nail to avoid regulation in cities around the world, appears 
to have reversed its attitude toward regulators in a dramatic change of policy.

In a deal with London and Amsterdam 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/airbnb-agrees-to-enforce-amsterdam-limit-on-rentals-1480580233>
 announced this week, the company has agreed to take on the responsibility of 
policing limits on thenumber of days per year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/airbnb-introduces-90-day-a-year-limit-for-london-hosts>
 a full unit can be let through its system, making it the first short-term 
rental company to cut such a deal.


Airbnb introduces 90-day annual limit for London hosts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/airbnb-introduces-90-day-a-year-limit-for-london-hosts>
Some analysts have met the move with cautious optimism, hoping that the 
short-term rental giant might finally be able to get its regulation problem 
under control before its mooted IPO.

Under the deal, Airbnb will be responsible for making sure their hosts stick 
to the local limits for short-term rentals unless the hosts have the proper 
licenses – 90 days per year inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, 
60 per year in Amsterdam.


Even more so than Uber, Airbnb has struggled against local regulatory 
environments as it grew. It has been engaged in protracted battles with city 
authorities inSan Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/04/san-francisco-voters-reject-proposition-f-restrict-airbnb-rentals>
,New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/10/airbnb-new-york-city-listings-purge-multiple-apartment-listings>
,Berlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/01/berlin-authorities-taking-stand-against-airbnb-rental-boom>
,Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/07/airbnb-fined-illegal-tourist-lets-barcelona-catalonia>
, and scores of other cities – often because it is blamed for eating into the 
housing stock – and falls into legal grey areas in places likeJapan 
<http://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Consumers/Airbnb-use-soars-while-Japan-juggles-legal-conundrum>
. In Iceland’s capital, Reykjavik, critics say Airbnb is to blame for atotal 
drying-out of the long-term rental market 
<http://fusion.net/story/305584/airbnb-reykjavik/>. 

In Australia, where a construction boom means cities worry less about draining 
housing stock, regulatory bodies have been more open to short-term rentals, 
according to Julian Ledger, the CEO of the Youth Hostel Association of 
Australia.

But even there, the company is controversial. The state government of New 
South Wales is preparing a response to a parliamentary enquiry into Airbnb 
earlier this year. Public opinion, Ledger said, was “mixed”.

Dutch MP Mei Li Vos, a supporter of regulation of the “sharing economy” in 
Holland, welcomed the Amsterdam deal. “I think it’s a good step forward,” she 
said. “Some very stubborn people and hosts of illegal hotels will persist, but 
it’s a good thing that Airbnb finally listens to the complaints of its 
neighbors.


“It’s a positive development for Airbnb, because the more certainty there is 
around the structure for Airbnb in cities around the world, and the less 
uncertainty there is about what is legal and what isn’t, [the better],” said 
Arun Sundararajan, a professor at New York University’s Stern School of 
Business who studies the sharing economy.

Sundararajan found the move especially heartening in the face of Airbnb’s 
$30bn valuation <http://fortune.com/2016/08/06/airbnb-valued-at-30-billion/> 
and possible future IPO - though others have suggested that the move was a kind 
of Potemkin village move designed to reassure skittish investors before a 
possible offering.

Not all of Airbnb’s supporters were overjoyed. Andrew Moylan, the executive 
director of the R Street Institute, a libertarian thinktank, was concerned by 
the precedent that was set by the deal.


“Airbnb and other short-term rental services have been fighting these 
existential battles across the world, and this is worrisome to me in that it’s 
the first time I’ve seen a company make a concession of this scale in basically 
agreeing to serve as an extension of law and code enforcement on behalf of the 
cities in which they have to operate,” he said.

Opponents of the company, however, expressed skepticism that Airbnb could be 
trusted to self-police. “It’s a little bit like having the fox watch the 
chicken coop,” said Joe LaCava, a community leader and former chairman of the 
San Diego Community Planners Committee.

Judith Roth Goldman, the co-founder of Keep Neighbourhoods First, a Los 
Angeles-based grassroots coalition opposing Airbnb-type rentals, said that 
Airbnb would “do anything to keep their $30bn IPO valuation”.

“Let’s see if Airbnb follows through as agreed,” Goldman said. “Only time will 
tell, but truthfully I can say that we’re hopefully optimistic that they’re 
committed to comply – but we’re skeptical given their track record.”

Dale Carlson, the co-founder of Share Better San Francisco, a pressure group 
agitating for greater regulation of Airbnb, said that the move was a good thing 
“only if it’s real,” but felt that his experience of the company led him to 
doubt that they would follow through with the deal in good faith.

“Don’t buy the Airbn-BS” was his advice to London and Amsterdam. “These guys 
are really quite shameless.”

 * This article has been amended to state that Keep Neighbourhoods First is 
based in LosAngeles, not New York  