
Elizabeth Warren <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/elizabeth-warren> has 
long been calling for a federal probe into the short-term property rental 
industry – a shot aimed square at the upside-down-heart logo of Airbnb. This 
Tyrannosaurus Disruptus is swinging a $30bn tail through rental markets from 
Venice, California, to Venice, Italy. Now, people are starting to pay attention.


Warren’s call has been taken up by officials and civic leaders from a dozen US 
cities, who wrote a letter saying they want the Federal Trade Commission to 
take up the charge. It’s about time. “Cities are struggling to address urgent 
shortages of affordable housing,” the letter said, “and there is evidence that 
commercial interests in the [short-term rental] industry are removing 
residential units from housing markets and thereby contributing to even higher 
rents.”

One of the best places to observe the impact of Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> is New Orleans, where next week 
the city council will vote on a bill to regulate the short-term rental 
industry. The industry has transformed neighborhoods throughout the Crescent 
City, and debate over the subject is intense, bordering on bloodsport.

Lawmakers join Elizabeth Warren's call for US to 'step in' on illegal Airbnb 
hotels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/13/airbnb-cities-urge-government-crackdown-elizabeth-warren>
In advance of the vote, Airbnb has unleashed a crude $1m local ad blitz 
attempting to humanize its business model. One of the 60-second commercials 
opens with a local Airbnb host named Reneia. “I love rescuing animals,” she 
says overimages of her playing 
<https://www.airbnbaction.com/airbnb-in-new-orleans/> with shelter dogs. “And 
[hosting] gives me an additional income to help these animals.”

It’s almost enough to make your question your support for regulation – “Does 
this mean I hate puppies?” – but then you realize that owner-occupied rentals 
like Reneia’s are not affected by the proposed regulations. The law narrowly 
targets rentals of entire unoccupied homes (which would be limited to 30 rental 
days a year). Reneia and her rescues would be just fine.

A more fair Airbnb ad would profile absentee landlords and property managers 
laying on the beach or sitting at their desks. But their stories might leave 
audiences cold, and anyway the industry has no interest in reminding the public 
of these people.

It is they, not the waitresses with spare rooms and rescue animals, who have 
generated widespread anger in New Orleans and other cities across the country. 
Airbnb’s vast publicity machine is in fact geared toward obscuring the 
existence of the faceless commercial lessors who have fueled much of the 
company’s rapid growth.

I gained a front-row seat to this phenomenon when I moved to New Orleans in 
early 2013. Since then, I’ve seen entire blocks in the Bywater neighborhood 
converted to short-term rentals, most operated by absentee landlords. Vacancies 
in the area are few; rents have gone up. Long-term neighbors have been replaced 
by flows of vacationing strangers. You can’t blame Airbnb for all of this, but 
it’s past due we figured out what damage the industry has done – and how to 
roll it back.

New technology may soon resurrect the sharing economy in a very radical form
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/sharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership>
This is what residents from across New Orleans have been calling for in recent 
protests like amock funeral 
<http://www.nola.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/09/short_term_rental_demonstratio.html>
 procession to city hall, featuring coffins marked “affordable neighborhoods” 
and “real neighbors”.

But it’s not just activists who are worried – public officials across the 
country have been slowly collecting binders of data on Airbnb’s impact on 
cities. Two years ago, New York’s attorney general office released astudy 
<http://www.ag.ny.gov/pdfs/Airbnb%20report.pdf> showing that commercial lessors 
operate a third of Airbnb rentals in the city, most in violation of zoning and 
tax law.

And last year, the Los Angeles Alliance for a New Economy published a report  
<http://www.ag.ny.gov/pdfs/Airbnb%20report.pdf>estimating that close to 90% of 
Airbnb’s LA revenue was derived from absentee landlords and leasing companies. 
They estimate Airbnb keeps more than 7,000 units off the rental market – equal 
to seven years of affordable housing construction.


Unless this trend is reversed, our urban neighborhoods will become fun, cheap 
places to stay in if you are a tourist – and unaffordable hostel zones for 
people who used to live there.
 