
The world's already troubled airline industry was last night thrown into a 
fresh crisis after the crash of American Airlines flight 587 in New York.

The crash was a tragedy for AA, which suffered grievously on September 11 when 
two of its planes were commandeered by terrorists during the bombing of New 
York and Washington.

But it also had an immediate impact on British Airways whose shares slipped by 
as much as 13% shortly after the news broke.

Last night it faced the threat of falling out of the FTSE 100 list of top 
companies in the UK, so shattered is the confidence of investors in the 
beleaguered industry.

BA is not unique. It at least has Â£2bn of liquidity. All the world's large 
carriers were rocked yesterday on stock exchanges from New York to Frankfurt, 
and the situation will be repeated today when stock exchanges open in Tokyo and 
other financial centres.

AA, which in terms of the number of passengers it carries is the world's 
biggest airline, had already been hit by the US economic slowdown even before 
the terrorist attacks of September 11.

The devastated airline was forced to take dramatic steps as passenger numbers 
sharply declined. It decided that the overall route network would have to be 
reduced by 20%, with its UK-US routes sliced by 15%, or seven flights a week.

AA has reduced its 110,000-strong workforce by 20,000, and is considering 
further cuts. It carried 101m passengers last year, but this figure will be 
greatly reduced this year, and will be lower next year as well.

Industry sources said that it would be better for the airlines if 
investigators discovered that the crash was not due to terrorism but a fault on 
board the aircraft or pilot error.

They said that a new terrorist attack in New York would have a disastrous 
effect on passenger confidence, shattered by the events of September 11.

Anecdotal reports from passengers between New York and London suggest that 
Americans are tending to opt for British carriers like BA and Virgin Atlantic 
in preference to AA or United. One said: "We think it is safer to go British at 
the moment."

With the exception of the low-cost airlines, the big carriers say that they 
are not expecting to see an upturn - and then it will be slight - until 
December. Much of that, too, will be seasonal traffic over the Christmas period 
when fares are at their most expensive.

Yesterday's events put even more pressure on the airline industry to act 
together on security.

Europe is keen to establish some international security organisation which can 
share and act on information across international boundaries.

The crash of Flight 587 also draws attention to the growing need for the 
industry to rationalise. With the demise of national carriers in Switzerland, 
Belgium and Canada, the pressure for other carriers to step in and fill the 
void is inevitable.

Some senior airline managers said that the crash of flight 587 could also 
bring an end to hopes by AA and BA to establish closer links.

But the political talks still go on. The transport minister, John Spellar, was 
in Washington last week to give new bilateral talks between Britain and the US 
some extra ballast.

It will be the politicians who have to agree to create a new world airline 
map, not the airlines. The problem is only political because the airlines know 
that to boast possession of a national carrier carries much political prestige.

In the meantime, carriers like BA are hunting Europe for new mates. The most 
likely for BA is KLM, the Dutch carrier. Both airlines would like to stop 
duplicating routes on which they both operate. Schipol in Amsterdam and 
Heathrow are the most congested airports and the most likely where they could 
reach an agreement.

But it all depends on the approval of the European commission for such a small 
but important move to be adopted.

Yesterday's second disaster in New York in two months highlights the fact that 
while the industry faces further turmoil, it has not yet recognised that it is 
part of a global village.
 