 Whatever the cause of the American Airlines Airbus crash, the disaster can 
only undermine confidence in air travel and deepen the crisis engulfing the 
world's carriers.
The verdict on the markets was immediate, as shares among Europe's largest 
airlines slid sharply. British Airways, Europe's largest airline, fell 5.4%, 
Air France was down 3.1% and Lufthansa was off 5.5%.

Shares in the Italian national carrier, Alitalia, were suspended, after losing 
more than 10% following the crash. Shares in EADS, which owns 80% of the 
EuropeanAirbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> consortium, 
slumped 8.7%.

Apart from the financial fallout, the impact on air travel was fairly 
immediate as well, with Virgin Atlantic and United Airlines cancelling their 
London to New York flights.

"It's really going to come down to how long it will take the authorities to 
decide whether it was a terrorist thing or not. If it is, we're going lower 
again. If it wasn't terrorism, we won't go much lower," said a trader.

The airline industry is already experiencing its worst crisis in history. Ten 
years ago, the Gulf war led to a slump in air travel, but this time the ordeal 
for the airlines is far worse.

Tens of thousands of workers have been laid off on either side of the Atlantic 
and Congress has had to approve a $15bn rescue package for US carriers, while 
Sabena, the Belgian carrier, has filed for bankruptcy, the first European flag 
carrier to do so.

The only carriers to have profited from the crisis are the low-cost companies, 
particularly easyJet and Ryanair. They have moved aggressively to court 
passengers with heavy discounts and various marketing gimmicks, with Ryanair 
offering cheap seats to Ireland for hen parties.

But for most of the industry, these are uremittingly bleak times. BA is laying 
off 7,000 workers and expects to lose Â£775m this year. BA has been hit 
particularly hard because it relies heavily on transatlantic traffic.

Figures from BAA, Britain's main airports operator, released today underlined 
how badly transatlantic traffic has dipped since the September 11 attacks.

The group said its airports handled 9.8m passengers in October - 12% less than 
the same month last year. Heathrow and Gatwick were hardest hit, with passenger 
numbers down 20.1% and 12.7% respectively.

BAA said the north Atlantic and other long-haul markets continued to be worst 
affected by the September atrocities, with the north Atlantic market down 31.3% 
in October and other long-haul traffic down 16.4%.

But short-haul flights could suffer, too. After all, the American Airlines 
flight was bound for the Caribbean.

Just minutes after news of the Airbus explosion, one New Yorker said in an 
email: "I was supposed to fly to San Francisco next week. Now I think not."
 