
Alabama chief justice Roy Moore has been suspended for the rest of his term for
defying federal gay marriage rulings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/29/alabama-judge-roy-moore-gay-marriage-ambrosia-starling>
.

The punishment effectively removes Moore from office, without the court 
officially ousting him. The nine-memberAlabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> court of the judiciary handed 
down the punishment on Friday after ruling Moore had violating standards of 
judicial ethics.

Moore was found to have encouraged probate judges to deny marriage licenses to 
gay couples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/06/alabama-chief-justice-roy-moore-keep-denying-gay-marriage-licenses>
 six months after the US supreme court ruled that everyone had a fundamental 
right to marry regardless of sexual orientation in all 50 states.

 Moore vehemently denied that his administrative order was an act of defiance 
and said his personal beliefs had nothing to do with it.

The same panel removed the outspoken Republican in 2003 because he refused to 
remove a Ten Commandments monument from the state judicial building. Voters 
later re-elected him as chief justice after he lost a race for governor.

Alabama chief justice’s anti-gay marriage fight may be a rebellious bid for 
governor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/28/alabama-chief-justice-roy-moore-trial-campaign-for-governor>
This time, Moore sent an administrative order to the state’s 68 probate 
judges, maintaining that the Alabama supreme court’s gay marriage ban remained 
in “full force and effect” despite the ruling from the nation’s highest court.

Moore testified that his January order merely provided judges with a status 
report on a technical aspect of the law.

Moore, 69, had already been suspended from the bench since May, when the 
state’s judicial inquiry commission accused him of violating judicial ethics. 
By the end of his term in 2019, he will be beyond the age limit of 70 for 
judges, unless voters raise the limit in November.

“We are here 13 years later because the chief justice learned nothing from his 
first removal. He continues to defy the law,” John Carroll, a lawyer 
representing the commission, argued on Wednesday in Moore’s judicial court 
hearing.

Moore was loudly applauded when he entered the ornate chamber where he usually 
presides over the state supreme court. He told his inquisitors the ethics 
charges were “ridiculous”.

“I gave them a status in the case, a status of the facts that these orders 
exist. That is all I did,” Moore testified.

Moore’s ethics trial came amid upheaval in all three branches of Alabama’s 
government. The Republican speaker of the state house of representatives was 
removed from office this summer for criminal ethics violations. A legislative 
committee is weighing whether Governor Robert Bentley should be impeached over 
a scandal involving a top aide.
 