
Alanis Morissette <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alanis-morissette> is to 
find out how her songs go down in a theatre, after it was revealed that the 
Canadian-American singer-songwriter is working on a musical based on her 
best-selling album.

Jagged Little Pill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/16/alanis-morissette-profound-violation>
, which includes the songs Ironic and Hand in My Pocket, sold over 33m copies 
worldwide and spent 12 weeks at No 1 in the US Billboard 200 album chart when 
it was released in 1995.

Now Morissette, 39, is working alongside Tom Kitt, who composed orchestrations 
and arrangements of Green Day's biggest hits for the Broadway tunerAmerican 
Idiot <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/11/american-idiot-review>, 
towards turning it into a musical with a workshop production scheduled for next 
year.

While no details about the plot have been released, the musical is intended to 
include the full tracklist of Jagged Little Pill, as well as other songs in 
Morissette's back catalogue and some original material.

"I look forward to taking the heart of Jagged Little Pill and expanding its 
story, fleshing it out into ever deeper layers of emotionality, specificity, 
humanity, power, physicality, spirit and fabulism," said Morissette in a 
statement.

The musical will be produced by Arvind Ethan David and Vivek J Tiwary, who 
described the album as "a triumph of self-expression – an album that was 
impossible to ignore with its massive sound and raw honesty."

The American Idiot producer continued: "We need more Broadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> musicals with a serious, relatable 
emotional core and strong female voices. So we're looking forward to honouring 
the Jagged Little Pill legacy – while still surprising fans with some 
unexpected twists."

Morissette's co-writer on Jagged Little Pill, Glen Ballard, has already turned 
his hand to musical theatre, as one of the primary collaborators onGhost: the 
Musical <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jul/19/ghost-the-musical-review>
, which is currently on tour in the UK, following runs on Broadway and in the 
West End.
 