
If you’re an American movie lover, you’ll find yourself flooded with choices 
this weekend. It’s your first chance to seethe Captain America sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/captain-america-the-winter-soldier-first-look-review>
, Jonathan Glazer’sUnder the Skin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/13/under-the-skin-scarlett-johansson-peter-bradshaw>
 and the second part ofNymphomaniac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/20/nymphomaniac-volumes-1-and-2-von-trier-bradshaw-review>
. But the film you should watch, despite it not featuring nudity and/or 
Scarlett Johansson, is Alan Partridge.

Understandably, you might be a little put off by this idea. It’s not as big as 
the others. It hasn’t wowed as many festival juries. To you it may be an 
obscure foreign comedy, almost entirely set within a single building, featuring 
a little-known character played by the guy from Hamlet 2. But avoiding it would 
be a grave error on your part.Alan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge> is one of the 
greatest and most beloved comic creations of the last few decades. Perhaps an 
explanatory glossary would help.

Abba

The key cultural touchstone to understanding Alan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/coogan?page=4>. A longtime fan – to the 
extent that he named his own son Fernando – Partridge’s big break on television 
came as the host of a talk show named after Abba’s song Knowing Me, Knowing 
You. Although his love for Abba is also the root of his infamous catchphrase 
"Aha", it by no means mark the limits of his musical knowledge. He has been 
known to describe Wings as "the band the Beatles could have been", and has a 
freakish understanding of the subtleties of Roachford’s 1988 UK number four hit
Cuddly Toy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Ei0-wq9AqQ>. He has also been 
known toplay a mean air bass <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VokAbAfTfCc>.

Alpha Papa 

The original UK title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/aug/01/alan-partridge-alpha-papa-video>
 for Alan Partridge, based on his Nato phonetic alphabet initials. It’s a 
better title than Alan Partridge, but we ruined The Avengers by calling it 
Avengers Assemble, so let’s call it a truce.

Football pie 

Alan’s first job in broadcasting was as the sports correspondent on the early 
1990s news programmeThe Day Today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chris-morris>. Alan quickly established 
himself as an exuberant commentator, especially during the 1994 World Cup where 
he marked goals with joyous cries of“Twat!” and “Shit!” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DsQpWBSjVzI>

I’m Alan Partridge 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCdCfuZMD3L0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCdCfuZMD3L0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCdCfuZMD3L0&media=>
 I'm Alan Partridge 
A docu-soap following the lean times that came after his talkshow years. 
Divorced and living in a roadside hotel, I'm Alan Partridge saw Alan try to 
claw his way back to respectability by presenting the evening show on Radio 
Norwich and hosting the military-themed game show Skirmish on digital channel 
UK Conquest. He would then suffer a mental breakdown and drive to Dundee in his 
bare feet before eventually embarking on a short-lived love affair with a 
disturbed Ukrainian woman named Sonja.

Knowing Me, Knowing You 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx1AH-1ZnGiM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx1AH-1ZnGiM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx1AH-1ZnGiM&media=>
 Knowing Me, Knowing You 
Alan Partridge’s talk show. Plagued by disaster from the outset, barely an 
episode would pass without incident. The show was taken off air after episode 
six, where he accidentally shot a guest dead during a broadcast. Alan’s attempt 
at a comeback, a one-off festive edition entitled Knowing Me, Knowing Yule, 
effectively marked the end of his career as a major broadcaster when he punched 
both a disabled man and the BBC’s director of programming in the face with a 
roast partridge.


Ladyboy 

Alan’s favourite combination of beverages: a pint of lager with chasers of 
Baileys and gin and tonic.

Mid-Morning Matters 

Partridge’s current job. He hosts a daytime show on a small, online-only, 
ultra-local radio station. Despiteoccasional signs to the contrary 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GbneAdXnW9c>, Alan finally seems to have found 
peace with his life at the station.

Norwich 

Alan Partridge’s home town. His love for Norwich is unparalleled. Even during 
his glory days in London, he’d still find the time toremind viewers of his roots
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aREF7dOYXMY>. He’d return to Norwich with the 
late-period documentary specialWelcome to the Places of my Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H2wfK_L01tk>. In return, the people of Norwich 
repaid his kindness by illuminating the city with a giant festive effigy of his 
face, complete withlaser-firing eyes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xJojyHWADIc>. It is no less than he deserves.
 