
Alanis Morissette <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alanis-morissette> 
remembers the moment she sensed that music – writing and performing songs, 
packing out stadiums, selling millions of records – might not be enough to get 
her point across. It was the mid-1990s and she was one of the biggest stars on 
the planet. Her albumJagged Little Pill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/jun/15/jagged-little-pill-alanis-morissette-most-important-album-90s>
 was on its way to becoming a cultural touchstone, a distillation of anger and 
heartache that seemed to speak for a generation.

And yet, barely into her 20s, the Canadian queen of alt rock felt her message 
was not getting through. “I was made fun of on the cover of a magazine,” she 
recalls. “‘Stadium therapy rock’ or whatever it was. And a lot of people would 
write, ‘Oh, Alanis and her psychobabble’.” And, of course, there was criticism 
of Morissette’s use of the word ironic, to describe a black fly in your 
chardonnay and a no-smoking sign on your cigarette break.

Sitting in the conference room of her production company’s office in 
Brentwood, a swish part of Los Angeles, on a breezy, sunlit afternoon, 
Morissette can laugh about the I-word now. She recentlyrecorded a duet with 
James Corden on the Late Late Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/nov/11/alanis-morissette-updates-lyrics-ironic-late-show-video>
 – an updated, very funny version of Ironic that went viral (“It’s like swiping 
left, on your future soulmate. It’s a Snapchat, that you wish you had saved”). 
But, for a long time, the song haunted her. “I’ve certainly had my ass kicked 
for a very long time over the malapropism of it all,” she smiles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdb94fc1e44675cb62e65a6cf066c26c8acf62b3%2F28_57_757_1050%2F757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdb94fc1e44675cb62e65a6cf066c26c8acf62b3%2F28_57_757_1050%2F757.jpg>
 On stage in 2001. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Dressed in runners, a grey T-shirt and sweater, and a hint of lipstick, 
Morissette is chatty and affable, laughing easily. She has impeccable posture, 
thanks to regular yoga, and is still recognisably the tousle-haired brunette 
who rocketed to fame in 1995 withYou Oughta Know 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NPcyTyilmYY>, a visceral ode to the pain and 
jealousy of breaking up.

Two decades on, at the age of 41, Morissette is moving to a new medium. She 
still writes songs, but is now also making podcasts, writing a book and,
beginning next week in Guardian Weekend magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/08/alanis-morissette-to-be-guardian-weekends-new-advice-columnist>
, responding to readers’ letters in a new advice column. “I was getting bored 
with just one form,” Morissette says. “Songs are my favourite, let’s be honest. 
But there’s a limitation: it’s just three or four minutes. In a podcast, or in 
a column, there’s an intimacy and vulnerability on my part and the questioner’s 
part. We’re going for it, and there’s no hiding.”

The artist once labelled “an angry young woman” is, it turns out, a born agony 
aunt. The daughter of teacher parents, Morissette grew up Catholic in Ottawa, 
Canada, with an older brother, Chad, now a businessman, and a twin brother, 
Wade, who is a musician and yoga instructor. “It’s been the role I’ve played my 
whole life – family therapist,” she explains. “Parents, brothers, even extended 
family members, that was the role I took on, because I suppose I had this 
combination of intuition and empathy. I cut my teeth, basically, listening for 
a living.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cd588261ed5be656feb411d30cc1da17ad1f109%2F0_0_1548_928%2F1548.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cd588261ed5be656feb411d30cc1da17ad1f109%2F0_0_1548_928%2F1548.jpg>
 As God (in silver and white) in Kevin Smith’s 1999 film Dogma. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Morissette has spoken in the past about growing up feeling anxious and “mired 
in patriarchy”, leading to periods of depression and bouts of anorexia and 
bulimia. Even so, a precocious musical talent, dance lessons andappearances on 
the children’s variety show You Can’t Do That On Television 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B1Q55CLrTkg> attracted her to the limelight. 
She landed a record deal and in 1991 released her debut album,Alanis 
<http://alanis.com/music/alanis/>, a dance-pop mix, aged 17. It sold well, 
though she remained largely unknown outside Canada.

Moving to LA and collaborating with producer and songwriter Glen Ballard 
<http://glenballard.com> prompted a change of direction. When she released the 
LPJagged Little Pill <http://alanis.com/music/jagged-little-pill/> in 1995, her 
label, Maverick Records, considered it a quirky, arty album with limited 
commercial appeal. It became a phenomenon, selling 33 million copies worldwide, 
with songs such asAll I Really Want 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HLHvb9V8Yzs>, Hand In My Pocket 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQ8D5Ihe4hg> and Ironic vaulting Morissette to 
stadium status at the age of 21. (More recently, the album soundtrackedSteve 
Coogan and Rob Brydon’s drives in The Trip To Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jan/18/steve-coogan-rob-brydon-trip-to-italy>
.)

Then came the rollercoaster of the 1990s, when mega-watt success and the 
pressure that came with it crashed into Morissette’s life. Hysterical fans 
mobbed her car, yanked her hair and left creepy notes in her hotel rooms, a 
period she now refers to as a “hailstorm of stimulation”.

She continued mining her emotions in subsequent albums, including Supposed 
Former Infatuation Junkie 
<http://alanis.com/music/supposed-former-infatuation-junkie/>, Under Rug Swept 
<http://alanis.com/music/under-rug-swept/> and Flavors Of Entanglement 
<http://alanis.com/music/flavors-of-entanglement/>, a cathartic response to a 
breakup withthe actor Ryan Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-reynolds>. The albums had respectable 
sales and reviews, but nothing like the feverish reception of Jagged Little 
Pill. Morissette also acted, taking eclectic roles on stage (The Vagina 
Monologues), film (Kevin Smith’s Dogma, in which she plays God) and television 
(Sex And The City;she kisses Sarah Jessica Parker in a game of Spin The Bottle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eblMwE64mpI>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4251472d45c879e7f6a34a2a16139c47246ad42a%2F30_30_766_1437%2F766.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4251472d45c879e7f6a34a2a16139c47246ad42a%2F30_30_766_1437%2F766.jpg>
 With husband, rapper Mario ‘Souleye’ Treadway, and son Ever. Photograph: 
WireImage 
About 10 years ago, she says, she decided to rebalance her life, after 
realising “I don’t want to be that woman who, at 70, has all these awards and 
is dying alone. So I decided I want to cultivate some real intimacies.” In 
2009, she metMario “Souleye” Treadway 
<http://jezebel.com/5558336/meet-the-guy-alanis-morissette-married>, a rapper 
and DJ, at a meditation gathering. Unlike her previous relationships, this one, 
she says, felt lasting. They married a year later in LA. “Anyone who meets us 
often marvels at how different we are,” she says, “but where we unite is our 
true north. We have this shared sense of marriage being this hotbed for 
healing. It’s a context in which we can grow and uplift each other, and 
catapult each other’s missions even further. It’s a very sacred crucible.” She 
pauses and gives a goofy grin. “We’re both traumatised humans, just trying to 
get it together.”

Their five-year-old son, Ever Imre Morissette-Treadway, has been “a total 
life-spinner”, she says, and she has tried to avoid repeating patterns from her 
own childhood. “For instance, being able accurately to reflect who he is, as 
opposed to those aspects that serve my needs. I’ve had great perfectionist 
issues since I was young, so it’s really lovely – because there’s just no 
possible way for me to be a perfect parent.”

She is happiest, she says, on her couch with her three dogs, Mario and Ever. 
That said, happiness can be overrated: “I don’t think that’s something we can 
have all the time. I’m not sure people want to feel happy so much as resilient 
and equipped. People enjoy watching sad movies for a reason.”
 With James Corden on the Late Late Show in 2015. Photograph: CBS 
Anger and love “are the two hugest life forces”, Morissette believes. “I can 
tell when I’m angry. I feel it on a physiological level. I get flushed, I feel 
hot, my jaw clenches, my arms activate.” Anger is not necessarily bad, she 
adds: “That’s the anger that is out of control and irresponsible. But anger has 
a lot of different layers that are often overlooked. It gets a bad rap.”

These days, she soaks up books on psychology, relationships and spirituality, 
and has “copious” therapists. “I’m definitely a therapy girl – I think that’s 
quite obvious. I don’t want to say everyone should [have therapy], but do I 
think everyone might benefit from it? Yes. But I’m aware that a lot of people 
have great resistance to it: there’s an implication that if they go, there’s 
something inherently wrong with them, that they’re damaged or innately flawed. 
Which is not true.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b2a64574a64cdbc38bd5063f39607b1bfd2d0c5%2F19_29_631_1306%2F631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alanis%20Morissette%3A%20from%20queen%20of%20alt%20rock%20to%20Guardian%20advice%20columnist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F09%2Falanis-morissette-queen-alt-rock-guardian-advice-columnist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b2a64574a64cdbc38bd5063f39607b1bfd2d0c5%2F19_29_631_1306%2F631.jpg>
 On stage in 2015. Photograph: Getty Images 
Once a symbol of youthful ire, now an advocate for therapeutic healing – I 
want to ask if that’s ironic, but I know Morissette has a tangled relationship 
with the word. “If somebody brings it up to shame me for the 450,000th time, 
it’s not the most pleasant experience,” she smiles. Neither she nor co-writer 
Ballard anticipated the song’s popularity or subsequent scrutiny. “So we 
thought, let’s not be precious about it.” She laughs. “But perhaps, in 
retrospect, we should have been.”

Collaborations with the likes of Justin Bieber 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6663890/alanis-morissette-justin-bieber-tease-video>
,Taylor Swift <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-LF844sMD4Q> and Demi Lovato 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/see-demi-lovato-alanis-morissette-belt-you-oughta-know-at-2015-amas-20151122>
 – “these chronologically younger, talented creatures,” Morissette calls them – 
have introduced her to younger audiences. “It’s their way of honouring me, and 
my way of honouring the baton being passed,” she says.

Now Morissette is mining her past in a memoir-cum-self-help book, Perpetual 
Becoming <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378969/>, due 
out in May, which braids recollections with “hopefully, some hard-won wisdoms”. 
She has no shame about her own experiences, sexual or otherwise, she says, but 
is veiling certain details to shield others’ privacy: “It’s out of respect, not 
out of trying to hide.”

Might she make an exception, and finally break her silence on the breakup that 
inspired You Oughta Know, rumoured to have been actor-comedianDave Coulier 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dave_Coulier> or even Matt LeBlanc 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matt_LeBlanc>? Those big, brown eyes widen. “No! 
It was my revenge fantasy. I’m all about revenge fantasy, but I’m not into the 
acting out of revenge. It’s really destructive.”

What’s the best advice Morissette ever received? She says it came not from a 
therapist but from a manager during her hurricane stardom years. “He said, 
‘Just look down and imagine you’re walking on a train track, and put one foot 
on each piece of wood, and keep looking down and walking.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Falanis-morissette-updates-lyrics-ironic-late-show-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F11%2F1447232426608%2FKP_593028_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alanis%20Morissette%20updates%20lyrics%20of%20Ironic%20on%20The%20Late%20Late%20Show%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Falanis-morissette-updates-lyrics-ironic-late-show-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alanis%20Morissette%20updates%20lyrics%20of%20Ironic%20on%20The%20Late%20Late%20Show%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F11%2Falanis-morissette-updates-lyrics-ironic-late-show-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F11%2F1447232426608%2FKP_593028_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Morissette updates the lyrics of Ironic on The Late Late Show – video. 
Do other people’s problems ever make her feel impatient? Could “therapy girl” 
ever dispatch someone with a brisk, “Pull yourself together”?

“A version of that, yes. When someone is dropping into victim or blame 
consciousness, I’ll yank on their bootstraps.” Morissette smiles. “Lovingly and 
firmly.”

• Alanis Morissette’s new advice column begins on 16 January. Email her at 
ask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:askalanis@theguardian.com>. Her podcast is 
available on iTunes and atalanis.com <http://alanis.com/>
 