
His performance as criminal mastermind Hans Gruber in Die Hard has earned him 
a place as one of Hollywood’s most iconic villains, butAlan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-rickman> has revealed that he almost 
turned down the role.


Speaking at a Bafta celebration of his work 
<http://www.bafta.org/whats-on/bafta-a-life-in-pictures-alan-rickman>, Rickman 
admitted that “having a film career at all is a bit of a surprise”. The British 
actor, who started out on the stage, recalled his initial disdain when he was 
offered his first film role, in Die Hard, two days after arriving in Los 
Angeles in 1987.

“I didn’t know anything about LA. I didn’t know anything about the film 
business … I’d never made a film before, but I was extremely cheap,” he said. 
After reading the script, he thought: “What the hell is this? I’m not doing an 
action movie.”

Rickman, who was 41 at the time, was won over by the wit of the script and the 
progressive storyline, which still stands out from other action films. “Every 
single black character in that film is positive and highly intelligent,” he 
said. “So, 28 years ago, that’s quite revolutionary, and quietly so.”

A Little Chaos review – Louis XIV romp borders on verge of ridiculous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/10/a-little-chaos-alan-rickman-kate-winslet-louis-xiv-film>
Rickman admitted that his lack of film experience had not stopped him from 
voicing opinions about Die Hard’s script. He decided it would be more 
interesting for his character to wear a suit than the full terrorist gear, and 
in one scene pretend to be a hostage. He then left a note on the producer Joel 
Silver’s table with his suggestions.

Rickman said: “I got Joel saying, ‘Get the hell out of here, you’ll wear what 
you’re told.’ But when I came back, I was handed a new script. It showed that 
it pays to have a little bit of theatre training.”

Rickman, who has acted and directed for stage and film, also said he enjoys 
the “risk factor” in his profession. “I like feeling a bit unsafe, and theatre, 
of course, is deadly.” He later added: “The good thing about starting late in 
this career is you go, ‘Well, what’s the worst that could happen?’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Falan-rickman-nearly-turned-down-villain-in-die-hard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429190757649%2F159e3c8f-c3e6-4110-a2ba-d89aa5e5cf82-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%3A%20'I%20almost%20turned%20down%20the%20role%20of%20the%20villain%20in%20Die%20Hard'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Falan-rickman-nearly-turned-down-villain-in-die-hard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%3A%20%27I%20almost%20turned%20down%20the%20role%20of%20the%20villain%20in%20Die%20Hard%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Falan-rickman-nearly-turned-down-villain-in-die-hard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429190757649%2F159e3c8f-c3e6-4110-a2ba-d89aa5e5cf82-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alan Rickman at the Bafta Life in Pictures event Photograph: PR 
The Bafta event was filled with anecdotes from working with directors 
including Neil Jordan and Anthony Minghella. Looking back on Ang Lee’s 1995 
film Sense and Sensibility, he recalled how the director had “his own way of 
getting upset about something. He’d disappear off into the middle of a field 
with a cardboard box and a big pile of pink buns and sit there, thinking.”

Rickman also revealed that 1996 film Michael Collins, a historic biopic of the 
Irish civil war, in which he portrayed political figure Éamon de Valera, 
initially had an alternative conclusion. “We shot an ending that didn’t make it 
into the film, and I’m sad about that because I think that would have made it 
more equivocal,” said the actor. “But, of course, there’s pressure from 
Hollywood to have a happy ending.”

Rickman has been asked for years about whether JK Rowling revealed to him the 
outcome of Snape in theHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> series to help him with the 
role. At Bafta he said the author gave him a single hint: “Jo Rowling gave me 
one piece of information, it wasn’t even a fact – I promised I would never 
share it and I never will – which made me know that whatever happened, I had to 
drive down two roads at the same time with this character, until all the facts 
emerged. So I knew there was ambiguity.”

The actor has “no regrets” about taking on the Harry Potter films,though it 
meant he had to put directing on hold for more than a decade. Rickman’s second 
directorial project,A Little Chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-little-chaos>, is released in cinemas this 
month.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fa-little-chaos-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193050887%2Fcrop_KP_181431_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Little%20Chaos%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fa-little-chaos-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Little%20Chaos%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fa-little-chaos-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429193050887%2Fcrop_KP_181431_640x360.jpeg>
 The film team review A Little Chaos 
“The job of directing it is absolutely terrifying,” he said. “But you realise 
you’ve learned so much down the line … like Anthony [Minghella]’s vulnerability 
on the set of Truly, Madly, Deeply. He gathered all the actors together on day 
one and said: ‘I have one word: help.’ … Ralph [Fiennes] gave me another piece 
of advice, which was, ‘The danger of directing yourself is that you are 
embarrassed about going for another take.’”

A Little Chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/10/a-little-chaos-alan-rickman-kate-winslet-louis-xiv-film>
, which Rickman appears in with Kate Winset and Stanley Tucci, tells the story 
of a female landscape gardener working for Louis XIV in the gardens of 
Versailles. Of Alison Deegan’s debut script, Rickman said he loved that it 
“tore the pages up of history”.

He added: “The central character is a woman landscape gardener – a woman who 
couldn’t have possibly existed. And it’s a male-dominated world, where women 
are merely decorative objects – weirdly, that has modern parallels still. So 
also I like that about it.”
 