
Having been a Spitting Image puppet, voiced a biographical caricature on 
Family Guy and characterised himself in a film and several plays, Alan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett> has an unusual level of 
recognition for a writer. A consequence of this is requests for selfies, even, 
as Bennett notes, “when you’re plainly running for a train”.

Shyness may be a fault, but politeness a virtue, so he always accepts, except 
for a brief recent spell of novel political protest. “I went through a rather 
prissy period immediately after Brexit. I’d ask people if they voted in or out. 
And, if they’d voted out, I wouldn’t give them a selfie. But it started to seem 
rather mean, so I stopped doing it.”

Bennett has still not adjusted to the prospect of the UK leaving the EU, 
however: “For me – I think it was probably the same for a lot of people – there 
was a few weeks of gloom, really. I couldn’t throw it off. It was like a 
general election result, but worse. I still find it very difficult to 
understand. Just on a personal level, my stuff does very well in Italy and 
Germany, and to a lesser extent in France, and I feel very embarrassed … 
Because you just feel it’s a slap in the face for them. I also feel we had a 
duty to stay to counter, for example, Hungary, which is very fascist at the 
moment.”

The visual familiarity that leads to Bennett being asked to pose for mobiles 
more than say David Hare or Caryl Churchill comes partly from his tendency to 
wear almost a uniform of button-down shirt and tie under a sweater. On an early 
autumn morning in the basement kitchen of his house in north London, he is the 
very model of this look, which has recently been further popularised by Alex 
Jennings playing two versions of the writer (the public and the private man) in 
The Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/15/lady-in-van-review-maggie-smith-alan-bennett>
, a film version of Bennett’s play and memoir about a malodorous evangelist who 
lived on his drive for many years. Jennings did another Bennett double in Hymn 
andCocktail Sticks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/17/hymn-cocktail-sticks-review>, a 
pair of autobiographical plays about his childhood in Leeds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F038fdf04fb1f6cabbc035734801a2b3ae98f8072%2F8_94_1772_2214%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Brexit%2C%20if%20people%20had%20voted%20out%2C%20I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20give%20them%20a%20selfie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Brexit%2C%20if%20people%20had%20voted%20out%2C%20I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20give%20them%20a%20selfie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F038fdf04fb1f6cabbc035734801a2b3ae98f8072%2F8_94_1772_2214%2F1772.jpg>
 Alan Bennett in June 1965. Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex Feature 
Bennett’s recognisability is increased by having been a performer longer than 
a playwright, distracted from a would-be academic career in 1960 by appearing 
in the post-Oxbridge revueBeyond the Fringe. But one of the entries in his 
latest volume of diaries marks the death of his long-time theatrical agent, Ros 
Chatto. Does he still get acting offers?

“Very few,” he says, in that voice that manages to be jauntily mournful. “I 
get offered those career-reviving options, like the one where you’re in a 
jungle.” As he would seem most temperamentally suited to a TV series calledGet 
Me Out of Here, I’m Not a Celebrity!, I have to check that he really was tapped 
up for the Ant & Dec ITV franchise: “You were invited to appear onI’m a 
Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here?”

“That’s right. When they first asked, I tried to find out who were the other 
people, but they wouldn’t tell me. It’s rather chastening when you realise 
you’ve been singled out because they think: ‘Oh, he could do with a bit of a 
shot in the arm.’”

Although not encyclopedic on the history of reality TV, Bennett thinks that 
the run he ducked was won by a boy-band member. Has he never been offered
Strictly Come Dancing? “Oh, no. It’s one of Rupert’s jokes that I must never be 
allowed to do any type of dancing because it’s so embarrassing.”

Rupert is Bennett’s civil partner (they saw no need to take the Cameron 
upgrade of gay marriage), Rupert Thomas, editor of World of Interiors magazine. 
Across the three volumes of diaries and occasional writings that Bennett has 
published –Writing Home (1994), Untold Stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/oct/15/featuresreviews.guardianreview4> 
(2005), and nowKeeping On Keeping On – the development of the writer’s private 
life has been a key theme.

Alan Bennett: 'It was weird to film The Lady in the Van in my old house'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/lady-in-the-van-shoots-camden-town-alan-bennett-maggie-smith>
The first anthology, mentioning Bennett’s relationship with Anne Davies, a 
neighbour in the Yorkshire village where he has a cottage, resulted in his 
becoming a rare example of a celebrity outed by the tabloids for having 
secretly been a heterosexual. In the second book, he came out as living with 
Rupert and having been treated for colon cancer. Bennett retrospectively 
attributed the new level of self-exposure inUntold Stories to the belief that 
he would be dead by the time the volume was out in paperback (his oncologist 
later admitted that the survival odds had been lower than 50-50).

Although Bennett lugubriously jokes about the appearance of a sequel 11 years 
on, at the age of 82, that “I will be dead after this one comes out. I can’t 
have much longer”, the new book is, in every sense, a more benign work, 
focusing on domestic and romantic life with Rupert, and restricting a 
seven-hour operation for a stomach aneurysm in 2008 to a single entry. This 
medical reticence, he says, was not due to privacy but theatrical judgment: “It 
wasn’t that it dramatically burst. They just found two, one of them was in a 
peculiar place, so they couldn’t just do a stent, they had to transplant a vein 
and it took seven hours. I knew nothing about it but I think Rupert had just 
about written me off, I was in there so long.”

Bennett writes his diaries in longhand, giving them for transcription to a 
secretary, Sue Powell, who has been typing up his life for more than 20 years. 
This text – from which the London Review of Books takes a “diary of the year”, 
published each December – goes to the Faber archive, while the manuscript 
diaries are sent to the Bodleian library in Oxford, Bennett’s alma mater, to 
which he has donated his papers.

“I think there are people who thought that the only way I was going to get 
into the Bodleian was by giving them the stuff,” says Bennett. “But I don’t 
care.”

Bennett sometimes has to decipher his handwriting for Powell, but, while the 
political diarist Alan Clark used to employ a particularly “crabbed hand” when 
recording sexual details, Bennett uses no such subterfuge. “No, no. There 
aren’t many dirty bits, but I always think Sue knows more about me than anyone 
because she gets the unexpurgated version. So she sees all the dirty bits, such 
as they are. I always think when she comes round to collect it, and takes it 
away in her handbag, that if she’s mugged and they go to the Daily Mail, 
that’ll be the end of me.”

Unsparing as a diarist towards himself, Bennett is sensitive about exposing 
others. His elder brother Gordon prefers to be mentioned only minimally in 
plays and diaries, an absence that the writer explains inThe Alan Bennett 
Diaries, an Adam Low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/sep/27/alan-bennetts-diaries-trailer-adam-low-video>
 documentary released next month. Has Gordon ever questioned any of his 
brother’s family accounts? “He has a different view of some things. And he 
wouldn’t come to seeCocktail Sticks. Not in a hostile way. He just thought it 
might be upsetting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F994d0ed89b0c25df6d4fce9b52097b25c6553dda%2F0_133_2594_1556%2F2594.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Brexit%2C%20if%20people%20had%20voted%20out%2C%20I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20give%20them%20a%20selfie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Brexit%2C%20if%20people%20had%20voted%20out%2C%20I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20give%20them%20a%20selfie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F994d0ed89b0c25df6d4fce9b52097b25c6553dda%2F0_133_2594_1556%2F2594.jpg>
 Rupert Everett, left, and Julian Rhind-Tutt in Nicholas Hytner’s 1994 film,The 
Mdness of King George, Photograph: Allstar/Channel 4 
The poet Philip Larkin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiplarkin>, about 
whom Bennett made a TV programme, ordered his journals to be burned after his 
death. But Bennett’s diaries are stocked for posterity in Oxford, so would he 
be content for the complete versions to be published posthumously? “Yes. I’m OK 
with that. The person who would mind might be Rupert but, as he’ll be my 
executor, he can decide.”

In the case of Larkin, every piece of writing he didn’t destroy has 
subsequently been published. Such judgments may arise with the Bennett archive, 
which includes unmade film scripts and TV plays, includingGay Night at Bangs, 
written in the 1980s, before he came out publicly. “At the time, it would have 
been quite … well, not daring really, but quite on the edge. But not now,” 
Bennett says. Would he leave instructions to prevent the play being staged by a 
fringe theatre in the future? “Oh, no no. It’s in the public domain. Or, 
anyway, the Bodleian library. It wouldn’t bother me. People do unexpected 
things with writing.”

He points out that writers may not be the best judges of their literary 
afterlife: TS Eliot would never have imaginedOld Possum’s Book of Practical Cats
 becoming the Andrew Lloyd Webber dance musicalCats, and Franz Kafka – about 
whom Bennett wrote a stage play,Kafka’s Dick, and a TV script, The Insurance Man
 – would not be known as an author at all if his friend and executor,Max Brod 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/15/franz-kafka-archive-public>, had 
not ignored an instruction to destroy the unpublished works now regarded as 
classics.

“I think Kafka did and didn’t want his work destroyed. Larkin the same. He 
wanted to be famous, but was always drawing back from it somehow.”

But you have a bit of that yourself?

“Yes.” A kindly laugh. “Precisely. But it all bothers me much less than it 
used to. I mean, if the new book does badly, it’s sad. But it doesn’t break 
your heart like it did when I was younger.”

One of the revelations of the latest diary entries, covering 2005-15, is that 
Bennett seems to be a keen and eclectic viewer of TV. “Well, we tend to eat 
about nine o’clock. So we watch whatever’s on when we’re having supper … And 
sometimes, when I’m having my lunch, I watch a terrible programme: er,Bargain 
Hunt. The thing we don’t watch is all those gloomy Scandinavian detective 
things.”

Having a memorial service is the best sort of party, where you can be at the 
party without being there

Readers may note that the celebrated playwright seems almost never to go to 
the theatre. “No, I don’t,” he admits. “Rupert doesn’t get home until 8pm, 
which makes theatre difficult. But it’s no loss. I don’t mind.”

Bennett feels spoiled by the comfort of his years at the National, knowing 
where the best seats and nearest loos were, during a period when he worked with 
director Nicholas Hytner  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/13/alan-bennett-nicholas-hytner-national-theatre>
on an adaptation ofThe Wind in the Willows, followed by a string of Bennett 
originals, includingThe Madness of George III  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/31/madness-george-theatre-bath-review>
andThe History Boys, which lifted him to international theatrical and cinematic 
recognition.

In a quarter of a century of collaborations, Bennett says that he has never 
had a creative disagreement with Hytner. “No. We probably should have done: it 
might have been beneficial for the plays. It’s probably the way Nick works. He 
doesn’t like rows and problems outside the play. There was some bother about 
money or rights with one of my plays and he didn’t want to know. And I felt a 
bit bereft at that point. But I realised he doesn’t like any kind of upset. 
That’s the only criticism I’d ever have of him.”

His throat tiring from talking, Bennett stands up to fetch a glass of water, 
and stumbles slightly. “Ooops. That’s another thing that happens as you get 
older – you flop about more.”

Ageing is inevitably a theme of the new book, the diary entries pitted with 
the melancholy appointments of decline: colonoscopies, ultrasounds, funerals, 
memorial services.

Bennett went to Victoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-obituary>’s 
send-off in St James’s, Piccadilly. “You didn’t meet anyone who wasn’t sorry. 
She was a nice woman and very funny off-stage as well. Although Alan 
Titchmarsh, who had been on programmes with her once or twice, said she very 
much knew what she wanted and could be quite stern with people about work, 
which is good.”

The best memorial service Bennett attended was in Westminster Abbey for Thora 
Hird <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/mar/17/guardianobituaries.media>, 
who played various of his northern matriarchs, including Doris in theTalking 
Heads monologue A Cream Cracker Under the Settee. He acknowledges, though, 
that, for older attendees, there is an inevitable shadow over any obituary 
event: “You do start to see yourself there. Or not there. It wouldn’t bother 
me, having a memorial service, in the sense that it’s the best sort of party, 
where you can be at the party without being there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d5e7b00925036ce8f2151b3698d7c4936dda93c%2F0_131_1615_2019%2F1615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Brexit%2C%20if%20people%20had%20voted%20out%2C%20I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20give%20them%20a%20selfie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Brexit%2C%20if%20people%20had%20voted%20out%2C%20I%20wouldn%E2%80%99t%20give%20them%20a%20selfie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Falan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d5e7b00925036ce8f2151b3698d7c4936dda93c%2F0_131_1615_2019%2F1615.jpg>
 Maggie Smith inTalking Heads, Chichester, 2005. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
He describes himself as a “parenthical Anglican”, meaning the type of C of E 
member who brackets an undevout life with the rituals of baptism and burial. 
“I’d quite like a service,” he confirms. “But the problem with religion in this 
house is that Rupert is so atheistical, although hymns make him cry from his 
childhood. So I don’t know what he will do.”

A chilling anecdote in the new book concerns a passenger on the London-Leeds 
train explaining that he finds it strange to be sitting opposite Bennett 
because he picked the writer in an office sweepstake to predict the next 
celebrity to die. “He’s stopped being on the train. So perhaps he’s the one 
that’s gone. What struck me was that he wasn’t at all embarrassed about telling 
me. It was as if I should be flattered.”

Such an encounter would have finished off Larkin, who fretted away much of his 
life thinking about death. “I do think about it a lot. But it doesn’t paralyse 
me in the way that it did Larkin.”

Mention of the poet who lived and died in Hull tempts the Leeds-born Bennett 
into comments that may spark a civil war with Humberside: “I know it sounds 
awful, but I find it quite difficult to take the notion of Hull as a European 
City of Culture. When we went – I think it was something to do with Larkin – we 
could only find one restaurant. It was a Pizza Hut, and it was locked. And they 
opened the door for us, and then locked it after us. That was a few years ago, 
though. It’s probably changed a lot since then.”

As long as mental agility remains, there is no retirement age for writers. He 
still tries to work every weekday, though now in the afternoons (he used to be 
a mornings author) after a half-hour bike ride in Regent’s Park: “I find riding 
on the bike easier than walking now really.”

I know it sounds awful, but I find it quite difficult to take the notion of 
Hull as a European City of Culture

He has various folders holding scraps of writing, but doesn’t currently have a 
single idea that ignites. Surely the sweepstake guy on the train might be a 
promising subject? “Yes, you could write a story about that … I’ll open a 
folder for it.” He also knows that his audience would most like moreTalking 
Heads: “I’ve got two that I could work on, but they’re both so gloomy. I can’t 
make them funny. I’m quite happy if I leave them behind. Someone else can do 
them.”

What he has, he feels, is less writer’s block than author’s caution. “You do 
it and you feel it’s not up to what you’ve done before. What you’ve done before 
is in some ways a comfort, but it’s also an examination board that you’re 
failing to pass with the stuff that you’re doing now. But maybe one had always 
felt that. You just have to keep going and see if it turns into anything.”

Hytner, having retired as artistic director of the National, is opening a new 
900-seater venue, the LondonTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
Company, beside the Thames next year, and there has been a widespread 
assumption that a Bennett play will be part of the schedules.

“Well, he’s not asked me,” Bennett says. “And I feel, after 25 years, he 
probably deserves a break from me. I’m sure that, if I wrote something, he’d 
look at it and consider it. But his priority is getting the theatre up and 
running.”

The playwright, though, is still back at his desk every afternoon. “There’s 
always something going on. I write scenes, and then can’t quite see what to do 
with them. I wish I understood the actual writing process better than I do. 
There’s a story about Harold Pinter ringing [director] Peter Hall, and saying 
‘I’m pregnant.’ Meaning there was a play on the way. The notion of knowing that 
you’re pregnant! I wouldn’t know until I’d actually had it. To know that there 
was something there - I’ve never had that!”

And according to the rhythm he has established since Writing Home, there 
should be fourth volume of diaries and pieces in around 2026-27? One of the 
most distinctive voices in English literature is at its most beautifully, 
musically lugubrious as he replies: “Yes, that’s right. But I would think it 
would be very unlikely.”

The documentary Alan Bennett’s Diaries will be shown in UK cinemas on 
16 November and on BBC2 in December.
 