
Alan Rusbridger <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger>, the former 
editor-in-chief of the Guardian, has accused Fleet Street of behaving like a 
private club with a bunker mentality, during both the phone-hacking scandal and 
following threats to civil liberties.

In a wide-ranging speech at the Society of Editors’ annual conference on 
Sunday night, Rusbridger also took aim at the government’s response to the 
phone-hacking scandal when he called the resultingroyal charter on press 
regulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/30/press-regulation-royal-charter-approval>
 a “piece of medieval flummery”.

In charge when the Guardian ran award-winning reports based on revelations 
unearthed byEdward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> 
as well as phone hacking, Rusbridger reserved some of his harshest words for 
the use of surveillance powers to discover journalistic sources, describing 
this as the greatest scandal of all.

Both over hacking, which Rusbridger described as the press’s own “massive 
ethical disaster” akin to scandals atVolkswagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/08/vw-scandal-two-simple-questions-two-complex-answers>
 orFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/18/franz-beckenbauer-2006-world-cup>
, and over surveillance, Fleet Street was found wanting.

He criticised the lack of interest or debate in the issue of surveillance – 
which led US congress to rewrite the rules over what could be tracked and tech 
companies to increase security.

“The general reaction in this country’s media - but not, it must be said, 
elsewhere, nor I think, among large swaths of the British people – was a 
shrug,” he said of the Snowden revelations. “One distinguished former editor 
wrote that if the security services said a journalist shouldn’t publish 
something, who was he to argue? Had it really come to that?”

He suggested that the behaviour of newspapers that sided with the security 
services was a consequence of a lack of confidence in their own ability to do 
the right thing.

“The immense confidence that Fleet Street once exuded has worn thin. We’ve 
started – occasionally – behaving as though the whole world is ganging up on us 
and it’s not fair. We’re in the bunker.”

Now principal of Lady Margaret Hall in Oxford and, as of next year, chair of 
the Scott Trust, the ultimate owner of the Guardian, Rusbridger talked about 
the response of the press to its own “massive ethical disaster”.


“Fleet Street … did, and does, sometimes feel like a club, with its own rules 
and articles of belief.

Alan Rusbridger: press can't afford to cover corruption and tax avoidance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/21/alan-rusbridger-press-corruption-tax-avoidance-guardian>
“And I know some of you think the Guardian stepped out of the club when it 
exposed criminal behaviour in our business. If so, there are parts of the club 
rules that, even after 40 years, I have failed to understand.”

On the royal charter, agreed in a late-night deal to the disgust of the 
industry in October 2013, he said: “Exemplary damages felt like something MPs 
wanted, but no one else.” Such damages are due to come into force in November 
for newspapers, including all national ones, which have refused to sign up to a 
charter-compliant regulator. Although most newspapers have signed up toIpso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso>, the industry-funded regulator, the 
Guardian, the FT and the Independent have not.

Other press behaviour criticised by Rusbridger included paying public 
officials for stories and its treatment of the BBC.

“I’m glad juries didn’t want to convict reporters for doing what the culture 
of some newsrooms demanded of them,” he said. “But I guess we all feel uneasy 
at the sight of our sources going to jail because we paid them while the 
managements which paid the cash denied all knowledge.”
 