
Six months ago, I was back at the BBC. It was a drinks reception to celebrate 
45 years of The Goodies and Bill Oddie invited me as his plus one, mindful that 
he might bump into Chris Packham and lamp him for stealing the Springwatch gig.

Alan Partridge to return to Sky Atlantic for second Mid Morning Matters series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/01/alan-partridge-sky-atlanic-mid-morning-matters>
My focus was – often is – on keeping Oddie calm. He’s grown wise to me 
slipping Rescue Remedy into his Merlot, so I always make sure I have my iPad 
with me. That way if we do have a flare-up Bill can go sit in the back of the 
car and look at pictures of birds. I also confiscate his glasses so he can’t 
scan the room for enemies.

Yet that evening something else caught my attention. It was the sound of 
braying broadcasters proclaiming that we’re now in a golden age of TV. Well, 
Oddie and I threw our heads back and roared (me laughter, Oddie anger). It 
wasn’t just the arrogance of it, but its wrongness.Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> is a busted flush. No sensible 
broadcaster wants to work in it, and I am no exception. Nor, he has asked me to 
point out, is Oddie.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWS7BdQGE9No&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWS7BdQGE9No>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWS7BdQGE9No&media=>
And so, in this piece, I will debunk the myth that we are seeing a golden age 
of television. I will go on to demonstrate that radio is the preferred medium 
for the talented broadcaster. I will summarise these points in a recap 
paragraph and end on a single pithy line that knits everything together. I will 
then spellcheck the document. I will email it to the Guardian and will then go 
into town to meet an acquaintance. Then it’s BodyPump, Tesco Metro, bite to eat 
and bed.

A golden age? More like a golden shower! If you work in television, you’re 
probably spluttering something about the mass appeal of Strictly Come Dancing 
or how cutting-edge Game Of Thrones is, with its sandals and dragons. 
Personally, I fail to see what’s cutting edge about a dragon. They were used to 
advertise mouthwash in the 80s. They’ve been extinct for millions of years!

Everywhere you look there are signs of decline. Our newsreaders now stand up, 
our chatshow hosts don’t chat, our TV detectives take a “series arc” to suss 
out what Bergerac managed in an hour – admittedly, the kind of canny 
problem-solving you’d expect from a guy residing in a tax haven.

Of course, put this to a TV exec and they’ll waffle on about appreciation 
indexes, time-shifted viewing figures, strong online feedback. Talk about 
mealy-mouthed! But then BBC mouths are some of the mealiest in the industry. 
And it’s not just their mouths. Face, head, neck, you name it – all very, very 
mealy indeed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Falan-partridge-explains-why-radio-is-better-than-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf2938efdecfa4205e6636039de6414e93c425a%2F0_238_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20TV%2C%20I%E2%80%99ve%20got%20two%20Nutribullets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Falan-partridge-explains-why-radio-is-better-than-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20TV%2C%20I%E2%80%99ve%20got%20two%20Nutribullets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Falan-partridge-explains-why-radio-is-better-than-television%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdf2938efdecfa4205e6636039de6414e93c425a%2F0_238_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
 Alan Partridge’s Mid Morning Matters. 
But where one empire crumbles, another rises. While TV slides into the abyss, 
radio rises like a phoenix/new day/beanstalk. Some of the best broadcasters are 
realising radio is the place to be and are migrating to this medium in their 
droves.

Iannucci: Alan Partridge went to Sky because BBC wanted to interfere
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/11/iannucci-alan-partridge-sky-bbc> 
Am I just saying this because it’s the arena I happen to work in? No! Or maybe 
because I’m bitter that I no longer work in television? Of course not! I’m in a 
more contented place than ever. I drive an executive saloon, I take several 
foreign holidays a year, I have a four-figure endorsement deal with Norfolk’s 
leading manufacturer of non-recyclable cat litters. What else? I own two 
NutriBullets. My hair’s still nice and thick. I do have a fat back but I’m able 
to manage that by not approaching people back-first with my top off.

No, the reason I’ve penned this piece is because I’m genuinely evangelical 
about digital radio. Enter any DRS (digital radio station) and you’ll find it 
fizzing with ideas, like liver on a hotplate – or liver on a hot plate. I, 
personally, come up with over 20 ideas a day; more if I’ve had egg for 
breakfast (don’t know why).

Then there’s its global reach. Digital shows can be accessed via the internet 
anywhere on Earth. When I launch a phone-in that asks: “How often should you 
wash your towels?” or “How long can a dog stand on its hind legs?”, it’s as 
likely to be enjoyed by a housewife in Hemsby as it is by a factory owner in 
Guangzhou or a weaver high (or low) in the Andes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Falan-partridge-explains-why-radio-is-better-than-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F538e67484b86b6e2c3220566697b742a00fa2429%2F0_292_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20TV%2C%20I%E2%80%99ve%20got%20two%20Nutribullets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Falan-partridge-explains-why-radio-is-better-than-television%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20TV%2C%20I%E2%80%99ve%20got%20two%20Nutribullets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Falan-partridge-explains-why-radio-is-better-than-television%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F538e67484b86b6e2c3220566697b742a00fa2429%2F0_292_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
 Alan Partridge’s Mid Morning Matters. 
All of which explains why I was gracious enough to allow Sky Atlantic (a TV 
channel) to broadcast my forthcoming (radio) show Mid Morning Matters. Perhaps 
it’s because they Believe in Better, I don’t know, you’d have to ask them. All 
I know is it takes real humility for them to admit that television, the very 
medium they operate in, is a spent force that simply isn’t working and that the 
only thing that might be able to prop up their viewing figures is the webcam 
footage of a Norfolk-based digital radio show.

I guess that’s also why I was only too happy to go along with their suggestion 
that they take sole ownership of the rights to the show along with all back-end 
revenues in perpetuity. After all, don’t kick a man when he’s down, right?

Back at the Goodies shindig, I made many of these points and more. The braying 
of the execs softened to a whinny as they digested what I had to say, and 
before long they were listening in rapt silence. It was then I realised they 
weren’t listening but were watching Bill Oddie pin Chris Packham to a wall. I 
handed Bill his spectacles. He realised it was Sue Barker, apologised and we 
sloped back to the car.

I’ve run out of space for the summary paragraph and pithy sign off. Sorry.

PS. Mid Morning Matters is back on Sky Atlantic,10pm, 16 February
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F02%2Fsteve-coogan-interview-memoir-easily-distracted-drugs-and-strippers-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443543055298%2FKP_504957_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Coogan%20meets%20Steve%20Coogan%3A%20Is%20there%20anything%20in%20your%20memoir%20about%20drugs%20and%20strippers%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F02%2Fsteve-coogan-interview-memoir-easily-distracted-drugs-and-strippers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Coogan%20meets%20Steve%20Coogan%3A%20Is%20there%20anything%20in%20your%20memoir%20about%20drugs%20and%20strippers%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F02%2Fsteve-coogan-interview-memoir-easily-distracted-drugs-and-strippers-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443543055298%2FKP_504957_crop_640x360.jpg>



ALAN’S PICK OF THE RADIO RENEGADES

Freddy And Ted, Majesty Radio

Breakfast presenters at this Peterborough outfit, Freddy and Ted had a blokey 
repartee which took on a different hue when they announced their engagement 
live on air. Controversially, the show now features Snog or Yog, in which 
listeners guess whether the slopping noises they can hear are the sound of them 
eating yoghurt or French-kissing one another. Advertisers and parents have run 
a mile but it makes for urgent, compelling radio.

Judge Solomon, Six Counties Radio

A former barrister, Solomon takes a cue from his biblical namesake with Judge 
Solomon’s Kids Court, in which he presides as a family court judge and, after 
hearing from both parents, grants custody to one or the other – with explosive 
results. His decision carries no legal weight whatsoever but the listeners 
don’t seem to know that.

Steve Penk, The Steve Penk Wind-Up Channel

If you think Trevor Bayliss invented wind-up radio, think again. Penk is the 
master of the practical joke and is as creative and daring as ever. He once 
phoned me to say my daughter had lost an arm in a powerboating accident and it 
was “touch and go” if she’d pull through. I couldn’t stop crying, even after I 
realised I’d been “penked”. That’s Steve!
 