
Alan Rickman: an actor of singular charm and hypnotic charisma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-an-actor-of-singular-charisma-whose-hold-over-audiences-was-hypnotic>
After graduating from drama school in 1974, Rickman pursued a successful 
career in theatre, culminating in an award-winning performance as Valmont in 
the premiere run of Les Liaisons Dangereuses in 1985. Before that, however, he 
had made his mark on screen,playing the oleaginous Obadiah Slope 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=992UbveiTmE> in The Barchester Chronicles, the 
celebrated BBC adaptation of Anthony Trollope’s novels which was broadcast in 
1982.

Die Hard
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL0CL__Tvp-o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL0CL__Tvp-o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL0CL__Tvp-o&media=>
After knocking Broadway audiences out with Les Liaisons Dangereuses, Rickman 
jumped straight into the deep end, cinema-wise, joining the big-budget action 
film ballasted by Bruce Willis, then mainly known for Moonlighting. Rickman put 
his suave, insinuating tones to tremendous use, turning in a definitive 
performance as the contemporary Eurovillain and providing generations of Brit 
stage actors with endless work in Hollywood blockbusters.

Truly, Madly, Deeply
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj1BlyOcmBs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj1BlyOcmBs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj1BlyOcmBs&media=>
Anthony Minghella’s directorial debut marked a change of pace for Rickman, a 
more naturalistic performance in what, admittedly, is essentially a ghost 
story. Rickman played Juliet Stevenson’s cellist boyfriend, who returns to 
“haunt” her after his death. Stevenson’s portrayal of a grief-stricken lover 
hanging on to what she has lost remains a towering achievement, and Rickman is 
the perfect foil.

Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLjQBbvMoNpc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLjQBbvMoNpc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLjQBbvMoNpc&media=>
Hollywood was not to be denied for long, however, and Rickman returned for a 
villainous role that arguably outdid even Die Hard. Though it attracted plenty 
of ridicule for its copious use of American accents, as well the wearying reign 
of theme song Everything I Do at the top of the charts, Robin Hood: Prince of 
Thieves was a massive commercial success, in no small part due to Rickman’s 
black-clad brilliance as the Sheriff of Nottingham – for which he wona Bafta 
for best supporting actor <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ICdPZKc9bVY>.

Close My Eyes
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJoT3VwlQdXE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJoT3VwlQdXE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJoT3VwlQdXE&media=>
Another change of pace for Rickman, taking top billing over Clive Owen and 
Saskia Reeves in Stephen Poliakoff’s incest drama. In truth, Owen and Reeves 
were the leads, playing a brother and sister fatally attracted to each other, 
and whose messy relationship functions as a metaphor for the murky morals of 
late Thatcherite Britain. Rickman, however, was on top form as the rich 
business analyst who marries Reeves, embodying the unconventionality that 
enabled the powerful classes to maintain their wealth and position.

Sense and Sensibility
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DclTG6sYtJig&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DclTG6sYtJig>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DclTG6sYtJig&media=>
Another smallish but memorable role came Rickman’s way in the 1995 adaptation 
of Sense and Sensibility, written by Emma Thompson and directed by Ang Lee. An 
unexpectedly perfect rendering of Jane Austen’s novel, Rickman – as the noble 
Colonel Brandon – scaled it back a little to play a notionally older man who 
woos and wins Kate Winslet’s Marianne. In retrospect, S&S turbocharged many 
careers – though perhaps not Rickman’s, who was already fully established. 
However, it did mark the beginning of a fruitful collaboration with Thompson, 
who he cast inhis directorial debut The Winter Guest 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=31SHaFJfxhI> (alongside Thompson’s mother 
Phyllida Law) two years later.

Galaxy Quest
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuDJsCE01LYI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuDJsCE01LYI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuDJsCE01LYI&media=>
Rickman showcased his gift for comedy in this immensely likeable Star Trek 
spoof in which the crew of a sci-fi TV series are mistaken for genuine space 
warriors by a group of visiting aliens. Rickman played the show’s Spock-type 
character – Dr Lazarus of Tev’Meck – as a frustrated stage thespian, convinced 
the whole thing is beneath him. All together now:“By Grabthar’s Hammer, you 
shall be avenged!” <https://youtu.be/r7bo_A6XnUU?t=29s>

Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9JVNdsyjU5A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9JVNdsyjU5A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9JVNdsyjU5A&media=>
Rickman’s leading-man days were well behind him by the time the Harry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> films were put into production, 
but his casting as Severus Snape gave him a fantastically meaty role that 
lasted throughout the entire series. An enigmatic figure of apparently shifting 
loyalties, Snape evolved from a sardonic teacher of potions into a key player 
in Potter’s ongoing battle with Voldemort.

Love, Actually
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcfNzZre-sIU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcfNzZre-sIU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcfNzZre-sIU&media=>
Rickman’s position as one of British cinema’s great and good was cemented by 
his participation in the instant-family-favourite Love, Actually, directed by
Richard Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis> at the 
height of his popularity. Rickman played a philandering husband (his wife 
played by Emma Thompson) whose sneaky purchase of a necklace for his secretary 
leads to a near-total unravelling of his marriage.

A Little Chaos
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D39tluT3k3dI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D39tluT3k3dI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D39tluT3k3dI&media=>
Rickman returned to the director’s chair nearly 20 years after The Winter’s 
Guest, and reunited withKate Winslet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet> for an 17th century-set study of 
royal gardening. Winslet played the lead, as unconventional garden designer 
Sabine de Barra who is haunted by a tragic past; Rickman cast himself as Louis 
XIV whose patronage leads to her success.

Eye in the Sky
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Feye-in-the-sky-watch-the-uk-trailer-for-the-drone-warfare-drama-starring-helen-mirren-and-alan-rickman-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449666392210%2FKP_710583_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eye%20in%20the%20Sky%3A%20watch%20the%20UK%20trailer%20for%20the%20drone%20warfare%20drama%20starring%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Alan%20Rickman%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Feye-in-the-sky-watch-the-uk-trailer-for-the-drone-warfare-drama-starring-helen-mirren-and-alan-rickman-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eye%20in%20the%20Sky%3A%20watch%20the%20UK%20trailer%20for%20the%20drone%20warfare%20drama%20starring%20Helen%20Mirren%20and%20Alan%20Rickman%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Feye-in-the-sky-watch-the-uk-trailer-for-the-drone-warfare-drama-starring-helen-mirren-and-alan-rickman-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449666392210%2FKP_710583_crop_640x480.jpg>
Rickman’s final performance (not counting his voiceover for the forthcoming 
Alice in Wonderland sequel) is in this well-received British produced thriller, 
which focusses on the moral complexities of drone strikes in overseas conflict. 
Rickman plays a British military officer acting as the interface between 
politicians and the army, while Helen Mirren (who handed him his Bafta all 
those years ago) is the tough-nut colonel who wants to call in the missiles.

 