
Newcastle United’s record goalscorer Alan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> is to be recognised by a 
statue in his home city. The former Newcastle chairman Freddy Shepherd has 
resurrected plans to establish a permanent tribute to the now 44-year-old, who 
scored 206 goals for the club during a 10-year career on Tyneside.

The Northumberland artist, Tom Maley, who was initially commissioned eight 
years ago, will now complete the 9’6“ statue, which will take four months to 
cast, with Shepherd’s family business, Shepherd Offshore, covering the cost.

“It’s been resurrected,” said Shepherd. “We have commissioned Tom Maley to 
finish it off – the family thought it was the right thing to do. We, along with 
the Halls, signed him and he was a great servant to Newcastle, so that’s why we 
are doing it.

“The idea was to put it in the Exhibition Park Museum but we have had so many 
enquiries from the city about where to put it, so what we are doing is getting 
it finished first and then we will worry about where it’s going to go.”

Newcastle paid a then world record £15m to lure Shearer from Blackburn to St 
James’ Park and he surpassed Jackie Milburn as the club’s most prolific 
marksman. He remains a hero with the fans andwas briefly handed the managerial 
reins by current owner Mike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/02/alan-shearer-manager-newcastle-united>
, although he could not prevent the club slipping from thePremier League at the 
end of the 2008-09 season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/may/24/newcastle-relegation-alan-shearer>
.

Shepherd for one is in no doubt as to the place Shearer holds in Tyneside 
folklore, alongside former manager Sir Bobby Robson, whose own statue – also 
created by Maley–stands outside the Gallowgate End at St James’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/may/24/newcastle-relegation-alan-shearer>
. He said: “He’s the best buy ever for Newcastle, nobody would ever contradict 
that. It was important that he was recognised, certainly by his own city, for 
his years of service. He certainly deserves it, in my opinion. Some people 
might disagree, but I think he deserves it and the family is pleased to do it.”
 