
Former Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> is to be recognised for his 
outstanding contribution to the UK’s media industry at this year’sBritish Media 
Awards <http://britishmediaawards.com/> in London.

'An act of genius' – Alan Rusbridger the editor on Alan Rusbridger the album
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/18/alan-rusbridger-editor-album-guardian-woog-riots>
Iain Brown, general manager of awards organiser, TheMediaBriefing 
<https://www.themediabriefing.com>, said Rusbridger was being recognised for 
his 20 years overseeing the Guardian. Brown said: “During that time he was 
instrumental in defending the Guardian from threats to its existence, from 
high-profile lawsuits toWikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>
, and undeniably helped define and promote the concept ofopen journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/open-journalism>.

“Rusbridger, in concert with his team at the Guardian, also helped to pioneer 
many digital publishing endeavours which we now take for granted, in addition 
to delivering on the mission of liberal journalism with endeavours such as 
Wikileaks, [Edward] Snowden, phone-hacking and theKeep It In The Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground> 
campaign. Nobody yet has the answers, but we feel it is important to reward 
those who take bold steps and who have undeniably changed the media landscape 
along the way.”

Rusbridger stood down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/10/alan-rusbridger-stand-down-guardian-editor-in-chief>
 as editor of the Guardian in May last year. He is currently principal of Lady 
Margaret Hall at Oxford University and chair of the Reuters Institute, and is 
due to take over later this year as chair of theScott Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-scott-trust>, the ultimate owner of the 
Guardian and the Observer.

Last year’s winner was Marjorie Scardino, former chief executive of the 
Economist and Pearson, which during her tenure was the owner of the Financial 
Times.
 