
We oughta have known: fresh from a break-up, Alanis Morissette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alanis-morissette> has once again found all 
the material she needs for a new album. "It was the perfect time for me to 
write," she explained to the Canadian Press. "[The new record] chronologises 
the rock bottom and then the phoenix rising and everything after it".

Thirteen years after Jagged Little Pill introduced Morissette - and her angst 
- to the world, Flavors of Entanglement will be released this spring on 
Maverick Records. This time she draws her inspiration from the collapse of a 
four-year relationship with Ryan Reynolds, to whom Morissette became engaged in 
2004. The actor has more recently been seen together with Scarlett Johansson.

Morissette co-wrote much of the new album with Guy Sigsworth, the English 
producer/songwriter who has worked alongside Bj√∂rk, the Sugababes and Madonna. 
"I just wanted to surprise myself a little bit and stretch," Morissette said. 
The new music is described as having "electronic hues and Eastern percussion".

Last year the singer caused a short-term internet sensation with a YouTube 
video cover <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W91sqAs-_-g> of the Black Eyed 
Peas' My Humps that featured Morissette writhing and bumping in faux-chav 
regalia. Though she has no plans to resurrect that style, she is considering 
self-releasing videos for songs that don't make the final album cut. Add to 
this plans for a book and a role in Radio Free Albemuth, a sci-fi film due this 
summer, and 2008 is looking to be a banner year for Alanis Morissette.

"My orientation was always to kind of look outside myself," she said. "And 
over the last year, especially, it's just so much been about an inward-looking 
journey and really applying the wisdoms that I'm learning, not just singing 
about them."
 