
Alan Partridge <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge> will 
return to Sky Atlantic in a second series of Mid Morning Matters along with a 
“hard hitting documentary special”, the broadcaster confirmed on Tuesday.

Filming has begun on the second six-part series, written by Steve Coogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/coogan>, Neil Gibbons and Rob Gibbons, and 
will be broadcast on the channel next year.

Unlike the first run, which was made up of content originally filmed for an 
online initiative funded by beer brand Foster’s, the second season is being 
made specifically for TV.

Partridge returned to the small screen on Sky in 2012 with the first series of 
Mid Morning Matters and two specials, Welcome to the Places of My Life and Alan 
Partridge on Open Books with Martin Bryce.

He has since made his long-awaited big screen debut in Alan Partridge: Alpha 
Papa,with a sequel already in the works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/03/alan-partridge-alpha-papa-sequel-henry-normal-steve-coogan?CMP=twt_gu>
.

Coogan, in his Partridge guise, said: “I am both thrilled, humbled, gladdened 
and excited to be bringing Mid Morning Matters back toSky Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic>. 

“I expect those who doubted its success feel suitably chastened to never again 
doubt the wisdom of my career choices and to say nothing in response unless 
their comments are wholly supportive and positive. I hope I’ve made myself 
clear... thank you, let’s leave it there.”

Partridge co-creator Armando Iannucci previously revealed that the BBC – the 
original home of the Coogan character, first on Radio 4 and then BBC2 – passed 
on Mid Morning Matters, deeming it unworthy of a primetime spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/11/iannucci-alan-partridge-sky-bbc>.

Sky head of comedy Lucy Lumsden said: “We’re thrilled that Steve wants to do 
more Partridge for Sky Atlantic. We look forward to seeing where Alan takes us 
next.”

The series will be made by Baby Cow Productions and executive produced by 
Coogan and Henry Normal.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 