
Warm beer and cold hands, the peal of church bells and a healthy suspicion for 
human rights. Despite the divisive Brexit referendum, widening inequality and a 
surge in hate crime, these are the things that unite Britons after voting to 
leave the European union, according to the veteran broadcasterAlan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge>.

Partridge, the fictional character played by Steve Coogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/coogan> – who has been a regular fixture 
on television and radio for 25 years – told the Today programme on BBC’s Radio 
4 that he disagreed with doomsayers who say Britain has never been more divided 
in politics and culture.

Speaking to BBC arts editor Will Gompertz, Partridge said that in researching 
his latest book, Alan Partridge: Nomad, a deeply personal journal of his 
travels around the British Isles, he had discovered there were “certain things 
that unite us all”.

“It’s warm beer and cold hands,” he said. “It’s the clacking of bowling balls, 
the peal of church bells; it’s tutting when you see an ice-cream van selling 
hamburgers; it’s a healthy suspicion of human rights; it’s a Punch and Judy 
show having a giggle at a domestic incident; it’s a dozen sausage rolls in a 
tupperware box and a pair of trunks wrapped in a towel; it’s an iPhone, it’s an 
iPhone charger.

“You take my point, don’t you?

“People say Britain’s divided, just because people voted for a Conservative 
government, which, without hinting at my own political views, is as British as 
it gets. And what are leftwing politics? An idea developed by a German and 
popularised by the Chinese. What’s British about that? Julian Fellowes believes 
Labour voters should be charged with treason, and I think he has a point.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Falan-partridge-uk-united-by-warm-beer-and-healthy-suspicion-of-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad1a92883d1404c3ce485db102c0eaa81290a8db%2F0_0_1807_2766%2F1807.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20UK%20united%20by%20warm%20beer%20and%20healthy%20suspicion%20of%20human%20rights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Falan-partridge-uk-united-by-warm-beer-and-healthy-suspicion-of-human-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20UK%20united%20by%20warm%20beer%20and%20healthy%20suspicion%20of%20human%20rights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Falan-partridge-uk-united-by-warm-beer-and-healthy-suspicion-of-human-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad1a92883d1404c3ce485db102c0eaa81290a8db%2F0_0_1807_2766%2F1807.jpg>
 Alan Partridge’s new book, Nomad. Photograph: Publicity image 
The Partridge character first appeared in 1991, presenting sports on Radio 4 
current affairs programme On The Hour, before being approached by BBC talent 
spotters to present his own chat show on the station, Knowing Me, Knowing You 
with Alan Partridge, which was soon transferred to television.

However, by 1997 he was fired from the corporation for punching the then chief 
commissioning editor in the face with a stuffed partridge, and spent several 
years in the wilderness of commercial local radio, presenting the graveyard 
shift on Radio Norwich. In more recent years, following a successful 
autobiography, he has transformed himself into a chronicler of British life in 
documentaries and print.

In Nomad, Partridge combines a travelogue of British life with a personal 
exploration of what has made him one of the country’s best loved personalities. 
Published last week, it has already been awarded five stars in 18 Amazon 
customer reviews, and four in the 19th.

“Another volume of pedantic, over-wrought, stylistically and tonally muddled 
prose from a man who once again comes across as petty, parochial and 
ludicrously vain,” one buyer writes.

But Partridge said his decision to turn his hand to travel writingcame from 
more than just a love for his native country. He said: “Britain loves a travel 
writer. One thinks of Michael Palin, Judith Chalmers, Bill Bryson with his 
gentle ribbing of this country’s way of life – which is meant to be 
affectionate but I think is a little bit 
if-you-don’t-like-it-Bill-go-back-to-America for my tastes.

“So I looked at them, looked at their passion for travel, and crucially how 
they monetise that passion for commercial gain.”


 