
Widespread opposition to the Iraq war and anger over the aftermath of the 
conflict “played a big part” in the rise of Jeremy Corbyn’s popularity,Alastair 
Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> has said.

Labour and Manchester United – how two winning machines broke down | Alastair 
Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/alastair-campbell-labour-manchester-united-how-two-winning-machines-broke-down>
In a searing assessment of Labour’s prospects, the former No 10 director of 
communications said the party has an “unelectable but unassailable” leader 
after Tony Blair, Gordon Brown andEd Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> all failed to plan for their 
succession.

“So somehow we seem to have ended up with a leader who is unelectable but 
unassailable,” Campbell writes in an article for the Guardian.

“Unelectable in the eyes of the non-political public, unassailable because he 
is exactly what those inside the bubble want: something different.”

Campbell issues his warning after Margaret Beckett warned that the party will 
face “huge challenges” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/19/labour-huge-challenges-2020-election-margaret-beckett>
 to win the 2020 general election as changes to parliamentary boundaries and 
Britain’s ageing population move against the party.

In Labour’s official report into its election defeat last year, the former 
foreign secretary saysLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> will 
need to gain an extra 94 MPs to secure a Commons majority of just two – a 
challenge that will become more difficult as Tory-inclined older voters begin 
to make up a larger proportion of the electorate.

“It is critically important for the country that Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> is able to win the 2020 election 
but we will face huge challenges,” Beckett writes in a 35-page report on the 
reasons for Labour’s defeat last year.

Beckett, who was asked by the former acting Labour leader Harriet Harman to 
compile the report, highlighted four factors cited by pollsters and by voters 
on the doorstep to explain Labour’s defeat:

 * Ed Miliband still wasn’t judged to be as strong a leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/07/ed-miliband-campaign-trail-interview-simon-hattenstone>
 as David Cameron, despite his surge in 2015.

 * Failure to shake off the myth that Labour was responsible for the financial 
crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/29/labour-government-not-responsible-crash-bank-england-governor-mervyn-king>
 and therefore a failure to build trust in the economy. 
 * Inability to deal with the issues of “connection” and, in particular, 
failing to convince on benefits and immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/mar/31/immigration-big-issue-left-cant-get-right-labour>
. 
 * Fears that a minority Labour government could be propped up by the SNP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2015/apr/27/will-snp-run-britain-under-minority-labour-government>
.

Beckett declined to endorse any of the four issues, as she said it was 
important to treat with caution a number of theories frequently cited as the 
reasons for Labour’s defeat. These include the charge that Labour was out of 
tune with the public on deficit reduction, that it had the wrong policies, that 
the party was too leftwing and too anti-business.

She blamed largely external factors for Labour’s defeat, including that the 
party fell victim to a Tory-inspired “myth” that it was to blame for the 
financial crash, and the party struggled to win media attention during the last 
parliament when splits in the coalition dominated the headlines.

Beckett praised Miliband’s performance during the election and said Labour did 
not lose the ground campaign. “Ed Miliband performed well during the campaign. 
When, for the first time, the public had more of an opportunity to seeEd 
Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> for himself, his 
standing markedly improved.

“We certainly did not lose the campaign on the ground. Many have remarked that 
the ground campaign was the best ever and, while there are inevitable 
geographical variations, our staff and activists did us proud.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Falistair-campbell-iraq-war-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c793a8c29ace85a47c3c3b4cdbe51ac152916c0%2F0_6_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alastair%20Campbell%3A%20fallout%20from%20Iraq%20war%20to%20blame%20for%20rise%20of%20'unelectable'%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Falistair-campbell-iraq-war-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alastair%20Campbell%3A%20fallout%20from%20Iraq%20war%20to%20blame%20for%20rise%20of%20%27unelectable%27%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Falistair-campbell-iraq-war-corbyn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c793a8c29ace85a47c3c3b4cdbe51ac152916c0%2F0_6_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Alastair Campbell, left, said neither Tony Blair nor Sir Alex Ferguson created 
good succession plans after great careers. Photograph: supplied/alastair 
campbell 
In the final section of the report, Beckett said Labour may struggle to win in 
2020 as she saysTory plans to shrink the House of Commons from 650 to 600 seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/25/mps-who-regularly-defy-labour-whip-should-face-reselection-says-livingstone>
 by equalising the size of constituencies will benefit the Conservatives. She 
said Britain’s ageing population will create an extra 1.5 million voters aged 
over 65, and if the Tories maintain their share of these older voters it will 
hand them an extra 570,000 votes.

The challenge facing Labour was highlighted by a YouGov poll which showed that 
55% of Labour voters at the last election believe it is unlikely the party can 
win under Corbyn. The Labour leader’s net satisfaction ratings stand at minus 
39% compared with minus 6% for David Cameron.

In his Guardian article, Campbell voices fears that the next Tory leader is on 
course to win the election in 2020. “I know that if Labour becomes an 
anti-American, anti-Nato, weak on defence, soft on terror, unilaterally 
disarming party of protest, along the lines Corbyn appears to want to take it, 
then David Cameron’s successor can expect a long haul in office.”

But the former No 1o director of communications says that the legacy of the 
Iraq war and the failure of the previous three leaders to prepare for their 
succession are to blame for Corbyn’s rise. “So now we haveJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, as surprised at being 
leader as everyone else is that he is there. But this did not happen in a 
vacuum. Tony begat Gordon begat Ed begat Jeremy ... Although I can and will 
defend Tony over Iraq, I also know that we cannot overlook the fact that 
widespread opposition to the war, and anger about the aftermath, played a big 
part in Corbyn’s rise.”

Campbell highlighted the importance of “planning succession and legacy” in an 
article which drew comparisons between the way in whichTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> and Sir Alex Ferguson achieved 
great success in their own careers, only to see Labour and Manchester United 
fail under their successors.
 