
It is the start of the lambing season in Bedfordshire and, while the maelstrom 
caused by the England and Wales Cricket Board's decision to part company with
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> swirls 
around, Alastair Cook will be finding solace tending the ewes on the farm. In 
broad terms, after the most trying winter any England captain can have endured, 
it will be respite until he bats again, no doubt for Essex, in April.

Then the spotlight will be on him for, although the dynamic is already 
changing, with Andy Flower resigning as team director and a new man expected to 
be in position by the early part of the season, Cook has already received the 
strongest backing from his employers as the man to take the England Test team 
forward.

It appears to be a huge leap of faith but, essentially, the captain is chosen 
by the selectors and the managing director of England cricket, now Paul 
Downton, with input from the team director, and then endorsed by the ECB board. 
In other words it is not simply a case of the team director expressing a wish 
for a certain individual and it is hard to see how Flower's successor could 
operate properly unless he was comfortable with the man leading the side.

Central to this will be the condition in which Cook emerges from the furore. 
Will the fact that it was deemed necessary to jettison the most senior player, 
one of high accomplishment, in order to clear the path for the team's 
redevelopment be seen as an indication of weakness in the system â€“ a failure of 
management as many would like to view it? Or does the decision indicate 
strength in its willingness to excise what had come to be regarded within the 
team and management as a thoroughly divisive influence? Will Cook gain 
authority from being party to such decisiveness now? Or will that authority be 
reduced because ultimately he could not embrace a free, if calculating, 
individual?

In 2012 Cook, a new captain then, was the driving force behind Pietersen's 
reintegration into the side after the controversies of that year, which 
included the player's demands for his own preferential scheduling and the 
so-called Textgate affair. So it must have taken some considerable upheaval for 
Cook to change tack so dramatically.

In addition, how will he be considered by the cricket-watching public who, 
deprived for whatever reason of information, see only the ECB outmanoeuvred in 
terms of public relations by Pietersen's acolytes and sympathisers. In this, a 
distraction as it may be from the main debate, Cook through no fault of his own 
has been done no favours.

This, though, is genuinely the start of a new era. Cook may have been Test 
captain for 18 months but it has largely been Andrew Strauss's team he has been 
leading. All players get used to being led in a certain manner and the 
adjustment, particularly when someone has been promoted through the ranks, is 
often not straightforward. It was no different for Strauss, whose team did not 
really become his until, for example, Andrew Flintoff retired.

Now Cook is charged with the responsibility of helping to rebuild the Test 
team, if not in his image, then according to his strategies and ethos. He, and 
the team director, have a blank canvas with which to work, the process already 
starting perhaps with the decision of Eoin Morgan to withdraw from the Indian 
Premier League auction. That, given Morgan's standing within the T20 world, is 
something that will not have happened without prompting: it certainly looks to 
have Downton's fingerprints on it and, by association, those of Cook.

That Cook is a cricketer of the highest calibre brooks no argument. Nor does 
the fact that he is as mentally strong as any who have taken the field for 
England. The challenge in Australia was the first to which he failed to rise 
either as batsman or leader. He has been learning and, while cricket education 
never ceases, he cannot hide behind that any longer. Cook held up well in 
Australia in spite of everything thrown at him. He is held in the highest 
esteem by those left, respected both as a single-minded, driven player and as 
an individual, the most important elements.

Michael Clarke may do well to remember that whatever rings he ran round Cook, 
it was less than a year ago that he oversaw, and was therefore complicit in, 
the greatest shambles to beset Australia in recent times. That in itself is a 
lesson.
 