
The Labour party is in “big trouble” and could see its support fall further 
after its heavy defeat at the general election,Alastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> has said.

Tony Blair’s former director of communications said he believes the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party needs to embark on a debate 
about its future that should have taken place before the leadership contest.

Speaking on the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1, Campbell said: “We are in big 
trouble, and we are in big trouble in the UK, which is why this leadership 
election is very very important. I wish we were having the election at the end 
of the debate, not instead of the debate. But we have to understand this may 
not be the bottom.”

Campbell spoke about Labour’s future as he related a story about his last 
contact with his friendCharles Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/charleskennedy>, the former Lib Dem 
leader who died last week from a haemorrhage related to his alcohol problems.

Charles Kennedy – a lovely man, a talented politician, a great friend | 
Alastair Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/02/charles-kennedy-alastair-campbell-lovely-man-a-talented-politician-a-great-friend>
Campbell said Kennedy had texted him to say they should discuss forming a new 
progressive, centre-left unionist party in Scotland after the SNP won 56 of 
Scotland’s 59 seats.

He said of Kennedy, who lost his Highlands seat in the general election to the 
SNP: “He basically [thought] that that the Labour party and Lib Dems up there 
are knackered.” Campbell then said Labour was in trouble across Great Britain.

Liz Kendall, one of the Labour leadership contenders, has hit back at her 
rival Yvette Cooper, who accused her last week of having swallowed the Tory 
manifesto. Asked on the Andrew Marr Show which parts of the Tory manifesto she 
would spit out, Kendall said: “The only thing I have swallowed is the sheer 
scale of the defeat that we faced at the election and the huge changes we need 
to win again.

“People didn’t trust us with their money or on the economy and we didn’t set 
out a positive enough vision for the future of the country that everyone could 
feel part of. It is the person that can answer those questions that’s going to 
win the leadership election to win the country in 2020.”
 