
Piers Morgan


Thursday 29 November 2001

The Mirror came in for lunch, Piers Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/piersmorgan> [pictured below left] behaving 
like a child. TB let it go for a while but then put him down heavily once 
Morgan started to get on his high horse about the Sun and his claims we gave 
them the election date. He went on and on until eventually TB said that he had 
better not be calling him a liar.

Tuesday 29 January 2002

I got a crazy letter from [Piers] Morgan in response to mine, saying I had 
misquoted him on saying the Mirror was no longer a Labour paper, but I could 
always rely on [Neil] Wallis to 'squeeze in Blair press releases in between 
Jordan's tits and kinky sex spreads'.

Tuesday 13 May 2003

Lunch with Piers Morgan. We met at the Savoy Grill. He was in appeasing mood, 
said he had ballsed up the war, had lost 60,000 readers through that, 120,000 
to the price war and he accepted he had fucked up. He knew he wasn't in a 
strong position with us but said he wanted to come back in a bit, needed to get 
rid of [John] Pilger [journalist and polemicist], cut down on [Paul] Routledge 
[columnist], stop whacking CB [Cherie Blair], get back to being more positive 
on the domestic agenda. He denied there was a pro-GB [Gordon Brown] agenda at 
the Mirror. He viewed TB as a formidable politician who won things through 
argument. He was sure that if ever it did go to a TB/GB war, TB would win and 
the Mirror would be on our side.

Adam Boulton


Tuesday 11 December 2001 Colin Powell, the US secretary of state, announced 
that the UK had volunteered to lead a security force in Afghanistan

Adam Boulton <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adam-boulton> [Sky political 
editor] into an absolute bilious frenzy in which he said it was extraordinary 
that the British public learnt of this kind of thing from a US politician and 
that Powell was coming for a 'bizarre event' to remember September 11. I 
sometimes wondered if Adam didn't let a lot of his own anger about whatever 
come through on issues like this. I got him in after his report in the street, 
and said it was outrageous that he editorialised like that. He held his ground 
and after a pretty robust exchange, went off in a huff.

Tuesday 2 April 2002

TB asked who could replace me and said he couldn't just take a chance. At one 
point we thought of Adam Boulton [Sky political editor] but coincidentally 
today we had the TV political editors in for lunch at Chequers and he thought 
Adam lacked judgment.

Ed Richards


Tuesday 29 January 2002

Ed Richards [senior policy adviser on media business issues] came to see me re 
the media ownership policy discussions. He said in the end it boiled down to a 
decision about whether we were prepared to see Murdoch become more powerful. He 
felt that we shouldn't.

Thursday 14 March 2002

I had a meeting on media ownership with Ed Richards. TB was keen for total 
liberalisation as a way of getting more Europeans into our market but it could 
lead to Murdoch getting ITV news. TB's general view was that we got nothing 
worse out of Murdoch than we did from anyone else. Ed was with me in bemoaning 
the lack of focus on the cultural impact, the fact that content regulation was 
virtually non-existent and these people had too much unchecked power. He said 
that Pat [Hewitt] and Tessa [Jowell] were also opposed to TB's view. They 
wanted controls on it.

Richard Desmond


Wednesday 18 June 2003

I had a bizarre email exchange with Richard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> [Express proprietor]. I 
complained about the Express splash – Blair knifes the middle class – and sent 
him the speech, asked him to read it, and tell me how they get that headline 
out of it. He sent an email saying he totally agreed and signed it off 'Fuck 
editors, fuck Brown, yes to Tony and Alastair.'
 