
Alastair Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alastaircampbell> has 
made an explosive entry into the EU referendum debate, condemning newspapers 
that back Brexit for plumbing “fresh depths of dishonesty” and peddling lies 
and propaganda that insult the intelligence of their readers.

Tony Blair’s ex-director of communications, who is due to appear on the BBC’s 
Newsnight this week to discuss the media’s role in the EU debate, says he 
thought he had seen the worst that “the wretched rightwing press” could do in 
his time as a journalist and spin doctor.

But writing in the Observer, Campbell claims that several newspapers have 
stooped even lower and totally given up on trying to inform their readers or to 
debate issues, and instead promote the anti-EU views of their owners, 
regardless of the facts.

This slavish Brexit propaganda would make Pravda proud | Alastair Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/12/alastair-campbell-brexit-referendum-media-bias>
“More than in any such debate I can remember, large chunks of the press have 
totally given up on the role of properly informing public debate. TheMail, the 
Sun, the Express, and the Star in particular, to a lesser extent the Telegraph 
and, on a bad day, theTimes, are more propaganda sheets for one side of the 
argument.”

He anticipates a wave of criticism and inevitable counterattacks from 
Eurosceptics and journalists who he knows will blast him as a hypocrite and 
propagandist himself, and cite his role in the “dodgy dossier” about Iraq’s 
non-existent weapons of mass destruction. “Before any of you start bleating or 
tweeting‘dodgy dossier’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/jun/26/broadcasting.politicsandiraq>, 
the accusations against me of lying, deceit and misinformation in relation to 
Iraq have been thoroughly investigated by three inquiries (we await the fourth) 
and I have been cleared by all of them.”

Campbell describes a story in the Sun last week, which asserted that the Queen 
backed Brexit, as “cock”.

Brexit: the Queen is a powerful asset, but she is being exploited | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/12/queen-elizabeth-brexit-sun-nick-clegg-eu-referendum>
“The Sun has dragged the Queen into the whole thing, taking something that was 
almost certainly never said to make a claim that she supported the Out 
campaign. I had a fair bit to do with the royals and the often crazy coverage 
of them in my time in Downing Street. Based on that experience, and her ability 
to shrug off without complaint so many false stories written about her, I can 
pretty much guarantee this – the fact the Palace has made a complaint to Ipso, 
the so-called independent press regulator, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/palace-sun-queen-backs-brexit-ipso>
 means the story is a load of cock.”

The newspaper has stood by its story, insisting it had “multiple sources”.

On Saturday, the justice secretary Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, who is campaigning for 
Brexit, stopped short of ruling himself out as the source of comments the paper 
said were made by the Queen at a meeting five years ago, at which Gove was 
present.

Buckingham Palace has lodged a formal complaint with the Independent Press 
Standards Organisation (Ipso) about the report which appeared under the 
headline “Queen backs Brexit”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Falastair-campbell-dishonesty-papers-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bed09b8735b674265722f608f48d9f546454b84%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alastair%20Campbell%20slams%20%E2%80%98dishonesty%E2%80%99%20of%20papers%20backing%20EU%20exit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Falastair-campbell-dishonesty-papers-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alastair%20Campbell%20slams%20%E2%80%98dishonesty%E2%80%99%20of%20papers%20backing%20EU%20exit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Falastair-campbell-dishonesty-papers-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bed09b8735b674265722f608f48d9f546454b84%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Michael Gove said ‘enough has been said’ about the Queen backing Brexit story. 
Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
Speaking on a visit to Hampshire, Gove said: “I don’t know how the Sun got all 
of its information.” Pressed on whether it was unfair to drag the Queen into 
the row about Britain’s future in the EU, he replied: “I’ve already said that 
enough has been said about this story, so I don’t think it’s appropriate to say 
any more than I’ve already said and others have already said.”

Asked if he thought the Queen would be pleased to see him when he next has an 
audience with her, he replied: “I don’t know. I wouldn’t speculate on a matter 
like that.” A source close to Gove later denied that his boss had been the 
source.
 