
Graeme Swann <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/graeme-swann> has defended the 
England captain Alastair Cook's Ashes performance, declaring the captaincy an 
impossible task this winter.

Swann, who retired after three Tests of the 5-0 whitewash, was just one of a 
number of players who failed to get anywhere close to peak form as Australia 
reclaimed the urn in emphatic style.

As the on-field leader Cook shouldered much of the blame, with his captaincy 
dissected unfavourably by a number of observers â€“ led by the increasingly 
partisan Shane Warne.

Cook was variously criticised for being too defensive, too reactive and 
uninspiring in comparison to his opposite number, Michael Clarke, but Swann 
feels he was hamstrung by those around him.

"He had to change things and try to be a bit funky as the series went on 
because we were terrible," Swann says in a special edition of BBC Radio Five 
Live's Not JustCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket>, to be aired 
on Monday at 9pm.

"Whatever we tried wasn't working. You can understand people saying, 'He's not 
a good captain; Clarke's got the rub on him,' but Clarke had a guy he could 
turn to at any point to get a wicket, seemingly at will, and Cooky never had 
that."

Cook is almost certain to remain in charge of the side after the England and 
Wales Cricket Board's new managing director, Paul Downton, completes his review 
of the Ashes.

One reason for that is a lack of credible alternatives but Swann believes not 
even one of England's finest leaders would have been able to alter the course 
of the 2013-14 series.

"No man could have captained us this winter, not a captain on earth. You could 
bring back Mike Brearley and it wouldn't do any good. We were terrible."

Swann did not exempt himself from blame, admitting he called time on his 
career before the end of the series because he was no longer contributing.

"Quite simply I was awful," he confessed. "It gets to a point where you 
realise you're hindering the team, not helping them in any way, and it's a 
horrible feeling to come to terms with.

"You're playing for your country, you love playing cricket for England, it's 
your life. To come to that conclusion is actually one of the most sobering 
decisions I've ever had to make. It was horrendous."
 