
 Alastair Campbell has admitted that his newly published diaries show clearly 
how New Labour sowed the seeds of theUK’s vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 by failing to respond to growing concerns over immigration.

The former Downing Street director of communications said he feared the party 
became complacent on the issue due to Tony Blair’s electoral success, allowing 
the debate to shift in favour of a pro-Brexit vote in the EU referendum years 
later.

The diaries, covering between 2003-2005, also reveal the then chancellor 
Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> had growing 
concerns that Labour had not done enough to change opinions, complaining that 
Blair was helping the Tories under Michael Howard to turn immigration into an 
electoral issue.

I was a Blairite baby: how Grace Campbell survived a childhood in politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/23/grace-campbell-alastair-campbell-how-i-survived-a-childhood-in-politics>
Campbell told the Guardian: “We were more and more aware of the problem 
politically but there was always a tension between knowing that the economy and 
public services needed immigration but knowing the issue was causing real 
concerns. I think the fact that we won two elections in 2001 and 2005 despite 
the Tories campaigning on immigration may also have made us complacent. Just as 
in Scotland people started to feel Labour support was taken for granted so in 
areas of high immigration I think someLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> voters started to feel the same.

“I think deep down we always felt despite the difficulties we would be able to 
persuade people of the benefits of immigration and the benefits of the EU. We 
did to a large extent but where we are now, on both issues, suggests that we 
did not cement the political views we were putting forward.”

The diaries, Campbell’s fifth volume and available from Thursday, record 
Blair’s pollster Philip Gould raising immigration as a key factor in loss of 
support for Labour as early as 2004.

In one extract in January that year from the book, Outside, Inside, which is 
being serialised by theNew European newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/27/the-new-european-sales>, 
Campbell writes: “PG was worried we had three groups of people we were losing: 
anti-war middle-class and younger voters shifting to the Libs because of Iraq 
and tuition fees; suburban middle-class, some of them moving to the Tories over 
more general issues; and working-class voters switching to disengagement 
because of asylum and immigration in particular, and the feeling they are 
getting a raw deal.

“Asylum was definitely linking up all our negatives now, from anything bad on 
the economy to crime, pressure on public services, terrorism,Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. There was an opening for 
populism that we had to watch out for.”

Campbell’s diaries further reveal that in 2005 he asked the then Manchester 
United manager, Alex Ferguson, to join up with the Arsenal manager, Arsène 
Wenger, to attack the Conservatives’ hardline immigration policies under leader 
Michael Howard. One diary extract reads: “Alex was interesting on the Howard 
stuff. He felt he had a point but that every foreigner would hate it. I said he 
and Wenger should do a joint presser saying they would have to send all their 
players back to their own countries under a Tory immigration policy.”

It is also documented that it was Brown’s belief that Labour under Blair, whom 
he was agitating to replace, was giving theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> scope to make immigration 
a key issue. An extract from February 2005 reads: “[Gordon Brown] said Bush was 
dominating world politics, a rightwing ideologue. But he was pretty down about 
[Bill] Clinton, with obvious resonances to [Tony Blair]. ‘He won two elections, 
he did some good things, and was popular at times, but he didn’t change the 
country’s direction for good.’ I argued that we had done a lot to change the 
country, not least thanks to him, but he said: ‘Come on, you don’t think it’s 
enough and nor do I.

“‘We have not changed the country as much as we could and should. Look at the 
media 80% come at politics from a rightwing agenda, and we haven’t changed 
that. Look at how easy it is for the Tories to make immigration the issue, and 
we help them.’”
 