
It's not often that a record company feels compelled to answer criticism of an 
album before a note of it has been heard. But then, Tupac Shakur's Better Dayz, 
released later this month, is no ordinary album. It is the 16th Tupac release 
since the gangsta rapper's murder in September 1996.

Sixteen albums in six years would be a prodigious feat for an artist who was 
still breathing, particularly when you bear in mind that many of them are 
double CD sets. For a dead artist who released only four albums during his 
lifetime, it smacks of macabre exploitation, not to mention an ever-dipping 
quality control.

Listen carefully to many of the posthumous Tupac releases and you can 
distinctly hear the bottom of the barrel being scraped. Hence the record 
company press release, which announces Better Dayz's arrival with a raised 
eyebrow: "For you nay-sayers out there, and amazingly enough I know there are 
some, justification for the amount of posthumously released stuff can be found 
partly in the fact that Tupac... recorded shed-loads of tracks that were never 
released before his death."

Shakur's staggering posthumous release schedule exists for the same reason 
that most things in the world of rock and pop exist - because there is a market 
for it. Last year, Shakur sold 2.7m albums. His earnings of $7m (Â£4.6m) put him 
10th in Forbes magazine's chart of top-earning dead celebrities, a chart 
dominated by rock stars: Elvis Presley (who earned $37m), George Harrison 
($17m), John Lennon ($20m), Bob Marley ($10m) and Jimi Hendrix ($8m).

Shakur may currently be pop's most prolific corpse, but he's certainly not the 
only deceased star with new material on the shelves. Recent months have seen 
posthumous offerings from Presley,Jeff Buckley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jeff-buckley> and singer-songwriter Eva 
Cassidy. In the run-up to Christmas, we can expect new albums from TLC - whose 
singer Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes died earlier this year - Aaliyah, George Harrison 
and Nirvana. The latter appeared on the cover of Q magazine last month. Eight 
years after Kurt Cobain's suicide, the headline proclaimed them "the most 
important band in the world". That's both a faintly troubling judgment on rock 
music in 2002 and an indication of the public's current appetite for dead stars.

On one level, the reasons are straightforward. Prematurely dead artists make 
perfect pop stars. They don't become old and unattractive, nor do they lose the 
musical plot. They are easier to worship because they're not around to blot 
their copybook with embarrassing middle-aged lapses of taste: they don't appear 
in cabaret or on game shows, they don't wrong-foot their fans by going techno 
or releasing albums of skiffle cover versions. "Dead rock stars appeal to 
people because their death allows something nebulous to become a story with a 
beginning, a middle and an end," says Pat Gilbert, editor of the music magazine 
Mojo.

Many artists experience a surge in popularity immediately after their deaths 
for simple reasons of commemoration or nostalgia. For others, however, the 
reasons for the posthumous fame are more complex. Death adds a poignancy to 
their work, as in the case of American folk singer Eva Cassidy. Prior to her 
death from cancer in 1996, Cassidy was unknown outside her local Washington 
music scene - she famously discovered she was terminally ill while working as a 
painter to make ends meet.

In recent years, she has become a multi-platinum success, spawning 
documentaries, books and a series of albums. Her posthumous success began in 
Britain, the direct result of Terry Wogan repeatedly playing her cover version 
of Somewhere Over the Rainbow on his Radio 2 breakfast show. Quite aside from 
any musical worth, that track became viewed as an encapsulation of her tragic 
story of a life cut short and promise unfulfilled. There's an undeniable 
emotional appeal in hearing an artist who you know died in obscurity singing a 
song about hope and a mystical world beyond everyday life.

"There's something pretty peculiar about the whole experience of listening to 
pop music," says clinical psychologist Oliver James. "It hits at a much more 
profound emotional level than, say, cinema. It's a very intense relationship. 
When the person who makes that music dies, it's analogous to losing a relative. 
Because you're genuinely upset, you start searching for hidden meanings, your 
mind jitters about all over the place."

Other artists see their critical stock soar because their death validates the 
emotions in their work. Every gangsta rapper in history has rapped about dying 
in a hail of bullets, butTupac Shakur <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2pac> 
actually did die in a hail of bullets, as a result of the feud between east 
coast and west coast rappers that he himself had done much to fuel. Suddenly, 
tracks such as If I Die Tonight cease to sound like mannered posturing and take 
on a peculiar prescience.

"He has become a kind of hip-hop James Dean," says Andy Cowan, editor of Hip 
Hop Connection. "He's a charismatic figure and an icon, he symbolises that 
don't-give-a-fuck anti-authority attitude, but there's also this myth that's 
built up around him - he was shot on Friday the 13th, there are loads of 
theories about who killed him, some people think he faked his own death. Even 
the fact that he recorded so much unreleased music before he died suggests that 
he must have had a sense of destiny and of his own fate."

Nirvana were a groundbreaking and wildly successful band, but prior to 
Cobain's suicide, there were signs that the press at least had tired of his 
expressions of self-loathing and disgust at the music industry. Today, their 
final album, In Utero, is held up as a perfect example of art created by a man 
at the end of his tether, an unimpeachable expression of nihilism and horror. 
At the time, however, the general British critical consensus was that Cobain 
should pull his socks up and stop whingeing. "The lyrics are wretched," claimed 
Q magazine. "Childish witterings about 'self-appointed judges'; shock-horror 
stuff, feeble navel-gazing. It's as if Not the Nine O'Clock News were weakly 
parodying grunge." "The bitterness of the unhappily famous isn't much of a 
replacement for the determinedly doomed's ironic charm," sniffed the NME.

"If you look at Nirvana's career, no fan at the time really thought Kurt 
Cobain was going to blow his brains out," says Gilbert. "A song like I Hate 
Myself and Want to Die seemed to be dealing in a kind of faux-angst. After he 
died, that song seemed like a genuine expression of angst. Look at the Manic 
Street Preachers. To a large portion of the music press, they were a joke, 
people used to openly laugh at things like Richey Edwards cutting his arms. 
Then he disappeared or killed himself and suddenly everyone began taking the 
band very seriously. You view the music in a different way."

As with Shakur, Cobain's death lent his work a remarkable gravitas. The 
extracts thus far published from his forthcoming diaries may suggest someone 
"unhappily famous" rather than "determinedly doomed" (there's certainly a lot 
of whining about the music press) but in death, rock stars tend to become 
rather unambiguous figures, easily summed up in a soundbite: tormented genius, 
doomed romantic, hip-hop thug.

Buy into Nirvana today, and you can be sure you're hearing something authentic 
and raw. In 2002, pop music is widely perceived to be manufactured, bland and 
glossy. Rock is either mellifluous background strumming, pointedly devoid of 
character (Travis, Starsailor and the other bands who evoke the "it's all about 
the music" get-out clause) or the arch and knowing revivalism of the Hives and 
the Strokes. Their lead singer's death is the gory proof that Nirvana really 
"meant it".

Worshipping dead rock stars as icons has been going on for years: teenagers 
have regularly identified their existential angst with figures they perceive as 
doomed, such as Joy Division's Ian Curtis. The difference today is that the 
process seems to extend far beyond the teenage bedroom. As James points out: 
"Traditionally, the search for identity is something that takes place in 
adolescence. Rock music appeals to teenagers trying to make sense of life, 
constructing their identities using an imaginary person. Today, because there 
are more choices available to people, more people are being confused and that 
search for identity goes on much later. You get a lot of rubbish written in 
Sunday magazines about this kind of thing, but you are getting more people in 
their 20s still acting like someone in their teens. It's not surprising that 
more people are buying into figures like Kurt Cobain."

However, a star does not have to appear doomed for their death to increase or 
alter their value. R&B divaAaliyah <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah>, 
whose first posthumous album, I Care for You, is released in December, was 
young, successful and happy when she died in a plane crash last summer. In 
America, her demise caused a remarkable outpouring of public grief. Thousands 
of fans turned up to her funeral. Her website compared her to Princess Diana.

The media seemed startled both by the opulence of the funeral - a horse-drawn 
glass carriage drew a silver-plated coffin to New York's Loyola Roman Catholic 
church, where 22 white doves were released - and by the public response. "Black 
culture in America tends to dramatise death in a way that white culture does 
not," says Craig Marks, editor of US magazine Blender. "It's a lot more public 
and ritualistic. Even when someone dies in a gang fight, little folk industries 
appear, where the dead person's friends and family get together and make 
T-shirts bearing their image, which people wear to the funeral. They bring it 
out into the world. In the same way, the new Missy Elliot record talks 
explicitly about the deaths of Aaliyah and Lisa 'Left Eye' Lopes."

Just as none of the fans clamouring to get a glimpse of the cortege seemed to 
think Aaliyah's funeral was over the top, so few seem concerned that the 
relentless marketing of dead R&B and hip-hop stars seems mawkish or tacky. 
"There's a whole different sense of rules and ethics in hip-hop and R&B," says 
Cowan. "It's a blatantly commercial world, the music itself constantly talks 
about wealth and status. There's an absolutely massive market there."

And if rock fans like to think of themselves as more refined, more finely 
attuned to exploitation of their lost idols, there's plenty of evidence to 
suggest that they are not. The official Jimi Hendrix website offers a 
preposterous array of Hendrix memorabilia, most of which has absolutely nothing 
to do with preserving Hendrix's image. You can buy Hendrix incense holders, 
candles, even a Jimi Hendrix water bottle, perfect for slaking your thirst when 
caught in - ho ho - crosstown traffic. But someone is buying it: last year, 
Hendrix earned $8m.

"It's clearly a personal choice, how you want an artist to be marketed," says 
Mary Guibert, the mother of singer-songwriter Jeff Buckley, who runs her late 
son's estate. "I arrived at a personal philosophy not to get Jeff Buckley to 
people who haven't already heard Jeff Buckley. What we do is for people who 
really love his music. They'll do the job of turning other people on to what he 
did, not me. I remember someone once showed Jeff a mug with his face on it, and 
he broke it. He was like 'No! No! No! Stop!' He didn't want keychains with his 
picture on them. So for me, that was a no-brainer. It's the same with music. I 
have to be the one who says 'No, that's not for commercial release'."

Nevertheless, Guibert admits that virtually anything would find an audience. 
"When an artist dies, there are fans who want to hear everything, every 
utterance, burp, belch. They don't think it takes away from the legacy. People 
become obsessive. We get some pretty interesting letters. Someone scans my 
email for me now."

The business of death in rock music is a curiously cyclical one. For whatever 
reasons - authenticity, a quest for identity, a desire for public mourning - 
the act of dying invariably increases an artist's value, often out of 
proportion to their status while alive. The fans are willing, there is money to 
be made. The oft-repeated line about Elvis Presley's business associate 
claiming the star's death was "a good career move" may be apocryphal, but it's 
oft-repeated because it continues to embody the truth.

In such a climate, it's easy cynically to suggest that some artists' career 
and reputation would be bolstered by their death. This summer, the Sex Pistols 
reformed to coincide with the Queen's Golden Jubilee. The reformation was met 
with critical opprobrium and public indifference. Neither a greatest hits 
collection nor a sumptuous career-spanning box set sold well. The band's 
mythology was punctured rather than bolstered by the sight of a middle-aged 
Johnny Rotten doing chat shows and breakfast television. "I don't think there's 
any doubt that if Sid Vicious had been the Sex Pistols' lead singer and 
creative mainspring, the band would be much bigger than they are today," says 
Pat Gilbert. "Their mythical properties would be vastly increased."

He stops for a moment. "Obviously, though, it's better that people don't 
die... "

Â· Better Dayz is out on Amaru/Death Row on November 25. Nirvana is out now on 
Geffen Records.
 