
Alec Baldwin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin> has spoken out on 
the result of this year’s US election, claiming the political system is 
“broken”.

How comedians struggled to parody Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/08/donald-trump-comedians-parody-satire>
The actor, who recently took on the role of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on Saturday Night Live, 
tweeted his disappointment as the results came in on Tuesday night.

“The billionaire Republican businessman is close to winning the race and world 
markets are crashing,” hetweeted <https://twitter.com/ABFalecbaldwin>. “He’s 
all yours, America. He’s all yours.”

As Trump’s victory was assured, he spoke reflectively on what people should be 
focusing on during this period. “I think the thing to focus on now is our 
families,” he tweeted. “To love those that were put in our lives to care for. 
Also our respective health, work and faith. The American political system is 
broken. Walk away from it for a while. As Coriolanus says, ‘There is a world 
elsewhere.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Falec-baldwin-takes-on-trump-on-saturday-night-live-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alec%20Baldwin%20takes%20on%20Trump%20on%20Saturday%20Night%20Live%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Falec-baldwin-takes-on-trump-on-saturday-night-live-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alec%20Baldwin%20takes%20on%20Trump%20on%20Saturday%20Night%20Live%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Falec-baldwin-takes-on-trump-on-saturday-night-live-video&media=>
Alec Baldwin takes on Trump on Saturday Night Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/oct/09/alec-baldwin-takes-on-trump-on-saturday-night-live-video>
He also went on to say that “Italy survived Berlusconi” but that the former 
prime minister was like the progressive politician Adlai Stevenson compared to 
Trump.

Baldwin’s portrayal of Trump has led to record ratings for Saturday Night Live 
andin an interview 
<http://www.wnyc.org/story/alec-baldwin-sheds-trump-impressions-election-day/> 
this week, the 30 Rock star wanted to point out that he doesn’t hate Trump but 
he’s not somebody he admires. It’s unconfirmed as to whether he will be 
appearing on this Saturday’s show.

Other celebrities to tweet their disapproval of the result include Chris Evans 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisEvans/status/796219890239733760>, who called it “an 
embarrassing night for America”, andSeth MacFarlane 
<https://twitter.com/SethMacFarlane/status/796343301196500992>, who believes “a 
climate-denying, anti-equality, anti-reproductive rights establishment has been 
installed.”
 