
An influential US lobbying network of Republican politicians and big 
businesses is seeking to avert a looming funding crisis by appealing to major 
donors that have abandoned it over the past two years following criticism of 
its policy on gun laws.

The Guardian has learned that the American Legislative Exchange Council 
(Alec), which shapes and promotes legislation at state level across the US, has 
identified more than 40 lapsed corporate members it wants to attract back into 
the fold under a scheme referred to in its documents as the "Prodigal Son 
Project".

The target firms include commercial giants such as Amazon, Coca-Cola, General 
Electric <https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalelectric>, Kraft, 
McDonald's and Walmart, all of which cut ties with the group following the 
furore over the killing of the unarmed black teenager Trayvon Martin in Florida 
in February 2012.

Alec was embroiled in the controversy surrounding Florida's 2005 
"stand-your-ground" law 
<http://thehill.com/opinion/columnists/juan-williams/222965-martin-case-puts-alec-in-spotlight>
 after George Zimmerman, a neighbourhood watch volunteer, shot and killed the 
17-year-old Martin. The Florida law was picked up by Alec, and, working in 
partnership with the National Rifle Association, used as a template for one of 
its"model bills" <http://alecexposed.org/wiki/ALEC_Castle_Doctrine>, which was 
then taken up by other states across the country.

The Guardian has learned that by Alec's own reckoning the network has lost 
almost 400 state legislators from its membership over the past two years, as 
well as more than 60 corporations that form the core of its funding. In the 
first six months of this year it suffered a hole in its budget of more than a 
third of its projected income.

The reference to the Prodigal Son Project is just one of many revelations 
contained in a batch of internal Alec documents that have been obtained by the 
Guardian. The documents, prepared for its most recent annual board meeting in 
Chicago in August, cast light on the inner workings of the group.

They show that:

• Alec has set up a separate sister group called the "Jeffersonian Project" 
amid concerns over possible government inquiries into whether its activities 
constitute lobbying – which would threaten its tax-exempt status;

• the network has suffered a decline in its membership among state-based 
Republicans and among big corporations following theTrayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin> controversy;

• its income raised from conferences, membership fees and donations has fallen 
short, leaving the group with a potential funding crisis;

• a draft agreement prepared for the board meeting proposed that Alec's chairs 
in each of the 50 states, who are drawn from senior legislators, should be 
required to put the interests of the organisation first, thus setting up a 
possible conflict of interest with the voters who elected them;

• Alec also considered extending its remit to include the gambling industry, 
particularly online gambling, as a possible source of new members and revenue.

Alec reconvenes for its next nationwide meeting, described as a "states and 
nation policy summit" <http://www.alec.org/meetings/snps2013/>, on Wednesday in 
Washington. The three-day event will be attended by hundreds of state 
legislators and corporate representatives.

In a sign of the influence the network holds with Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, it will be addressed by 
rising stars of the party including US senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who led the 
push for the recent government shutdown, and the party's budget guru, Paul Ryan 
of Wisconsin.

The network also counts among its former members the two highest ranking 
Republicans in the House of Representatives, John Boehner and Eric Cantor, as 
well as prominent Republican governors such as Scott Walker of Wisconsin and 
John Kasich of Ohio.

The documents seen by the Guardian show that Alec is hoping to avoid legal, 
tax and ethical challenges by creating a separate sister organisation it calls 
the "Jeffersonian Project". The new body would be categorised as a 501(c)(4) 
social welfare organisation, a designation that would allow Alec to be far more 
overt in its lobbying activities than its current charitable status as a 
501(c)(3).

"Any activity that could be done by Alec may be done by Jeffersonian Project 
if legal counsel advises it would provide greater legal protection or lessen 
ethics concerns," anote on the proposed new body 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/841593-alec-docs.html#document/p13/a134830>
 to Alec's board of directors says. The note adds that the Jeffersonian Project 
would remove "questions of ethical violations made by our critics and state 
ethics boards and provides further legal protection".

Alec's critics have accused it of violating tax laws by lobbying on behalf of 
rightwing legislation that advances the interests of its corporate members. 
Among the areas that Alec has pursued aggressivelyin the form of model bills 
<http://www.alec.org/model-legislation/> are measures to privatise public 
education, cut taxes, reduce public employee compensation and workplace rights,
oppose Obamacare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/20/obamacare-alec-republican-legislators>
 and resist state action to reduce global warming gas emissions.

A letter included among the documents from Alec's lawyer, Alan Dye, warns that 
"though we do not believe that any activity carried on by Alec is lobbying, the 
IRS could disagree". It also makes clear that major potential donors are 
holding back because they are anxious about Alec's tax status.

"Alec has been approached by donors who are willing to make sizable donations, 
but insist that the donations go to a section 501(c)(4) organization," Dye 
writes.

Lisa Graves, executive director of the Center for Media and Democracy, which 
monitors Alec's activities, said the Jeffersonian Project laid bare Alec's 
internal concerns about the tax rules and the perceived need to take steps to 
avoid getting into trouble. "It should have disclosed its lobbying long ago," 
she said.

But Alec's senior director of public affairs, Bill Meierling, insisted that 
the group complies with all state and federal tax laws. He said the creation of 
the Jeffersonian Project "does not indicate a desire to avoid trouble; it 
illustrates a desire for compliance with the law".

It would also be proactive, rather than reactive. "We are preparing for the 
possibility of future change that may alter the way we communicate with the 
public."

The Obama administration last week signaled its intention to get tough on 
tax-exempt organisationsthat stray into the political realm 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/27/us/politics/new-campaign-rules-proposed-for-tax-exempt-nonprofits.html?hp&_r=0>
. Alec is not directly affected by the new rules as it does not engage in 
election campaigning, but more intense federal scrutiny could have longer-term 
ramifications.

Meierling insisted that Alec does not lobby in any state. It "provides 
non-partisan study, research and analysis on policy issues, and nothing more. 
Alec does not advocate the passage of specific legislation; it discusses the 
impact of potential policies on the American people."

Alec's own internal records of its membership states that it has 1,810 state 
legislators on its membership books – amounting to almost a quarter of all 
elected representatives at state level across the nation. That support base has 
declined though over the past two years, from a peak in 2011 of 2,200, 
underlining the structural problems that the group faces in the wake of the 
Trayvon Martin outrage.

Alec has also suffered heavy losses in its private backing from corporate 
members that have declined from a similar 2011 peak of 280 to 214. Among the 
documents are Alec's own list of 38 companies that have allowed their 
membership to lapse, including The Home Depot, the over-50s organisation AARP, 
healthcare insurers such as WellPoint and the pharmaceutical company Roche 
Diagnostics.
&lt;base target="_blank"&gt;&lt;/map&gt; 

The documents show that Alec has struggled to hold on to members from the 
financial services industry.A note records that 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/841593-alec-docs.html#document/p49/a134831>
 "many of these companies failed to renew at Alec due to controversy".

The group accepts that it has lost members in recent months, but puts it down 
to normal cyclical pressures. "No one disputes that Alec lost public and 
private members during the past several years, but Alec and its members work on 
issues relevant to the American people and will continue to do so long into the 
future," Meierling said.

He added that "companies do not like controversy of any sort. It is also clear 
that – whether true or untrue – accusations made of Alec cost members."

But he said the network intended to regain the trust of lapsed members by 
focusing on "transparency and engagement".

However, the decline in both public and private membership is starting to have 
an impact on Alec's financial health, the documents show. Over the first six 
months of this year, the network suffered a shortfall on its projected budget 
of $547,500 in sponsorship of its thrice-yearly national conferences, and a 
further shortfall of $440,792 on its general support from memberships.

By 30 June this year it had developed a hole in its income 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/841593-alec-docs.html#document/p43/a134833>
 of $1.4m on expected dues of $3.9m.

Alec said that its financial challenges did not amount to a crisis, though it 
admitted that there had been a shortfall in projected income.

Despite the losses, Alec continues to be supported by some of the largest 
rightwing foundations in the country, including the energy tycoons the Koch 
brothers, the Bradley Foundation and the Searle Freedom Trust set up by the 
creator of NutraSweet. Alec'slist of corporate members 
<http://www.alec.org/about-alec/private-enterprise-advisory-council/> includes 
companies such as the telecoms firm AT&T, energy concerns Exxon Mobil and 
Peabody Energy, the pharma company Pfizer, drinks giant Diageo and the tobacco 
multinational Altria.

Yet the hole in Alec's budget still has to be filled, lending urgency to the 
push to regain lapsed members referred to in the documents as the Prodigal Son 
Project. Meierling said no "specific, named project exists", but he added that 
"it is reasonable for any organisation to be interested in engagement with 
former members".

A total of 41 companies are listed by Alec as targets to be lured back into 
membership. Of those, only one – Wells Fargo – is known to be still funding the 
network,acting as a sponsor 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/842809-alec-sponsorship.html> of the 
August board meeting in Chicago.

Walmart is one of the companies that withdrew its membership of Alec in May 
2012 complaining that the organisation had strayed from its core mission to 
advance free-market policies and that the "divide between [its] activities and 
our purpose as a business has become too wide". In April 2012, in the wake of 
criticism from Walmart and others, Alec shut down its Public Safety and 
Elections Task Force, which had been responsible for the stand-your-ground law 
as well ascontroversial voter suppression legislation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/18/us/trayvon-martin-death-spurs-group-to-readjust-policy-focus.html>
.

Yet Walmart <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> continues to keep 
its distance. A company spokesperson, Lorenzo Lopez, told the Guardian: "We 
don't have any current plans to rejoin Alec."

Coca-Cola <https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola> was also asked 
whether they had plans to rejoin, but did not comment.

Lisa Graves said that the difficulty the network was having in attracting back 
major corporate sponsors showed how vulnerable the network is to public 
scrutiny. "This is a reflection of the power of sunlight on their activities – 
for too many years they were operating largely in secret. Corporations are 
sensitive to these issues."

The documents obtained by the Guardian include a variety of papers prepared 
for Alec's board of directors. To give a full and fair picture of the 
organisation, the Guardian ispublishing all of the documents 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/841593-alec-docs.html>.

Among them is a draft agreement that was prepared for Alec's board of 
directors that set out the proposed responsibilities of the group's state 
chairs from prominent, largely Republican, legislators. The draft agreement 
contains theproposed commitment from state chairs that 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/841593-alec-docs.html#document/p20/a134822>
: "I will act with care and loyalty and put the interests of the organization 
first."

The duty of elected politicians to put the interests of Alec first, with no 
mention of their obligations to the voters who put them in office, would have 
set up an apparent conflict of interest. But Alec said that the draft agreement 
was not adopted by the membership committee or by any of the state chairs. "All 
legislators are beholden to their constituents' interests first – if they are 
not, they will be held accountable at the ballot box," Meierling said.

Another document prepared for the board meeting reveals that Alec considered 
expanding its area of interests to take in gambling, specifically online 
gambling and sports betting. Theposition paper  
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/841593-alec-docs.html#document/p50/a134842>
notes that $37bn in revenue was generated by gambling in the US last year, 
providing a potentially lucrative source of new corporate members – it lists 
giant casino operators such as Las Vegas Sands, MGM and Wynn Resorts as 
potential draws. "This industry is very large and regulated by the states. We 
believe they would have a strong interest in Alec."

But Meierling said that the proposal was not taken up. The Alec board, 
consisting solely of state legislators, rejected the gambling plan.

• This article was amended on 18 December 2013. An earlier version wrongly 
stated that George Zimmerman claimed self-defence under the "stand your ground" 
law.
 