
No one wants to be a celebrity any more. Alec Baldwin has retired from public 
life. He's done with it. Indeed, he has so emphatically had enough that he has
penned a break-up letter to his own fame 
<http://www.vulture.com/2014/02/alec-baldwin-good-bye-public-life.html> for New 
York magazine. His 5,000-word farewell concludes with an expression of sympathy 
for Shia LaBeouf, who announced his own desire to leave the limelight bydonning 
a paper bag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/09/lars-von-trier-nymphomaniac-berlin>
 bearing the words: "I am not famous any more." Even Jennifer Lawrence might be
sacking it off for a while 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/24/jennifer-lawrence-harvey-weinstein-year-off>
, according to Harvey Weinstein. But is it possible to just disappear? Well, 
actually, yes. Here are four proven ways to ditch the burden of being famous:

Find religion and denounce your former work


You are always going to be playing second fiddle when you share cast space 
with mid-meltdown Charlie Sheen, but Two and a Half Men child star Angus T 
Jones ensured his inevitable slide into the Where Are They Now? file 
by becoming a Seventh Day Adventist and roundly slagging off the only notable 
thing he had ever done. "Stop watching it," he urged fans of the show, as his 
agent "cleared his schedule" for the rest of his life.

Go a bit weird and open a ridiculous business


When you are a footballer who retires at the age of 29, with a good 
half-decade left in you, it's usually due to persistent injury. The former 
Leeds United and Sweden midfielder Tomas Brolin, however, retired for the 
simple reason that he had become irreparably bad at playing football. His 
retirement saw him helming a company that made vacuum cleaner parts, owning a 
restaurant that, according toSwedish press 
<http://www.aftonbladet.se/nyheter/article11552152.ab> reports, repeatedly got 
done for allowing underage drinking, and lots of people laughing at him for 
both of the above.

Document your messy demise via the medium of song


When you are the most famous band on the planet, it is difficult to execute a 
complete vanishing act, but Abba, and in particular the female half of it, made 
a pretty good fist of it in the aftermath of the release of the albumThe 
Visitors <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Visitors_(ABBA_album)>, quite 
possibly the most depressing record ever made. Wrought in the midst of the two 
couples' divorces, it culminates in the overwhelmingly bleakLike an Angel 
Passing Through my Room <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Za7ThH5x01k>, of which 
the underlying message is: "This is effectively the end of your life as a pop 
star, ha ha." To hammer it home, the record ends with the sound of a clock 
coming to a stop. There's a reason why they don't do reunion gigs.

Just generally be an awful human being


To be more specific, adopt the public persona of the singer Steve Brookstein, 
or at least the bitter, prejudiced-against-everything underling who apparently 
tweets on his behalf. As recently as last week, Steve described depression as 
"lazy sadness", and in the past he hassuggested that the showbiz journalist Dan 
Wootton should contract HIV 
<http://www.gaystarnews.com/article/former-x-factor-winner-wishes-hiv-gay-columnist260712>
. He does not get a lot of bookings these days.
 