
It seems that we owe Alec Baldwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin> an apology. By "we" I mean the 
general public or at least those of us who fall into one or more of the 
following categories – professional photographers; amateur photographers; 
anyone who owns a smartphone (and uses it to take photographs); airline 
attendants who order people who own smart phones to turn them off before 
take-off; New Yorkers; gay people who are offended by gay slurs; straight 
people who are offended by gay slurs; Shia LaBeouf; the media in general; 
MSNBC, in particular, and fans who fail to maintain a respectful five foot 
distance from the famous person on whom they wish to lavish praise.

It seems that because of our collective failure to treat him with due 
deference, Alec Baldwin feels he has no choice but to give up on public life. 
If only the misunderstood media star would engage in a little private 
introspection, this self-imposed estrangement might not be necessary.

2013 should have been another great year for Baldwin. In addition to turning 
in a praiseworthy performance in an Oscar-nominated movie, (Woody Allen'sBlue 
Jasmine <http://www.sonyclassics.com/bluejasmine/>), and getting his own talk 
show on MSNBC 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/pop-culture/pop-culture-news/alec-baldwin-not-returning-msnbc-f2D11660293>
, his lovely new wife had a lovely new baby. But instead, as Baldwin recounts 
in a 5,000 word"mea not culpa" style essay 
<http://www.vulture.com/2014/02/alec-baldwin-good-bye-public-life.html> in this 
week's New York Magazine, the year became his Annus Horribilus.

He lost his TV show and his lust for show business (or at least some aspects 
of it) after being unfairly labeled a homophobe and a hothead. The essay was 
intended (I assume) to vindicate the actor on both counts, (as well as to alert 
the public of his decision to leave us for failing to please him.) But he would 
have been better advised to stick to the 140 character Twitter format he has 
used to air his grievances in the past, as the lengthy essay only reinforces 
the actor's image as an over-privileged and tone deaf hothead with a 
persecution complex.

For instance, Baldwin's attempt to show how down he is with the LGBT community 
got off to a shaky start when he opened byreferring to one of his "advisors" 
<http://www.gaystarnews.com/article/alec-baldwin-uses-term-tranny-attacks-rachel-maddow-and-others-blistering-article240214>
 in that community as a "M to F Tranny." Nor is he likely to have gained any 
favor bychallenging the integrity of prominent gay individuals 
<http://www.thewire.com/entertainment/2014/02/list-people-alec-baldwin-blames-his-personal-failures/358426/>
 like MSNBC host Rachel Maddow, (whohe claimed was "phony" 
<http://www.frontpagemag.com/2014/dgreenfield/alec-baldwin-calls-rachel-maddow-phony-blames-her-for-firing/>
 in real life even though she says the pair have never met) or by insulting 
CNN's Anderson Cooper or The Dish'sAndrew Sullivan 
<http://dish.andrewsullivan.com/> or TMZ's Harvey Levin, whom Baldwin has 
collectively referred to in the past as the"fundamentalist wing of gay advocacy"
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/27/alec-baldwin-gay-activists-show>
when they objected to his threatening a gay British journalist with violence 
and calling him a "toxic little queen 
<http://www.people.com/people/article/0,,20713213,00.html>". 

Baldwin claims that he didn't know this term was offensive to gay people and 
later apologized. He did the same a few months later when he called a 
photographer a "cock-sucking fathead" (or more likely "cock-sucking faggot" –
you decide <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w52r5mbD5Io>). Still, while a 
tendency to put one's foot in one's mouth does not necessarily a homophobe 
make, expressing a desire to stick one's foot up someone else's ass is another 
matter.

For anyone unfamiliar with the "toxic little queen" incident, it all started 
when the aforementioned British journalist, George Stark, falsely asserted that 
Baldwin's wife, Hilaria, had tweeted during James Gandolfini's funeral. By way 
of response, Baldwin sent Stark a series of tweets threatening to find him, 
fuck him upand this nugget 
<http://twitchy.com/2013/06/27/alec-baldwin-threatens-toxic-little-queen-reporter-in-epic-twitter-rant/>
:

If [sic] put my foot up your fucking ass, George Stark, but I'm sure you'd dig 
it too much.

In his essay, Baldwin apologizes for calling Stark a "toxic little queen" and 
claims he didn't realize at the time that it was a homophobic statement. He 
doesn't mention the bit about wanting to put his foot up his ass, however, and 
even re-invokes the violent threats by writing that "If he was inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, I might had had the impulse to 
beat the shit out of the guy." Whatever this attempt at vindication may or may 
not do to mitigate Baldwin's reputation as a homophobe, it can only reinforce 
his reputation as a violent hothead.

The actor's proclivity for violence is not comprised solely of idle threats. 
In a recent interview on the Late Show with David Letterman, the host 
tentatively raised the delicate issue of Baldwin's rather tense relations with 
members of the paparazzi whom he has beenphotographed assaulting 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=alec+baldwin+assaults+photographer&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=xzwNU-_MCOScyQGH84DIAw&sqi=2&ved=0CCUQsAQ&biw=1033&bih=309>
 on many occasions. "What is the cycle,"Letterman asked 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4No0AJ_an7g>, "that I pick up the paper and see 
you strangling a photographer?" Baldwin jovially responded that it does seem 
like it's "almost daily" and proceeded to justify the assaults as a necessary 
means of protecting his wife and child.

All very noble, I suppose and, in the actor's defense, some of the 
photographers who hang around outside his apartment building do seem to get a 
kick out of goading him. But Baldwin should have learned by now that if you 
assault a photographer in the morning, rather than deterring paparazzi 
activity, it's far more likely that by the afternoon there will bea swarm of 
media <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9z9FDD7udJE> on his doorstep hoping to 
photograph further assaults.

Anyway, pretty soon, the paparazzi of New York will have to find another 
celebrity to beat them up since Baldwin has publicly declared his decision to 
leave public life. Unfortunately, as is often the case with such declarations, 
(Baldwin's nemesis Shia LaBeouf's omnipresence in the media since he announced 
his retirement being a case in point), they rarely stick. AsSalon reported 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/02/25/a_day_after_retiring_from_the_public_eye_forever_alec_baldwins_still_tweeting/>
, less than a day after pronouncing his desire to shield his family from prying 
media eyes, Baldwin was tweeting photos of his wife doing yoga. So we're not 
off to a good start, but at least the actor has acknowledged that he has some 
problems.

Now if he could only realize that he is the instigator and not merely the 
victim of most of his problems, we'd all be better off.
 