
Alek Wek <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alek-wek> was 19 when she was 
approached by a model scout from a top London agency at a fair in Crystal 
Palace park. Her mother, she remembers, was horrified, thinking her daughter 
was about to become a Page 3 girl. She laughs loudly: "I had to point out that 
I wasn't really built for that." Wek, one of the most successful models of the 
past two decades, has inherited her father's height and extraordinarily long 
limbs, her mother's cheekbones and her "little booty and big smile", but she's 
not exactly glamour-girl material. But the agent persisted, finally convincing 
Wek's mother that theirs was a reputable agency, and her daughter's career 
began.

She went to New York and had been there barely a week when Ralph Lauren  
<http://www.ralphlauren.co.uk/home/index.jsp>booked her to open and close his 
catwalk show (the spot normally reserved for the big model of the moment, not a 
newbie).Calvin Klein <http://explore.calvinklein.com/en_US/explore>, Isaac 
Mizrahi <http://shop.nordstrom.com/c/isaac-mizrahi>, Todd Oldham 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Todd_Oldham> and Anna Sui 
<http://www.annasui.com/en/> followed suit. Wek was booked to star in Tina 
Turner'sGoldenEye video <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bkBYVNrjjIs>, named 
Model of the Year byi-D magazine <http://i-d.vice.com/en_gb/> and, in 1997 
(less than a year after starting out), became the first African model to appear 
on thecover of Elle magazine 
<http://fabfashionfix.com/tag/elle-cover-1997-alek-wek/>.

Wek was born in South Sudan, arriving in London when she was 14, and was 
acutely aware of how different she was from the other big models of the day, 
women such asKate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss>, Claudia 
Schiffer <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudia_Schiffer> and Eva Herzigova; 
while <https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2008/jun/08/eva.herzigova.eco>
growing up, she had no knowledge of trailblazers such asIman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iman_%28model%29> and Grace Jones 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grace_Jones>. "There was no concept of fashion 
and catwalk shows where I came from," Wek says. "There were no magazines. I 
never saw women in makeup, or with different hairstyles. Absolutely not." Now, 
she says, there are so many South Sudanese girls working as models it is not a 
big deal; in the late 1990s, she was one of very few successful African models. 
"There were black models, but no one as dark-skinned, and none withDinka 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dinka_people> features, that's for sure." Even 
so, she was regularly mistaken for Naomi Campbell, an entirely 
different-looking model from Streatham with a Jamaican-born mother. She laughs 
at the ridiculousness: "A black woman is not 'a type'. I never had any interest 
in those jobs that asked for only black girls. What the hell is that? Would you 
be comfortable saying you wanted only white girls, or Latin? Are you kidding 
me? It's baffling."
 Shirt, £35, Limited Edition by Marks & Spencer, marksandspencer.com. 
Trousers, from a selection, dvf.com. Shoes, £225, whistles.co.uk. Photograph: 
Gustavo Papaleo for the Guardian. Styling: Priscilla Kwateng. 
At a time when black models were considered commercially more viable if their 
hair was relaxed, their complexions light, Wek (very dark skin, cropped natural 
hair) was confident of her value. I have interviewed many models and, without 
fail, when asked if they always knew they were beautiful, each of them has 
given me a look of mock horror before going on to list their unsightly features 
as a child: big feet, too tall, gawky features. But when I ask Wek, she 
immediately replies, "Oh yes, of course."

There's an argument that this self-belief comes from growing up with what was 
effectively a media blackout. "Our confidence came from my mother," she says 
(Alek, pronounced a-LEK, is one of nine children). "She told us it was about 
celebrating the beauty of being a woman – that's what made you gorgeous." 
Models hear more direct criticism of their appearance than anyone else, with 
casting agents, editors and photographers picking apart their features in front 
of them. "You can feel very strongly that someone doesn't like you. I think any 
model who didn't have the same sort of upbringing as me would find that very 
difficult. But I absolutely knew I was entitled. I never thought I was ugly – 
it never crossed my mind."

From the start, it was high fashion and couture, not mainstream fashion, that 
most enthusiastically embraced Wek's look. "High fashion were the brave ones," 
she says. "When I started, I'd hear other people saying, 'God, she's so 
bizarre-looking', because I didn't look like the girl next door. But I was just 
normal. Iwas the girl next door. There were people in high fashion I could 
better relate to, who were doing something more interesting and not talking 
this sort of rubbish."

Her early childhood was a happy, peaceful one. "We had an extremely simple 
life. No running water, no electricity. We walked to a well for drinking water, 
and the loo was a hole in the ground. My mother ran the house, but if we 
complained about anything, we'd be told to clean it," she laughs. "It was a 
tiny town, where everyone knew everyone. We had no idea how poor we were, 
because we were so rich in our culture, our education. I loved going to school, 
walking home via the mango trees for a snack."
 Blouse, £29.50, marksandspencer.com. Trousers, from a selection, dvf.com. 
Bag, £29.50, marksandspencer.com. Photograph: Gustavo Papaleo for the Guardian. 
Styling: Priscilla Kwateng. 
When she was five, civil war broke out. At first her parents kept it from her. 
"They tried to protect us, but things escalated to such a degree that the 
militia began fighting the police. Suddenly, neighbours were disappearing 
mysteriously. You'd go to fetch water and see dead bodies along the way. We all 
had curfews, we were given regular siren warnings. The police had no resources 
or ammunition left and, finally, told us to evacuate. There was no 
accountability. It was chaotic and terrifying."

The Wek family, along with thousands of others from their Dinka tribe, began a 
long walk deep into the bush to seek safety. Her father, who was unwell and 
barely able to walk, was carried part of the way. It was rainy season and a 
bridge across a nearby river was under water, so they travelled on makeshift 
boats, each family member carrying one item from home: a water bottle, a 
saucepan, some sheets. Wek was (and still is) unable to swim, and was 
terrified. "It was horrible," she remembers. "We were squatting in huts that 
others had evacuated, just to avoid harm from snakes." Her parents, the first 
generation in their family to have gone to school, were able to identify wild 
foods that were poisonous and the few that were safe to eat.

The Weks were eventually able to leave for Khartoum because her mother had 
managed to take a quantity of salt with her, which she sold to people in the 
bush. Bit by bit, the salt money went on getting passports for the family. Her 
mother also borrowed tiny plots of land and grew peanuts, roasting and grinding 
them herself to make enough money to pay for their escape. Every day, the sound 
of an unscheduled Hercules aid flight would prompt Alek and other local 
children to run to their temporary homes, hurriedly pack their belongings, then 
go to the plane to beg the armed officials for a seat. Her critically ill 
father went first, in the hope of getting medical treatment in Khartoum. Alek 
made it to the capital a couple of months later, after conspiring with her 
mother to pose as an uncle's child (the Wek family was too large to escape en 
masse). She was 12. Her mother arrived three months later. Her father suffered 
a stroke and serious infection, and died before he could make it out of Sudan.

Wek arrived in London two years later, to live with her sisters in Hackney 
(her mother followed when she was 16). She attended the formerHackney Free & 
Parochial CofE secondary school 
<http://www.hackney.gov.uk/bsf-hackney-free-and-parochial-ce-school.htm#.Uyw9w_Y0kZQ>
, though she spoke only Arabic and Dinka; she had never known such cold 
weather. It must have been a disorienting time. "It was really, really hard. 
Children at that age can be such bullies, period. That's before you even factor 
in that I looked and sounded so different. But after going through everything, 
where nothing was ever sure, where I might get killed, I was free and so happy 
to be learning. I focused on that and threw myself into it." She was assigned 
her own special needs teacher and was soon fluent in English.
 Jumper, £325, whistles.co.uk. Shorts, £32.50, marksandspencer.com. 
Photograph: Gustavo Papaleo for the Guardian. Styling: Priscilla Kwateng. 
In 2007 Wek published a book 
<http://www.abebooks.co.uk/Alek-Sudanese-Refugee-International-Supermodel-Wek/10614980772/bd>
 about her journey from refugee to supermodel, and was amazed to find that 
"people were still not accepting of a model talking about that stuff. We have 
such a strong voice in fashion, such a platform. We have to utilise that." She 
says she decided as soon as she started working that she would use her success 
to talk about South Sudan and its refugee crisis. "We survived by relying on 
one another. There would be no Alek without that, so it was my responsibility 
to support them, too." She has worked for several years asan ambassador for the 
United Nation's refugee agency, the UNHCR 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/512242926.html>, and regularly visits South Sudan's 
camps.

Did she think the modelling itself was also a way of doing something 
important? "Yes, absolutely. But it wasn't even about black or white, it was 
about women. I felt that girls growing up needed to see somebody different, who 
may have been criticised for their nose, or their hair, or anything – that they 
could be beautiful. It's about telling girls from a young age that it's OK to 
be quirky, it's fine to be shy. You don't have to go with the crowd."

One girl inspired by her example was Lupita Nyong'o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/lupita-nyongo-best-supporting-actress-oscar>
: the actor paid tribute to Wek as an inspiration soon after winning her Oscar 
for12 Years A Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/09/12-years-a-slave-review>, saying: 
"A celebrated model, she was dark as night, she was on all of the runways and 
in every magazine and everyone was talking about how beautiful she was… My 
complexion had always been an obstacle to overcome… when I saw Alek, I 
inadvertently saw a reflection of myself. Now, I had a spring in my step 
because I felt more seen, more appreciated." Wek says she was extremely touched 
by this. "It was very humbling. I never fully understood the magnitude of what 
I was doing, because I hadn't grown up in this culture." Modelling was, as she 
puts it, never a case of, "I wanna talk about my handbag and how gorgeous I 
am!" She has always taken it seriously. "It's work to make it glamorous and 
it's work to use it for good. There are mothers who sew for six months to make 
a fashion collection – someone's grandmother, someone's sister. We come in and 
get paid to walk for 10 minutes at the end. Whenever I think about that, I 
realise it's not about me. I was just the one chosen to represent those women 
and sell the clothes."

Wek is now able to choose her assignments (between studying design, working on 
a handbag collection, and writing), but still loves the business. "The day you 
stop enjoying something is the day you should quit, if you can afford to," she 
says. "I can no longer face doing 10 fashion shows a day. But we travel 
constantly and see places people only dream of. We can eat wherever we want and 
always know there's drinking water – my mother had to boil water to stop me 
getting sick. I never take that for granted."
Bralet 
<http://www.topshop.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/ProductDisplay?searchTerm=bralet&storeId=12556&productId=14501738&urlRequestType=Base&categoryId=&langId=-1&productIdentifier=product&catalogId=33057>
, £22, by topshop.com.Skirt <http://www.fenwick.co.uk/stripe-peplum-skirt-9>, 
£495, by Mother of Pearl, from fenwick.co.uk. Photograph: Gustavo Papaleo for 
the Guardian. Styling: Priscilla Kwateng. 
She is based in Brooklyn, New York, and lives very comfortably, having made 
many smart investments and career decisions. She has recently split from her 
long-term partner and is navigating the dating scene, weeding out those who 
clearly "just want to date a model", but also deftly sidestepping her mother's 
requests that she find a man inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>. "I want to have babies in the 
next five years," she says matter-of-factly, without being asked.

She has recently been signed up by Marks & Spencer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/mar/24/marks-spencers-2014-leading-ladies-campaign-whos-who>
for a campaign alongside Emma Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson>, Annie Lennox  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/annie-lennox>and Rita Ora 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rita-ora>. "It's a huge deal for me, because 
M&S is a legend. I remember arriving in London and going there for my tights 
and scarves, it was so cold!" Her adoption by a very British institution seems 
fitting. "This is a place that's very close to my heart, and a big part of who 
I am. It was the most exciting thing to leave secondary school and go to 
college, to have that freedom to study whatever I wanted. I could never 
understand why other kids wanted to truant – my education here gave me 
everything. It's the place where I really got to flourish."

• Photographer's assistant: Fabian Nordstrom. Stylist's assistants: Genevieve 
Torabi and Xuxa Milrose. Makeup: Alex Babski at Frank Agency using Lancôme. 
Hair: Ernesto Montenovo at Phamous using Bumble and bumble. Digital operator: 
Kelly Mitchell, Republik Agency. Alek Wek is represented by Storm Model 
Management.
 