
An ice storm looms over Chicago and Aleksandar Hemon 
<http://www.aleksandarhemon.com/> is going for a walk. Flat-capped, 
black-coated, his stride restricted by old football injuries, he gives the 
impression of a man older than he is. Hemon is tall, and has a shaved head. 
Everyone who knows him even a little bit calls him Saša. "I walked a lot when I 
first moved here," Hemon says, as we enter a small, nondescript storefront. For 
the past year he has gone to this studio during the day to write. He makes a 
coffee and leads us to a silent conference room; it is 21 years ago to the day 
that Hemon landed in America – 27 January 1992. The Serbs' terrible siege of 
Sarajevo had yet to begin, and Hemon was just a young Bosnian journalist about 
to set off on a tour of the United States. His plan was to return home with the 
cultural loot of new experience.

"I landed in DC, and an escort from the US information agency and I went to 
see his friends," Hemon recalls. "We parked in Georgetown, and I remember the 
street. It was a nice townhouse in Georgetown, and I could see the light inside 
and the people inside moving, and whatever little bit of furniture, and I 
thought with that kind of pressing clarity: I will never get inside this house.

"And there was no basis for that. I did not intend to stay, I had no 
experience in the United States – I may have been here less than 24 hours – but 
I knew I would never get inside there. And 'there' not being America 
necessarily, but that harmonious mode of living that some people are lucky 
enough to have in this country."

It was an inauspicious first feeling, and one he would have to live with for a 
while. Hemon wasn't able to return to Sarajevo for eight years. Shortly after 
he arrived in the US war descended on Bosnia, cutting him off from friends and 
family. Rare phone calls brought him news of friends conscripted into the army, 
separated from their fathers and brothers and killed. Snipers riddled his 
neighbourhood with bullet holes. The snipers shot dogs when it was discovered 
that the animals could anticipate a shelling.

Many Sarajevans who escaped lost their whole family. Hemon was luckier. His 
parents, an engineer and a schoolteacher, got out the day before the siege 
began. So did his sister. Eventually, they wound up in Canada, where they 
worked in grim jobs and his father was able to resurrect his love of 
beekeeping. Stuck in Chicago, Hemon watched as his city was destroyed.

The loss of Sarajevo was, to him, a metaphysical loss, as it removed him from 
his past. He has spent the past two decades trying to narrativise it back to 
wholeness. His work, from his 2000 debut collectionThe Question of Bruno 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/07/30/reviews/000730.30ederlt.html> with its 
eight, radically different tales, to his most recent work of fiction,Love and 
Obstacles <http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/11/28/051128fi_fiction>, 
borrow heavily from his own life to tell tales of love and loyalty, but also 
the difficulty of living within a fractured self.

Now he has written a memoir, The Book of My Lives 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447210900>
, a tale that stretches from his early years in Sarajevo with his parents and 
younger sister to his recent life in Chicago. It is less an autobiography than 
a series of maps inside his head.

To understand Hemon's displacement, it is important to understand two things 
about him – his childhood, and the Proustian way in which he has always linked 
memory and the sensory experience of a place – both of which he lays bare inThe 
Book of My Lives. Hemon had a happy childhood. He played football, performed in 
mathematics competitions, became a reader and learned to play chess from his 
charismatic, domineering father. Like so many teenagers, he fell in love with 
Salinger and Rimbaud, he was sex-crazed, listened to the Sex Pistols, played in 
a terrible band, and drove recklessly over the roads home when he was allowed a 
driver's licence. His family curated their imagined noble past. Hemon calls it 
all back in the first half of his book, beginning often with an object, 
sometimes a lost object. "For people who are displaced, you can reconstruct the 
story of your life from the objects you have access to, but if you don't have 
the objects then there are holes in your life. This is why people in Bosnia – 
if anyone was running back into a burning house it was to salvage photos."

When he first arrived in Chicago, Hemon didn't just lack photographs. He 
barely had a change of shirt. So he roamed the city, haunting diners and coffee 
shops where chess was played and cigarettes were smoked, and clothed himself in 
stories. InThe Book of My Lives he described meeting Peter, an Armenian Iraqi 
who had lived in Europe and lost his family, winding up in Chicago alone. In 
another, more humorous piece, Hemon describes playing football with a ragtag 
bunch of immigrants from Italy, Cameroon, Nigeria, Tibet and elsewhere.

When Hemon wrote a tale about Peter, whose trauma was greater than Hemon's 
own, he was evidently a young man seeking out people who were like him. People 
who had a before and after. Hemon insists this was not the case. He was 
looking, rather, for complication, and for Hemon complication is the stories we 
tell about ourselves. "The privilege of a middle-class, stable, bourgeois life 
is that you can pretend that you are not complicated and project yourself as a 
solid, uncomplicated person, with refined life goals and achievements."

Hemon saw these things from the outside because he was tumbling down a ladder 
into the underclass. For the first time in his life he was poor. When the 
fellowship ran out and the lies on his CV were detected – sure, he had been a 
salesman, yes he had been a bartender! – he was nearly homeless. A smoker then, 
he remembers upending an armchair "like some kind of Hercules," to try to shake 
the change out of it so that he could buy cigarettes. He ate terrible food and 
gained weight. And he wasn't writing. For three years, from 1992 to 1995, Hemon 
simply couldn't write. "I couldn't write in Bosnian, because I was cut off from 
that, and it was traumatic," he recalls. Friends asked him to file dispatches 
for their magazine from afar – their principle being that if the war led 
everyone to talk only about the war, then the war had won. Hemon couldn't do 
it. He walked and he listened, he smoked and he worked at jobs that made it 
hard to do nothing but think about what he had lost.

Finally he began to start again, first with deciding how to write. Hemon began 
rereading the books that mattered to him, this time entirely in English: 
Salinger, who held up, and Michael Ondaatje; others who had not. "I had to 
reevaluate my aesthetics," Hemon says, "because of the war and the siege, and 
the fact that my professor would have been at work had he not shot himself."

The man who taught Hemon to read and write critically, he explains in The Book 
of My Lives, turned into a rightwing genocide-enabler during the war. 
Everything the man had planted in Hemon felt tainted.

Most brutally, Hemon reread his own work. "I went back to things I 
had written, many of the things I had written in the 90s, and there was only 
one paragraph that I really liked." From the very beginning, when he began to 
publish pieces in Story magazine and Ploughshares, and later Granta and The New 
Yorker, Hemon's prose has been chiselled, direct, though saturated with 
similes. Hemon has been widely praised for the unexpected images this style 
creates, but it was not, he says, the hallmark of a writer trying to bridge 
here and there. It was deliberate, honed, and in some cases, mapped out.

At a certain point Hemon decided if he was to survive in Chicago, the city 
would have to become as intensely real to him as Sarajevo. He would have to be 
able to hear it and sense it and taste it. Simultaneously, he would have to 
retrieve and capture the Sarajevo that he had left behind, before memory and 
his changing self destroyed it. "Memory narrativises itself," Hemon says, like 
a warning.

So he went back to Sarajevo and stayed with his aunt, and strolled the streets 
in a state of delirious confusion and deja vu. People who had stayed behind 
were hollowed out, like the buildings around them. He began to go back more 
often.

Hemon also continued to write about people, like himself, who were caught 
between two worlds, looking strangely at the new one while the old one remained 
fraught and internally present. InNowhere Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jun/28/featuresreviews.guardianreview18>
, Hemon's second book, he included an extended series of fragments about 
Pronek, who appeared inThe Question of Bruno. "One of Pronek's problems is that 
he seeks a kind of moral continuity," Hemon says. "If I change suddenly and 
decide not to be who I am right now what happens to all the other people that 
I'm connected with, and how do I sustain some kind of moral continuity."

The Lazarus Project <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/06/fiction>, 
Hemon's debut novel, attacked this question in a two-pronged narrative that 
shows how moral continuity can come from an unlikely connection with the past. 
The book portrays a confused Bosnian- American writer named Vladmir Brik who is 
living in Chicago and adrift in his life and work. He becomes obsessed with the 
story of another immigrant, Lazarus Averbuch, a Jewish man who escaped the 
pogroms in what is now Moldova, and came to Chicago. Shortly after his arrival 
Averbuch was murdered by a police officer.

Moving elliptically from Chicago in the long-ago past, to a trip Brik 
takes with a photographer friend, the novel circles the idea of memory and 
morality. What happens, it asks, when certain memories recede from American 
life, and how can a nation have any moral continuity if its culture is 
amnesiac? Hemon wrote the book at the height of the Bush years, when his 
attention began to shift away from Sarajevo to what his new nation was doing in 
the name of the "war on terror". The novel was a critical hit. It was a 
finalist for the National Book award <http://www.nationalbook.org/>, a literary 
prize open only to American citizens. In the runup to the prize, Hemon was 
interviewed and profiled, and his story became a deeply American one: the 
war-stranded immigrant who arrived on these shores and made the language and a 
big multi‑ethnic city his home by holding them up to the highest standards.

There was a lot of truth to the narrative, too. But this tale, the yarn of 
Hemon as heroic immigrant, reduces his journey to its destination. And even now 
that is a notion about which Hemon is extremely ambivalent.

In his early days in Chicago he struggled to charm the opposite sex – he had 
never before had to hit on a girl. Sarajevo-living, Hemon describes inThe Book 
of My Lives, was different in many regards from the reality he came to in 
America. If it was not communal, it was a shared space, with a fixed number of 
figures. "There was a network of people you've known for 20 years and you've 
never spoken one word to each other," he says. "And then one day you might end 
up at a party and then you might start dating, or just become best friends. But 
there was no rush, and there was no need to impress anyone." Hemon found it 
easier to collect the casual yet close relationships that amount from mapping a 
place.

Eventually, in spite of his terrible memories, and the anger he carried, Hemon 
did meet and marry Lisa Stodder, a writer and neurologist. This provided some 
stability during the publication of his first two books. But in a later chapter 
inThe Book of My Lives, Hemon describes the slow, then sudden, breakdown of 
their relationship. He returns to the dumps and nearly feels more at home there.

The memoir is full of such reversals of fortune. He experiences again and 
again the impossibility of retrieving Sarajevo, while what happens to him in 
Chicago seems to threaten any idea that it, too, will be a stable, safe place. 
After his split with Lisa, Hemon quickly met and married Teri Boyd, a photo 
editor from Florida. They had a daughter, Ella, born in Chicago. Two years 
later, Isabel was born.

And here The Book of My Lives enters its sad, final chapter. Nine months into 
Isabel's life, a doctor's appointment revealed her head to be slightly larger 
than normal. A Cat scan showed that this was not a harmless aberration, but the 
result of a small tumour on her brain. Surgery was scheduled immediately. It 
was discovered that she had a very rare form of cancer, one with very low 
survival rates. Still, for Hemon and Boyd, there is no choice but to fight it. 
Many surgeries and several months of chemo later, Isabel died.

In the chapter The Aquarium, 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2011/06/13/110613fa_fact_hemon> Hemon 
describes the peculiar disembodiment of being in the middle of the worst 
imaginable thing. The way the world recedes and the laws and priorities around 
which the outside world revolves don't just cease to apply, they become 
offensive.Language, the thing meant to help us connect, breaks down, too. 
Meanwhile, storytelling remains essential. Hemon writes of how when he became a 
father he used to start to imagine something terrible happening, but would stop 
himself. He knew, from imagining his own life in Chicago, and from flinging 
himself into experience that was not his own so that his language could catch 
up, that this was playing with fire.

In the meantime, his first daughter, Ella, began to tell stories about an 
imaginary friend called Mingus. After Isabel got sick, sometimes Mingus would 
be taking care of a sister, also called Isabel. In other moments Mingus himself 
was sick, but would always get better. Hemon watched as his daughter used the 
facility he had relied on to survive in Chicago to survive something she could 
only grasp through narrative.

The Book of My Lives is dedicated "to Isabel, forever sleeping on my chest". 
It's hard to read this line without thinking of another one in the book. It 
appears in the essay "The Lives of Grandmasters" on learning chess with his 
father, Hemon writes that the old board he was given, was "proof that there 
once was a boy who used to be me". For Hemon, there will always be a before and 
after, but, it turns out, there will also always be the period between. The 
time he had to make a choice about who he was, where he pointed his compass.

"I was cut off," he says, emphatically, "the language was cut off, all my 
friends were scattered, I had no access to them. This was, among other things, 
before the internet, and before the money. So I couldn't even call. And so I 
had this sense that I could make up my life entirely and that no one would 
know. Because who could say, "No, no, no, he was not that, he was this"? Book 
by book, he is making that impossible, it's all right there on the page, 
especially with theThe Book of My Lives.

• John Freeman is the editor of Granta magazine <http://www.granta.com/>.
 