
You are co-hosting the Mobos <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mobos> this 
year. Is it patronising to have a separate awards ceremony for music of black 
origin?

Even though it's called Music Of Black Origin, it's not just music for black 
people. Music is for everybody. I think it's good that black music is 
acknowledged and it's open for lots of artists, including white artists who 
have been inspired by black musical heritage.

Apparently your dad tried to discourage you from pursuing a career in music 
because there were hardly any successful black British musicians. Is that true?

He did have reservations. He'd much rather I'd have become an accountant or a 
stockbrocker, but that was never going to happen. Dad's fear, especially when I 
was 18, was that in the music industry in the UK there wasn't really anybody I 
would aspire to who was of black origin and who was successful. It was mainly 
black American musicians in the charts and, at that age, I think you look for 
someone you can identify with and there wasn't really anyone.

But what my dad said really helped me because I remember thinking: "I'll prove 
that black artists can sell music." And I've had two platinum albums – one with 
Mis-Teeq and one as a solo artist – and that's a massive achievement on a 
personal level. It goes to show that it doesn't matter what colour of skin you 
have, it's about character, perseverance, drive and music. That's what 
connects. It doesn't matter where you're from, it's where you're at that's 
important.

Has it changed since you were young? Does the UK now have more positive, 
multicultural role models?

Possibly but if I'm totally honest, I think there's still a large percentage 
of the country that doesn't always feel represented well enough in the media. 
Maybe a lot of mixed-race people get represented quite well, but a lot of black 
or Asian people will feel they're not as well represented.

You were one of nine celebrities who climbed Mount Kilimanjaro last year for 
Comic Relief. What was that like?

It was the hardest thing I've done in my life so far. If ever anything happens 
that's a bit tough or I need to dig deep to find inner strength, I remember the 
mountain. I remember being at the summit and thinking: "There's nothing I can't 
do." It was a really emotional, physical, draining experience. All of us have 
got this bond now – it's like the nine of us are the only people that truly 
understand how gruelling it was.

Did you get blisters?

I didn't get blisters but I could hardly feel my feet.

Do you feel you have a responsibility as a celebrity to do good works?

Absolutely. There are so many things you could reel off as negatives – your 
private life is exposed, every move is scrutinised – at the same time, you can 
think: "Wow, I'm in a position to shine a light into these areas." That's a 
powerful tool because, actually, it's quite a selfish job. It's a moral 
responsibility, I guess, I think I have.

Do you think people have ever found you intimidating?

I hope not. My friends say that at school I was quite bossy. I still am a bit 
bossy, but a nice bossy. I've always been very strong-minded, even as a little 
girl. But I'm a great friend and I've never been in a fight in my life. I think 
it's nice to be nice, especially because I've never been scared to stick up for 
myself. I'm not a shrinking violet.

In 2006, your marriage broke up amid claims of your husband's infidelity and, 
two weeks later, you were dropped by your record company. How did you cope?

Obviously that time was difficult, but I survived it and that's all that 
matters.

A year later, you won Strictly Come Dancing. After such a bruising time in 
your personal life, were you surprised by your popularity with the public?

When I went into the show it was just because I wanted to dance. I've always 
had a passion for dancing and I wasn't lucky enough to go to stage school, so 
when I got on to the show, I was like a kid in a sweet shop. I went into it 
just to have fun. The support was overwhelming, to say the least. It wasn't 
until the end of the show that I realised how much I really wanted to win it. I 
love the show. It helped me; it brought me back to life.

When you became a judge on the show at the age of 30 last year, the BBC was 
accused of ageism for replacing the 66-year-old Arlene Phillips. How did the 
ensuing row affect you?

At the time, yeah, it was difficult to read negative things, but I knew it 
would pass. I knew it wasn't life or death, I knew I was capable and there were 
more important issues going on in the world and that got me through. And then I 
did get a lot of public support, a lot of people saying: "Hang on a minute, 
this girl's just accepted a job offer!" The only side of it that was unpleasant 
was the journalists camped outside my house. Apart from that, it was 
manageable. Life's full of problems, it's how you respond to them that's the 
test of your character.

Which contestants are you tipping as ones to watch this series?

There's a few I really like. There's more people with potential this year than 
last year – Pamela [Stephenson] looks fabulous, Scott [Maslen], Kara [Tointon] 
and Matt [Baker].

What about Ann Widdecombe?

I don't think Ann Widdecombe can win the show, but she's a better dancer than 
people give her credit for. She does a good job; she's added great value to the 
show, she's funny, witty and she doesn't take any of it too seriously.

You're known for your trademark, Sid James-style laugh. Do you find it 
irritating?

Yeah, I've started to accept it, but it's just one of those things. It's a 
hearty laugh and it does annoy me slightly. Somebody actually used my laugh as 
a ringtone. If it was my mobile, I'd have thrown it away.

If you could sum up your life in the title of a song, what would it be?

"I Will Survive" by Gloria Gaynor.

Alesha Dixon will co-present the 15th anniversary Mobo Awards at Liverpool's 
Echo Arena on 20 October
 