
Alesha Dixon's debut as a judge on Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> at the weekend 
attracted 272 complaints to the BBC.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> issued a statement of support 
for the 2007 winner turned judge, saying it was "delighted" with Dixon, who 
appeared on the Friday and Saturday programmes.

"We are delighted with Alesha's debut performance as part of the judging panel 
on Strictly Come Dancing and that so many millions tuned in to enjoy the show," 
the BBC added.

"Having won the contest in 2007 Alesha understands exactly what it takes to 
excel as a dancer as well as knowing just what the celebrity contestants are 
going through in the competition. Her knowledge and direct experience adds a 
different perspective to the panel which complements the whole judging lineup."

Earlier today Dixon shrugged off criticism of her debut at the weekend and 
declared that she will remain on the show.

The Strictly Come Dancing messageboards now have 5,412 comments about the 
judges, dating back to August, when it was announced that Dixon, 30, would 
replace Phillips, 66, who had been with the show since its inception, to 
provide a different perspective on the celebrity dancers.

Dixon achieved fame with the girl band Mis-Teeq and won Strictly Come Dancing 
in 2007. Her replacement of Phillips provoked accusations of ageism at the BBC.

"I am not a quitter. It's not in my nature to consider quitting," Dixon told 
today's Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/celebs/news/2009/09/20/strictly-s-alesha-dixon-hits-back-at-critics-of-her-debut-as-judge-115875-21688812/>
.

"We are just starting on a long road and I know I can help make the path 
smoother for some of the celebs. You can't please all of the people all of the 
time," she said.

However, Dixon came in for criticism on the Strictly website talkboards over 
the weekend.

"I loved Alesha as a contestant and wanted her to win in the last series – but 
she is not a worthy replacement of Arlene," commented bigfanofsequins.

"Last night Alesha came across as a bit shouty, and didn't really make any 
useful comments on the dancing. Arlene didn't slouch in her seat and came 
across as a true professional. Whoever made this decision to dumb down the 
judges panel made a big mistake."

IreneBetty added: "While Alesha is very lovely, I don't think you can really 
be a judge on something like this unless you have had many years in the dancing 
industry."

But Dixon also had her supporters. "My family thought Alesha was superb on 
both shows," BadgerBoy commented on the message board.

"She understands that Strictly is a family entertainment show and speaks for 
the majority of the audience both in the studio and more importantly at home."

Phillips said the new show was "too long" but backed her replacement. "They 
hired Alesha because they wanted a different opinion a voice of the viewer and 
that's what she does. She was never hired to give a technical viewpoint,"she 
told the Sun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/strictly_come_dancing/2646543/Arlene-Phillips-Strictly-Come-Dancings-lost-some-sparkle.html>
.

"It is very hard for her - she must be incredibly nervous The judges had all 
worked together for six series and she is new and on her own."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 