
Alesha Dixon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alesha-dixon> has joined 
boyband 5ive in pulling out of a gig after discovering it is a political rally.


Both acts had been billed to join Sister Sledge and East 17 at the Bpoplive gig
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/feb/26/leave-aid-grassroots-out-anti-eu-festival-hottest-music-event-nigel-farage>
 in Birmingham days before the 23 June EU referendum.

But they have withdrawn after discovering the gig is being put on by the 
Leave.EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/ukip-backed-leave-eu-brexit-campaign-employs-eu-migrants-arron-banks>
 campaign, which was founded by businessman and Ukip donor Arron Banks.

The concert has already been hit by a number of line-up changes as acts 
discovered its political nature.

Drum’n’bass act Sigma pulled out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/04/brexit-concert-sigma-cancels-gig-pro-eu>
, telling BuzzFeed they were “in no way supporting the event” when asked if 
they were in favour of Britain voting to leave the EU.

Dixon, a judge on Britain’s Got Talent, announced she had pulled out of the 
gig hours after 5ive declared they had.

Leave Aid: Grassroots Out’s anti-EU festival is the hottest music event of the 
year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/feb/26/leave-aid-grassroots-out-anti-eu-festival-hottest-music-event-nigel-farage>
Her management said: “When Alesha was approached to perform at this event it 
was on the understanding that this was a multi-artist pop concert in a 
fantastic venue in the heart of the UK and Alesha would be there purely as an 
entertainer.

“It has now come to light that this is more of a political rally with 
entertainment included and we have decided to withdraw Alesha from the event. 
We wish to apologise to any fans who may have purchased tickets for this event. 
I would like to make it clear that Alesha has no political allegiances either 
way on this issue.”

Earlier on Tuesday, 5ive had announced two of its members – Ritchie Neville 
and Scott Robinson – had cancelled their performance. The band’s third member, 
Sean Conlon, was never due to perform at the gig because he was not available.

In a statement 5ive said: “When Rich and Scott agreed to play the event they 
understood that it was a pop concert funded by one of the Brexit organisations 
and not a political rally. As it has come to light that this is more of a 
political rally with entertainment included they have both decided to cancel 
their involvement.

“They would like to make it clear that as a band 5ive has no political 
allegiances or opinions for either side. Their allegiance is first and foremost 
to their fans.”
 