
Mr Woodhouse has an obsession with vitamin pills, Jane Fairfax plays the tenor 
saxophone and Frank Churchill has been living in Australia: meet the cast of 
the modern-day Emma, which is to be rewritten for the social media generation by
Alexander McCall Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexander-mccall-smith>.

McCall Smith, best known for his No 1 Ladies' Detective Agency series, is one 
of four writers so far on board to reworkJane Austen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten>'s novels with a contemporary 
twist as part ofa project to open up the stories <http://theaustenproject.com/> 
for modern sensibilities.

"One of the issues, of course, is the erotic tension that pervades the 
original novel Emma," said McCall Smith. "That is there in large measure and 
will remain there in my version. And Freud will be looking over my shoulder as 
I write. I can't wait to begin my encounter with these delicious characters. On 
which subject, I have great sympathy for Mr Woodhouse. The original felt very 
anxious about draughts; my Mr Woodhouse is extremely interested in vitamins."

Austen, famed for her sharp social observation, completed six novels in all. 
Her debut, Sense and Sensibility, first published in 1811 under the pseudonym 
"A Lady" and featuring the Dashwood sisters, Elinor and Marianne, has been
reimagined by Joanna Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/13/joanna-trollope-rewrite-jane-austen>
 in a version to be published by HarperCollins later this month.

"Elinor Dashwood, an architecture student, values discretion above all. Her 
impulsive sister Marianne displays her creativity everywhere as she dreams of 
going to art school," runs the cover description.

Queen of psychological thrillers Val McDermid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/val-mcdermid> is rewriting Northanger Abbey, 
about the gothic novel-obsessed Catherine Morland. In her version, Catherine 
visits the Edinburgh book festival, and the titular gothic mansion is situated 
in the Scottish borders. On the cover of the book,to be published in spring 2014
 <http://theaustenproject.com/news/>, Northanger Abbey sports a CCTV camera and 
satellite TV dishes.

The American writer Curtis Sittenfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/curtis-sittenfeld>, whose most recent novel, 
Sisterland, is about prescient identical twins, is reworking Pride and 
Prejudice for a 21st century version to be published in autumn 2014.

Writers for Mansfield Park and Persuasion, the two remaining Austen novels, 
will be announced later this year.
 