 Alexis, April 2 Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
In Richard Ayoade's film Submarine 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/mar/17/submarine-review?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
Paddy Considine plays a ghastly motivational speaker. His mullet speaks of the 
film's 80s setting, but his knobbishness is sartorially expressed by an 
ever-present waistcoat. It's the same withLittle Britain hypnotist Kenny Craig 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/littlebritain/characters/kennycraig.shtml>: 
something about a waistcoat, when not part of a three-piece suit, signifies 
that you're dealing with a berk. It's a bit like the bow tie, another formal 
accoutrement that, in the realm of casual wear, smacks of affectation: if the 
wearer lifts his trouser leg, he'll probably haveSpongeBob socks on 
<http://www.universal-textiles.com/UK-UT/lutk222.jpg>; and when ordering in a 
pub, he'll call the guy serving "barkeep".

It's a brave designer who tries to break the mould, which brings us to our old 
friends 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2009/dec/05/lancashire-cotton-shirt-alexis-petridis>
, traditional workwear brandOld Town <http://www.old-town.co.uk/>, the go-to 
guys if you want a pair of traditional Suffolk fisherman's jeans in a biscuit 
stout twill, as worn by Benjamin Britten. Their enthusiasm for a certain kind 
of old-fashioned waistcoat, made of drill or canvas, seems to know no bounds. 
"They don't look poncey," says Old Town's Miss Willey. "They make you look as 
if you've put a bit more thought into your outfit. And you can look quite 
cheeky by sticking your thumbs in the pockets."

She adds that a waistcoat can have a corset-like effect on larger gentlemen: 
"Though it won't perform miracles." On the plus side, neither will it make you 
look as if you're wearing novelty socks: the spectre of the berk who barks 
"barkeep" is pretty well extinguished.

Shirt, £130, by Universal Works at urbanoutfitters.co.uk 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>. Waistcoat, £78, and trousers, £102, both by 
Old Town <http://www.old-town.co.uk>. Boots, Alexis's own. 

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Nikki Palmer at Mandy Coakley.
 