
Russian anti-corruption campaigner and opposition figure Alexei Navalny has 
filed a lawsuit againstVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> after a company in which the 
Russian leader’s son-in-law is a shareholder received $1.75bn (£1.2bn) in state 
support.

 The suit cited a Reuters investigation reporting that Putin’s son-in-law, 
Kirill Shamalov, is a major shareholder in petrochemicals producer Sibur, which 
received the funding from Russia’s National Wealth Fund at an unusually low 
interest rate last year.

Navalny said Putin had violated Russian corruption laws by failing to declare 
a conflict of interest when he personally approved the financing.

 In the lawsuit, a copy of which was posted on his blog, Navalny asked the the 
Tverskoi court in Moscow to rule that Putin’s failure to act in preventing a 
conflict of interest was unlawful and asked the court to require Putin to 
recuse himself from any decisions about providing state funds for the Sibur 
project.

 “Kirill Shamalov is the spouse of Putin’s daughter. Putin giving money to a 
company when the beneficiary is his child’s partner is a classic conflict of 
interest. Straight out of a textbook,” Navalny wrote in a post on his blog.

 Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, did not immediately respond to written 
questions submitted by Reuters. Russia’s Tass news agency reported that Peskov 
said Putin had not yet been informed about the lawsuit.

 A Sibur spokesman said in December the state loan was approved in strict 
accordance with the law. The Russian Direct Investment Fund, which took the 
decision to make the loan, said it fully complied with procedures for investing 
state money in infrastructure projects.

 A Reuters investigation last year found that Shamalov married Putin’s 
youngest daughter, Katerina Tikhonova, in early 2013, shortly before acquiring 
a majority stake in Sibur.
 