
In celebration of its imminent 30th anniversary, I've been reading The Secret 
Diary Of Adrian Mole <http://www.adrianmole.com/books/diary.html> for the first 
time since my teens. I'm not sure that the book's real hero isn't his mum, the 
fag-toting Pauline, a woman responsible for one of literature's greatest 
aphorisms: "The only thing more boring than listening to other people's dreams 
is listening to other people's problems." I was struck by the bit where Adrian 
starts angrily recording the days that have gone by without her wearing the 
green Lurex apron he bought her for Christmas. Like her mother-in-law's 100% 
acrylic cardigans she quietly uses as dusters, Lurex is clearly considered 
beyond the pale even in the suburban 80s Midlands.

Perhaps it's down to the technological advances in Lurex since then – it now 
features a softer six-micron film and comes in a range of styles, including the 
amazingly named space gimp yarn – but it has made its way from the back of 
Pauline's wardrobe to the menswear catwalk. Not just any catwalk: the Prada 
catwalk, which is a good indication that something akin to the polo shirt I'm 
wearing might make its way into Topman.

I thought it gave me the look of a flamboyant competitor in the Lakeside World 
Professional Darts championship, but then I suspect it might be aimed at 
younger gentlemen. Speaking as a preternaturally decrepit 40-year-old, 
I struggle to imagine the circumstance in which I'd wear anything sparkly, let 
alone a polo shirt. Readers closer to Adrian Mole's age might disagree, but I'm 
sticking with his mum's assessment.

• Alexis wears lurex jumper £660, by Prada <http://www.prada.com>. 
Jeans £30, by Topman <http://www.topman.com>. 
Shoes £64.50, by Mango <http://www.mango.com>. 

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Charlotte Lowes at Mandy Coakley.
 