
Alex Gibney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alex-gibney>, the Oscar-winning 
documentarian behind Taxi to the Dark Side, Client 9: The Rise and Fall of 
Eliot Spitzer and The Armstrong Lie, will make his narrative feature directing 
debut with Action, a political thriller set in the 1970s.

According to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/03/alex-gibney-the-action-lionsgate-anonymous-content-participant-pictures-j-edgar-hoover-surveillance-1970s-1201729131/>
, Gibney’s film will centre on eight antiwar activists intent on exposing the 
systematic surveillance and blackmail of those who crossed J Edgar Hoover, the 
first director of the FBI.

Alex Gibney interview: journey into the seductive world of Scientology
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/28/alex-gibney-going-clear-scientology-and-the-prison-of-belief-interview-documentary-film>
The film will reportedly be based on the true story of the Citizens’ 
Commission to Investigate the FBI. The leftist activists broke into anFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> office in Pennsylvania and stole up 
to 1,000 classified documents on 8 March 1971, the day of Joe Frazier and 
Muhammad Ali’s “fight of the century” . It’s thought that 40% of the files, 
part of an operation called Cointelpro, detailed actions targeted at political 
groups against which Hoover held a vendetta. The papers revealed that mail 
workers and switchboard operators were being used to monitor antiwar groups and 
civil rights activists.


Although 200 FBI agents were assigned to investigate 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/07/us/burglars-who-took-on-fbi-abandon-shadows.html?_r=0>
 the burglary, the culprits weren’t caught before the five-year statute of 
limitations had expired. In 2014, three people – John Raines, his wife, Bonnie, 
and Keith Forsyth – admitted they had been part of the gang. Their story was 
told in Betty Medsger’s book The Burglary: The Discovery of J Edgar Hoover’s 
Secret FBI.

Gibney, a prolific documentary film-maker, has been involved with multiple 
projects related to freedom of speech and invasion of privacy by the state. He 
has made films about WikiLeaks (We Steal Secrets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/11/we-steal-secrets-story-wikileaks-review>
, 2013) and the US military’s use of torture (Taxi to the Dark Side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/13/documentary>, 2008). His 2016 
film,Zero Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/17/zero-days-review-malware-cyberwar-berlin-film-festival>
, investigates the use of computer viruses in cyber warfare.
 