
In menswear, beige sometimes doesn't seem a colour so much as a camouflage. 
Once you get past your mid-30s, you start to notice how many of the clothes on 
offer to you are beige – or its spiritual brothers taupe and mushroom. That is 
partly because designers assume that men get less adventurous with colour 
choices as they get older. But it also seems to have something to do with 
suggesting men approaching middle-age blend into the background, presumably in 
the hope that people won't notice your Methuselah-like decrepitude.

Of all the please-ignore-me shades, beige has the naffest reputation – beige 
is the colour of slacks, and the socks men wear with sandals; it's the colour 
of depressing tearooms in the kind of depressing English tourist attraction you 
never knew existed before you had children. So there's something appealingly 
perverse about designers trying to turn it into a statement of something other 
than nothing to see here, please move along, by encouraging men to clad 
themselves entirely in it. One manifestation of all-over beige is – brace 
yourselves – the safari suit with short shorts, ideal for anyone who looks at 
their wardrobe and sighs: oh, if only there was something in here that made me 
look like Sid James inCarry On Up The Jungle 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0065525/>. It's a look that certainly doesn't say, 
"Please ignore me" – it says, "Phwoooar! Nyah-ha-HA-HA!" – but I preferred the 
clothes the stylist came up with: whether it's a wearable look is a moot point, 
but at least it didn't look, as you might expect, as if you'd wallpapered 
yourself.

• Alexis wears jumper from a selection, by DSquared2 <http://www.dsquared2.com>
.Trousers £185, by Edun <http://www.edun.com>. Boots £71, by Dr Martens 
<http://www.drmartens.com>. 

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy 
Coakley
 