
After a decade of suggesting that men wear skinny jeans, menswear seems to 
have gone to the other extreme. Designers including Dior have started favouring 
wide-legged trousers. It's likely to go from catwalk to high street, but 
clearly not just yet. An internet search for wide-legged men's trousers 
revealed little, beyond a larger American gentleman angrily protesting that his 
bum was too big for normal trousers. "Minimal room in the seat," he complained, 
"does not go over well for men with larger hind parts."

Anyone who finds their hind parts already fit in their trousers might take 
more convincing. Skinny trousers have a tendency to make anyone of a certain 
age look like mutton dressed as lamb, but wide legs can make you look as if 
you're about to take part in theMorecambe And Wise Christmas special, singing 
There Is Nothing Like A Dame <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=czc-0OqfhEM>.

The last time men got behind the idea was 40 years ago. There's an amazing 
photograph of David Bowie pushing his son's pushchair with his hind parts in an 
immense pair of Oxford bags: should your kids accuse you of embarrassing them, 
this image will give them a sense of perspective. Alternatively, deploy it if 
you decide to opt for wide-legged trousers yourself, although the 
counter-argument – that Bowie got away with them because he was a nonpareil 
genius who single-handedly changed the face of popular culture and so could do 
what he wanted, and you probably aren't and therefore can't – could prove tough 
to overcome.

• Alexis wears shirt £105, by Universal Works, from Urban Outfitters 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>. Trousers £195, by Margaret Howell, from 
Liberty <http://www.liberty.co.uk>. Shoes £55, by Vans, from Urban Outfitters, 
as before.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming by Lisa Stokes.
 