
 Thom Browne <http://www.thombrowne.com/> is a hugely influential designer, as 
I have already found out the hard way.Some years ago, I cracked wise at his 
unique brand of suiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/feb/23/fashion.shopping>, in 
which the trousers stop short of the ankles: no one in their right mind, etc. 
Today, the streets are crowded with teenagers in trousers rolled up just short 
of the ankles.

So perhaps one should not snicker at his big idea this autumn, which involves 
enormous sunglasses, bright checked jackets, overcoats and trousers that stop 
short of the ankles, big boots, little top hats and what appears to be a 
maxi-skirt teamed with one of those Tibetan hats with earflaps. It's worth 
noting that, while a fair summary, the outfit I'm in here is a watered-down 
interpretation of the look. The real look is a bit ridiculous.

Browne claims influence from Thomas Jefferson 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/about/presidents/thomasjefferson>. You can see why a 
designer might be drawn to Jefferson – while in Paris, the third president of 
the United States "went on a buying spree that was staggering in its intensity" 
and ended up shipping 86 crates containing "numberless items of personal 
luxury", which certainly makes him sound like the fashion world's kind of guy. 
But I've done some research and can reveal that he probably didn't write the 
Declaration Of Independence while wearing a pair of huge sunglasses and 
a maxi-skirt. Instead, as one blogger noted, "the whole mood is totallyTim 
Burton <http://www.timburton.com/>", adding that it is "totally wearable with a 
little courage". "With a little courage" might be an industry term for 
"if you're insane", but look what happened last time I did that.

• Alexis wears shirt £225, from Burberry 
<http://uk.burberry.com/store/menswear/?Wt.srch=1>. Suit from a selection by 
Peter Jensen <http://peterjensen.co.uk/collections/>. Boots £200, from Kurt 
Geiger <http://www.kurtgeiger.com/online-shop/men>. Sunglasses £279, from 
Cutler And Gross <http://www.cutlerandgross.com/#/?page=home>. Photograph: 
David Newby. Grooming: Charlotte Lowes at Mandy Coakley.
 