 x Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
In a weird way, I quite admire the monomania of the fashion world. Other 
people look on hospitals with mixed emotions and feelings. They are places of 
trauma and grief, bravery and selflessness, diligence and helplessness, 
scarcely imaginable joy and terror. Philip Larkin looked on hospitals as 
modern-day cathedrals, "a struggle to transcend the thought of dying". Fashion 
designers, on the other hand, look at them and think: hmmm, those surgical 
scrubs are kind of fabulous.

So it is that the hospital look has worked its way into fashion, largely as a 
result of Miuccia Prada sending male models down the catwalk in something 
approximate to the shapeless V-neck scrub top. Designs based on her design 
based on the medical original have arrived in the high street: I thought this 
might say more about Prada's level of influence over fashion than it did about 
people's willingness to wear them, but I turned up at the photoshoot to find 
the make-up artist had got one on.

Given that fashion designers have exploited workwear from a host of other 
professions, why not look to the medical world for inspiration? The obvious 
answer is that people might feel queasy dressing in clothes associated with 
places of trauma and grief, "a struggle to transcend the thought of dying" etc. 
Perhaps not: one of the reasons hospitals in the US started to issue staff with 
pink scrubs a few years ago, rather than blue or green, was that people were 
nicking them, presumably to wear at home.

• Alexis wears tunic £200, by Dries Van Noten, at Liberty 
<http://liberty.co.uk>. Jeans £40, by Gap 
<http://www.thegap.co.uk/?tid=gups000196&kwid=1&ap=7&sem=true&mkwid=DEKyTJf5&adid=tnc&creative=10480798066>
.Brogues £220, by Oliver Spencer <http://oliverspencer.co.uk>. Bag £1,520, by 
Prada <http://www.prada.com/en>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Stylist: Aradia Crockett.
 