 Alexis Petridis in disco gear Photograph: David Newby 
Last week, I reported on the return of the 1970s disco suit 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/lifeandstyle/2011/apr/16/disco-white-suit-alexis-petridis>
, as sported byJohn Travolta on the poster for Saturday Night Fever 
<http://img.listal.com/image/61113/600full-saturday-night-fever-poster.jpg>. 
But it seems that the white disco suit is merely part of a wider trend: 70s 
macho, or, as people keep regrettably referring to it, the gigolo look. All of 
a sudden they're telling you to unbutton your shirt to the navel, get your 
medallions out and worse. "Think ofOliver Tobias in The Stud 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/_V5SReiHuxbs/S-nkbfmP4dI/AAAAAAAAB7U/7jaoNEX2hZg/s1600/STUD+VIDEO+COVER+1.jpg>
," instructed one, something I've been trying my hardest not to do ever since I 
saw The Stud one fateful night on ITV in the late 80s. I regret to inform you I 
tuned in for precisely the kind of reasons you might imagine a 14-year-old boy 
would tune into The Stud after his parent had gone to bed, but any lubricious 
thoughts were swiftly overwhelmed by a mounting panic that couldn't be assuaged 
by the occasional flash of Joan Collins' bosom: if this wasn't actually the 
worst film ever made, it was doing such a good impression of the worst film 
ever as to make no difference.

Perhaps it was an early sign that the whole 70s macho thing wasn't for me. You 
can understand designers importing a version of male luxury from another 
recession-scarred era to 2011, but there's no getting around the fact that it 
doesn't work if you're pale and thin and knocking on 40, which might explain 
why it quickly became a joke in Britain in the first place. Looking at myself 
in the gigolo look, I couldn't help but feel that women might indeed pay me: 
alas, to keep well away from them, rather than keep them company.

• Alexis wears shirt, from £109, by Paul Smith Jeans, and boots, £235, by Paul 
Smith,paulsmith.co.uk <http://www.paulsmith.co.uk/>. Medallions, stylist's own. 
Jeans, Alexis's own.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy 
Coakley
 