 Alexis Petridis: white suit Photograph: David Newby 
You can see why people are keen to revive the disco era. Everything about it 
is appealing: the music, with its blend of euphoria and melancholy; the sense 
of escapism from tough times – it was born out of New York when the city was on 
the verge of bankruptcy; the hedonistic abandon; the Halston gowns. Everything, 
in fact, except the menswear. I'm fairly sure one of the key factors in disco's 
confinement to the bin marked naff was the way men were encouraged to dress. 
The male disco uniform, codified for ever by the poster forSaturday Night Fever 
<http://www.allposters.co.uk/-sp/Saturday-Night-Fever-Posters_i96443_.htm>, 
lost something in translation. The white flared suit and dark shirt that looked 
great on a numb-nosed male model squiringBianca Jagger around Studio 54 
<http://www.anothermag.com/filestorage/83134.jpg> had an effect that was 
pathetic in the extreme on the night bus in Leeds.

Even the people who are saying the white disco suit is back, on the grounds 
that designers everywhere have done them, are advising a degree of caution lest 
you look like you're en route to a provincial nightclub called Flares. Their 
advice is to dress it down: match it with off-whites rather than black, wear 
casual footwear, substitute knitwear for a shirt. I know, I know: I struggle to 
imagine anything more ridiculous than walking around in a white suit with a 
jumper underneath, but I'm merely reporting what they said. And, presumably, 
whatever you do, don't stand in the middle of an illuminated dancefloor with 
one hand on your hip and the other pointing skyways.

• Alexis wears jacket and trousers from a selection, by Jaeger 
<http://www.jaeger.co.uk/>. Shirt £109, by Paul Smith 
<http://www.paulsmith.co.uk/>. Shoes £340, by Acne <http://www.acnestudios.com/>
. Photographer: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy 
Coakley.
 