 Alexis Petridis in belted suit Photograph: David Newby 
The female waist has been accentuated for centuries, but no one appears to 
have been bothered about doing anything similar with men. Until this season. 
Suddenly, they were all at it: putting belts around suits, cummerbunds on the 
outside of dinner jackets, exposing models' midriffs.Our old friend Walter Van 
Beirendonck 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2008/may/17/fashion.shopping1>, the 
Belgian brain behind the legendary papier-mache penis hat, has apparently 
designed a plaid corset for men. Alas, I could find no pictorial evidence 
online, although I did find a photo of one of his female models wearing a 
riding hat about five times the size of her head and a dress with a hobby 
horse's head sticking out the front of it, which made me laugh for a whole 
afternoon, so I didn't feel I'd wasted my time.

"Men are very reluctant to emphasise their waist," admitted one blog, above a 
picture of a model in a Calvin Klein cropped top and shorts, his tanned abs on 
display. "Why not drink less and gym more, so you can have a lean waist to put 
some belts, bands or even corsets on?"

The obvious answer to this seemed to be: a) because the model in the cropped 
top looks like a herbert, toned abs or not; and b) the thought of walking 
around with my waist on display makes me want to drink gin until I forget it.

Of course, you don't have to expose your waist – you can just put a belt 
around the outside of a suit. Why you'd want to do it, however, is as 
mysterious as the Walter Van Beirendonck plaid corset.

• Alexis wears suit £1,555, by Viktor & Rolf Monsieur, from Harvey Nichols. 
<http://www.harveynichols.com> 
Shirt Alexis's own. 
Shoes £50, by Topman <http://www.topman.com>. 
Belt £75, by Twenty8Twelve <http://www.twenty8twelve.com>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy 
Coakley.
 