
I'm suspicious of fashion with a mission statement, just as I'm suspicious of 
restaurants where waiters explain "the concept" to you, but I have to admit 
that Out Of Print is a nice idea: a range of T-shirts based on classic book 
jackets, celebrating something that might vanish in the age of the Kindle.
 x Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
It raises an interesting question about whether you should have read the book 
in question before buying a T-shirt with its cover emblazoned on it. On the one 
hand, you don't want to be a literary equivalent of David Beckham, who famously 
once turned out to face the press wearing aCrass 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crass> T-shirt, which either suggested evenings 
at Beckingham Palace were being soundtracked by furious early 80s anarcho-punk 
– "Shall we listen toPenis Envy <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ytZY1QPaSO0> or 
Christ: The Album <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christ_%E2%80%93_The_Album>?" – 
or a dim bloke unaware of what his T-shirt signified. On the other, the designs 
are often gorgeous – the art-deco first edition of Brave New World, the 
typographical experiments of Catch-22 and One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest. 
Either way, gentlemen past a certain age are probably best advised to give a 
wide berth to the one featuring Lolita, however appealing they find the 
sumptuous typeface and the era-evoking photo: it seems to signify something 
other than a love for Nabokovian wordplay.

Meanwhile, any passing rightwing dingbats will doubtless be delighted that Ayn 
Rand's Atlas Shrugged is in there, but perhaps horrified to learn that at least 
some of their money goes to charity: the purchase of each T-shirt sends a book 
to a community in need, which should have the founder of objectivism turning in 
her grave.

• Alexis wears T-shirt, £27.99, by Out Of Print, from details from 
boyparker.com <http://www.boyparker.com>. Jeans and shoes, Alexis's own.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy 
Coakley.
 