
Russia’s most prominent opposition politician, Alexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>, was released from prison on 
Friday, and vowed that the murder of his ally Boris Nemtsov during his 15-day 
sentence had not intimidated him.


“There will be no let-up in our efforts, we will give up nothing. This act of 
terror has not achieved its goal in this sense,” said an unshaven Navalny, with 
a sports bag slung over his shoulder, after leaving the Moscow detention centre.

He was jailed for 15 days for handing out leaflets in the metro for a protest 
rally he was due to lead with Nemtsov on 1 March. Two days before the rally, 
Nemtsov was shot on a bridge close to the Kremlin, the most prominent 
politician to be killed during Putin’s 15-year rule overRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. A week later, no arrests have been 
made over the murder.

A court refused Navalny leave to attend Nemtsov’s funeral, held in Moscow on 
Tuesday. He said he would go home to shower and change and then planned to 
visit Nemtsov’s grave.

“I am not frightened and I am sure my associates are not frightened either,” 
said Navalny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexei-navalny-russian-opposition-is-not-deterred-by-boris-nemtsov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425651021063%2F9d5fc768-4baf-43f7-acb3-6e7f22851e38-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexei%20Navalny%3A%20Russian%20opposition%20is%20not%20deterred%20by%20Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexei-navalny-russian-opposition-is-not-deterred-by-boris-nemtsov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexei%20Navalny%3A%20Russian%20opposition%20is%20not%20deterred%20by%20Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Falexei-navalny-russian-opposition-is-not-deterred-by-boris-nemtsov%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425651021063%2F9d5fc768-4baf-43f7-acb3-6e7f22851e38-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alexei Navalny, right, and the late Boris Nemtsov at a protest rally in 
Moscow. Photograph: Misha Japaridze/AP 
A protest march has been organised for 19 April, but the opposition appears to 
be demoralised and unsure about how to win any concessions from the Kremlin. A 
mourning rally for Nemtsov in central Moscow attracted tens of thousands of 
people, but with Putin’s official ratings higher than ever and a new climate of 
fear among the opposition, galvanising a meaningful street movement is likely 
to be a hard task.

To add to this, Russian authorities have claimed that any attempts to bring 
people on to the streets are aimed at creating a Kiev-style Maidan protest in 
Russia, and serve nefarious western interests. Navalny has accused the Kremlin 
of being directly responsible for Nemtsov’s death; other opposition leaders say 
they doubt the killing was ordered by the Kremlin but believe this new 
atmosphere, in which the opposition is portrayed as a “fifth column”, is to 
blame.

On Wednesday, President Vladimir Putin called the murder a “disgrace”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/04/vladimir-putin-condemns-boris-nemtsov-murder>
 but his spokesman has said the president believes it to be a “provocation” 
carried out with the goal of discrediting Russia. Investigators have offered 
several versions but appear to have excluded what Nemtsov’s allies believe to 
be the most likely reason for his killing: his political activity as an 
opposition leader.

Boris Nemtsov’s whole career was not aimed at helping Russia, but at the 
interests of foreign states
Nikolai Starikov 
Nemtsov had been working on a report about the involvement of Russian soldiers 
in the Ukraine conflict, a taboo topic which the Kremlin has repeatedly denied 
despite convincing evidence. Nemtsov’s aide Olga Shorina said that a day before 
his death the politician had told her about his investigations into 
paratroopers from the town of Ivanovo apparently killed inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. He had been so worried about the 
sensitivity of the information, he scribbled a note to her on a piece of paper 
rather than speak out loud about the dead soldiers, Shorina told Reuters.

On Thursday, leaders of a new “anti-Maidan” organisation held a press 
conference in Moscow, in which they denied that their movement’s calls to 
confront “traitors” in Russia’s midst had contributed to an atmosphere of 
hatred. Instead, they insisted Nemtsov had been killed by the United States, a 
conspiracy theory that has been given much airtime on Russian television.

“Boris Nemtsov’s whole career was not aimed at helping Russia, but at the 
interests of foreign states,” said Nikolai Starikov, one of Anti-Maidan’s 
leaders. “Boris Nemtsov is the first victim of the Maidan in Russia … he was 
killed by his American curators.”

In Kiev, Nemtsov’s girlfriend, Anna Duritskaya, who was with him when he was 
murdered, has applied for state protection after receiving threats, it emerged. 
It was unclear who was threatening the 23-year-old. She cooperated with Russian 
investigators, giving testimony for several hours after the incident. On 
Monday, she complained she was being held under guard and not allowed to leave 
Russian territory, but late on Monday evening she flew back to Kiev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/03/boris-nemtsov-murder-ukranian-girlfriend-kiev-russia>
.
 