 Alexis petridis: big suits Photograph: David Newby 
Last week, I reported on the ongoing vogue in fashion not for an 80s revival, 
or a late 80s revival, but a 1988 revival 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/02/alexis-petridis-1988-revival>
. It sounds like something someone made up for a laugh, but here's more 
evidence: the return to the catwalk of the big suit. It seems to come in two 
forms. One, by Lanvin, has a boxy, shoulderpad-y jacket teamed with skinny 
trousers cropped just above the ankles, which has been acclaimed as giving men 
"a fresh new silhouette": good news for those of us who start the day with a 
despairing cry of, "When will someone devise something to replace my 
increasingly tired old silhouette?" The other is just big all over, like
something Jonathan Ross would have worn on The Last Resort 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Media/Pix/pictures/2009/01/23/LastResort460.jpg>
.

If, like me, you err on the small side of perfect, a baggy suit has a tendency 
to dwarf you further, as evidenced by the way I looked in my "best clothes" in 
the late 80s: not a big suit, but an immense pair of cords and an equally 
immense sports jacket. Somewhere between the shoulder pads, my head looked 
weirdly tiny, as if I'd got on the wrong side of a Jivaroan tribe. And when 
I sat down, it vanished completely.

In fairness, dwarfing you might be part of the point of the big suit: on some, 
the sleeves are deliberately cut to hang over the hands. It's not inconceivable 
they'll click with the general public, as they did in the 80s: for a larger 
gentleman, they're infinitely more forgiving than a slim-cut suit. Before 
opting in, however, the more diminutive among us might consider carefully the 
pitiful image of me at 16, spending endless family meals and visits to the 
theatre looking like a victim ofla Terreur 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Revolution>.

• Alexis wears suit £125, and shirt £25, both by Asos. Suit, £125, by Asos, as 
before. Brown b
Boots, £55, by Oliver Spencer <http://oliverspencer.co.uk/>, as before.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Stylist: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Jen Fechter at Era Management.
 