
In theory, suede in summer should be as ridiculous an idea as last week's full 
leather summer suit 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/lifeandstyle/2011/jul/01/all-over-leather-mens-fashion>: 
it's just another form of leather, after all. And yet it isn't, as a result of 
something called refined suede, a phrase that's been cropping up a lot in 
menswear recently. Demonstrating once more the encyclopedic knowledge of 
fashion that's made this column so indispensable, I initially thought they 
meant refined in the Gwyneth-Paltrow-offering-etiquette-tips-on-her-website 
sense of the word; in fairness, a lot of the articles that mentioned refined 
suede were on the kind of menswear blogs that seem to be written by, or aimed 
at,Niles off Frasier <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niles_Crane>, packed with 
casually deployed phrases such as "commission a lightweight navy blazer from 
your tailor". But apparently not: refined suede is actually a lighter version 
of suede, more suitable for summer.

Its appearance on the catwalk has caused the kind of menswear blogs that seem 
to be written by Niles off Frasier to do their collective nut: "sartorial 
perfection", "playful and masculine", etc, etc. You can see their point, at 
least some of the time. The zipped blousons and one-button jackets designers 
have come up with look pretty great: somewhere between smart and casual. They 
also seem to have gone in for the sort of suede cardigan that readers of Adrian 
Mole's diaries may recall his mother refusing to buy on the grounds it made him 
"look like Frank Bough". They may have the same effect on you, but if that's 
your idea of playful and masculine sartorial perfection, be my guest.

• Alexis wears jacket £90, by LTD, from Topshop <http://www.topshop.com>. 
Shoes, jeans, shirt, all Alexis's own.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy 
Coakley.
 