 Alexis Petridis in terrycloth Photograph: David Newby 
Towelling or terrycloth has been out of fashion for decades, if indeed it was 
ever in. Once you start making men's clothes out of it, they invariably give 
the wearer the air of a middle-aged, 1970s suburbanite. Online, I found a white 
towelling polo by a French designer, but something about it made me think not 
just of the Daily Mail, but of the guy fromFred Basset 
<http://www.gocomics.com/fredbasset/>, its soul-crushingly unfunny strip 
cartoon.

I was looking online for towelling clothes because they're undergoing a 
revival. Or at least that's what the excellent style magazineFantastic Man 
<http://www.fantasticman.com/> said recently. Its website devoted a whole week 
to the fabric, which gave the impression that there was virtually no item of 
menswear that some designer hasn't tried to make out of terrycloth in recent 
months. There were pullovers, shorts, a Tom Ford zip jacket, an 
impressive-looking bag that folds out to become a beach towel and a blazer 
("while totally ridiculous", Fantastic Man said of the latter, "it is 
nevertheless amazing").

In fairness, none of the models looked like Fred Basset's owner. But the 
stylist, called upon to source the finest the towelling revival had to offer, 
could find only a solitary terrycloth short-sleeved shirt: evidence, perhaps, 
that the revival isn't happening. Wearing it, though, I could see why it might: 
it was incredibly soft and comfortable. Whether that's enough to stop people 
worrying about looking like a middle-aged 70s suburbanite is open to question. 
Ripe for revival or still Terrycloth and June? The choice is yours. 

• Alexis wears blue towelling polo £95, by Orlebar Brown, from Fenwick 
<http://www.fenwick.co.uk>. 
Trousers, £40, by Farrah, and shoes, £40, by Superga, both from Urban 
Outfitters <http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Jen Fechter at Era 
Management.
 