 Alexis Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
'For a so-called 'fashion expert'," opined the presumably Brighton-based 
Twitterer, "you don't make much effort when you're hitting Waitrose." I felt a 
chill of panic. It was the phrase "so-called fashion expert" that threw me. 
"So-called" by whom? When? Where? Who are these people who, having read this 
column and seen the accompanying pictures, tell other people I'm a fashion 
expert? How inexpert in fashion do you have to be to think that? The thought of 
what they might like turns my water to ice. I imagine people trying to cram 
their heads through trouser legs, wearing shoes on their hands, wandering 
around naked from the waist down, etc.

You could suggest that I've been writing a column about fashion for years, so 
I must have learned something. I haven't. Every time I think I have, events 
conspire to convince me I haven't. Regard the shoes here. I know: they make you 
look like you accessorise with a flower that squirts water, and that you turned 
up in a car with doors that fall off, etc. They are by Prada, whose menswear 
tends to be covetable, the kind of clothes that make sense of high-end fashion 
in that they're things you'd buy if you had endless amounts of money. 
Furthermore, they are apparently considered so remarkable, they've sparked a 
trend for jute-soled shoes: actual leather shoes with the kind of soles you 
find on espadrilles. Once again, I turn to you with my palms upturned in 
supplication and say: what on Earth is going on? It's beyond my comprehension. 
And that's my expert opinion.

• Alexis wears shoes, £510, by Prada, prada.com. Shirt, £49, by Farah, and 
trousers, £150, by Universal Works, both from urbanoutfitters.co.uk. 
Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Aradia Crockett
 