 Alexis Petridis in floral prints Photograph: David Newby 
Some fashion clearly isn't designed to hang about for long: it's all about 
immediate impact. Look, if you dare, at the work of New Power Studio, who
recently enlivened London Fashion Week with a hat that had burning incense 
sticks in the top of it and a PVC penis beret 
<http://www.newpowerstudio.com/new/index.php?/projects/the-last-dance/> (the 
latter an intriguing successor to our old chum, theWalter Van Beirendonck 
papier-mâché penis cap 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2008/may/17/fashion.shopping1>, this 
time with the penis in question in a state of arousal and relocated from the 
forehead to the crown). Obviously, don't let me stop you rushing to avail 
yourself of either – for all I know, you may be reading this going, thank God, 
I've been looking to replace my worn-out papier-mâché penis cap with some fresh 
penis-related headgear – but I'm not sure it's a look that's going to ring down 
the ages.

At the other extreme is fashion with staying power, which seems to transcend 
trends. Which brings us to the Liberty print shirt. Floral prints are big this 
season, but they're a classic anyway. They sit somewhere between smart and 
casual; they're striking without venturing into PVC penis beret territory. And 
they key into a long artistic history: the first Liberty prints were designed 
in the 20s, but you can see in the fabric designs the influence of the store's 
past as a bastion first of aestheticism, then of the arts and crafts movement 
and art nouveau.

They aren't the only way of doing the current floral trend: one recent shoot 
featured a male model in what appeared to be lace-trimmed floral 
knickerbockers. Once again, if it's immediate impact you're after, don't let me 
stop you.

• Alexis wears shirt £170, by B Store for Liberty 
<http://www.liberty.co.uk/fcp/product/Liberty/B-Store-Loves-Liberty/Baracuda-Two-Tone-Print-Shirt-B-Store-Loves-Liberty-/62407>
.
Jeans, £130, by Von Hundred at Urban Outfitters 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk/clothing/denim/icat/mensdenim/&bklist=icat,5,shop,mens,mensclothing,mensdenim>
.
Shoes £40, by Mango <http://www.mango.com>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Jen Fechter at Era Management.
 