
Someone seems to have decided that, rather than revive a general era, we 
should revive specific years. We're apparently currently in the grip of a 1988 
revival. People are demanding not just vintage 80s clothes, but vintage 1988 
clothes. A pop-up restaurant serving 1988 food recently opened in London: no, I 
have no idea what 1988 food is either. In our house, the big culinary 
innovation of 1988 was the arrival of theMüller Corner 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Muller+Corner&hl=en&prmd=ivns&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=0g4wTsOdHM67hAeVpNwp&ved=0CEsQsAQ&biw=1645&bih=1006>
. Perhaps they're all sat there in east London eating them.

The 1988 revival is complicated by the fact that there was a 1950s revival in 
the mid-late 80s: Levis 501s, Rayban Wayfarers, monochrome documentaries about 
Chet Baker, Reet Petite at number one, etc. Which brings us to Oliver Peoples' 
O'Malley sunglasses, decreed as this season's big thing, introduced in 1988, 
but based on a 1950s style. Patrick Bateman wore them inAmerican Psycho 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0144084/>: handy information if you're planning on 
basing your look on a grotesque parody of the brainless, tasteless 
acquisitiveness of the 80s.

Actually, endorsement of fictional serial killer notwithstanding, O'Malley 
sunglasses look a good investment. Like 501s, they're less a 50s design than 
a classic design that happened to originate in the 50s. That means they'll 
still look good next year, by which time we'll presumably be in the grip of a 
1989 revival: a swath of hip new bands claiming the influence ofJive Bunny 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2JU8dvQ4wvI> and Milli Vanilli 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sZG-VvlErJY>, pop-up restaurants serving peanut 
Boosts <http://www.cadbury.co.uk/ourproducts/yesterday/Pages/Yesterday.aspx>. 
I know, I know: but we'll all have to do our best to contain our excitement at 
the prospect.

• Alexis wears: T-shirt, £20, by Won Hundred from Urban Outfitters 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk/clothing/striped-tees/icat/stripedtees/&bklist=icat,5,shop,mens,mensclothing,stripedtees>
. Jeans, Alexis own. Pumps, £40, by Superga, from Urban Outfitters 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk/shoes/all-shoes-/icat/mshoes/&bklist=icat,5,shop,mens,mshoesgw,mshoes>
.Sunglasses, £260, by Oliver Peoples, from 36opticians. 
<http://www.36opticians.co.uk/>
Photograph: David Newby. Grooming: Jen Fechter
 