
Almost everything is wrong about the first episode of the 10-part BBC 
adaptation ofThe Three Musketeers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-25724508>, which starts on 
Sunday. Played by Luke Pasqualino, 23, its D'Artagnan is no teenager (the novel 
calls him "Don Quixote at 18"), and is not marked out by accent as a Gascon.The 
Musketeers's opening sequence meddles with Alexandre Dumas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexandredumaspere>'s beginning so it 
resembles a modern movie thriller's violent prologue, thereby distorting 
D'Artagnan's motivation when he meets and joins Aramis, Athos and Porthos. 
Wintry rain and snow make his journey to Paris hazardous, although Dumas sets 
his initial chapters in April.

Equally prone to depart from the original are the scenes at the 1620s French 
court. Louis XIII, idle and petulant, is a cartoonish king fromHorrible 
Histories <http://www.bbc.co.uk/cbbc/shows/horrible-histories>, while his 
queen, Anne of Austria, looks and sounds – as does Pasqualino's male model-like 
hero – like aMade in Chelsea 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/made-in-chelsea> character (in Dumas her 
foreignness is a key plot point). Ambiguous in the novel, chief minister 
Cardinal Richelieu becomes lecherous and lethal, executing or personally 
killing anyone no longer of use to him.

For some viewers, though, the adaptation's biggest shock will be seeing 
D'Artagnan and his new friends firing pistols. Although Dumas's musketeers 
presumably owned muskets, he's clearly keen to restrict these belated exemplars 
of medieval chivalry to sword-fighting, knowing that having guns around would 
be fatal to swashbuckling.

In being consistently unfaithful to the novel, however, The Musketeers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00sxqkb> is at least faithful to the 
tradition of unfaithful Dumas adaptations: even when they stick roughly to his 
plot, the dozens of movie and TV versions (from the silent era toPaul WS 
Anderson's 2011 film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143595/three-musketeers>) usually do 
their best to mess it around with bizarre casting, Americanisation, 
anachronistic dialogue and so on. There are also musical, cowboy, ninja and 
Foreign Legion versions, plus cartoons featuring dog and cat musketeers, Disney 
characters and – in an all-female tale – Barbie. Adapters arguably feel so free 
to play fast and loose because they view Dumas as a pulp writer: the king of 
pulp, perhaps – near unique in having created not one but two enduring 
characters, D'Artagnan and the avenging Count – but nevertheless essentially a 
purveyor of adventure yarns.

What that ignores is that he's also a seminal historical novelist, as 
interested in political intrigue as swashbuckling. The three D'Artagnan novels, 
which together cover around 40 years, are part of a piecemeal but ambitious 
chronicle of French history that stretches from the 1570s ofLa Reine Margot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/56747/reine.margot> to the 1820s and 
30s ofThe Count of Monte Cristo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91383/count.of.monte.cristo>.

Using fighting, bed-hopping and court soap operas as reader-bait is one part 
of Dumas's influence on subsequent historical fiction, but less recognised is 
the debt of later authors to his depiction of the powerful.The Three Musketeers 
exemplifies how he shifts away from Shakespeare's direct portrayal of kings to 
centring his novels on subordinate figures who have close-up access to them – 
something that's become the template for books leading up to today's novels by, 
for example,CJ Sansom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/nov/15/cj-sansom-interview>, Philippa 
Gregory <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippa-gregory> and Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel>. Mantel's Cromwell is a far 
more complex creation than Dumas's Richelieu, but he's clearly descended from 
him.
 