
I was recently in front of Su Pollard <http://www.supollard.co.uk/> in the 
queue at Victoria station. I know, I know, but that's the life of a journalist: 
one endless round of head-spinning celebrity encounters. I knew it was Su 
Pollard because she was dressed as Su Pollard – ie, in a manner that made your 
eyes involuntarily cross. Her tights were cerise, her ra-ra skirt berserk, but 
not everything she was wearing was as understated as that.

I mention this because Pollard's sense of aesthetics seems to hang over the 
current vogue for "psychedelic" men's clothing. I love the brief period of 
British menswear between the smartness of mod and the luridness of 
flower-power: paisley shirts and vintage militaria. In an America scarred by 
Vietnam, people took acid and began fomenting plans for revolution. Here, 
lysergic mind expansion's main effect seems to have been to instil an 
insatiable desire to dress like a Victorian.

It's a look you can't bring back without looking parodic, which is why what's 
now touted as the psychedelic look seems to have more to do with Su Pollard 
than withSyd Barrett <http://www.sydbarrett.com/>: clashing colours and 
patterns, op-art prints, dip-dye and tie-dye and sweaters described as "blotchy 
intarsia" – which sounds like something you'd make a discreet appointment at a 
clinic about, but turns out to be a knitting technique – all thrown on at once. 
A lot of the stuff is lovely in isolation: one style mag had a photo of a James 
Long shirt with a beautiful, mind-blowing print and a price to match. But all 
at once? In the parlance of the era: it's too much, man.

• Alexis wears: Shirt from a selection, by Etro <http://www.etro.it/>. Jeans 
£120, fromUrban Outfitters <http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk/>. Shoes £125, by 
Russell & Bromley <http://www.russellandbromley.co.uk/>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Jen Fechter at Era Artist 
Management.
 