
It's not that there's any disagreement among fashionistas that bright colours 
are in for menswear this autumn. They just can't work out which ones, how many 
there are and how you should wear them. Some argue for colour blocking, which 
involves wearing swaths of clashing colours: perhaps you could start with Louis 
Vuitton's burnt-orange blazer, at a mere £1,500. Others advise "pops" of bright 
colour in an otherwise muted outfit. This seems more practical and likely to be 
taken up by the general public, not least because there's something about 
wearing a blazer in a retina-searing colour that makes you look as if you're 
going to start judging a glamorous grans competition.

This is my last column. It's been a five-year journey I'm grateful I 
undertook: had I not, I'd have remained ignorant not only of the existence of 
theWalter Van Beirendonck papier-mache penis hat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/may/17/fashion.shopping1>, but 
also of the Bernhard Willhelm crotchless men's leotard, and I can't help 
feeling my life would have been much the poorer as a result. But it seems 
fitting I end it as I began: looking at wildly contradictory advice about 
menswear, struck by the impression that the fashion world might just be making 
it up as it goes along, but still feeling as clueless as Terry Collier claimed 
to be in Whatever Happened To The Likely Lads? "I've learned nothing," he 
complained bitterly, before offering an epigram that could easily be this 
column's epitaph: "You know what it'll say on my gravestone? None The Bloody 
Wiser."

Alexis wears: Trousers £39.99, by Zara <http://www.zara.com/>. Jumper £159, by 
Universal Works atFenwick <http://www.fenwick.co.uk/>. Shoes £79.90, by Mango 
<http://shop.mango.com>. Rucksack £32, by Topman <http://www.topman.com>.

Photograph: David Newby. Stylist: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: Charlotte Lowes 
at Mandy Coakley.
 