
I thought we'd basically dealt with fur in the 1980s – that all those 
blood-spatteredPeta <http://www.peta.org.uk/> adverts and the threat of 
Chrissie Hynde <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chrissie_Hynde#Personal_life> 
chaining herself to you had done the trick and no one was interested any more. 
But that was before the global recession and subsequent shift in the menswear 
market: the only people who can afford to buy the high-end stuff are the 
super-rich from Russia and south-east Asia, two areas with a substantially less 
squeamish attitude to animal cruelty than our own. One theory is that they're 
keen on fur because it has connotations of social status: it's what 
19th-century aristocrats wore in colder climates. The other is that they just 
like big, vulgar, up-yours displays of wealth. Anyone who's glanced at Hello! 
magazine when one of their wives welcomes us into their sumptuous London home 
will know your average oligarch frequently displays the kind of aesthetic sense 
that makes a gangsta rapper look like a member of theArts and Crafts movement 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/t/the-arts-and-crafts-movement/>.

So it was that many designers at the A/W menswear shows did fur: fur gilets, 
belted fur raincoats, fur pea coats. Even if you have no moral objection to 
fur, you quickly develop an aesthetic one. Dolce & Gabbana's fur biker jacket 
is a thing of such advanced hideousness, you can look at it only through your 
fingers. Doubtless someone on the high street will copy some of it in fake fur. 
Anyone desperate to look as if they've got all the money and none of the taste 
should consider investing.

• Alexis wears jacket £850, by John Rocha, from 15a Dover Street, 020-7495 
2233,johnrocha.ie <http://johnrocha.ie>. Trousers £28, by Topman 
<http://www.topman.com>. Shirt £30, by American Apparel 
<http://www.americanapparel.com>. Trainers Alexis' own. 
Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Charlotte Lowes at Mandy Coakley.

• This article was edited on 18 October 2011. The original had an incorrect 
stockist details for the John Rocha jacket.
 