
Alexandra Harris's elegant re-evaluation of the arts in Britain between the 
wars, in which she argues that some of the key battles of modernism were fought 
in English tea shops and churchyards, was tonight named the winner of this 
year'sGuardian first book award <>.

Harris was awarded the Â£10,000 prize for Romantic Moderns: English Writers, 
Artists and the Imagination from Virginia Woolf to John Piper at a ceremony at 
the Victoria & Albert Museum in London.

She follows in the footsteps of Zadie Smith and Jonathan Safran Foer, two 
previous winners of the award. Harris, 29, is a lecturer in English at 
Liverpool University. Her book presents a radically new interpretation of the 
arts in the interwar period.

The Guardian's literary editor, Claire Armitstead, who chaired the judging 
panel, said she was excited by the judges' choice, which had been described as 
a "counterintuitive decision" by one of their number.

"Serious works of art history rarely win populist prizes, and often have 
trouble finding publishers at all," Armitstead said. "Yet the response from our 
Waterstone's reading groups, as well as from our central panel, showed that 
readers of all sorts are willing to engage with demanding books, if they are 
well written and beautifully produced."

Romantic Moderns <https://www.theguardian.com/books/romantic-moderns> 
interrogates the received notion that the interwar period was imbued with a 
simple nostalgia, looking only to a provincial world of tea shops and old 
churches while the key battles for modern art and modern literature were being 
fought in Paris and Spain. Instead, Harris argues, English culture of the time 
was eclectic and urgent, pursuing its own often pastoral slant on modernism.

Whether in the work of novelists Evelyn Waugh or EM Forster, artist Graham 
Sutherland or photographer Cecil Beaton, food writer Florence White or garden 
designer Christopher Tunnard, Harris argues, a modern English renaissance was 
at work, with the nostalgic and the modern living side by side.

"I wanted to get over this divide that we get in some books between the 
international and the insular," Harris said. "John Piper and Graham Sutherland 
have been written about in the past as the most insular, inward-looking 
artists, and yet they're not. Part of what's so special is their understanding 
of European tradition and their great love for it all, their way of creating a 
dialogue between home and abroad."

Armitstead said that "at a time when universities are threatened as never 
before", Harris's book was a reminder of how important higher education is to 
literature and to culture as a whole, "and how crucial it is that the finest 
young thinkers have the time and space to develop."

The Guardian first book award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardianfirstbookaward> is unique in 
including reading groups from five branches of the bookshop chain in its 
judging process.

Novelist and poet Adam Foulds, biographer Richard Holmes and actor Diana Quick 
were also among the judges for this year's prize, along with former ICA 
director Ekow Eshun and Katharine Viner, deputy editor of the Guardian.

Foulds called Harris's book, published by Thames and Hudson, his personal "top 
choice", describing it as "a brilliant piece of work that manages to be both 
comprehensive and coherent as it tells a compelling story about 20th century 
English art". He predicted a long life for Romantic Moderns, calling it "a 
significant contribution to the history of English culture".

Romantic Moderns was one of just two non-fiction works on the shortlist for 
the award, the other being journalist Kathryn Schulz's Being Wrong: Adventures 
in the Margins of Error. Also shortlisted were the novels Black Mamba Boy, by 
Nadifa Mohamed, Boxer, Beetle, by Ned Beauman, and Your Presence is Requested 
at Suvanto, by Maile Chapman.
 