 Alexis in Crombie Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
When I was a kid, Crombie overcoats <http://www.crombie.co.uk/> came with 
rather menacing connotations, largely because they'd been adopted by the 
skinhead cult. Whatever other failings they had, you couldn't fault a 
skinhead's eye for a menswear design classic, unless, of course, said menswear 
design classic was made of oxblood leather, had 18 holes and was busy removing 
your teeth at the time. One company used to advertise Crombie-style coats in 
the back pages ofSmash Hits <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smash_Hits> – not 
perhaps the first publication you'd think of if trying to reach an audience of 
number-one-cropped bovver boys – using a line drawing of a skin with a speech 
bubble coming out of his mouth offering the winning endorsement, "Good coats, 
these."

The ad certainly demonstrated how the perception of the Crombie had changed 
from its posh origins: its cloth was commended by Queen Victoria and Napoleon 
III, its coats favoured by the Russian imperial court. The coat now seems to 
have regained its more highfalutin connotations thanks toThe King's Speech 
<http://www.kingsspeech.com/>, which features Colin Firth looking pretty dapper 
in the prosaically named Crombie King Coat, designed especially for George VI 
in 1932. It's a markedly different design from the Crombie once favoured by the 
skinheads, which is perhaps just as well, given that it retails at a fairly 
eye-watering £995: that's a lot of money to look like a line drawing in the 
back of Smash Hits in the early 80s.

• Alexis wears crombie, £995, by crombie.co.uk <http://www.crombie.co.uk>. 
Suit trousers, from a selection, by asuitthatfits.com 
<http://www.asuitthatfits.com/shop/index.php>. Shoes, £165, by 
russellandbromley.co.uk <http://www.russellandbromley.co.uk/>. Shirt, £39.50, by
gap.eu <http://www.gap.eu/>. Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: 
Aradia Crockett. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy Coakley
 