 Alexis Petridis in velvet Photograph: David Newby 
Virtually every fashion blogger seems to think velvet suits are a big deal in 
menswear this autumn. That said, every fashion blogger I read talked about the 
velvet suit as something that required confidence to wear. A couple even 
suggested alternatives for the faint-hearted, including velvet overcoats and 
suits with velvet lapels: I thought the latter had an air of 50s Soho about 
them, not in the sense of conveying appealingly louche bohemianism, but in the 
sense they looked like something you'd wear while furtively trying to encourage 
passing businessmen into a strip club.

The velvet suit is not clothing that projects rugged masculinity, although I'm 
not sure a velvet overcoat is upping the machismo level much. Every velvet 
overcoat I've seen looked like it should come accessorised with a powdered wig 
and beauty spot. Nothing wrong with that, but put it this way: I wouldn't wear 
one to the football.

Besides, I didn't think the velvet suit I tried on required that much 
confidence to pull off. The fact that every lady present started cooing 
appreciatively when I put it on helped: I'm sure you don't need me to tell you 
how infrequently that reaction comes my way. It was by Mr Start, the fabric was 
a fathomless, gorgeous blue, and it was beautifully cut. Again, I wouldn't wear 
it to the football. But as an alternative to evening dress it worked: less 
starchy, more relaxed, less likely to get you confused with a waiter.

• Alexis wears jacket and trousers, both from a selection, by Mr Start 
<http://www.start-london.com/>. Shirt, from £225, by Burberry Prorsum 
<http://www.burberry.com>, burberry.com. Shoes, £199, by Loake, from 
my-wardrobe.com <http://www.my-wardrobe.com/>.

Photography: David Newby for the Guardian. Stylist: Priscilla Kwateng. 
Grooming: Charlotte Lowes at Mandy Coakley.
 