 Alexis Petridis in headphones Photograph: David Newby 
The aesthetic point of headphones you'd wear in the street used to be 
discretion. The idea was that other people didn't really notice them, the 
wisdom of which idea was underlined when the iPod arrived with its 
attention-grabbing white earbuds, which muggers took as visual shorthand for, 
"I have about my person an expensive piece of new technology. Please relieve me 
of it at knife-point." And yet, recently, the aesthetic point of headphones 
you'd wear in the street seems to have changed: people (men, mostly) are 
wearing increasingly immense, colourful over-ear cans in public.

It could be a matter of sound quality, or drawing attention to the fact that 
you're interested in sound quality, but I don't think it is. You surely 
wouldn't draw attention to the fact that you're interested in hi-fi, in much 
the same way as you wouldn't walk around in a T-shirt that proclaims, "I have 
every Gillingham FC programme since 1961 stored in chronological order in 
plastic bags in my spare room"; it's one of those peculiarly male passions you 
don't publicly advertise, lest women flee from you, screaming.

I think it's more likely to be a kind of latter-day equivalent of a band 
T-shirt, for a less tribal era, when no one really defines themselves by their 
favourite style of music any more. In an age of "I like a bit of everything, 
actually", loudly signifying that you like music per se is perhaps enough. 
Either that, or it's an act of cocooning yourself away from the rest of 
humanity: you are basically attaching to your head a sign that reads: "Bugger 
off." 

Alexis wears headphones from £131, by Ultrasone <http://www.ultrasone.com>.
All clothes, Alexis's own.

Photographer: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Nikki Palmer at Mandy 
Coakley.
 