 Alexis Petridis: cable knit Photograph: David Newby 
Fashion's obsession with the past extends only so far: retro clothing never 
reaches back much further than the start of the 20th century. Occasionally, you 
get Victoriana, but never anything older, presumably because the notion of 
retro clothing is founded in a vague notion that people looked more stylish in 
the past: once you get past a certain point, you hit both the widespread belief 
they weren't, plus the fear of looking as if you're in fancy dress. I once met 
a member of a psychedelic folk rock band calledCirculus 
<http://www.myspace.com/circulus>, who'd made the bold, possibly suicidal, 
decision to dress in a style he claimed was based on that of Philip the Good, 
14th-century Duke of Burgundy, while living in Plumstead, but I think it's fair 
to say he was a one-off.

So, there's something weirdly cheering about the current revival in cable-knit 
sweaters. Some clothing historians think the 9th-century manuscriptThe Book Of 
Kells <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_of_Kells>contains a drawing of what 
looks like a man wearing not merely a cable-knit Aran sweater, but cable-knit 
leggings as well: I confess I hesitated to mention the latter fact lest I ended 
up glumly sweating while modelling a pair here.

Excited by the opportunity to rock a look roughly similar to that being rocked 
around the timeKing Ethelwulf of Wessex 
<http://www.suite101.com/content/the-british-monarchy-ethelwulf-of-wessex-a127080>
 defeated the Danes, I recently tried a cable-knit sweater. I don't know what 
effect I was hoping for – something rugged and windswept, I suppose – but it 
wasn't what I got. I looked as if I should have been playing trumpet in winsome 
early 80s pop bandHaircut One Hundred <http://www.haircutonehundred.net/>: the 
hand of a certain kind of history was upon me, but I decided to shake it off.

• Alexis wears jumper, £38, by Topman <http://www.topman.co.uk>. Jeans, £135, 
by Nudie, fromurbanoutfitters.co.uk <http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>. Boots, 
Alexis' own. Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Stylist: Priscilla 
Kwateng. Grooming: Jason Croizer using Yonka for men.
 