 Alexis Petridis in tux Photograph: David Newby 
You might think the tuxedo is one of those staples with which you just 
shouldn't mess. You might adduce as evidence any photo of Simon and Garfunkel 
at the 1975 Grammys, at whichGarfunkel 
<http://29.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lmd28gaAQo1qc3td4o1_500.jpg> wore a dinner 
jacket over a T-shirt on which was printed a picture of a dress shirt and bow 
tie. He not only looks like a pillock, he looks like a pillock who spent some 
time chuckling smugly in the mirror before going out.

But maybe there should be room to adapt men's evening dress. A dinner suit is 
meant to be the thing men look best in, the outfit that most brings out 
masculine suavity, James Bond's preferred mode of dress. But I know loads of 
men, myself included, who hate it. The only thing it brings out in me is a 
resemblance to a waiter in a seedy taverna. You can mess around with the dinner 
suit all you want; you couldn't make it any less appealing to me.

That was a statement I quickly filed under "rash" when I saw Thom Browne's 
"alternative tuxedo" 
<http://i619.photobucket.com/albums/tt275/jvdin/MODE/TREND%202011/64419b77.jpg>
, which involved shorts and black knee socks. But other designers' attempts 
were pretty laudable: I probably wouldn't wear one with nothing underneath, as 
Givenchy appeared to be suggesting on the catwalk, but Acne's slim-cut version 
seemed to lose just enough formality. I liked the one pictured. "You look all 
right," grunted the stylist, who normally sits with her head in her hands, 
letting out the occasional muffled sob. At least I didn't think I looked as if 
I should be asking if anybody wanted more retsina, which counts as an 
improvement.

• Alexis wears tuxedo £1,495, and shirt £175, both by Ozwald Boateng 
<http://www.ozwaldboateng.co.uk>.
Shoes £175, by Russell & Bromley <http://www.russellandbromley.co.uk>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Grooming: Lisa Stokes.
 