 Alexis Petridis in coat Photograph: David Newby 
Gwyneth Paltrow's GOOP <http://goop.com/> website seems to have been greeted 
with an almost universal yell of horror. Honestly, you try and share your tips 
about "nourishing the inner aspect" and everyone starts carrying on as if your 
lovely advice about feeding your children flax oil for breakfast is indicative 
of a lethal lack of self-awareness. I hesitate to stand up for GOOP, but there 
was one point where I found myself if not agreeing with, then understanding its 
advice, which was about picking out key pieces for your wardrobe six months in 
advance. This smacks of a rarefied life in which you use words like "key 
pieces" instead of "trousers" but it inadvertently makes a point about how 
fashion works. I write this on a freezing cold day, the kind of day you realise 
you need a new winter coat. But you can't get one, because the shops have 
started stocking spring and summer stuff: it's all shorts and flip-flops out 
there.

I eventually found a winter coat that still seemed to be available: it was on 
a men's style website, accessorised with a cardigan by BERK – I merely present 
that fact to you without comment – but it looked great: a parka lined with fake 
fur. It looked a bit like the one here, but not quite: when the stylist tried 
to get one, it transpired that the London shop that stocked it was so 
fashionable it closed on Japanese bank holidays. Ah well: back to picking 
out your key pieces six months in advance.

• Alexis wears: Parka £100, by American Apparel 
<http://store.americanapparel.co.uk/?kw=american%20apparel&key=american+apparel+mt;SEARCH+lp;Brand+Rg;UK+FID;6230>
.Jeans £135, by Nudie at Urban Outfitters <http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>. 
Sneakers £125, by Russell & Bromley <http://www.russellandbromley.co.uk>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Stylist: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Jason Croizer, using Yonka For Men.
 