 Alexis Petridis in Folk clothes Photograph: David Newby 
I know you'll find this as hard to believe as I do, but I occasionally receive 
complaints from readers. Sometimes they draw attention to shortcomings in my 
legendarily encyclopedic knowledge of men's fashion – I was particularly taken 
by the guy who said I never wrote about clothes people actually wear, and 
suggested I cover "the Edwardian gentleman's look". Sometimes they draw 
attention to shortcomings in my appearance – "Your face scares me."

Mostly, though, they ask why I don't write about clothes that I like or wear. 
I don't do that very often because a glowing recommendation from me might be 
menswear's answer to receiving the black spot in Treasure Island. This column 
may instil many emotions, but I doubt that "he looks and sounds like a man who 
really knows what he's talking about vis-a-vis menswear – I'll try to look more 
like him" is chief among them.

But if I had to write about menswear I really love, I'd write about Folk. 
Almost uniquely, they make clothes aimed at men in their 30s. Their shirts 
feature enough interesting detailing to set them apart, but not so much as to 
make you look ridiculous. And when they go for a more berserk idea, they pull 
it off: a jumper with a built-in balaclava helmet is just the kind of thing I'd 
crack wise about, but it transforms into a genuinely lovely polo neck. I 
suppose that's what good design does. They never appear to be trying too hard, 
so neither does the person wearing them, which is pretty much exactly what you 
want from clothes.

• Alexis wears jumper £115, shirt £120, jacket £210, and shoes £165, all by 
Folk <http://www.folkclothing.com>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Stylist: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Charlotte Lowes at Mandy Coakley.
 