 Alexis Petridis in hat Photograph: David Newby 
Two months ago,  Razorlight <http://www.razorlight.co.uk/> announced a new 
line-up, the old band having understandably wearied of life in close proximity 
to frontmanJohnny Borrell's winning personality 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnny_Borrell#Reputation.2C_controversy.2C_charity_work>
 ("Firstly, I am a genius – musically, culturally, everything" etc, etc). The 
news was met with bemusement, largely because ofthe accompanying photograph 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/music/3372979/Razorlight-reveal-new-line-up.html>
: for once, the aesthetic consternation wasn't caused by Borrell – sad news for 
a man who's apparently dedicated his life to looking like a twerp – but one of 
the new hired hands: this guy was in a hat the sheer size of which is hard to 
put into words. To call it wide-brimmed is to wallow in understatement: it went 
on and on like the Pampas. The message was clear: watch out, Johnny, there's 
a new twerp in town.

It turns out I must now deploy that oft-used phrase "he's not dressed like a 
twerp, he's being fashion-forward" ("dressing like a twerp" and 
"fashion-forward" being two concepts that are easily confused), for at the 
Paris menswear shows in January, you couldn't move for hats like this: at Adam 
Kimmel, Lanvin, Dior, Roberto Cavalli, in styles ranging fromBoy George circa 
Do You Really Want To Hurt Me? <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4P_5EWjVNr4> to 
"You think the guy from Razorlight looks a twerp? You ain't seen nothing yet." 
Even blogs that praised them noted there might be a degree of difficulty 
"translating them to real life", unless you were joining a Culture Club tribute 
act. The widest brim the stylist could source was the trilby here, but even 
that was literally left in the shade by those on the catwalk.

• Alexis wears hat, from a selection, by Ede & Ravenscroft 
<http://www.edeandravenscroft.co.uk>.
Shirt £130, by Universal Works from Urban Outfitters 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>.
Boots £150, by Jaeger <http://www.jaeger.co.uk>.
Jeans Alexis's own.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Stylist: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Nikki Palmer at Mandy Coakley.
 