 Alexis Petridis in band T-shirt Photograph: David Newby 
In my teens, no item of clothing mattered more to me than band T-shirts. 
I bought them at gigs – the one pictured came from the night at the Cambridge 
Corn Exchange when My Bloody Valentine attempted permanently to damage my 
hearing – and treated them with the reverence some women afford haute couture.

I thought it was only me, but not on the evidence of the excellent My Band 
T-Shirt website <http://mybandtshirt.tumblr.com/>. Here, people write about 
them as talismans that evoke dead friends and relations or hedonistic nights in 
Norwich, as lasting evidence of youthful folly, including a contributor who 
bought a Pop Will Eat Itself T-shirt without having heard them ("As the opening 
strains of their album faded in, it dawned on me that I had made a terrible 
mistake") and a bloke who wore a Public Enemy T-shirt in the belief that people 
who stared at him were "thinking, 'That guy's right, we should be nicer to 
people of all races, religions, colours'," only later to reflect that they 
were more likely struck by the size of his moobs.

It's funny and touching, but you do read this wondering if it might be a 
glimpse into a lost past, when kids defined themselves by the bands they liked, 
when music dictated fashion rather than the other way round. Maybe not: 
everyone knows that merchandise sales keep artists afloat these days. I hope 
the kids buying them are investing them with the same kind of daft significance 
I did: that way, the memories won't fade when the logo does.

• Alexis wears his own T-shirt and shoes. 
Jeans £120, by Nudie at Urban Outfitters <http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk/>.
Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Jen Fechter at Era Management.
 