
Provenance

First recorded in the early 19th century in the collection of a portrait 
painter called Stewart, from whom it passed to a dealer named Gwennapp. 
Purchased from Gwennapp some time before 1845 by Patrick Fraser Tytler, a 
Scottish historian who identified the portrait as Mary, Queen of Scots (it was 
formerly known asMary of Lorraine 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/367567/Mary-Of-Lorraine>, Queen of 
James V of Scotland). Sold to the Gallery by Tytler's son. Purchased 1860 (NPG 
96).

When acquired by the National Portrait Gallery, it was thought that this 
portrait depictedMary, Queen of Scots <http://www.marie-stuart.co.uk/>. 
However, technical analysis in the 1960s found that many of the symbols in the 
painting, including a coat of arms, on which the identification was based (now 
removed) were later additions. The sitter, who does not resemble authentic 
portraits of Mary, remains a mystery, but the costume indicates that this is a 
portrait of an English noblewoman. The timepieces may signal the sitter's 
awareness of human mortality and hope for Christian salvation, or another more 
complex interpretive programme now lost to us.

The story

Mary Peebles, or "False Mary" as she came to be known, is one of the most 
unusual figures of Scottish 16th-century history. She was the daughter of an 
Edinburgh merchant, a man who had prospered sufficiently to be noticed on the 
fringes of the Holyrood court of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots. This court, of 
course, was a hotbed of intrigue, a dangerous place for anybody, including a 
young queen, to be. The Scottish nobles, a bickering and ruthless group, 
thought nothing of murder as a means of securing their goals, and were not 
above bringing their murderous schemes into the heart of the Queen's household.

After the slaughter of her Italian secretary, David Rizzio, Mary Stuart 
realised that she could trust virtually nobody, including her husband, the vain 
and scheming Henry Darnley. It is not known how she came to the decision, but 
shortly after Rizzio's murder she formed the view that she needed to employ a 
body double. This device was later to be used by a variety of shady 
20th-century dictators, but it was not unknown to prominent figures in the 
past. The double could serve more than one purpose: he or she would enable the 
real person to be in more places more frequently, to obvious political 
advantage. The double could also draw the fire of those plotting to kill the 
real king or queen â€“ an occupational hazard for doubles, of course, but grounds 
for great reward, even if posthumously enjoyed.

Mary Peebles did not resemble Mary Stuart in her colouring or even in her 
facial appearance, but, very importantly, she was exactly the same height as 
the Queen, and had a very similar gait and bearing. These factors were enough 
to make her an obvious choice, and she, naturally enough, accepted the role. It 
did not at first occur to her that she would be a target for assassins; for 
her, it was a great adventure, enabling her to inhabit regal quarters and enjoy 
the French style that Mary had brought to the dismal Scottish court.

The Queen liked her and taught her French and deportment. She encouraged her 
to sit for the numerous Italian portrait painters who attended her court; Mary 
Stuart herself did not enjoy sitting for portraits, as she found the formal 
clothing stifling and could not endure hours of immobility in it. In 
particular, she did not like the constraint to which her waist was subjected. 
Mary Peebles, by contrast, did not mind this, as she was naturally 
slim-waisted. "Corsets hold no terrors for me," she said. "Nor does the weight 
of jewels burden me unduly. I am content in this employment that the Queen has 
so graciously given me. It is a great thing that I, a merchant's daughter, 
should spend many hours pretending to be the Queen herself, waving from my 
horse to the small children of the town, dispensing alms as they were from my 
own purse, occasionally even doing justice in confining some rogue or vagabond 
to his just punishment. And the Queen is most kind to me, and gives me the 
delicate jams that she has sent to her from France. I dine well most nights."

She soon came to understand, though, the essentially temporary nature of a 
body double's work. She now realised that it was only a matter of time before 
she encountered an assassin's knife, and so she took to sitting for portraits 
bearing an iconographical timepiece, occasionally even two, lest the point be 
missed. She also detested Darnley, who on several occasions forced his 
attentions on her and then claimed that he had thought she was his wife. She 
hated him, and when he was blown up at Kirk o'Field, she devised a courtly 
dance, performed to the words: "Darnley is gone skywards, sing hurrah." The 
words reveal the depth of her feeling, so much so that some suspected that she 
was involved in the plot against him, or even instigated it. Nobody knows what 
happened to her.
 