 Alexis Petridis in print suit Photograph: David Newby 
Perhaps the biggest obstacle facing menswear designers is menswear's lack of 
malleability. Female clothes seem infinitely adaptable, but the staples of the 
male wardrobe – jeans, shirts and, especially, lounge suits – can really bear 
only minor adjustments. Stray too far from the blueprint and the wearer goes 
the way of the plank.

Still, they keep trying. They're imaginative people who find their 
imaginations restricted by in-built confines: Heston Blumenthal forced to do 
the Earlybird Menu at a Harvester year after year. Who can blame them for 
occasionally trying to nitro-poach the Cajun chicken burger?

Well, perhaps the people who are forced to eat it, which brings us to the 
print suit, which is big on the catwalks this season. Has anybody ever looked 
good in a print suit? NotGraham Norton 
<http://cache2.allpostersimages.com/p/LRG/10/1063/1RUL000Z/posters/graham-norton.jpg>
, perhaps the most high-profile print-suit sporter. Not the poor soul on the 
Comme des Garçons catwalk in a monochrome skull pattern suit, the trousers of 
which finished just below the knees, around the same area the crotch hung down 
to; nor his chum, in a Givenchy leopard-print suit, shirt and shoes. And not 
me, wearing a psychedelic Paul Smith creation covered in astrological symbols. 
It looks like something a minor 60s icon who overdid the mind-expansion might 
wear for a comeback gig at Northampton Roadmenders. Come on, Heston, put the 
dry ice down: crackerjack king prawns and a mixed grill for table six.

• Alexis wears jacket £405, and trousers £225, both by Paul Smith 
<http://www.paulsmith.co.uk>.
Shirt £45, by Shore Leave, from urbanoutfitters.co.uk 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk>.
Shoes £125, by Russell & Bromley <http://www.russellandbromley.co.uk>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Aradia Crockett. Grooming: 
Lisa Stokes.
 