 x Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
BBC4 is repeating editions of Top Of The Pops from 1976 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00zwrn7>. The music is unremittingly, 
brain-scramblingly awful, but at least it's a distraction from the clothes.
Demis Roussos 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Demis%20Roussos#q=Demis+Roussos&hl=en&prmd=ivnslo&source=univ&tbm=vid&tbo=u&sa=X&ei=MIZTTs2BGcex8gOp443fBQ&ved=0CGcQqwQ&bav=on.2,or.r_gc.r_pw.&fp=2b153c10c243109d&biw=1765&bih=1008>
, gargantuan in a kaftan split to the navel and silver platforms, doesn't 
particularly stand out. He looks hideous, but so does everyone else – 
performers, presenters, audience.

At the time of writing, Elton John and Kiki Dee are number one with Don't Go 
Breaking My Heart <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWLpiPlJAA8>. In the video, 
the former wears a plaid suit. It might be bespoke. If so, it seems to have 
been tailored to fit Demis Roussos. The checks are bigger than his head. The 
trousers look like he's stuck his legs into two tartan wigwams.

It seems pertinent because I can't help but feel that ongoing attempts to 
revive the plaid suit might be dashed on the rocks of the mid-70s. Plaid has a 
grand history – some historians think plaid patterns date back to the earlyiron 
age <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/British_Iron_Age> – but somehow, it's the 
last time it was big that sticks most firmly in the collective memory. You 
think of plaid, you don't think of 1930s elegance, you think of Elton's little 
head sticking out of his Roussos-scale suit or newsreaders in stroboscopic 
jackets with huge lapels talking aboutHarold Wilson resigning 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/march/16/newsid_2524000/2524099.stm>
. It's a shame, because done right – subtle patterns, slim cut – plaid suits 
can look good. Of course, some designers are currently trying out patterns that 
the cast of TOTP in 1976 would reject as too garish. The rule of thumb is: 
remember Elton. Don't go hurting your eyes.

• Alexis wears suit from a selection, by Mr Start 
<http://www.start-london.com/mens.html>. Shirt £125, by Burberry Brit 
<http://uk.burberry.com/store/menswear/?Wt.srch=1>. Shoes £199, by Loake, from 
my-wardrobe.com <http://www.my-wardrobe.com/menswear/shoes>. Photograph: David 
Newby. Grooming: Charlotte Lowes at Mandy Coakley.
 