
Weaving together the stories of a teenage girl in modern-day Cambridge and a 
15th-century Italian artist, Ali Smith’s How to Be Both has won the Baileys 
women’s prize for fiction, with chair of judges Shami Chakrabarti describing it 
as a work that will still be read in 100 years.

Ali Smith's joyful curiosity about language, love and everything else
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/03/ali-smith-baileys-fiction-prize> 
Already the winner of prizes including the Costa novel award and the Goldsmiths
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/12/ali-smith-goldsmith-prize-how-to-be-both>
, and shortlisted for the Man Booker, Smith’s novel beat a strong shortlist to 
win the £30,000 award on Wednesday evening. Intended to celebrate “excellence, 
originality and accessibility in women’s writing from throughout the world”, 
the Baileys prize, formerly known as the Orange, has been won in the past by 
Lionel Shriver for We Need to Talk About Kevin, and Zadie Smith for On Beauty.

“I think she is a literary genius,” said Chakrabarti, director of the civil 
rights group Liberty. “I haven’t felt that way about reading since I was doing 
my English A-levels. It reminded me of what it felt like reading Virginia 
Woolf, James Joyce, all of the greats … that this is not a good book, this is a 
great book, and people are going to be reading it long after I’m dead.”

Ali Smith on How to Be Both: nonsense, science and frescoes - books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2014/aug/29/ali-smith-how-to-be-both-books-podcast>
How to Be Both is a split narrative, and half of its copies were printed with 
the story of the teenage girl, George, whose mother has recently died, first. 
The other copies begin with the story of Francesco del Cossa, an artist in 
15th-century Ferrara who in Smith’s story is born a girl but raised as a man.

In a statement, Chakrabarti called How to Be Both a “tender, brilliant and 
witty novel of grief, love, sexuality and shape-shifting identity”. She added: 
“The way she has the ancient and the modern, the high art and the references to 
classical art, but also the contemporary nature of the story, and the universal 
themes of grief, loss and gender … it’s all so effortless … there’s also really 
contemporary stuff like pornography, technology and surveillance.”

Chakrabarti said she had read How to Be Both both ways – with George’s 
perspective first, and then with Francesco’s. “I think if I were advising 
somebody, and this is probably deeply controversial and Ali and her publisher 
will probably be very cross with me, I think the best way in is to read the 
modern story first. But others would disagree.”

This year’s Baileys judging panel also included Laura Bates, founder of the 
Everyday Sexism Project <http://everydaysexism.com/~everydr0/>, the columnist 
Grace Dent, the novelist and winner of the inaugural Orange prize in 1996 Helen 
Dunmore, and Channel 4 news presenter Cathy Newman.

How to Be Both by Ali Smith review – playful, tender, unforgettable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/13/how-to-be-both-ali-smith-review-novel>
Chakrabarti said the panel “went round the houses” to choose Smith as their 
eventual winner from a shortlist that also included Sarah Waters’ The Paying 
Guests – the bookies’ favourite – Rachel Cusk’s Outline, Anne Tyler’s A Spool 
of Blue Thread, Kamila Shamsie’s A God in Every Stone and Laline Paull’s debut 
The Bees.

“It wasn’t easy,” she said. “But in the end How To Be Both was a very popular 
choice.”

Smith, who was born in Inverness, is the author of four collections of short 
stories and six novels, including the Booker and Orange-shortlisted Hotel 
World, and the Whitbread prize-winning The Accidental. She is critically 
acclaimed, but Chakrabarti hoped that the Baileys win would bring her work to a 
wider audience. “In my heart I believe she will be read in 100 years’ time, but 
I want her to be really broadly read now,” she said.

The women’s prize for fiction was set up after researchers led by the novelist 
Kate Mosse found that by 1992, only 10% of novelists shortlisted for the Booker 
had been women. In 1991, not a single female author was shortlisted for the 
prize. The award has beendescribed as “sexist” by the novelist AS Byatt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/20/as-byatt-intellectual-women-strange>
, who said that it “assumes there is a feminine subject matter – which I don’t 
believe in”. But Chakrabarti called new research from the novelist Nicola 
Griffith, which found thata novel is more likely to win a literary award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/01/books-about-women-less-likely-to-win-prizes-study-finds>
 if it is about a man, “vindication of the role of the prize”.

Looking at the subject matter of the winners of six major literary awards, 
including the Booker and the Pulitzer, Griffith found the majority, even if 
written by women,were told from the point of view of men or boys 
<http://nicolagriffith.com/2015/05/26/books-about-women-tend-not-to-win-awards/>
. None of the 15 Pulitzer winners was told wholly from a female perspective, 
she wrote, while between 2000 and 2014 the Booker has been won by nine books by 
men about men, three by women about men, two by women about women, and one by a 
woman about both.

“Certainly the results argue for women’s perspectives being considered 
uninteresting or unworthy. Women seem to have literary cooties,” Griffith has 
written.

“Women’s stories and their characters are not being celebrated enough in 
modern publishing,” agreed Chakrabarti. “Women are great readers as well as 
great writers and understandably they want their stories to be told.” Gender 
injustice, she added, is still the “greatest injustice on the planet”.

“There’s a lot of work to be done, and a lot of stories to be told, and 
stories are what I believe change the world more than anything,” she said.

How to be both by Ali Smith (Penguin, £8.99). To order a copy for £6.99, go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281596/s/how-to-be-both/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 