
Ali Dizaei <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, the former senior 
Scotland Yard officer, is to make a last ditch bid to have his conviction for 
corruption overturned, his solicitor said today.

The former police commander plans to ask a panel of judges to reconsider his 
appeal against his conviction and sentence. Dizaei, 47, believes he has grounds 
to prove his trial was unfair and that his four-year jail term was too harsh.

The move comes after a senior judge sitting alone ruled he had no grounds for 
an appeal earlier this month. Dizaei will now ask a panel of judges, sitting in 
public at the court of appeal, to reconsider his arguments.

Stephen Fox, senior partner at Ralli Solicitors, confirmed Dizaei had 
instructed him to co-ordinate a renewed appeal. He said: "Although being 
refused leave to appeal by a single judge, Ali Dizaei has instructed Ralli 
solicitors and two QCs, Michael Mansfield and Matthew Ryder, to go directly to 
the court of appeal and renew his application."

Dizaei was jailed in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/09/ali-dizaei-guilty-metropolitan-police>
 after a jury found him guilty of attempting to frame an Iraqi businessman when 
they fell out over money.

The court heard the Iranian-born officer threatened, assaulted, falsely 
arrested and faked evidence against Waad al-Baghdadi, who had built a website 
for him.

The two men clashed physically in the street after being caught on CCTV 
arguing at a Persian restaurant in west London.

It is understood the appeal focuses on the evidence of waiter Ahmad Golizadeh, 
who witnessed Dizaei's actions at the restaurant.

It also questions whether the four-year jail term is excessive when compared 
with other police officers convicted of similar offences. Dizaei is the most 
senior British police officer in three decades to be convicted of corruption 
offences.

Dizaei has endured a torrid time since being jailed, including being attacked 
and covered in slop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/24/ali-dizaei-assault-prison>, and is 
now jailed in Monmouthshire for his safety.

He could be ordered to serve the period of time between his failed first 
appeal bid and the final decision under section 29 of the Criminal Appeal Act 
1968.
 