
Disciplinary charges against Ali Dizaei, the Scotland Yard commander convicted 
of falsely arresting and attempting to frame a man in a dispute over money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/09/ali-dizaei-guilty-metropolitan-police>
, could have been proved in the past but were dropped because politicians were 
wary of offending the black police association, a former Met deputy 
commissioner said today.

Brian Paddick, who was the Liberal Democrat candidate for London mayor in 
2008, saidDizaei's reinstatement after being acquitted in 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/oct/31/race.ukcrime> of charges including 
misconduct in public office was "politically driven". The case had prompted a 
boycott of the Met by its own ethnic minority officers.

"He was given compensation, he was welcomed back to the Met, he was even 
allowed to write a book about the way he was mistreated by Metropolitan police. 
I think that may have been a settlement driven by politics, driven by the Home 
Office who wanted to keep the black police association on side," Paddick told 
BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

"All formal disciplinary procedures against him were dropped and my 
understanding is that it might have been the case that some of those 
disciplinary charges against him could have been proven. And I think all of 
that was politically driven."

Dizaei, 47, was an outspoken critic of the police on race, leader of the 
National BlackPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Association, and a 
key figure in a race row that erupted at the top of Scotland Yard in the summer 
of 2008.

Paddick said that in the aftermath of Dizaei's conviction it was time for the 
Metropolitan Black Police Association (MBPA) to reform, with less 
"grandstanding in front of the microphone".

"I think the lesson to be learnt here for the black police association is this 
aggressive, confrontational approach thatAli Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei> took and Tariq Ghaffur, the most 
senior Asian officer to serve in the police service [who claimed discrimination 
against the Met before dropping the claim after settling out of court] â€“ that 
sort of approach is probably not the best way to achieve change," he said.

Dizaei's conviction had "damaged the black police association and therefore 
damaged police community relations". But Paddick said there was still a 
definite need for a black police association with "plenty of evidence to 
suggest that black officers face a difficult time in the Met".

"The black police association need to employ the facts, lose the emotion, 
concentrate on the facts and by doing that I think they will begin to move the 
police service," he said.

Alfred John, the chairman of the MBPA, agreed on the Today programme that the 
association had been damaged. But he insisted there was "without a doubt" still 
institutional racism in the force, as identified in the 1999 MacPherson report 
into the aftermath of the botched investigation into the murder of the black 
teenager Stephen Lawrence.

"Black people [in the Met] are still disproportionately disciplined, are still 
disproportionately asked to resign and there's still a lack of progress for 
black people," he said.

John said the MBPA supported the process which allowed Dizaei to be 
prosecuted. But he added: "The case cost more than a murder case and, if you 
remember, one of the reasons for the boycott from the black police association 
was the disproportionate pursuit of black people."
 