
Alisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> has 
said it is still his dream to own Arsenal and has given the under-fire Ars√®ne 
Wenger his full backing. The Russian billionaire already owns a 30% stake in 
the club but has no seat on the board and has been frozen out by the majority 
shareholder, Stan Kroenke.

In a rare interview, Usmanov told CNBC: "I want to take this opportunity to 
just reaffirm that in order to help the team, we would be ready to buy more 
shares, to buy control, to buy all shares. It is my dream to have a controlling 
stake ofArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>. I would never 
instruct the chief executive, and I would ask if they need my help.

"If I had a big stake in Arsenal of course I would have my opinion of what we 
must do, for example on the commercial side. I think there are also many 
questions about the management of Arsenal's commercial activity. We will see 
and we will wait. Maybe one day I will wake up and have control of Arsenal."

Usmanov said it was a mistake to sell Robin van Persie to Manchester United in 
the summer and added if he had more involvement in the club he would back the 
manager in the transfer market.

"Today less, but over the last five years he has not had enough support to 
provide his conceptions of his game in Arsenal from the board, either for 
transfers or for keeping players etc. We are ready to do all that we can in 
order to help the company, in order to consider any form of cooperation or 
ownership with the team.

"This decision [losing Van Persie] was a mistake. If I am one of Wenger's 
players I would want to stay for the finish, but he explained Robin wanted to 
go to win trophies."

Asked about his influence in the transfer window, Usmanov said: "I never 
interfere with things over which I have no control, this question [about buying 
players] is for Wenger. I never ever give instruction to chief executive of my 
plans I only ask you need my help or not."
 