
WHO: Zika virus is no longer a world threat

The World Health Organization declared on Friday that Zika virus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus>, shown to cause microcephaly in 
infants and spread by mosquitos, was no longer an international emergency. The 
virus causes a mild fever and flu-like symptoms in healthy adults but has been 
linked to malformed heads in newborns, and research has suggested possible 
links to other birth defects.

The organization noted, though, that while no longer a “public health 
emergency of international concern”, the virus remains “a significant enduring 
public health challenge requiring intense action”. The WHO shifted to a 
“longer-term technical mechanism” to confront the crisis, it said.

Almost 30 countries have reported birth defects linked to the virus, and 
thousands of people have tested positive in Brazil and the US territory of 
Puerto Rico. Florida has reported 139 locally acquired cases of the virus, 
accordingto the CDC’s most recent count 
<http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/united-states.html>.

Zika virus is no longer a global health emergency, UN health agency says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/zika-virus-not-public-health-emergency-world-health-organization>
Trade and Peru

The White House and leaders in Congress quietly abandoned the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/12/tpp-trade-deal-congress-obama>
, the free trade deal that would have set up new rules of commerce for 12 
countries, including the US, Japan, South Korea, Australia and Peru. The trade 
deal became a symbol of globalization and lost manufacturing jobs during the 
presidential campaign, and Donald Trump had promised to take it off the table.

The deal would have phased out thousands of tariffs and made it easier for US 
vendors to sell products abroad, and vice versa. It also had provisions for 
internet and copyright provisions, guards against wildlife trafficking and 
child labor, and rules designed to curb China’s influence in Pacific trade. Its 
opponents included unions, which argued it gave too much power to foreign 
manufacturers.

Barack Obama will meet with leaders of Japan, China, Australia and other 
countries 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/world/americas/peru-protests-apec.html> in 
Peru this weekend for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum. He will face
questions 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/obama-expects-trump-queries-on-trip-to-greece-germany-peru/2016/11/11/812d182a-a82e-11e6-ba46-53db57f0e351_story.html>
 about trade and, inevitably, Trump.

Airbnb 

The housing startup blocked a Harvard professor, Ben Edelman, from its service 
after he found evidence of racial discrimination by its users. Edelman said he 
had found that black guests were more often rejected than white guests who used 
the site; he reached his findings in part by creating multiple fake accounts as 
black and white users.Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> 
said it suspended his service for violating policy about multiple fake accounts.

The $30bn company also announced a big expansion to create entire itineraries 
for tourists, though it already faces opposition in cities such as New York and 
San Francisco, where critics say the company ismaking exploitative housing 
practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/airbnb-launch-new-trips-service-los-angeles-protests>
worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/10/airbnb-new-york-city-listings-purge-multiple-apartment-listings>
.

Airbnb blocked discrimination researcher over multiple accounts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/airbnb-while-black-discrimination-harvard-researcher-banned>
China and the Arctic: global warming still real

The north pole was reported at about 20C (36F) warmer than normal, with record 
low sea ice,alarming climate scientists 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/11/17/the-north-pole-is-an-insane-36-degrees-warmer-than-normal-as-winter-descends/?utm_term=.0138d96919eb>
. “The extreme behavior of the Arctic in 2016 seems to be in no hurry to quit,” 
Jennifer Francis, a Rutgers University scientist, toldthe Washington Post <>.

Meanwhile, China’s deputy foreign minister, Liu Zhenmin, felt compelled to 
remind 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/world/asia/china-trump-climate-change.html?ref=asia>
 the US president-elect that global warming is real and that Republican 
presidents including Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan have supported 
environmental measures. In 2012 Trumpwrote 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en>: “The 
concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make 
US manufacturing non-competitive.”

Dakota protests

The energy company trying to build a pipeline through North Dakota has asked a 
federal judge to intervene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/dakota-access-oil-pipeline-construction-delay-court>
 in the project, which the US government ordereddelayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/dakota-access-pipeline-completion-delayed-army-corp-engineers-review>
 and against which Native Americans have protested for months.

“It is time for the Courts to end this political interference and remove 
whatever legal cloud that may exist over the right-of-way beneath federal land 
at Lake Oahe,” CEO Kelcy Warren said in a statement.

In response, the Standing Rock Sioux tribal chair, Dave Archambault II, said: 
“Dakota Access is so desperate to get this project in the ground that it is now 
suing the federal government on the novel theory that it doesn’t need an 
easement to cross federal lands.” More than 400 people have been arrested in 
demonstrations so far.

Dakota Access pipeline: the who, what and why of the Standing Rock protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/north-dakota-access-oil-pipeline-protests-explainer>
Gains in Iraq, losses in Syria

The Iraqi army and Kurdish peshmerga, backed by US special forces and 
airstrikes, have madetentative gains 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/fragile-army-gains-mosul-leave-residents-exposed-092537595.html>
 in the gruelling battle for Mosul, Iraq’s second largest city and one of 
Isis’s most important strongholds. Reuters reported that advances into Mosul had
slowed out of concern for civilians 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-iraq-idUSKBN13D1G4>trapped in 
the city, and that 54,000 people havebeen displaced 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/fragile-army-gains-mosul-leave-residents-exposed-092537595.html>
 by the four-week campaign.

Iraqi forces also retook Nimrud, the site of an ancient Assyrian city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/iraqi-troops-capture-nimrud-ancient-assyrian-city-isis>
 where the king Ashurnasirpal built his palace. Isis militants tried to 
bulldoze sections of the site last year, and released video purportedly showing 
fighters destroying artifacts.

‘I hate this beard. By God, I hate it’: Iraqi men celebrate their freedom by 
shaving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/nov/08/i-hate-this-beard-by-god-iraqi-mosul-men-celebrate-freedom-by-shaving>
In Syria, civil war between the regime of Bashar al-Assad, rebels and Isis 
continued to devastate the country. A children’s hospital in Aleppo wasbombed 
by chlorine gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/aleppos-childrens-hospital-bombed-as-it-treats-chlorine-gas-victims>
, leaving only four functioning hospitals in the city for some 250,000 
civilians in the area. The bombing was believed to have been carried out by 
Syrian government forces, which havelaunched a new assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/aleppo-airstrikes-resume-as-russia-announces-major-syria-offensive>
 with airstrikes and support from Russian allies.
 