
The academic career of Allan Lloyd Smith, who has died of cancer aged 65, hit 
its stride in the 1980s, when he established himself as a leading British 
scholar of 19th-century American culture. He wrote three books about classic 
authors of 19th-century American literature, exhibiting a deep knowledge of 
psychology and a commitment to the darkest, most morbid and violent modes of 
the American imagination. Lurking behind the proper facades of American life, 
he found a seething, extremist popular culture, which drew upon the wilder 
conventions of gothic writing in Britain. He made important contributions to 
the study of gothic and the uncanny, and caught a rising tide of academic 
interest in popular culture and the movies.

The smooth progression of his career, however, masked a striking intellectual 
transformation. His doctoral dissertation, The Analysis of Motives: Early 
American Psychology and Fiction (1980), exhibited the cautious sobriety of 
study at a major American research university. But by 1984, when he published 
his second book, Eve Tempted: Writing and Sexuality in Hawthorne's Fiction, 
there was a new postmodernist intellectual framework which Lloyd Smith 
proselytised, and to which he remained loyal for the rest of his career. He 
read Freud's essay on Das Unheimliche (The Uncanny), and the work of Derrida, 
Lacan, Foucault and Paul de Man, and saw American writing in a different light.

Uncanny American Fiction: Medusa's Face (1989), his third book of the decade, 
imported something of the new "French Freud", theorised and much-improved by 
Lacan and Derrida, into the study of American culture. He argued that 
indeterminacy, enigma, suppression and repression, rooted in sexual 
interactions, made the uncanny a crucial mode of American writing.

Lloyd Smith was born Allan Lloyd in Rugby, Warwickshire, and lived in 
Southport, Merseyside, until he was 10, when his family moved to Lutterworth in 
Leicestershire. The son of an engineer who worked on the design of diesel 
locomotives for British Leyland, Lloyd Smith went to local schools and then 
read history at Sussex University. He received an English Speaking Union 
fellowship for graduate study at the University of Indiana, where he worked as 
a teaching assistant. He married Sylvia Ryder in 1966, and returned to England 
in 1970 to take up a lectureship at Keele University.

In 1973, after the end of his first marriage, he married Barbara Smith, an old 
friend from Sussex University, who brought with her three children, Walter, 
Jacob and Lindsay, from a first marriage. They went on to have three children, 
Rosy, Anny and Cressida. "My wife's name is Lloyd," he wrote to his new 
colleagues. "Our stepchildren are Marshall; our daughters are called Lloyd 
Smith. We've decided to end the confusion by all adopting the same name: Lloyd 
Smith."

Also in 1973, he moved to a lectureship at the University of East Anglia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofeastanglia> (UEA) in 
Norwich, where Malcolm Bradbury was putting together an interdisciplinary 
American studies programme. He served several times as head of American studies 
at UEA, and was formidably successful at securing research grants. He 
recognised early on the significance of computers for teaching, and did a 
pioneering CD-Rom on Arthur Miller's The Crucible.

Lloyd Smith organised the first International Gothic Conference in 1991, and 
became president of the International Gothic Association when it was founded in 
1995. In collaboration with colleagues at UEA such as David Punter, Victor Sage 
and Rosemary Jackson, Lloyd Smith helped make Norwich an excellent place to 
study the worst fears and horrors of the western imagination.

After a year as a visiting professor at the University of Minnesota in 
1976-77, he piled the family into a VW bus, complete with dodgy carburettor, 
for a cross-country drive. By the time they reached California, broke and on a 
Fourth of July weekend, the family had to remove the engine to effect a repair. 
Some of that family wisdom with engines had stood him in good stead.

He was a stimulating teacher and an inspiring supervisor of research students. 
He gave his students the confidence to trust their own judgment.

He is survived by Barbara, his children and stepchildren.

â€¢ Allan Gardner Lloyd Smith, academic, born 4 January 1945; died 19 February 
2010
 