
The convicted fraudster Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> has claimed it “breaks my 
heart” to hear of the embarrassment he caused English cricket.

In an interview with BBC Sport from his high-security prison in Florida, 
Stanford said he regretted the damage done to the sport following his agreement 
with the England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board (ECB), which he claims was intended to revolutionise the game in the West 
Indies.

Stanford signed a deal with the ECB in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jun/11/englandcricketteam.cricket> to 
play a series of five Twenty20 matches in the Caribbean, worth a combined £10m, 
in an attempt to raise the profile of the game among young people in the area.

England convincingly lost the first game against the Stanford Superstars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/nov/02/stanford-super-series-englandcricketteam>
 by 10 wickets, with Stanford attracting criticism for what was considered to be
inappropriate behaviour around the players’ wives and girlfriends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/oct/28/stanford-wag-gaffe-cricket> 
during the game.

“I had no idea those were the English players’ wives and that created quite a 
bit of an uproar,” he said. “But I apologised for it. I went over to the 
English locker room and I apologised to the guys. I said, ‘Look I was just over 
there having fun with the crowd like I always do. I was just horsing around. I 
didn’t mean anything by it.’ And they accepted my apology.”

The following year he was charged with fraud worth £8bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/feb/22/cricket-allen-stanford> 
andsentenced to 110 years in jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/14/allen-stanford-110-years-jail>, 
causing huge embarrassment to the ECB and in particular Giles Clarke, who was 
chairman at the time.

Speaking to BBC Sport, Stanford said of the impact it had on the ECB: “It’s 
very sad. I have nothing but respect for the English cricket board and I love 
the sport of cricket.

“I’m very sorry. It breaks my heart and there’s nothing I can say other than 
that was not caused by Allen Stanford. That was caused by the wrongful 
prosecution, an over-zealous and wrongful prosecution.”

He added: “Will I apologise? No. Mark my words … I am going to walk out the 
doors of this place a free man.”

Of those in charge of the ECB at the time, Clarke – who stepped down as 
chairman in May 2015 – and the former chief executive David Collier, Stanford 
said: “I’m not sure if Giles Clarke is still the head person now but he and I 
got along well. And I think the world of David Collier. My dealings with theECB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> was one of professionalism and one of 
mutual respect and I love cricket.”

Stanford insisted his intentions were to invest in and grow cricket in the 
West Indies. “My goal was to have a vehicle where I could uncover new talent, 
take the money that this tournament generated and pile it back into the island 
so that they could develop their own programmes, home-grow these young athletes 
and bring them to the Stanford 20/20,” he said. “We would pick the best players 
out of the tournament. These would not be the superstars that currently play 
for the West Indies. These would be unknown young guys.

“In the West Indies we have the greatest physical athletic talent for cricket 
anywhere in the world. They were just being diverted into other sports, whether 
it’s basketball or soccer. There just wasn’t that real incentive for them to 
stay and play in a sport that had not kept track with the 21st century and the 
modernisation of the sport.”
 