
11 June 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jun/11/englandcricketteam.cricket> 
Three months after first mooting a $20m prize for a single 20-overs-a-side 
game, Stanford landed at Lord's in a helicopter. Posing among some of cricket's 
greatest players with a box apparently containing $20m, Stanford happily 
declared that he found a five-day test match "boring".

1 November 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/nov/02/stanford-super-series-englandcricketteam1>
 After legal tussles the game goes ahead, with England losing to Stanford's 
All-Stars – and the man himself criticised forover-familiarity with players' 
partners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/oct/28/stanford-super-series-englandcricketteam1>
.

19 December 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/dec/19/allen-stanford-cricket> 
First sign of potential trouble, as Stanford suddenly ends his financial 
involvement with cricket.

13 February 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/13/sir-allen-stanford-financial-investigation-ecb>
 A Securities and Exchange Commission investigation into Stanford comes to 
light.

17 February 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/17/allen-stanford-fraud-sec-federal-agents-houston>
 The SEC accuses Stanford of perpetrating an $8bn fraud, involving allegedly 
dubious "certificates of deposit". The humiliated England and Wales Cricket 
Board suspends all relations with Stanford.

18 February 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/18/allen-stanford-run-on-banks> 
Long queues form at bank branches in Antigua, Panama and Venezuela as anxious 
savers try to withdraw their money. It also emerges thatthe head of Stanford's 
auditors died in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/18/allen-stanford-cas-hewlett>, 
prompting new questions over how the empire was regulated.

19 February 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/19/allen-stanford-cricket-antigua-bank>
 After a short search, Stanford is found in Virginia.

22 February 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/feb/22/allen-stanford-drugs-trade-mexico>
 News that the FBI is investigating possible money-laundering and links to 
Mexican drugs cartels give the case a new dimension.

27 February 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/27/first-arrest-stanford-inquiry> 
The first arrest is made. Laura Pendergest-Holt, former chief financial officer 
of Stanford Financial Group, is charged with obstructing investigations into 
the alleged fraud.

6 April 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/apr/07/allen-stanford-ponzi-scheme> 
After weeks of silence, Stanford breaks cover to claim the charges are 
"baloney" and vows to clear his name. "I'm not a high-fallutin' guy. What 
people have always said about me is that I'm more in touch with the valet and 
the maître d' than I am with the president or the CEO."

21 April 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/andrew-clark-on-america/2009/apr/21/sir-allen-stanford-cia-reports>
 Another twist as Stanford declines to discuss the suggestion that he may have 
worked for the CIA. Stanford: "I'm just not going to talk about that."

May 1 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/01/allen-stanford-court-stunt> 
Stanford pitches up at a Texas court and tries to turn himself in, but is sent 
away as the authorities have not issued a warrant for his arrest

June 18 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/19/allen-stanford-arrested> FBI 
agents take Stanford into custody.
 