
A jam session between Allen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/allen-ginsberg> and Bob Dylan in the East 
Village may sound like the apex of Beat Generation romanticism – the Howl poet 
and Like a Rolling Stone bard draped over one microphone, riffing incendiary 
ideas and counterculture wordplay. However, the reality of it, in the fall of 
1971, was less a bohemian summit and more like a hostage negotiation.

“Bob told me that Allen and Gregory Corso were reading their poetry at NYU, 
and invited me to come along,” recalls David Amram, 85, a prolific 
classical/jazz composer and mutual friend. “We went backstage during 
intermission and Allen told me: ‘My god, I’ve been trying for 10 years to get 
Dylan to do something musical with me. Will you bring him over to my place 
tonight, please, please?’ All the years I’d known him, I’d never seen him like 
that.”

The death of bohemia: can the dream survive in gentrified New York?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/24/new-york-chelsea-hotel-artists-bohemia-gentrification>
After a dinner of fried clams at Nathan’s, Amram dutifully delivered the 
semi-retired Dylan to Ginsberg’s apartment near Tompkins Square Park, where 
Ginsberg opened the door with a guitar in hand. “He handed it to Dylan and 
said, ‘Key of G, Bob’,” says Amram. “Allen played the one note he could play on 
the harmonium, and suddenly, he had this whole tape recorder set up on the 
table. Dylan looked over and yelled, “Turn that ‘expletive’ thing off!”

Despite that tetchy start, Ginsberg did tease out several new folk tunes that 
evening. Those efforts – topical, surreal, blithely shambolic – can be heard on
The Last Word on First Blues 
<http://omnivorerecordings.com/music/the-last-word-on-first-blues/>, the first 
box set to chronicle Ginsberg’s most fruitful singer-songwriter years, which 
spanned that session through the early 1980s. It includes a reissue of 
Ginsberg’s previously out-of-print 1983 album First Blues, which included a 
handful of tracks from those Dylan sessions, as well as a disc of previously 
unreleased tracks culled by Pat Thomas, a historian whospecializes in 60s 
counterculture <http://roomonetwofour.com/books.htm>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fallen-ginsberg-boxset-music-bob-dylan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2078963d3e6268222882b0a88d50a3e69929b61d%2F0_2849_4788_2872%2F4788.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allen%20Ginsberg%20boxset%20gives%20beat%20junkies%20reason%20to%20howl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fallen-ginsberg-boxset-music-bob-dylan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allen%20Ginsberg%20boxset%20gives%20beat%20junkies%20reason%20to%20howl&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fallen-ginsberg-boxset-music-bob-dylan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2078963d3e6268222882b0a88d50a3e69929b61d%2F0_2849_4788_2872%2F4788.jpg>
 Ginsberg and Dylan’s meeting was ‘less a bohemian summit and more like a 
hostage negotiation’. Photograph: Douglas R Gilbert/Redferns 
“Ginsberg is obviously an iconic, legendary poet and we all know him as that. 
Very few people know him as a singer, and even less people like him as a 
singer,” Thomas admits. He first proposed a box set to theAllen Ginsberg Estate 
<http://allenginsberg.org/#!/> in 2012, 15 years after the poet from died from 
liver cancer at age 70. “If I’d contacted them and asked to go through Allen’s 
poems, they’d say, ‘Go away, we have 100 people already doing that.’ I was the 
only guy who was crazy enough to want to go through the music – and the thing 
about Allen Ginsberg’s music is, you either dig it or you go running in the 
opposite direction.”

The Last Word on First Blues is indeed polarizing, true to its creator, whose 
provocative epic Howl (1955) inspired Dylan and many more counterculture 
artists of the 60s. Despite Ginsberg’s enduring fame as a poet and the 
reluctant center of Howl’sensuing obscenity trial 
<http://foundsf.org/index.php?title=The_Howl_Obscenity_Trial> – in which his 
homosexuality and anti-conformist stances were equally prodded– by the 70s, he 
already hoped to pivot his career toward music. “Allen, like 90% of America, 
was enthralled with the image of the rock’n’roll stardom,” says Amram.

First Blues reflects that abundance of ambition; it’s unapologetically 
ramshackle and hectic with ideas, ricocheting from confrontational folk screeds 
to droll faux-tropicalia and jaunty ragtime, united loosely in the sort of 
colorful imagery Ginsberg had already penned in abundance. It opens with the 
anti-Vietnam war guitar romp Going to San Diego, on which Ginsberg rasps such 
barbs as “Come to San Diego, show you’re a peaceful man/Old Mr Nixon better bow 
down to Uncle Sam.” In the background, Dylan, Amram and other downtown friends 
(including the poet Anne Waldman and musician Happy Traum) smack tambourines, 
bleat on French horns and harmonize with merry discordance. Dylan’s other 
appearances are subtle – a yelp here, some guitar strums there – on the 
delicate piano ditty Vomit Express and a jaunty clarinet bounce vaguely about 
social equality called Jimmy Berman (Gay Lib Rag).

Bob Dylan unseen: Daniel Kramer discusses rare images from the 1960s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/25/bob-dylan-75-unseen-photos-daniel-kramer>
Elsewhere, on the absurd CIA Dope Calypso, Ginsberg coos an abridged history 
of American interference in Thailand (“First they stole from the Meo tribes/Up 
in the hills, they started taking bribes”). The drawling ballad You Are My 
Dildo, with his falsetto yelps and frequent tumbles into an incomprehensible 
accent (English? Australian? Ketamine?) could pass for a spectacularly obscene 
Dr Demento outtake. As a musician, Ginsberg is of modest range; his overall 
tonal flatness nods most overtly to Dylan and the wily humor also has shades of 
Phil Ochs, while the unpolished musicianship is pure downtown folk bravado.

Steven Taylor, Ginsberg’s steady guitarist from 1976 to 1992, says the 
crooning Ginsberg was not without his skeptics.

“I remember one time Marianne Faithfull, who was a good friend, said, ‘Oh, 
don’t sing, Allen.’ I think there was general feeling he was no good at it,” 
says Taylor. “But actually, he really did have a talent for music. He had a big 
vocal apparatus, he could harmonize, he could carry a tune. And he had a funny 
ear.” He toured with Ginsberg in the 1970s and 1980s, when the writer 
supplemented his ebbing poetry income with regular treks throughout America and 
Europe. Often, Ginsberg brought along his partner, the poet Peter Orlovsky, and 
took the opportunity to wedge songs from First Blues into his literary 
recitations.

“We would always begin with a song or two, then he would read some poems, then 
we’d finish with music. It got very colorful at times – Peter would shave his 
corns while we were performing, clip his toenails,” recalls Taylor. “In Oxford, 
a local poet denounced our so-called circus act, even went on the evening news 
to complain. But Allen didn’t care; he had a great sense of humor.”

 The bonus disc of previously unheard material in The Last Word on First Blues 
– which Thomas plucked from 2500 tapes in the Ginsberg archives at Stanford 
University – is significantly more avant-garde than the frayed folk of First 
Blues. A spectral minimalism dominates these demos and outtakes, most notably 
on September on Jessore Road, a 14-minute drone dirge. That track’s baleful 
cello comes courtesy of another vaunted Ginsberg collaborator,Arthur Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/feb/01/in-praise-of-arthur-russell>
, who sat in sessions occasionally as a musical arranger.

“It’s a weird curiosity that Arthur’s even on this, but they had a strong 
relationship,” says Thomas. “Arthur wanted Allen’s music to be more far-out, 
more freaky, and Allen wanted to keep it in a more conventional folk-blues 
thing.” (Ginsberg’s occasional mentorship toward Russell wasn’t an isolated 
example; he also co-wrote a song with The Clash, Ghetto Defendant, replete with 
a cameo as the voice of God.)

Those who knew Ginsberg best point to the box set as evidence of Ginsberg’s 
agile mind, even later in his career, and say he had still more to share before 
his death.

“Allen was still connected in the 90s – he was really into Beck and Nirvana. 
He’d say, ‘These kids nowadays, they really get it,’” says Peter Hale, 48, 
manager of the Allen Ginsberg Estate. “There were even talks of doing a 
Ginsberg Unplugged session on MTV, right before he got the diagnosis that he 
was terminally ill. Had he lived longer, he definitely would have focused more 
on music. Who knows what he could have done?”
 