
The Serious Fraud Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>
 has revealed that it has seized $100m (Â£60m) of assets linked to Sir Allen 
Stanford, the billionaire facing criminal charges over an alleged $7bn fraud.

The funds, which are thought to be a mixture of cash and other financial 
assets, were frozen on 7 April following a request from the US department of 
justice. The SFO kept quiet about the move until Stanford had been taken into 
custody.

"Once we became aware of these assets we moved quickly to seize them," said an 
SFO spokesman today. "We were pleased that the court acted so fast, so that we 
got the freezing order within five hours of requesting it."

The SFO spokesman added that the assets were held in accounts at "well-known 
financial institutions", but declined to identify them.

Thousands of investors fear they have lost money because of the alleged 
Stanford fraud. Any assets that can be recovered could potentially be used to 
compensate victims.

Stanford has denied running a Ponzi scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/dec/19/ponzi-scheme>, insisting that 
his empire was well-resourced with assets around the world. Hesurrendered to 
the FBI earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/19/allen-stanford-arrested>, and 
appeared in court last Thursday in handcuffs, wearing an orange jumpsuit, to 
pleadnot guilty to 21 charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/25/stanford-pleads-not-guilty>.

Stanford, who had bankrolled his own cricket team and financed a $20m game 
against England, remains in custody. A judge may rule later today whether to 
grant him bail.

The SFO said that the assets seized in April had no connection to Stanford's 
partnership with the England and Wales Cricket Board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/19/ecb-county-cricket-allen-stanford>
. The arrangement collapsed in February after the Texan was accused of fraud by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 