
Allen Stanford <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford>, the Texan 
billionaire and cricket promoter, was indicted today on fraud charges in 
connection with a massive pyramid scheme, the US justice department said.

Stanford, who surrendered to the FBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> 
last night, is to appear in court to face charges that he orchestrated a $7bn 
scheme advising clients to buy certificates of deposit from the Antigua-based 
Stanford International Bank.

The justice department was unveiling the charges at a press conference today. 
Six other Stanford associates were also indicted.

Stanford, 59, had been staying at his girlfriend's home in Fredericksburg, 50 
miles south of Washington, but left the premises to speak with FBI agents who 
were parked outside, according to his lawyer.

"He walked out and asked if they had a warrant," said Dick DeGuerin. They did, 
and Stanford was taken into custody.

In February, the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) launched civil 
charges against Stanford. It alleged that he fraudulently sold $8bn (£4.7bn) in 
certificates of deposit with improbably high interest rates from Stanford 
International Bank Ltd, based in Antigua.

In April, Stanford dismissed the charges as "baloney" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/apr/07/allen-stanford-ponzi-scheme>.

Before the SEC levelled fraud charges against Stanford, his personal fortune 
was estimated at $2.2bn by Forbes magazine. He was a generous sports patron and 
owned homes in Antigua, St Croix, Florida and Texas.

Nigel Hamilton-Smith, the Antiguan official named to oversee the liquidation 
of the offshore bank that was run by Stanford, has accused the tycoon of using 
client funds to pay for jets, lavish homes and yachts.

Stanford's profile soared last June when he touched down at Lord's cricket 
ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jun/11/englandcricketteam.cricket> to 
launch his multimillion-dollar Stanford Super Series.England were defeated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/nov/02/stanford-super-series-englandcricketteam1>
 in the first, and in all probability last, game of the series in November – 
losing a $20m jackpot.

While worried depositors started a run on banks within Stanford's empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/18/allen-stanford-banks-caribbean> 
in February, the man himself wasquickly tracked down to Virginia by the FBI 
after a two-day search 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/20/allen-stanford-useconomy>.

In the four months since, the former chief financial officer of Stanford 
Financial Group has been charged with obstructing the SEC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/27/first-arrest-stanford-inquiry>, 
and Stanford himself has been accused ofworking with the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/andrew-clark-on-america/2009/apr/21/sir-allen-stanford-cia-reports>
. He tried to surrender to US authorities at the start of May, but wasturned 
away <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/01/allen-stanford-court-stunt> 
as no criminal charges had then been laid.
 