
The film world approaches its awards season, and is experiencing a recurrent 
phenomenon concerning the way press promotional comment becomes dangerously 
unhelpful and unmanaged. The errant publicity takes up as much cultural space 
as the film, a distracting alternative narrative. It is cognitive hype 
dissonance.

Robert Zemeckis’s forthcoming Allied is set fair to be a great big 
blockbuster, a swooning second world war romantic drama. Brad Pitt is Max 
Vatan, a handsome Allied intelligence agent who has a steamy affair with French 
resistance fighter Marianne Beausejour, played byMarion Cotillard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marion-cotillard>. But then he is told that 
she is a Nazi spy and he must kill her. It sounds like a gripping tale, full of 
passion, transgression, suspicion.

Marion Cotillard issues statement denying role in Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie 
divorce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/marion-cotillard-issues-statement-denying-role-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce>
The problem is that the public, disobediently giggling over their social media 
accounts, reckon they’ve already got the scoop without needing to see the film. 
As reports came in ofBrad’s upcoming divorce with Angelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
, fans convinced themselves he had been cheating on Ange with Marion Cotillard 
while away shooting this very picture. Mischievous bloggers and tweeters are 
jujitsu-ing the Allied publicity machine with gags about how it’s Ange who is 
going to come on to whackMarion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/marion-cotillard-issues-statement-denying-role-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce>
. Allied might be upstaged by the gossip, and become best known for something 
other than itself.

And why shouldn’t it happen? Cotillard and Pitt have denied any affair, but 
the rumours have been fuelled by how Pitt and Jolie first met. When the couple 
were filmingMr and Mrs Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Observer_review/0,,1504566,00.html>
 a decade ago they were married to other people. The film ignited their 
romance. The publicity worked in the film’s favour, just about, though with 
lingering sympathy forJennifer Aniston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/jennifer-aniston-first-marriage-first-wives-club-husbands-divorce>
. This kind of spontaneous fact-meets-fiction hype mirage is hardly new.Richard 
Burton and Elizabeth Taylor met while filming Cleopatra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/15/how-we-made-cleopatra> in the 
late 1950s, and both were married. Their affair was considered hardly less 
sensational and world-historically important than that of the characters they 
played.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbrad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Marion%20Cotillard%20as%20second%20world%20war%20spies%20in%20trailer%20for%20Allied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbrad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Marion%20Cotillard%20as%20second%20world%20war%20spies%20in%20trailer%20for%20Allied%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbrad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video&media=>
Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard as second world war spies in trailer for Allied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/oct/05/brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-trailer-allied-video>
A quite different, more serious sort of publicity dissonance concerns The 
Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/oct/10/the-birth-of-a-nation-problems-nate-parker>
, the forthcoming true-life story of a US slave uprising in 1831, led by Nat 
Turner, played by the movie’s young director Nate Parker — and of course 
satirically named after DW Griffith’s notorious silent movie of 1915 praising 
the Ku Klux Klan.

Before anyone had seen the film, they had read about how it had stunned crowds 
at Sundance and secured a huge studio deal. In the #blacklivesmatter era, this 
was a movie the liberal media classes were naturally preparing to get behind, 
until it became known thatParker had been accused of raping a fellow student 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/nate-parker-criticizes-press-coverage-rape-case>
 while at Pennsylvania State University in 2001; he was acquitted. The 
complainant later took her own life, in 2012. It should be irrelevant to the 
question of how good the film is. But it can hardly be set aside, especially 
for a film with lofty ideals.

The news story looms over the film. How to reconcile the two? Richard Brody in 
the New Yorker boldly tackled the dissonance head on with his comment aboutthe 
way Parker shows the rapes in his movie 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/richard-brody/the-cinematic-merits-and-flaws-of-nate-parkers-the-birth-of-a-nation>
. They are “depicted entirely from their significance to men,” Brody writes. 
“Parker appallingly shifts the scenes around to the male view of the action, 
and never shows women in discussion among themselves, never presents how 
enslaved women endure and confront their own oppression.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3a7f9bba5e8728fd53cd8dacd534ce6ec868ee6%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allied%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20a%20film%20gets%20eclipsed%20by%20gossip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allied%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20a%20film%20gets%20eclipsed%20by%20gossip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3a7f9bba5e8728fd53cd8dacd534ce6ec868ee6%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Counter-reading … Nate Parker in The Birth of a Nation, about a US slave 
uprising. Photograph: Jahi Chikwendiu/AP 
A similar kind of real-life counter-reading has been happening for decades 
with Roman Polanski’s films, to which the director has long made it silently 
plain he will not concede an inch. Time will tell if Parker must pursue the 
same course, although their legal positions are different.

These cases are quite different from the phoney stories planted by studio 
flacks from time immemorial, dependent on co-operative artists and a 
complaisant press. Fixers from the Hollywood golden age like MGM’s Howard 
Strickling and Eddie Mannix and Fox’s Harry Brand were always creating bogus 
romances, fake intrigues and hokey life-stories to promote movies or distract 
attention from brewing scandals. The Coens’Hail Caesar! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/11/hail-caesar-coen-brothers-eddie-mannix-reel-history-josh-brolin-george-clooney>
 (2016) and Alexander Mackendrick’s Sweet Smell of Success (1957) have scenes 
about this seedy byproduct of the fantasy-factory.

Press rows sometimes dwarf their films and sometimes they don’t. Before Doctor 
Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/24/doctor-strange-review-benedict-cumberbatch-marvel-eyepoppingly-freaky-extravaganza>
 was released, there waswidespread unease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/04/doctor-strange-tilda-swinton-whitewashing-row>
 about the portrayal of the Ancient One, regendered and reconceived for the 
movie and played by Tilda Swinton, with a “Celtic” origin. Was the Tibetan 
identity erased out of deference to the important Chinese market? Very 
possibly. As things turned out, her weirdness seemed to go beyond national 
identity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a7221aeb93a282fdf936a85a260000390f29bb4%2F0_0_2096_1382%2F2096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allied%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20a%20film%20gets%20eclipsed%20by%20gossip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allied%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20a%20film%20gets%20eclipsed%20by%20gossip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a7221aeb93a282fdf936a85a260000390f29bb4%2F0_0_2096_1382%2F2096.jpg>
 Will change film-making for ever (or not)… Samuel L Jackson in Snakes on a 
Plane Photograph: New Line/Everett/Rex Features 
Or take a movie that was once the most discussed film of its day, a film which 
the commentariat regarded with saucer-eyed seriousness as a zeitgeist 
phenomenon:Snakes on a Plane <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/aug/18/1> 
(2006). It is difficult to believe now, but this all-but-forgotten Samuel L 
Jackson thriller about — well — snakes on a plane, was once feverishly 
discussed, because of its much-vaunted but wildly exaggerated status as an 
internet phenomenon. The producers allegedly incorporated online feedback into 
production with extra shooting days. Pundits believed that this Wiki-ised 
technique could be used for all films from then on. But it wasn’t. And when the 
film turned out to be a bit of a dud, this wall of chatter turned to sheepish 
silence.

The list of dissonant films goes on. The Interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/feb/06/the-interview-video-review> 
(2014) was a film satirising North Korean leader Kim Jong-un that led to 
hacking attacks, which in turn led to apparently craven industry moves to 
re-edit the film and limit its distribution. Theresulting hype 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/10/10000-copies-of-the-interview-to-be-sent-to-north-korea-by-balloon>
 built the movie up in everyone’s mind as a classic of satire, standing up 
heroically to both the North Koreans and the cringing producers. When it 
finally came out, it was clear that it wasn’t that great. It didn’t fit the 
narrative created for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F588101feb933fbd42879abd4a09c2c4d508aa3b1%2F0_39_1550_930%2F1550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allied%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20a%20film%20gets%20eclipsed%20by%20gossip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allied%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20a%20film%20gets%20eclipsed%20by%20gossip&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fallied-eclipsed-by-gossip-brad-pitt-marion-cotillard-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F588101feb933fbd42879abd4a09c2c4d508aa3b1%2F0_39_1550_930%2F1550.jpg>
 Not the disaster everyone said it would be … Titanic. Photograph: Allstar 
Other films have identities which leaked into the real world of the news: the 
Watergate mole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/jun/01/pressandpublishing.usnews2> took 
his nickname from the title of the porn filmDeep Throat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jun/11/film.filmnews> (1972). It wasn’t 
simply arbitrary. In the Watergate era, when cynicism about a dodgy president 
was becoming widespread, there was a kind of weird karmic alliance between this 
blase mood and the new porno chic.

Very strangely, in recent times, there has been an attempt to force this kind 
of branding. In the runup to the Brexit vote,Boris Johnson was bellowing that 
the referendum would be “independence day” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/brexit-independence-day-claim-nonsense-says-david-cameron>
 — apparently attempting to coattail the publicity of thesci-fi movie sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/21/independence-day-2-resurgence-review-sequel-jeff-goldblum-charlotte-gainsbourg>
 with that name. Brexit was victorious, but no-one remembers Boris’s cheery, 
lame film-title wheeze.

The strangest example of publicity dissonance was that which accompanied the 
release of James Cameron’s gigantic blockbusterTitanic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/05/titanic-review> (1997). Of 
course, this is remembered as acolossal triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/apr/03/titanic-event-movie-james-cameron>
, which involves a willed amnesia about the huge groundswell of stories before 
its release about the impending opposite: how terrifyingly unsafe the 
production was and how brutally Cameron had been driving his cast. There were 
stories about how Kate Winslet had chipped a bone in her elbow during filming 
and how she seriously thought she might drown in the tank in which the 
“sinking” scenes were filmed. The narrative was clearly all about how the curse 
of Titanic was about to strike again …. But it all vanished like snow off a 
ditch when the film emerged and became a hit.

 * Allied is in cinemas from 23 November 
• This article was amended on 7 November 2016 because an earlier version 
wrongly said Tilda Swinton’s scenes in Doctor Strange were shot in Tibet; they 
were shot in Nepal.
 