
BBC1's time travel cop drama Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> lost almost 1 million 
viewers on its second outing last night, Thursday February 14, but was still 
well in front of ITV1's Trial and Retribution.

The follow-up to Life on Mars attracted 6.1 million viewers and a 25% share 
between 9pm and 10pm, according to unofficial overnight figures.

Last week, Ashes to Ashes opened with 7 million and a 29% share.

Trial and Retribution fell to a series low, picking up 4.6 million viewers and 
a 19% share in the 9pm hour – down from last week's previous low of 5.1 million 
and a 21% share.

Never Mind the Buzzcocks – A Moving Tribute, featuring highlights of the last 
series of the BBC2 music panel show, pulled in 2 million viewers and an 8% 
share from 9pm.

Little Miss Jocelyn then attracted 800,000 viewers and a 3% share over 30 
minutes from 9.30pm on BBC2.
 Baby Bible Bashers. Photograph: Channel 4  Channel 4's Baby Bible Bashers 
documentary picked up 1.5 million and a 6% share in the 9pm hour. Another 
130,000 watched the show on Channel 4+1.
Over on Channel Five, live Uefa Cup coverage of the match between Slavia 
Prague and Tottenham Hotspur scored 1.9 million and an 8% share between 7.30pm 
and 10.10pm.

The teachers of Waterloo Road taught the cops of Sun Hill a lesson in the 8pm 
slot, with the BBC1 drama pulling in 5.3 million and a 22% share while ITV1's 
The Bill picked up 4.7 million and 19%.

BBC2's MasterChef attracted 3.1 million and a 13% share in the 8pm hour.

Channel 4's double bill of Jamie at Home picked up 1.9 million and an 8% share 
for the first instalment from 8pm, and 2 million and 8% in the half hour from 
8.30pm.

The Jamie Oliver double bill averaged a further 167,000 viewers across an hour 
on Channel 4+1 between 9pm and 10pm.

BBC1 also took the ratings honours in the 10pm slot, with its news pulling in 
4.7 million viewers and a 25% share over 35 minutes.

This compared to 2.7 million and a 14% share for ITV1's News at Ten over the 
same time period.

Channel 4's new US comedy The Big Bang Theory picked up 900,000 viewers and a 
5% share from 10pm. Channel 4+1 added another 115,000 viewers for The Big Bang 
Theory.

Then a repeat of E4 teen drama Skins attracted 700,000 viewers and a 6% share 
between 10.35pm and 11.40pm.

Five's movie repeat Anaconda drew 700,000 viewers and a 5% share from 10.10pm.

This was followed on Five at 11.45pm by the final episode of the first series 
of US comedy import 30 Rock, which attracted 200,000 viewers and a 4% share.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk 
<mailto:editor@mediaguardian.co.uk> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 