
The bad buzz has been building for months and finally this week US critics 
were allowed to judge whether Cameron Crowe’s new filmAloha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aloha> was worthy of a garland. The answer 
was a resounding no.

The romantic comedy, which sees defence contractor Bradley Cooper fall for 
pilot Emma Stone, received a string of damning reviews in the US on its release 
on 29 May.The Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/movie/aloha/review/796217> called it “deeply 
confused” with “mostly forced” chemistry.Variety 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/reviews/aloha-review-cameron-crowe-1201506992/> 
said it was “fatally misguided”.IndieWire 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/review-cameron-crowes-aloha-is-shockingly-bad-20150528>
 labelled it “shockingly bad” with “horrific dialogue”.The Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/goingoutguide/movies/aloha-with-bradley-cooper-and-emma-stone-misfires-from-the-first-lei/2015/05/27/9735b57a-046d-11e5-a428-c984eb077d4e_story.html>
 referred to it as an “incoherentpu pu platter 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pu_pu_platter>”.

The negative reaction to the film (it currently has a 14% rating on Rotten 
Tomatoes <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/aloha_2015/>) comes after a troubled 
journey to the screen. Rumours of reshoots, heavy editing and leaked emails 
suggest thatex-Sony head Amy Pascal 
<http://defamer.gawker.com/leaked-emails-cameron-crowes-new-bradley-cooper-movie-1670963815>
 wasn’t a fan of the film. The original release date was moved from December 
2014 to May this year, which jars with the film’s Christmas setting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fcameron-crowe-aloha-bradley-cooper-trailer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424350040515%2Fcrop_KP_99476_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Cameron%20Crowe's%20Aloha%2C%20which%20stars%20Bradley%20Cooper%2C%20Emma%20Stone%20and%20Rachel%20McAdams%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fcameron-crowe-aloha-bradley-cooper-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Cameron%20Crowe%27s%20Aloha%2C%20which%20stars%20Bradley%20Cooper%2C%20Emma%20Stone%20and%20Rachel%20McAdams%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fcameron-crowe-aloha-bradley-cooper-trailer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424350040515%2Fcrop_KP_99476_640x360.jpeg>
There was further difficulty this week when Cameron Crowe was accused of 
whitewashing Hawaii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/26/cameron-crowes-new-film-aloha-accused-of-whitewashing-hawaii>
 by failing to portray the predominant Asian-Pacific population of the island. 
The Media Action Network for Asian Americans called the film an “insult to the 
diverse culture and fabric of Hawaii”.

It’s disappointing news for writer-director Crowe, who suffered a similar 
misfire with the Orlando Bloom and Kirsten Dunst comedyElizabethtown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/nov/04/4> in 2005. The film went on 
to make just $27m in the US. Analysts are predicting that Aloha, opening 
against earthquake thrillerSan Andreas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/28/san-andreas-review-dwayne-johnson>
, could bring in $12m on its opening weekend, though the negative reviews could 
reduce takings.
 