
A shabby downtown apartment, its air conditioner jutting out of a cracked 
front window, isn’t where you would imagine Iran’s foremost sopranos to be 
honing their craft. But behind its storied walls their coach, Austrian-trained 
opera director Hadi Rosat, may well be rewriting the rules for women singing 
solo inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. What’s more, he began in 
the dog days of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s conservative presidency.

Since the Revolution of 1979, restrictions have been placed on women singing. 
These first prohibited all singing but evolved into a ban on women singing solo 
in front of men who are unrelated to them. Conservative clerics say women’s 
voices have the potential to trigger immoral sensual - or kinetic - arousal.

Rosat has had many brushes with the authorities. His group was ejected from 
the 2012 Fajr music festival because his work, Puccini’s theatrical opera 
Gianni Schicchi, featured an uninterrupted two-minute solo by Shiva Soroush. In 
the sample video he sent earlier to festival organisers, Rosat had shown his 
cast singing in an innocuous choir, with no solo and no acting.

But Rosat is not one to give up, saying he spends 95% of his time lobbying for 
permits from the ministry of culture and Islamic guidance, which must authorise 
all artistic productions even before any tickets can be sold. His persistence 
had Gianni Schicchi on stage at Tehran’s Vahdat Hall just months later, 
although Soroush’s solo still threatened to upend his efforts.

After their first show, a reporter from a conservative news outlet alerted 
Ahmadinejad’s culture ministry. Reps showed up the next night to shut down the 
production. Rosat protested. “Didn’t I ask you to come and watch the 
rehearsals?” he told them (they hadn’t). “Assume tonight is your last, and that 
you’ll wave goodbye to the stage and go home,” they responded.


“They hadn’t been aware of what an opera was,” says Rosat, whose work was 
Iran’s first proper theatrical opera since the revolution. The ministry had 
simply taken him at his word when he assured them it wouldn’t be subversive.

It might have ended there. But the officials watched the show in its entirety, 
after which Rosat got on stage to explain. He carried authorities through the 
legal crucible he had to overcome to obtain his permits and praised the culture 
ministry for authorising his opera “on the basis of trust”.

Perhaps Rosat’s passion moved them. Maybe the solo wasn’t as inflammatory as 
they had imagined. When the cast got word of their special guests that night, 
they arranged for a background singer to murmur inaudibly over Soroush’s voice 
so it wasn’t as off-putting to the officials. Whatever it was, in a sudden turn 
of fate, officials approached Rosat and the cast backstage to congratulate 
them. They even asked Rosat for more tickets so they could bring their families 
the next night.

“They understood there’s nothing dangerous about opera,” Rosat says. “They 
realised that I’m not here to disrupt anything, that we performed a work of art 
that doesn’t pose a threat to anyone.”

In a sense, Gianni Schicchi was the straw that broke the camel’s back. “For 
solo-singing women, the road has been opened,” Rosat says. “[Today] they are 
doing it without any problems; none of them faced the obstacles I did.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409244449326%2F48e24ecb-09df-4648-bb70-620a0ddc85d1-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409244449326%2F48e24ecb-09df-4648-bb70-620a0ddc85d1-2060x2060.jpeg>
 After a concert in Gilan, Iran. Photograph: Negin Kiani via Flickr 
Women began singing in the theatre – and sang peek-a-boo solos

You’d be hard pressed to find documented examples of women singing solo in 
post-revolutionary Iran. Searching the Iranian media won’t yield much because 
female solo-singing, when it has occurred, has usually gone unpublicised. None 
of the write-ups of Rosat’s Gianni Schicchi seriously addresses the 
uninterrupted solo that moved some in theaudience to tears 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/pomegranate/2014/03/culture-iran>. 


But in post-revolutionary Iranian theatre women have been singing solo for 
years, long before Gianni Schicchi and long before last year’s election of 
moderate presidentHassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>. One vocalist recalls a 
performance by Hannah Kamkar, who sang a Persian tasnif (ballad) completely 
solo, albeit from behind a black curtain, in Ayat Najafi’s 2000 playSleepy Noon 
(Nim Ruz-e Khab-alud). As word of mouth spread, people bought tickets just to 
hear her. A playwright cites Sadegh Hatefi’s 1991 workBoar Toothed (Dandan 
Goraz) in which Marjaneh Golchin sang a solo.

Playwright and director Pari Saberi’s works have also featured bouts of female 
solo-singing. And since Rouhani’s election, numerous theatrical productions - 
including Rosat’s Farsi rendition ofThe Sound of Music, Hamid-Reza Naimi’s 
Faust and Socrates, Mohammad Rahmanian’s The Last Days of Esfand, and Diana 
Adama’s recreation of Mozart’sMagic Flute - have made waves for their 
substantive solos by female vocalists.

In the Islamic republic, however, it’s often difficult to say what qualifies 
as a “solo” and what doesn’t because many supposed solos are variations on 
choral singing. Jargoned in Iran as ham-khani or “co-singing”, it’s exactly 
what it sounds like: to brush aside the red tape, women have over the years 
sung together with other men and women to mask their own voices. “The goal is 
to make it so the woman’s voice isn’t detectable,” says one concert organiser.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409244540312%2F5eeef303-5cae-4c09-af67-1dd316ba96f7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409244540312%2F5eeef303-5cae-4c09-af67-1dd316ba96f7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Still wildly popular: Iran’s 1970s diva Googoosh more recently at Wembley 
Arena. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
Background

Decades after the revolution, faint memories of women who grew to be national 
pop stars still course through Iran’s veins. Within the intimate confines of 
Tehran’s elevator shafts, you might hear the melody of Haydeh’s Goleh-Sang 
echoing between floors. Or, perhaps you’ll recall a cover band at a packed 
Shiraz restaurant waiting for a government delegation to leave the premises 
before performing an instrumental version of a Googoosh classic, to the raucous 
applause of a post-revolutionary generation that knows the lyrics all too well. 
And you might have read about the Islamic republic diehard that, though madly 
in love with his country’s ruling Ayatollah, must admit: he has asoft spot 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CB4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bbc.co.uk%2Fpersian%2Firan%2F2013%2F01%2F130105_basiji_interview_hamedani.shtml&ei=4-jGU7HiK6Op0QWpvYHgCg&usg=AFQjCNE_l53F9sVERwx6UbrnfGzcNaeN4w&sig2=XA_y9QGAeuqRHehLg0JR2g&bvm=bv.71126742,d.d2k>
 for Homeyra’s arresting voice.

In the 1970s, these three stage-named women singing western-styled pop-- 
Haydeh, Googoosh, and Homeyra - were regulars on Iranian airwaves and household 
names among the urban youth. They booked stints at garishly lit cabarets on 
Lalezar Street, sang for state TV’s Rangarang, and even entertained for 
birthday parties at the palaces of the Shah.

But at some point after the Islamic revolution caught fire, they departed 
their homeland. State TV’s new managers didn’t take too kindly to them. 
“Googoosh… Haydeh and many other singers have no longer any place in radio and 
television,”they wrote 
<http://www.gozaar.org/english/articles-en/Women-the-Victims-of-the-Iranian-Revolution.html>
 in a press release.


Indeed, all state-media broadcasts of music, regardless of their Iranian or 
western origin, were banned. The Revolution’s leader Ayatollah Ruhollah 
Khomeini issued a fatwa forbidding music altogether, advocating it be 
“eliminated” in favour of other pastimes - “something else that’s educational,” 
he pleaded. And then, with words alone, Khomeini barred Iranian women from 
singing in public, a move other big-name clerics did not oppose.


Iran’s newly empowered leadership was equipped with a drive to transform a 
society whose denizens, said Khomeini and others, were becoming increasingly 
“west-toxified”. So, paying musicians was declared illegal, as was the sale of 
musical instruments. Cafes, cabarets, bars, concerts, and discos were closed 
down and outlawed. Revolutionary vigilantes enforced the rulings, occasionally 
travelling to villages with historically rooted musical traditions to make 
their leader’s decision known.

A few short years later, in the throes of the Iran-Iraq war, Khomeini backed 
down <http://www.radiozamaneh.com/82739> from his original decision to outlaw 
all music, citing as permissible the eulogistic hymns sung at thefuneral 
<http://www.tarikhirani.ir/fa/news/4/bodyView/904/صادق.طباطبایی:.نظر.امام.درباره.موسیقی.به.درستی.بیان.نشد.html>
 of his co-revolutionary Ayatollah Morteza Motahari. Others recall his lack of
objections to the broadcasting of patriotic and religious hymns on national 
television 
<http://www.tarikhirani.ir/fa/news/4/bodyView/904/صادق.طباطبایی:.نظر.امام.درباره.موسیقی.به.درستی.بیان.نشد.html>
.

Western classical instrumental music eventually returned to hotels and 
restaurants 
<http://books.google.com/books?id=HmkjGSbSLPQC&pg=PA41&lpg=PA41&dq=youssefzadeh+music+throughout+the+IRI&source=bl&ots=cSBqfooFwL&sig=9-E4VUi6cJPRWiCez9J4BK5itS4&hl=en&sa=X&ei=kp69U4TtGObJsQSspILICA&ved=0CB8Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=youssefzadeh%20music%20throughout%20the%20IRI&f=false>
, where the works of Bach, Chopin, and renowned Iranian composer and pianist 
Javad Maroufi again enchanted guests. And once more, after the UN-brokered 
ceasefire ended the eight-year war with Iraq, Khomeini in 1989 took another 
major step to seemingly undo what he had done, lifting the ban on the sale and 
use of musical instruments. Perhaps he would have continued untangling the knot 
he had tied in 1979, but later that year, Ayatollah Khomeini passed away.

It was during the post-Khomeini era that cultural restrictions relaxed in 
earnest. Under the presidency of pragmatic conservative Akbar Hashemi 
Rafsanjani, traditional music was given the green light and came to be sold 
legally on cassette. It acquired further legitimacy after a 1992 speech by
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, Khomeini’s 
successor as supreme leader. In the face of what Khamenei called the “western 
cultural onslaught”, traditional music was deemed an authentic Iranian 
production.

Traditional music ensembles like Dastan, Khonya, the Kamkars, Ham-Avayan, and 
Shams emerged. Post-revolutionary Iran’s first concerts were held, some of them 
in cultural centres built by Tehran mayor Gholamhossein Karbaschi. Music 
classes were again legal. Traditional vocalist Parisa, who sang hijab-less 
before the revolution, was invited back to Iran to teach another generation of 
Iranian women at the centre for preservation and dissemination of Iranian 
music. But Parisa and other Iranian women were still barred from publicly 
singing solo in concert and in front of mixed audiences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409245091781%2Fb2082fa7-678f-439e-9118-7b8b9631bf26-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409245091781%2Fb2082fa7-678f-439e-9118-7b8b9631bf26-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Radiohead peek-a-boo in Iran. Photograph: Negin Kiani via Flickr 
Women singing in public, and the peek-a-boo solo

When reformist president Mohammad Khatami seized the reigns in 1997, the 
situation improved. Helped to power by a generation of baby boomers thirsting 
for change, the chronically smiling Khatami kicked cultural liberalisation into 
overdrive - by Islamic republican standards, that is. Concerts were instituted 
where women could sing in front ofother women 
<http://iranwire.com/features/5803/>. Western classical music was again taught 
at Tehran University, and a record number of permits for albums and concerts 
were issued by a culture ministry headed by the reform-minded Ataollah 
Mohajerani. Whereas pop music had been illegal — listening to it in your car 
constituted an offence - certain kinds of domestic pop and concerts were now 
authorised, a move that spawned pop phenomena like Benyamin and the group Aryan.

The “co-singing” movement picked up steam under the relaxed social atmosphere 
of Khatami’s presidency, when women singingat all was still a hot-button issue. 
The winds of change awakened an experimental spirit of singers toying with one 
of the Islamic republic’s most enduring taboos. “It wasn’t easy back then [to 
sing solo] - they took issue with it and harassed singers,” says a classical 
vocalist who wanted to be identified as Faranak. “But in the end, with 
government connections and what have you, it was possible for these kinds of 
things to happen.”

These were days when no one had a camera-phone and YouTube didn’t exist. State 
TV didn’t - and still doesn’t - film performances. Meanwhile, the performers 
themselves made sure culture ministry minders were out of sight. If government 
officials did drop by, adjustments were made on the fly to turn women’s solos 
into choral performances. And journalists knew writing about solo-singing not 
only brushed up against their own red lines, but also threatened the performers 
they were covering.

So female “singers would do their thing in complete media silence,” says a 
traditional vocalist who asked not to be named. It’s why she decided to stay in 
Iran while others, she says, broadcast their voices on foreign satellite 
networks so they can flee the country as asylum seekers or allow their fame to 
extract them from Iran. She wants to prove - especially to those from more 
conservative backgrounds - “that a woman’s voice is not provocative”.

In the late 1990s, a choir led by Faranak’s former music instructor organised 
public concerts that managed to get around the constraints. “I remember when I 
saw one or two of his concerts, it was clear - women sang solo,” she says, even 
if it might have involved attempts to “fool the authorities”.


The supposed deception she’s referring to is often no more than one’s 
“co-singers” quieting down - sometimes to the point of being nearly inaudible - 
to highlight a female voice. It’s still a highly common technique in both 
theatre and even public concerts. But instead, what Faranak’s instructor likely 
did was employ a familiar but more audacious tactic: injecting brief moments of 
genuine female solo-singing throughout an otherwise co-sung performance, a kind 
of peek-a-boo solo.


A piece might open with co-singing, only for the choir to then slip into 
absolute silence as a woman’s voice emerges to sing uninterruptedly solo for a 
short while, after which she is rejoined by her fellow co-singers.


Faranak recalls the instructor being coy when another student asked their 
instructor how he managed to get a woman’s un-chaperoned voice out in the open. 
“Well, we do what we must to make things happen,” he said. Her teacher had 
friends in high places, she surmises.

At a recent concert by traditional music ensemble the Kamkars, Saba Kamkar 
navigated a powerful soprano number as her co-singers briefly went silent, only 
to join in moments later. In Pari Saberi’s latest playDelightful Garden (Bagh-e 
Delgosha), a female soloist can be heard singing for a moment’s time, after 
which she is joined by a deathly silent male murmur for the remainder of the 
piece. Fatemeh, who has filmed two independent documentaries on solo-singing by 
Iranian women, remembers when vocalist Afsaneh Rasaii released her albumLooking 
at White Waters in the Khatami days: “There were some parts where she sang 
solo, and [a man’s] voice was still in the background, but it might have 
disappeared for 30 seconds, and then her voice would be heard [solo].”

Peek-a-boo solos appeared to no longer require “connections”, and directors 
applying for permits to authorise their work might not even detail the extent 
of the female solo-singing, if at all, given how brief and unpredictable it is. 
It harkens back to a recurring theme in the Islamic republic’s cultural 
tug-of-war: artists chip away at taboos and then raise the stakes, provoking 
conservatives to shift their ire toward the latest cultural transgression.

That’s not to say the women’s singing movement hasn’t been dealt any setbacks. 
After Ahmadinejad came to power, there were more cancelled concerts (even 
women-only concerts), more frequent surprise censors at theatre performances, 
and more anecdotes of conservative officials in the audience being outraged by 
the women singing on stage. Women’s voices on co-sung albums were more likely 
to be drowned out by men. But that didn’t stop women from singing. After all, 
Gianni Schicchi was first performed in the final months of the Ahmadinejad 
administration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409307770425%2F4a63f916-9583-4174-8d0d-aa9fb152319c-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409307770425%2F4a63f916-9583-4174-8d0d-aa9fb152319c-1020x680.jpeg>
 Iranian violinist Nastaran Ghaffari practices for her band called “Accolade” 
in a basement of a house in Tehran, Iran. Feb. 1, 2013. Photograph: Vahid 
Salemi/AP 
‘It’s not co-singing’

When director Mohammad Rahmanian returned to Iran in 2013 following five years 
of self-imposed exile, he directed a play calledOld Songs. But it was his 
follow-up,The Last Days of Esfand, that had Tehran talking.


A musical featuring western pop from Abba and Mary Hopkin to Amy Winehouse and 
Frank Sinatra,Esfand stars Ashkan Khatibi and female lead Ghazal Shakeri. 
Together, the two perform solos and duets alongside three co-singers in the 
background. Here, “co-singer” is the term director Rahmanian stresses in an 
interview withMehr News <http://www.mehrnews.com/TextVersionDetail/2249385> 
intended for domestic consumption. That, however, doesn’t do justice toEsfand, 
or the other productions that have featured solo-singing women in Rouhani’s 
time.


“It’s not co-singing,” Khatibi says. Technically, he adds, co-singers in a 
choir parrot the lead singer, but in complementary octaves. The co-singers in 
Esfand do regularly sing along with Shakeri as any proper choir would. But 
then, say, at the beginning of the Hopkin number Those Were the Days, they fall 
completely silent and allow Shakeri to open the piece with a brief, unequivocal 
solo. On other occasions, they might hum so lightly as to be imperceptible. 
“It’s as if they’re instruments,” Khatibi says. Granted, Shakeri doesn’t sing 
any of the numbers entirely solo from start to finish as Soroush did in Gianni 
Schicchi, but there are many brief peek-a-boo solos when the choir dims down to 
an almost inaudible volume.


For director Rahmanian, the minutia behind solo-singing isn’t what defines his 
work. “Never before has western pop been performed, nor has a woman stood in 
place [apart from the cast] with a microphone in front of her, and sung,” he 
says. “It was practically a concert in a play.” Indeed, it’s hard to imagine
Esfand would have been authorised were it pitched as a concert rather than a 
theatrical production.


Still, if there are potential troublemakers in the audience, the cast have 
made ad hoc adjustments to the play. This means on some nights, Shakeri’s voice 
has been less noticeable - less “solo” - than others, with co-singers taking on 
a more prominent role.


“We would tell her to sing more quietly, or not to sway as much behind the 
microphone,” Khatibi says (the latter might resemble coquettish dancing, 
another potential offence).


Rouhani’s deputy culture minister Ali Moradkhani - highly regarded among many 
musicians for his open-minded outlook - was present the first night of the 
performance, and did not protest, Rahmanian says. Did he clap? “I assume so,” 
he replies.


Outside the realm of theatre, women singing solo in public concerts, 
emulating what Soroush did in the theatrical production Gianni Schicchi, is a 
different ball game. Some say that there has never been a moment when an entire 
piece was sung solo by a woman in concert. But there may be one documented 
exception.


In Khatami’s second term in late 2003, France-based Iranian opera singer Darya 
Dadvar was invited to Iran to perform two pieces at Tehran’s Vahdat Hall: 
Schubert and Gounad’sAve Maria and later a piece by Antonio Vivaldi 
<http://www.daryadadvar.com/Darya-Video/Vivaldi-Vahdat-Hall-2003.html>, both in 
Italian. World-renowned Armenian-Iranian composer Loris Tjeknavorian conducted 
the Tehran Symphonic Orchestra, and for both pieces a choir of sopranos sang 
alongside Dadvar to make sure all was in line with regulations.


But one vocalist on-stage with Dadvar at the time says she and others on-stage 
were instructed not to “co-sing” but to do something else entirely. For 
significant parts of the performance, they were asked to merely “move their 
mouths to feign singing” so the only voice reverberating in Vahdat Hall would 
be Dadvar’s. And it worked. In December of that year, Dadvarsang solo again 
<http://www.daryadadvar.com/Darya-Video/Rostam-Sohrab-Shahnameh-Ferdowsi.html> 
in a production Tjeknavorian had been working on for more than two decades -The 
Tragedy of Rostam and Sohrab, based on Ferdowsi’s epic, The Shahnameh. This 
time, she sang in Farsi. This has led some to credit Darya Dadvar with being 
the first woman to sing solo in concert in the Islamic republic.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409247499836%2Fe012804b-84ec-43e1-b690-e332447fc390-1020x645.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409247499836%2Fe012804b-84ec-43e1-b690-e332447fc390-1020x645.jpeg>
 The tar is an important musical instrument in Iran. Photograph: David Yaghoobi 
via Flickr 
Lyrics, language and provincial licence


State TV forbids showing musicians in the act of playing instruments, hijabs 
are almost always picture-perfect, and many of the Rouhani administration’s 
statements deviate too heavily from conservative canon to warrant broadcast. 
When Channel Three played a sanitised version ofWhere The Wild Things Are a few 
years ago, they excised Karen O’s humming from the background music, instead 
looping the instrumental parts. So it should come as no surprise that women 
have never been shown singing on national television.


“You might hear [women singing solo] in films and theatre, but state TV isn’t 
likely to broadcast it, unless it’s like a lullaby, for example,” says Fatemeh, 
the filmmaker. While women singing lullabies has become a normal affair in film 
and theatre since the Khatami era, the same could not be said about television. 
Or so it was thought.


A weekly historical TV series, Mokhtar-nameh, raised some eyebrows in 
Ahmadinejad’s time because the closing credits featured a woman from Bushehr, 
in southern Iran, humming a local lullaby. The series did not face any major 
objections, and it’s unclear if that was because of its religiously themed 
content, the lack of lyrics, or the provincial character of the vocals.


Bushehri women are known to sing solo in passion plays decrying Imam Hussein’s 
martyrdom in AD 680. In fact, Iran’s many ethnic minorities -Kurds, Azeris, and 
Lors, to name a few - have enjoyed rich musical traditions throughout history. 
This reluctance to upset ethnic groups, dating back to the opinions of 
Ayatollah Khomeini, may explain the government’s continued leniency.


“Generally, when we’re talking about folk, ethnic, and local music, that’s 
when the restrictions ease,” Fatemeh says. The same goes for dress: TV, she 
says, is more willing to show an ethnic Lor in her traditional garb, even if 
that might entail more exposed hair and forearm than it would tolerate from 
urbanites.


“Regarding music, this might also apply,” she says, mentioning languages like 
Kurdish or Azeri. “Perhaps not on state TV, but in film. If in a movie, you 
hear the voice of a woman who is singing folk music [in a language other than 
Farsi], yes, that movie will get a permit.” In a recent documentary about 
residents of the city of Sardasht in Iranian Kurdistan still suffering from the 
effects of chemical weapons attacks in the Iran-Iraq war, a Kurdish woman sings 
a local melody, solo, as the credits roll.


Some believe Farsi, the official language of Iran, is the root of the problem. 
Farsi might be more widely understood, and so more likely to inspire spectators 
to get out of their chairs and dance, sparking the kinetic arousal that 
cultural conservatives find abominable. That may be why operatic singing is 
more tolerated. “Opera isn’t considered provocative to them because you don’t 
clap to it,” says Ashkan. “Nor is it sexual.”


Marzieh, a seasoned playwright well-versed in the art of obtaining culture 
ministry permits for her work, is still grappling with why “if a woman sings 
[solo] in an opera, it’s [considered] very different from a woman singing 
traditional music.” Or how ballet and modern “western” dance are tolerated in 
theatre, she says, but not their Persian counterparts.


“In Iranian theatre, you can do modern dance as a woman, but Iranian dance 
with - you know, ‘ding da da, ding da da’ - with teasing and coquettishness, 
you can’t do that. It’s the same way in music.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409308664701%2Fccb38592-04b7-4b68-a6d8-957d4b23fb34-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20again%2C%20naturally%3A%20women%20singing%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2014%2Faug%2F29%2Fwomen-singing-islamic-republic-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F29%2F1409308664701%2Fccb38592-04b7-4b68-a6d8-957d4b23fb34-1020x680.jpeg>
 Iranian band “Accolade” at an unauthorised performance in Tehran, Iran. 
January 2013. Photograph: Vahid Salemi/AP 
Rouhani’s winds of change


By the time Rosat took his second major work on stage in October 2013, a 
Persian-language rendition ofThe Sound of Music, the culture ministry had come 
to know and trust him, even as it underwent staff changes called for by 
President Rouhani’s incoming administration. “The issue had become personal - 
it was like, oh, okay, Hadi Rosat is doing it,” he says.


But The Sound of Music (Ashk-ha va Labkhand-ha) featured more than one 
fully-sung solo. Farhnoush Rahimi and Rosemary Essapour, who played Maria and 
Mother Abbess respectively, sang numerous solos on stage, in Farsi, without 
humming, co-singing, or any other technique normally employed to avoid stepping 
on hardliners’ toes.

 But the road to women singing solo isn’t as well-paved as Rosat would like to 
believe.

 Despite having co-singers on stage, The Last Days of Esfand received an order 
from a Revolutionary Court after its 20-day run preventing it from being 
performed again. And female soloists still cannot apply for permits to hold 
their own public concerts as independent musical artists. Some still worry 
their productions will be shut down, which is why intermittent humming, 
co-singing, and peek-a-boo solos still persist.

If Iran’s nuclear negotiations end in an agreement, they might afford 
President Rouhani the necessary political capital to undertake his promised 
domestic reforms. Those in-the-know have heard rumours of what that might 
entail for Iran’s vocalists, including an attempt to legalise solo-singing in 
all capacities once and for all. One cites a composer who is already recording 
tracks for a female solo album, to make sure he’s the first to the market 
should the ban be lifted. Another has heard the Rouhani administration wants to 
introduce singing, for men and women, into universities as an academic major 
for the first time.


Rouhani administration officials have already proven to be of a “very 
different” breed than their predecessors, says Marzieh, who has word that one 
of the president’s culture ministry official wept as he watched a recent play 
of hers (which happened to feature short peek-a-boo solos). “Censorship of 
theatre has decreased significantly since Rouhani took office. Ahmadinejad’s 
officials only looked at things through an Islamic lens, but these people are 
educated, enlightened, and they’re even touched by a play. The censors that 
used to come before would come watch a play and keep their distance, as if the 
entire work was flawed.”


“The ambience has changed rather than any one thing changing,” says Khatibi. 
“The lack of trust - that hard, strict wall between artists and politicians - 
has been eliminated.”


Among the Iranian intelligentsia these days, there’s a sense that women can 
now sing solo. This writer has lost count of how many conversations have begun 
with “so I hear female solo-singing has been legalised?” But it may be a bit 
alacritous to say the practice is now “legal”. Female solo-singing has 
happened. But it also hasn’t. There have been caveats - what with language, 
lyrics, different media, co-singing, humming, and peek-a-boos impacting just 
how “solo” a performance can be. What can be said with more certainty is that 
it’s happening more frequently than before, with authorities continuing to turn 
a blind eye to the practice in Iranian theatre.

For an Islamic republic that once banned music outright and denounced women 
singing in public, these are changing times. Rosat, meanwhile, is on the 
lookout for a strong female vocalist for his next work: the Engelbert 
Humperdinck opera,Hansel and Gretel. 

 * This story initially ran without a byline 

The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 