
On a recent afternoon in the city of La Romana, in the Dominican Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dominicanrepublic>, teenagers hawked fish 
and soft drinks outside a beachside bar. Merengue music blared from the sound 
system, and groups of young people lounged about sipping coconut juice.

Just across the Rio Dulce the contrast couldn’t have been more stark: in a 
darkened classroom, students from equally humble backgrounds sketched a man in 
a blue toga splayed out on a yellow block. They worked so intensely that the 
sound of chalk moving across paper drowned out the whirl of a fan above.

This is the Altos de Chavón School of Design <http://altosdechavon.edu.do/>, 
an art college founded in 1984 by American billionaire Charles Bluhdorn,whose 
conglomerate owned everything from Dominican sugar plantations to Paramount 
Pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/05/william-friedkin-the-exorcist-sorcerer-interview>
. Bluhdorn’s idea was to bring this country’s poorest and richest students 
together and teach them the fine arts. Though the school has proven that equal 
education can yield talented artists regardless of social class, it remains an 
exception in a nation plagued by unequal access to education.

The campus – a pastiche 16th-century Italian village created by one of 
Bluhdorn’s set designers from Paramount Pictures – sits on a mountaintop 
overlooking the Chavón River. Teens who grew up without running water study 
alongside some of their country’s richest citizens. Yet it all seems to be 
working out: rich and poor students can be seen pairing off on classroom 
projects, and after graduation some have even gone into business together.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Faltos-de-chavon-dominican-republic-arts-school-rich-poor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427921647224%2Fa5091e30-2d22-41e7-bba6-38adadf75627-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Altos%20de%20Chav%C3%B3n%3A%20where%20Dominican%20Republic's%20richest%20and%20poorest%20paint%20side%20by%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Faltos-de-chavon-dominican-republic-arts-school-rich-poor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Altos%20de%20Chav%C3%B3n%3A%20where%20Dominican%20Republic%27s%20richest%20and%20poorest%20paint%20side%20by%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Faltos-de-chavon-dominican-republic-arts-school-rich-poor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427921647224%2Fa5091e30-2d22-41e7-bba6-38adadf75627-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The campus is an imaginary 16th-century Italian village created by one of 
benefactor’s Charles Bluhdorn’s set designers from Paramount Pictures. 
Photograph: Michael Scaturro for the Guardian 
“The social experiment that’s going on in this school is something that’s only 
happening here,” said Dominique Bluhdorn, who carries on her late father’s work 
as the school’s president and chief benefactor. “For one thing, all the kids 
live together in dorms. That’s not something that happens in this country. 
Initially, it was very traumatic for parents – both rich and poor – to send 
their kids here.”

The college offers two-year associate’s degrees. About 10 graduates per class 
continue on to Chavón’s partner university, Parsons The New School for Design 
in New York, on full scholarships.

Though many of the tuition-paying students seek out the school, Chavón’s 
admissions board has tended to go out and look for its lower-income candidates.

“When we do admissions recruitment, we have the capacity to see who has 
potential,” said Carmen Lorente, the school’s program director. “Not 
necessarily everyone who enters the school automatically draws and paints at an 
artistic level. But we can see their potential, and then we work with them to 
develop their talent.”

One such student is Rosalyn Paulino, who grew up in humble circumstances in 
Santo Domingo. Lorente calls the fine arts major one of the school’s most 
promising artists.

“I knew I wanted to be an artist when I was four or five years old,” Paulino 
said. “I basically spent all my time drawing, and decided when I was 11 that 
would study art.”

Her story is an exception in the Dominican Republic. The country’s private 
universities are generally out of reach for low-income applicants, and an 
ambitious public school reform program begun in the early 1990s has stalled, 
according to Marcela Gajardo, a Chilean education expert who hasmonitored the 
country’s progress for Unesco (pdf) 
<http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001555/155539e.pdf>.

“The government has invested a lot of effort in improving the equality of 
education,” Gajardo said. “But they are not obtaining the results that should 
be expected.”

Gajardo says failed poverty reduction programs and widespread economic 
inequality have meant that30% of people ages 15-24 in the country have not 
completed primary education (pdf) 
<http://www.epdc.org/sites/default/files/documents/EPDC%20NEP_Dominican%20Republic.pdf>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Faltos-de-chavon-dominican-republic-arts-school-rich-poor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427921715862%2F7a99e9e2-b8b4-449e-9be5-051980d90426-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Altos%20de%20Chav%C3%B3n%3A%20where%20Dominican%20Republic's%20richest%20and%20poorest%20paint%20side%20by%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Faltos-de-chavon-dominican-republic-arts-school-rich-poor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Altos%20de%20Chav%C3%B3n%3A%20where%20Dominican%20Republic%27s%20richest%20and%20poorest%20paint%20side%20by%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Faltos-de-chavon-dominican-republic-arts-school-rich-poor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F1%2F1427921715862%2F7a99e9e2-b8b4-449e-9be5-051980d90426-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Altos de Chavón remains an outlier in a country where access to education for 
lower-income students remains difficult. Photograph: Michael Scaturro for the 
Guardian 
The problem hasn’t gone unnoticed. Last year saw the resumption of Santo 
Domingo’s “yellow umbrella” protest movement,which calls on the government to 
increase educational spending from 2% to 4% of GDP 
<http://hoy.com.do/las-sombrillas-amarillas-se-vuelven-a-abrir/>.

Until that happens, however, philanthropic groups – many from abroad – are 
taking up the slack, particularly in the arts.

For Dominique Bluhdorn, this has meant trying to convince Dominican elites – 
many of whom would rather see charitable giving geared towards building roads 
and hospitals – that arts and design education can benefit the economy.

“It’s hard to convince people that for under $4,000 per student per year, you 
can help revolutionize this country,” Bluhdorn said. “But that’s the argument 
we’ve made over the last 30 years.”

Though hundreds of the school’s graduates have continued their studies and 
then settled abroad, most of Chavón’s nearly 2,000 graduates have remained 
here, and have come to form the core of this country’s nascent design, fashion 
and arts community.

Rosalyn Paulino, for her part, says she hopes to follow in their footsteps and 
win a scholarship to study in the United States.

“But then I want to come back too,” she noted. “We have limits here, but 
that’s an advantage. We look at art differently. And I want to show people that 
with my work.”
 