
Universities have traditionally reached out to their alumni through 
hospitality events.Alex Smith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2011/jul/13/higher-education-alumni-strategy?>
, a member of the University of Leicester's Alumni Association, describes these 
as: "'homecoming days', networking events and swanky dinners." But in a rapidly 
changing sector, where students are expected to pay more, how will the demands 
on alumni change and what new tools can universities use to make convert 
graduates into active alumni?

And while we're thinking about changes within the HE sector, it's worth 
mentioning that these are not the only ones that alumni relations staff have to 
contend with. Technology is revolutionising the way people interact and get 
their information. What impact will this have on alumni relations?

Andy Shaindlin 
<http://www.alumnifutures.com/2010/06/alumni-magazines-online-ii.html> asks 
questions to this effect in a 2010 blog post on impact the growth of the web 
and alumni magazines. The associate vice president for alumni relations and 
annual giving at Carnegie Mellon University writes: "The internet is not where 
printed content becomes immortal. It is, however, an increasingly interactive 
medium which points to new forms of alumni engagement."

Vince Sweeny 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2011/nov/04/social-media-fundraising-campaign?>
, vice-chancellor of university relations at the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, explores the potential of social networking in an article 
for the network: "The most exciting piece is still ahead of us, and is unknown. 
How much do new "likes" and "follows" translate to engaged alumni who visit 
campus, follow our news and share their views and ideas with us?"

Many universities are already grappling with these questions and interesting 
projects are starting as a result. On Friday 29 June, we'll bring a panel 
together to share the innovative ways alumni relations professionals are 
developing what it means to be an alum, as well as explore the skills that are 
needed to thrive in this fast-changing environment. Join the discussion in the 
comment threads at 12 BST

Panel

Andy Shaindlin, associate vice president, Carnegie Mellon University 
<http://www.cmu.edu/index.shtml>

Andy is associate VP for alumni relations & annual givin 
<http://alumni.cmu.edu/s/1410/alumni/start.aspx>g at Carnegie Mellon University 
in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. A 23-year veteran of higher education 
administration, he has worked at Brown University (his undergraduate alma 
mater), the University of Michigan, and the Caltech. Andy is the founder of
Alumni Futures <http://www.alumnifutures.com/>, a website devoted to exploring 
trends in alumni relations, fundraising, and communications. @alumnifutures

Lori Manders, director of development and alumni relations, University College 
London <http://www.ucl.ac.uk>

Lori joined UCL in February 2011. She is leading the fundraising Campaign for 
UCL <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/makeyourmark/> and expanding the alumni relations 
activity. Previously she was director of development and external affairs at 
the University of Aberdeen where she worked for 12 years and led its highly 
successful fundraising campaign which raised over Â£200m. She is an experienced 
marketing professional with over 13 years experience in HE marketing and 
fundraising. @loriaberdeen

Liam Mandeville, alumni development manager, ifs School of Finance 
<http://www.ifslearning.ac.uk>

The ifs School of Finance is a not-for-profit professional body and registered 
charity incorporated by Royal Charter and is the only specialist provider of 
professional financial education that is able to award its own taught degrees.
@ifsalumni

Ian Moore, head of alumni relations and annual giving, Queen's University 
Belfast <http://www.qub.ac.uk>

Ian has been working in alumni relations in the UK for over 10 years. 
Previously working in consumer magazine publishing he has a passion for 
communications and relationship building. He has gained experience in distance 
learning, new and traditional Universities having worked at the Open 
University, Coventry University and now Queen's University Belfast. @icoult

Jade Bressington, college alumni relations manager, University of Birmingham 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk>

Jade is responsible for developing, planning and managing the alumni relations 
strategy across the College of social sciences and act as the first point of 
contact for any alumni relations related queries or activity. With the support 
of a dedicated team of 3, her role is to deliver a range of activities 
including bespoke events, tailored communications and a variety of volunteer 
opportunities, which encourage graduates to directly support the College's 
ambition, objectives and targets.

Ana de la Varga, head of alumni relations, RWTH Aachen University 
<http://www.rwth-aachen.de>, Germany

Ana has been head of alumni relations since 2005. She has studied and worked 
throughout Europe, as a scientific researcher and subsequently in public 
outreach of science and technology. She is responsible for a fast-growing 
alumni relations programme and an expanding international network as an 
important element of university marketing.

Elizabeth Allen, director of alumni relations, The American School in London 
<http://asl.org>

Elizabeth directs alumni relations strategy at the American School in London. 
Before moving to the UK, she ran a communications consulting firm specializing 
in higher education and schools. Her previous work experience includes an 
international independent school and alumni relations at the California 
Institute of Technology (Caltech). @lizallen

Genevieve Kantoch, alumni relations officer, Goldsmiths 
<http://www.gold.ac.uk/>, University of London

Genevieve manages the day-to-day alumni relations programme 
<http://www.gold.ac.uk/alumni/> at Goldsmiths. As the only person working on 
alumni relations for the College, she delivers the communication, services and 
events programme for the 50,000 alumni. In addition she is responsibility for 
the implementation and development of the alumni relations strategy as well as 
focusing on supporting key College strategies. Previous to joining Goldsmiths 
in 2010, Genevieve worked in the alumni relations team at the University of 
Warwick after working in the Arts sector for the Royal Shakespeare Company and 
The Photographers' Gallery.

Rachel Dyson, alumni relations manager, Guildhall School of Music & Drama 
<http://www.gsmd.ac.uk>

Rachel has worked at the Guildhall School since 2006, when she established the 
alumni relations office. She is responsible for developing and implementing the 
School's alumni strategy and is the first point of contact for all alumni 
enquiries. The Guildhall School of Music & Drama is one of Europe's leading 
conservatoires, offering musicians, actors, stage managers and theatre 
technicians an inspiring environment in which to develop as artists and 
professionals. @DysonRachel

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 