
It took only four minutes for the trickery and showboating to start as 
Barcelona romped to a 5-0 victory over the Swiss league champions, Basle, in 
Group C. The result givesBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> the maximum nine points from 
their first three group games, the only club to manage that and all but 
guaranteeing them passage into the knockout stages.

"There are no easy games," the Barcelona coach, Pep Guardiola, said, although 
observers of the wreckage made of the Basle defence might be inclined to 
disagree. "Only when we give the maximum are victories like this possible."

Daniel Alves produced a look-away assist, chipping over the Basle defence from 
the right as Lionel Messi dashed in at the far post. Barcelona employed the 
same tactic for their second, this time a chip from Xavi to the near post found 
Sergi Busquets with enough time to control and pick his spot past the Basle 
goalkeeper, Franco Costanzo.

Bojan Krkic scored twice, first shooting between four defenders to beat 
Costanzo, the second coming almost immediately after half-time as Barcelona 
counter-attacked to devastating effect. By the time Xavi added a fifth, Basle 
were demoralised.

The Brazilian Liedson shot low and hard in the 76th minute to give Sporting 
Lisbon a 1-0 victory overShakhtar Donetsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shakhtardonetsk> in Group C's other game.

In Liverpool's Group D, PSV Eindhoven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/psveindhoven> claimed their first points 
with a 2-0 win over Marseille, who have now lost each of their three games. The 
result leaves the Dutch side trailing Liverpool and Atl√©tico Madrid.

Danny Koevermans scored both goals, first heading home Stijn Wuytens' corner. 
For the second Edison Mendez, drawing the defence on the right, sent in a cross 
that bounced into the centre of the box, where it was met by the flying head of 
Koevermans, who angled it past the onrushing Steve Mandanda.

In Chelsea's Group A Bordeaux secured a 1-0 victory against CFR Cluj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cfrcluj> that allowed the Blues to open a 
three-point gap at the top. Bordeaux benefited from a horrendous own-goal by 
the full-back Ricardo Cadu, who cut in front of his goalkeeper for an attempted 
clearance with his foot when the ball was nearer head height. Cadu, the 
captain, nearly had a second own-goal after an inadvertent back-heel required a 
sharp save from Eduard Stancioiu.

In Group B Jose Mourinho's Inter beat Anorthosis Famagusta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anorthosisfamagusta> 1-0 with a goal from 
Adriano while Panathinaikos and Werder Bremen drew 2-2.
 