
Alec Baldwin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin> is to pen a 
memoir, Nevertheless, which will be published in 2016 by Harper.

Announcing the news 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/alec-baldwin-memoir-be-published-766054>
, publisher Jonathan Burnham described it as “funny, occasionally combative, 
often moving,” straddling everything from his childhood to his stance on 
politics and the media. “He writes about his family, lovers, friends and 
enemies, confronts his former demons, relives the highs and lows of his career, 
and opens up in an unflinchingly honest way about his life and times.”

As anyone following Baldwin’s career will know, those life and times are 
richly, sometimes embarrassingly vibrant. His film hits straddle action, drama 
and comedy, including The Hunt for Red October, Glengarry Glen Ross and The 
Cooler, which earned him an Oscar nomination. He has latterly been adored for 
his longstanding role as a coolly abrasive TV executive in Tina Fey’s sitcom30 
Rock <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/30-rock>.

But it’s his personal life, and outbursts on Twitter and elsewhere, that have 
earned him notoriety. His relationship with Kim Basinger made the couple the 
Brangelina of the early 90s, but they separated in 2000, setting off a 
protracted custody case for their child. Baldwin has already written bitterly 
about that experience in the memoir A Promise to Ourselves: A Journey Through 
Fatherhood and Divorce, in which he attacks the apparent venality of Basinger’s 
legal team.

During that period he angrily called his daughter a “rude, thoughtless little 
pig” in a phone conversation published by TMZ – but there was more to come. 
There was an air rage incident when he was asked to stop playing the 
Scrabble-like game Words with Friends, and he was escorted off the flight. His 
show Up Late with Alec Baldwin was cancelled by MSNBC after he called a 
paparazzo a “cocksucking faggot”,later saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/27/alec-baldwin-gay-activists-show> 
he was a victim of “the fundamentalist wing of gay advocacy”.

His Twitter demeanour can be equally fiery, once launching a vitriolic attack 
on the Daily Mail after the newspaper wrote an article claiming his wife was 
tweeting during James Gandolfini’s funeral. “I’m gonna find you George Stark, 
you toxic little queen, and I’m gonna fuck you up,”he wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/03/alec-baldwin-quits-twitter>, 
referring to the Mail reporter. “Someone wrote that my wife was tweeting at a 
funeral. Hey. That’s not true. But I’m gonna tweet at your funeral.”

He still continues to get eye-catching roles, appearing next in Cameron 
Crowe’s forthcoming (and as-yet untitled) air force romance starring Bradley 
Cooper and Emma Stone, as well as Mission: Impossible 5, which is currently 
filming.
 