
Amanda Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/music/amanda-palmer> has called the 
past few months in the United States “a total shit show”, but there’s one 
silver lining she’s looking forward to in president Trump’s America: a 
renaissance of political art.

Speaking at a press conference during Woodford Folk festival in rural 
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> – where she 
announced she and husband, the author Neil Gaiman, had just been granted 
five-year working visas for Australia – the Dresden Doll, solo artist and cult 
cabaret icon invoked the flourishing of art and culture in Weimar Germany as 
proof that “frightening political climates make for really good, real, 
authentic art”.

Cult heroes: Amanda Palmer – a fearless one-woman creative typhoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/07/amanda-palmer-dresden-dolls-cult-heroes>
“It’s been a really scary time in America. I don’t know how it’s felt over 
here [in Australia] for the past few months, but it’s a total shit show over 
there. Especially if you’re an artist, a woman, a minority, gay – anything but 
a rich white man – it’s really very scary,” she said.


“But being an optimist ... there is this part of me – especially having 
studied Weimar Germany extensively – I’m like, ‘This is our moment.’Donald Trump
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is going to make punk rock 
great again. We’re all going to crawl down staircases into basements and 
speakeasies and make amazing satirically political art.

“If the political climate keeps getting uglier, the art will have to answer. 
We will have to fight. It’s already happening – the artists in my tribes have 
been like, ‘Alright. This is not good.’ We are sharpening our knives for a 
large buffet.”

Palmer, who is currently in Australia on a stripped-back acoustic tour 
<http://amandapalmer.net/shows/>, also announced that she and Gaiman have just 
been granted distinguished talent visas by the Australian government, which 
will allow them to travel freely between the US and Australia for the next five 
years. The pair will mostly be based in Melbourne.

“We started this [visa application] process long before the spectre of Donald 
Trump, before his orange head was even a speck on the horizon of our lives,” 
she said.

“We have a brand new baby, who’s a year old, and I’ve been looking around at 
the world, the political climate, the art scenes, my friends, our whole 
situation, trying to figure out where we should land. And Australia does look 
pretty tasty.”

Bob Hawke blames decline in quality of politicians on intrusiveness of media
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/bob-hawke-blames-decline-in-quality-of-politicians-on-intrusiveness-of-media>
While Palmer has a close relationship with Australia (she has toured here 
about half a dozen times over the past 10 years, solo and with her band the 
Dresden Dolls), she said she would be sad to miss the Women’s March on 
Washington,a nationwide day of protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/27/womens-march-on-washington-dc-guide>
 taking place the day after Trump’s inauguration.

“I actually feel quite guilty that I’m not going to be in the States on 
January 20. I feel like I really should be there in Washington with the 
millions of other women who are going to give the giant finger to the orange 
man. But I’ll do what I can from over here.”

• Woodford Folk festival is on until 1 January 2017 
<https://woodfordfolkfestival.com/>
 