
If you’re on the horns of a dilemma, have we got the perfect person to sort it 
out for you. Send in your problems now andAmanda Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amanda-palmer> will be your agony aunt. The 
punk-cabaret singer, currently appearing at the Sydney festival, has a proven 
track record in finding inventive, even visionary solutions to tricky problems.

When she didn't have the funds to make an album, she turned to Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/22/amanda-palmer-visionary-egotist-interview>
 – then in its infancy – and managed to raise $(US)1.2m, a story which provided 
the material forher ultra-popular TED talk 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/amanda_palmer_the_art_of_asking.html>. She's a social 
media star,with 980,000 followers on Twitter <https://twitter.com/amandapalmer>
. But she's not all about the business –her marriage to the fantasy author Neil 
Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/08/amanda-palmer-neil-gaiman-audience-geek-royalty>
suggests that she has valuable insights on affairs of the heart (or other 
organs come to that). Her most recent blogpost isa very moving and insightful 
meditation on a friend's death <http://amandapalmer.net/blog/20140112/>.

So whether you’re involved in some terrible social media snarl-up, having 
problems with your love life, or just feel stuck in a rut or worse, send your 
problems to us and we’ll get Amanda to answer them. We can’t promise that 
you’ll end up with $1.2m, but you will get an exhilarating new perspective on 
your issues, and sound advice on what to do next. Will her counselinvolve the 
untoward use of a rough towel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/apr/02/sexual-healing>, like 
another Guardian advice columnist? There's only one way to find out.

Post your queries below – we'll publish Amanda's answers to a selection later 
in the week
 