
Michael Nyman <https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-nyman> – Time Lapse

In the thick of making the minimal-leaning, string quartet David Bowie tribute 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/63321-listen-to-amanda-palmer-and-jherek-bischoffs-david-bowie-covers-ep-featuring-neil-gaiman-john-cameron-mitchell-anna-calvi/>
 that I just put out with Jherek Bischoff, I began thinking about strings and 
my more classical-leaning influences and about how strings can translate melody 
and music. When I first found Michael Nyman as a teenager, I made it the 
soundtrack to my life, and it was one of those beautiful backwards discovery 
experiences as I let his soundtracks lead me to the films ofPeter Greenaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peter-greenaway>. I would probably never have 
come to appreciate Greenaway’s films if I hadn’t already fallen in love with 
the music. This is one of my all-time favourite Nyman arrangements, from my 
all-time favourite Greenaway movie,A Zed and Two Noughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/16/distant-voices-zed-and-two-noughts-watch-on-demand>
. I love how, like classic Nyman, it just builds and layers and builds.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqR4NcJQMwnc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqR4NcJQMwnc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqR4NcJQMwnc&media=>
Beck <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beck> – Lonesome Tears

Best string arrangement ever, and composed by Beck’s dad! I’ve been obsessed 
with his album Sea Change ever since it came out in 2002, and I always come 
back to it. I saw Natalie Merchant at a talk a few months ago, when I’d just 
given birth, and she told a story about how this was the only album that would 
make her daughter go to sleep in the car (I also asked her for mom advice and 
she said: “Don’t tour.” I think I’m going to fail.) Anyway, she was right, Beck 
works like magic on a baby, and this song in particular has a part at the end, 
which I thought was just a magic trick that Beck played on my ears, a kind of 
go-sonic Möbius strip, but is actually a sound called aShepard tone 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shepard_tone>. It was used by the Beatles on I 
Am the Walrus and in the music for Super Mario 64. So there’s that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzWe6bMVvTzk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzWe6bMVvTzk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzWe6bMVvTzk&media=>
Henryk Górecki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/12/henryk-gorecki-obituary> – I 
Lento – Sostenuto Tranquillo Ma Cantabile

This arrangement for strings starts so slowly you can barely tell it’s there, 
so don’t go reaching for the volume knob. It then builds and blooms into a 
sorrowful kaleidoscope, not unlikeBarber’s Adagio for Strings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/nov/07/10-best-classical-tear-jerkers-fiona-maddocks>
. Lose yourself.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0nsLccXkDPc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0nsLccXkDPc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0nsLccXkDPc&media=>
Balanescu Quartet – Kraftwerk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/27/kraftwerk-most-influential-electronic-band-tate>
’s Robots

Listen to how they translate Kraftwerk’s simple computer melodies into strings 
– it’s really genius. With music that’s already so minimal, there’s so much or 
so little you could do, and I have always been so into these arrangements, this 
one especially. You can hear the strings playing off the mechanical sound of 
the original, as if the natural wood of the instruments is in a dialogue with 
the computers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8zbyES28D6k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8zbyES28D6k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8zbyES28D6k&media=>
Zoë Keating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/23/zoe-keating-youtube-block-channel>
 – Escape Artist

I’ve had the pleasure of watching Zoë layer her songs on the cello for an 
artist who was performing live – it’s like watching a religious ritual. When 
looping is done well, it’s as if a musician can take you by the hand, through 
the door and into a sonic palace they are building for you as you walk, brick 
by brick. Zoë does this, and it’s incredible.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ufe2JtYqZI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ufe2JtYqZI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Ufe2JtYqZI&media=>
 * Strung Out in Heaven: A Bowie String Quartet Tribute 
<http://amandapalmer.net/strungoutinheaven/> is out now  