
Crowdfunding <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/crowdfunding> startup 
Patreon is now paying $2m a month to its community of more than 10,000 
musicians, illustrators, vloggers and other creators.

The company, which recently added musician Amanda Palmer to its network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/03/amanda-palmer-crowdfunding-patreon-kickstarter-fans>
, has doubled its monthly payouts since November 2014, when itreached the 
$1m-a-month milestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/19/crowdfunding-patreon-creators-musicians-youtube>
.

Patreon now has nearly 250,000 “patrons” paying money to creators through its 
site, where they can pledge as little as $1 per release, whether that be a 
song, a video, a web-comic strip or another kind of content.

Now the company is buying one of its peers, crowdfunding service Subbable, 
which was launched byYouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> 
stars Hank and John Green in 2013, the same year as Patreon.

While Patreon funds individual creators, Subbable <https://subbable.com> has 
focused more on web video series, including its founders’ own SciShow and Crash 
Course shows, which have been watched more than 451m times on YouTube.

The Greens are among 24 Subbable creators, earning more than $1m a year 
collectively, who will now join Patreon’s network as part of the acquisition.

“From day one, Patreon and Subbable were guided by the same values and the 
same goals,” said Hank Green as the deal was announced.

“Initially we came at the problem differently, and this helped us both improve 
our products and our services to creators, but once it was clear that we could 
help creators more together than apart, this was inevitable.”

The Greens – also known as the “Vlogbrothers” – are well known within the 
YouTube community for more than their videos: they also own the high-profile 
VidCon online video conference.

The acquisition is likely to encourage more creators to give Patreon a try 
just as the arrival of Palmer did. The musician is currentlyearning more than 
$28,000 from her patrons on the site <https://www.patreon.com/amandapalmer> 
every time she releases a new song or piece of content.

Patreon’s growth is also part of a wider surge in direct fan-funding that also 
includes Bandcamp, which is currentlypaying out $3.5m a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/09/indie-music-bandcamp-100m-payments-artists>
 to artists selling music and merchandise through its site, and crowdfunding 
service Kickstarter, whichaveraged $44.1m of monthly pledges in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/06/kickstarter-crowdfunding-2014-pledges-backers>
.
 