
Every time US musician Amanda Palmer releases a new song, video or long-form 
piece of writing, she’ll earn more than a total of $13,000 from her1,400 
backers on crowdfunding site Patreon <https://www.patreon.com/amandapalmer>, 
making her one of the site’s most popular creators.

It took just over 14 hours for the musician to reach that figure after 
launching her profile on the US-based site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/03/amanda-palmer-crowdfunding-patreon-kickstarter-fans>
, with her fans pledging to pay an average of $9.28 each whenever she releases 
a new piece of content to her “patron-only” feed.

Palmer famously raised $1.2m in 2012 from fans on Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> to fund the release of her 
last album, plus an art book and tour. She’s now shifting her efforts to 
Patreon, with its model of regular, smaller payments from fans to support the 
work of creators.

So far, more than 430 fans have pledged to pay at least $10 per “thing” that 
Palmer releases – a payment level that will grant them access to a monthly 
webcast by the musician.

Amanda Palmer is crowdfunding again, but this time on Patreon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/03/amanda-palmer-crowdfunding-patreon-kickstarter-fans>
Meanwhile, 30 have pledged at least $100 per item to join her “inner circle”. 
After the campaign launched, Palmer added another tier – $1,000 or more per 
item – with two fans already having committed to it. “I’ll call, we’ll talk, 
we’ll have dinner. All the things, pretty much,” she wrote. “Thank you (holy 
shit).”

Outside Patreon, Palmer is planning to release “pretty much” all her work for 
free on sites including YouTube, Bandcamp and her own website, although she may 
still use Kickstarter as a pre-ordering tool for one-off releases.

“If 1,600 people want vinyl, i’ll make 1,600 vinyl. No problem,” she wrote. 

Patreon said in November 2014 that it was paying out $1m a month 
<https://www.patreon.com/creation?hid=1070951> to its network of musicians, 
filmmakers, writers, illustrators and YouTubers. The company takes a 5% cut of 
creators’ revenues, and signed up more than 125,000 “patrons” in its first 18 
months.
 