
Conditions created by the strong El Niño event that warmed up Pacific waters 
in 2015 and early 2016 altered rainfall patterns around the world. In the 
Amazon basin, that meant reduced rainfall during the wet season, plunging some 
parts of the region into severe drought.

According to NASA 
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=88308&src=eoa-iotd>, the 
Amazon is the driest it’s been at the start of the dry season since 2002 — and 
that probably means the rainforest is in for a particularly nasty wildfire 
season, according to Doug Morton, an Earth scientist with the U.S. agency and a 
co-creator of theAmazon fire forecast 
<http://www.ess.uci.edu/~amazonfirerisk/ForecastWeb/SAMFSS2016.html>, which 
uses climate observations and active fire detections by NASA satellites to 
predict fire season severity.

“Severe drought conditions at the start of the dry season have set the stage 
for extreme fire risk in 2016 across the southern Amazon,” Morton said in a
statement <http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=88308&src=eoa-iotd>
. The Brazilian states of Amazonas, Mato Grosso, and Pará arereportedly 
<http://www.ess.uci.edu/~amazonfirerisk/ForecastWeb/SAMFSS2016.html> at the 
highest risk.

Per NASA’s Amazon fire forecast, the wildfire risk for July to October now 
exceeds the risk in 2005 and 2010 — the last time the region experienced severe 
drought and wildfires raged across large swaths of the rainforest. So far, the 
Amazon has seen more fires through June 2016 than in previous years, which NASA 
scientists said was another indicator of a potentially rough wildfire season.

NASA’s forecast model, developed by scientists at the University of 
California, Irvine (UC-Irvine) in 2011, focuses on the link between sea surface 
temperatures and fire activity. Warmer sea surface temperatures in the tropical 
Pacific Ocean, which occur during an El Niño event, as well as in the Atlantic 
Ocean are known to shift rainfall away from the Amazon, thereby increasing the 
fire risk in dry months.

Sea surface temperatures in tropical Pacific waters from October 2015 to April 
2016 were at record highs relative to the 2001-2015 average,according to 
UC-Irvine scientists 
<http://www.ess.uci.edu/~amazonfirerisk/ForecastWeb/SAMFSS2016.html>. At the 
same time, sea surface temperatures in the tropical Atlantic from January to 
April 2016 were also above average.

The Amazon fire forecast team also tracks changes in terrestrial water storage 
(TWS) during the dry season. NASA’sGRACE satellites 
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/GRACEGroundwater/> registered 
below-average TWS across most of Amazonia in March 2016, which means there was 
less soil moisture recharge from wet season precipitation than in previous 
years.

“When trees have less moisture to draw upon at the beginning of the dry 
season, they become more vulnerable to fire and evaporate less water into the 
atmosphere,” UC-Irvine scientist Jim Randerson, who built the forecast model 
together with fellow UC-Irvine scientist Yang Chen, said in astatement 
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=88308&src=eoa-iotd>. “This 
puts millions of trees under stress and lowers humidity across the region, 
allowing fires to grow bigger than they normally would.”

Scientists at NASA and UC-Irvine have been working with South American 
officials and scientists to make them aware of these data and their 
implications.

Liana Anderson of Brazil’s National Center for Monitoring and Early Warning of 
Natural Disasters said in astatement 
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=88308&src=eoa-iotd> that 
“fire forecasts three to six months before peak fire activity are important to 
identify areas with higher fire probability for integrated planning.”
 