
Amazon has refused to hand over data from an Echo smart speaker to US police, 
who want to access it as part of an investigation into a murder in Arkansas, 
according to court records seen bytech industry news site The Information 
<https://www.theinformation.com/amazon-echo-and-the-hot-tub-murder>.

Arkansas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> police issued a 
warrant to Amazon to turn over recordings and other information associated with 
the device owned by James Andrew Bates. Bates has been charged with the murder 
of a man found dead in his hot tub in November 2015.


The Seattle-based tech company twice declined to provide the police with the 
information they requested from the device, although it did provide Bates’s 
account information and purchase history, the report said court records show.

Although the Echo is known for having “always-on” microphones to enable its 
voice-controlled features, the vast majority of the recordings it makes are not 
saved for longer than the few seconds it takes to determine if a pre-set “wake 
word” (usually “Alexa”) has been said. Only if that wake word has been heard 
does the device’s full complement of microphones come on and begin transmitting 
audio toAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>.


While that would seem to limit the use of the Echo data in the investigation, 
the device is also occasionally accidentally activated, through similar sounds. 
Those snippets of audio could potentially be useful to police investigating a 
crime, as could the timing information of when they were recorded. According to 
the report, the court records show police took the Echo and extracted some data 
from it.


US prosecutors and defence attorneys have both found new uses for “smart” 
device data in the courtroom in recent years, especially information collected 
by wristwatch-style Fitbit activity trackers. In 2014, a Canadian woman sued 
her former employer over a debilitating injury she claimed to have sustained 
during her work as a personal trainer; she submitted data from her Fitbit to 
prove that “her activity levels are still lower than the baseline for someone 
of her age and profession,” according toreports 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/11/when-fitbit-is-the-expert-witness/382936/>
.

Conversely, when a Florida woman claimed an intruder had assaulted her, police 
used information from a Fitbit she had been wearing during the alleged assault 
that suggested she had in fact been asleep at time. She wassubsequently charged 
<http://fusion.net/story/158292/fitbit-data-just-undermined-a-womans-rape-claim/>
 with filing a false report.

Amazon’s reluctance to part with user information fits a familiar pattern. 
Tech companies often see law enforcement requests for data as invasive and 
damaging to an industry that considers privacy a prime selling point. Last year,
Apple went to court with the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/29/apple-lawyer-fbi-bruce-sewell-more-crime>
 over the bureau’s demand that that company break its own encryption on an 
iPhone belonging to one of the shooters in the San Bernardino spree killing.

But firms often retain a “back door” for their own use – to automatically scan 
emails for key terms used to target advertising 
<https://support.google.com/mail/answer/6603?hl=en>, for example – and that can 
complicate claims that law enforcement access would uniquely invade a user’s 
privacy. Amazon’s internal approach to user data will likely prove integral to 
its ability to resist the warrant.

In the Echo case, police also extracted data from a different smart home 
device, a water meter. Bates’ smart water meter recorded a flow of 140 gallons 
between 1am and 3am, the report said. Prosecutors claim this is an unfeasibly 
large amount of water use, and allege it was the result of the garden hose 
being used to spray the patio clean of blood. Bates’s defence team disputes the 
accuracy of the readings.


Bates pleaded not guilty in April 2016 and is on bail awaiting trial early 
next year.
 