
I spend a lot of time in the rainforest. It’s by far the most rewarding and 
incredible part of the job but, I’ll be honest, it’s also pretty gruelling. 
While I’ve managed to avoid the malaria,dengue fever 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/dengue/Pages/Introduction.aspx> and tuberculosis 
that’s riddled my (male) colleagues, there are 101 things that make the 
rainforest a rather disagreeable place.

First and foremost, there’s the heat. It’s so hot you are continually bathing 
in your own sweat. By the end of a trip, my own stench really is something to 
behold.

Second absolutely everything bites or stings. Snakes and spiders you can 
understand. But a caterpillar that can kill a child – really? I’ve also 
casually brushed against a plant only to feel like I’ve been set on fire. 
Imagine a stinging nettle on steroids. The sting transformed into an enormous 
pus volcano on my thigh that considerately exploded in the middle of a meeting.

Third, the runs. No stay in the rainforest is complete without a good old bout 
of diarrhoea. One of our party was so fearful of what lay ahead he took an 
entire packet of Imodium before he even entered the forest. Needless to say, he 
couldn’t defecate for more than a week.

I’ve also contended with quicksand, nearly drowning in rapids, being held at 
gunpoint, and been made to sing (terribly) for our local hosts.


I would argue that these delightful quirks of the rainforest affect men and 
women in equal measure. But the one area that I am continuously envious of is 
the male ability to pee while standing. Despite my best efforts I’ve had to 
accept that I’ll never accomplish it. It really is a gift from the gods.

Trying to find somewhere to squat that doesn’t reveal my nether regions to all 
and sundry is the bane of my life. And yes, I have heard of aShewee 
<http://www.shewee.com/> but there’s something oddly humiliating about trotting 
off with a rubber hose in front of your colleagues. I’ll spare you the delights 
of thrush and periods in the rainforest, I’m sure you get the gist.

What I do find infuriating in all of this is that women who have a sense of 
adventure, who challenge themselves, or in my case merely marinade themselves 
in their own sweat, are often described as “having balls”. If a man does 
something stereotypically feminine, do we heap on praise by declaring “they 
have a vagina”? Obviously not. So why the hell is it considered complimentary 
to say that women have testicles? When women do something brave or adventurous, 
it should be a demonstration of their ability as a woman, not how like a man we 
can be.

I am completely in awe of the women in our rainforest projects around the 
world. Their unflappable style is an example to us all – male or female. They 
pay no attention to the pathetic tribulations I’ve listed above. I’ve watched 
my young friend Mikaela lop the head off of Peru’s most poisonous snake with a 
machete without a second thought.

Or what about giving birth in the rainforest? Think of the song and dance we 
make about childbirth in the UK – we’ve got the bloomin’ NHS. Ana from 
Cutivireni in Peru has given birth to 14 children with no medical help – half 
inside a cave while hiding from theShining Path 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shining_Path>. I can’t think of anything braver.

These women steadfastly safeguard their families and the forest. Cool Earth is 
about to celebrate saving its 100 millionth tree. A landmark achievement that 
is largely down to these incredible women, with no balls in sight.


Kitty Jenkin is the project manager for Cool Earth <http://www.coolearth.org/>
. Follow@coolearth <https://twitter.com/coolearth> on Twitter. 


Would you like to share your story of working in the field? Email 
globaldevpros@guardian.co.uk with ‘Field post’ in the headline.

Read more like this:
• Field post: ‘We live in the same world but we have such different lives’
• Land rights in Latin America: where are the voices of indigenous women? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/23/indigenous-women-latin-america-climate-change>
• COP20: Peru must give indigenous people means to fight climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/05/cop20-peru-indigenous-people-combat-climate-change>


Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox.
 