
Goggles said to have been worn by the aviation pioneer Amelia Earhart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/amelia-earhart> when she crashed early in 
her career have emerged for sale 90 years later.

Eighteen unseen photographs of Earhart as she prepared for her 1937 round the 
world attempt, during which she disappeared, are also up for auction.

Earhart is believed to have been wearing the broken Luxor aviator goggles when 
her plane came down during a lesson with her instructor, Neta Snook, in 1921.

The photos were discovered by 66-year-old Diane Brown, who had been given them 
by her pilot mother 40 years ago but had forgotten they existed.

They include shots of the Lockheed Electra 10E used for Earhart's doomed 
circumnavigation attempt. There are also personal images of her packing for the 
fatal flight and getting her hair cut at a barber's shop.

Brown, who had initially thrown the pictures out with the rubbish, said: "I 
thought at the time it was just old papers that weren't needed any more. But 
something said not to throw it out. I don't know why, but something just kept 
telling me: 'Get that back out of that bag.' Amelia Earhart inspired my mother 
to fly."

Marcus Wardell, from the Clars auction gallery 
<http://www.clars.com/press/2011/sept2011/sept_highlights.html> in California, 
which is selling the items, said: "The broken goggles and unpublished pictures 
really stand out as collector's items. The goggles were said to have been worn 
when Amelia crashed in 1921 at Goodyear Field in California. One eyepiece is 
broken and they were then owned by her instructor, Neta Snook, who gave them to 
our vendor.

"We have 18 unpublished photographs of Amelia just prior to her round the 
world attempt that ended with her disappearance. These items have caused a 
great deal of excitement because Amelia Earhart is still very well known."

The goggles are expected to fetch more than Â£20,000 and the photographs 
hundreds of pounds each when they are sold on 11 September.
 