
Two legendary female explorers are in the news this week: Sally Ride and 
Amelia Earhart. Ride, the first American woman in space, died on Monday 
following a 17-month battle with pancreatic cancer, while the $2.2m 
investigation into the disappearance of Amelia Earhartstopped short 
<http://news.discovery.com/history/earhart-plane-search-hope-fades-120720.html> 
Tuesday, on what would have been Earhart's 115th birthday, due to the 
challenges of exploring a steep, underwater coral cliff.

Female pioneers like Earhart and Ride have a powerful hold on our 
imaginations. They're icons of courage and perseverance. They're role models 
for young people, especially women.

People like Amelia Earhart and Sally Ride made a differance in the world for 
women. Honor these ladies true role models. RIP#SallyRide 
<https://twitter.com/search/%2523SallyRide>

— Fatima Khan (@Fatima_106) July 24, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/Fatima_106/status/227785840003260417>

Earhart and Ride are part of a tradition of women who discovered parts of the 
world that no man (or woman) had gone before, including Alison Hargreaves, who 
climbed Everest without oxygen (and several other mountains while heavily 
pregnant); Helen Thayer, who lived for a year with a wolf pack in the Arctic 
Circle; and Nellie Bly, who took a record-breaking trip around the world 72 
days and wrote a ground breaking exposé in which she faked insanity to study a 
mental institution from the inside. Their achievements are celebrated, rightly 
recorded and commemorated – albeit difficult to find. As they say, history was 
written by a man, and the accomplishments of many women are often looked over.

Today's challenge, then, is to look forward and find the women who continue to 
push the boundaries of knowledge. We've started the list with five but we need 
your help. Who have we missed? Help us build up this list andmake your own 
recommendations in the thread below

Kira Salak

Kira is the first woman to traverse Papua New Guinea and the first person to 
kayak 600 miles down Africa's Niger River to Timbuktu.According to National 
Geographic 
<http://www.nationalgeographic.com/explorers/women-of-national-geographic/#/salak-tuareg-guides-camels_44351_600x450.jpg>
 Kira Salak is "the gutsiest – and some say craziest – woman adventurer of our 
day."
 Kira Salak on the banks of the Niger River during an expedition for National 
Geographic. Photograph: Remi Benali 
Nalini Nadkarni

Using what she calls her "master caster" Nadkarni 
<http://www.nationalgeographic.com/explorers/women-of-national-geographic/> 
flings ropes high into the incredibly diverse world of treetops in tropical 
forests to study what she calls "last biotic frontier". She spends most of her 
time in the Monteverde Cloud Forest in Costa Rica where global warming is 
threatening to bring many species into extinction

Louise and Meave Leakey

The Leakey lineage <http://www.nationalgeographic.com/explorers/bios/leakeys/> 
is legendary. Louis and Mary Leakey's discoveries proved that Africa was the 
birthplace of human kind. Meave Leakey is one of the world's leading 
paleoanthropologist ,and Louise Leakey is following in her family's footsteps 
as a "bone hunter".

Gerlinde Kaltenbrunner

Kaltenbrunner 
<http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/expedition-k2/gerlinde-kaltenbrunner-bio> 
set herself a goal at a very young age: to climb every Himalayan mountain over 
8,000 meters high. One after another this trained nurse scaled such legendary 
peaks as Everest and K2 until she became the first woman to summit all 14 of 
them without relying on supplemental oxygen.
 Gerlinde Kaltenbrunner Photograph: Ralf Dujmovits 
Eugenie Clark

Clark <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugenie_Clark> is a pioneer of scientists 
studying shark behavior. It was as the "Shark Lady" that she became one of 
National Geographic's most popular contributors.

Opal Kunz via RLeeh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17315398>

Kunz <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opal_Kunz> was a famous early American 
aviator, the first president of the "Ninety-Nines <http://www.ninety-nines.org/>
", the international organization of women pilots that was formed in her living 
room, and an early feminist. She was active in promoting equality for women 
pilots.

Jane Goodall via thunnus10 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17315368>

According to thunnus, Goodall <http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/jane-goodall> 
is "a pillar in the world of conservation, science communication, and humanity. 
I have admired her since I was a very young boy (I'm in my late 30's now). The 
positive impact she's had on the world is immeasurable, and I was thrilled to 
shake her hand at a book signing about 10 years ago."
 Jane Goodall, the world's foremost authority on chimpanzees. Photograph: Jens 
Schlueter/AFP/Getty Images 
Molly Lutcavage via thunnus10 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17315544>

"Lutcavage 
<http://www.umassmarine.net/faculty/faculty.cfm?mode=detail&instructor_id=144> 
studies the ecology, physiology, and management of large marine animals like 
tunas, sharks, and turtles. She developed the Large Pelagics program at the 
University of Massachusetts Research Center in Gloucester, MA., navigating a 
very challenging funding and political gauntlet along the way. The scope of her 
work is broadly important, and worthy of recognition."

Marie Curie <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marie_Curie> via @ticking and 
gingerraspie
Jan-Paul Bultmann (@ticking) 
@GuardianUS <https://twitter.com/GuardianUS> @FreakkaerF 
<https://twitter.com/FreakkaerF> Marie Curie, exploring the frontiers of radio 
science!
 <https://twitter.com/ticking/status/227859559673372672> July 24, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/ticking/status/227859559673372672> 
"The greatness of Marie Curie's achievement is shown by the fact that despite 
the barriers that women faced in her day she is the only person to have won a 
Nobel Prize in two different sciences. She received the Physics Prize in 1903 
and the Chemistry Prize in 1911." –gingerraspie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17325375>

Bessie Coleman via timecop 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17315712>

When Coleman <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bessie_Coleman> left her job as a 
manicurist to pursue her dream of becoming a pilot, she was quickly 
disappointed. Flight schools in the US refused to train a black woman. After 
drumming up financial support, Coleman went to France, learned to fly in Paris 
and became the first female African American pilot and the first African 
American pilot to hold an international flying license.
 Bessie Coleman first African American female pilot. Photograph: Public Domain 
Valentina Tereshkova via Rashid Patch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17315737>

Tereshkova <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valentina_Tereshkova>, now retired, 
was the first woman in space. She piloted theVostok 6 
<http://russiapedia.rt.com/prominent-russians/space-and-aviation/valentina-tereshkova/>
 on 16 June 1963, becoming both the first woman and the first civilian to fly 
in space. During her three-day mission, she performed various tests on herself 
to collect data on the female body's reaction to spaceflight, according to 
Wikipedia.

Harriet Tubman <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harriet_Tubman> via @irieDC 
<http://twitter.com/iriedc>
Irie DC (@irieDC) 
Harriet Tubman MT @GuardianUS <https://twitter.com/GuardianUS>: In honor of A 
Earhart & S Ride, listing inspiring female explorers. Who do U look up to?
trib.al/kTaNpZ <http://t.co/mOESHrHd>
 <https://twitter.com/irieDC/status/227860194930081792> July 24, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/irieDC/status/227860194930081792> 
Ellen MacArthur via justinkyra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17316818>

MacArthur is an internationally renowned sailor and activist who completed the 
solo circumnavigation race, the Vendée Globe, then broke the non-stop solo 
world record. Now retired from professional sailing, MacArthur has become a 
powerful environmental advocate; her foundation educates young people about 
sustainability.
 Ellen MacArthur: 'When you sail you gain an understanding of the definition 
of finite.' Illustration: Chris Ison/PA 
Elinor Smith via electricia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17317392>

In mid-October 1928, The Flying Flapper of Freeport 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elinor_Smith>, as she used to be called, she flew 
a Waco 10 under all four of New York City's East River bridges on a dare; 
according to the Cradle of Aviation Museum, she is the only person ever to do 
so.

Rachel Carson via gingerraspie

"The biologist Rachel Carson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rachel_Carson> 
should be remembered because she was one of the first to recognize that human 
activity could damage the environment. Her book Silent Spring was a timely 
warning and is one of the most important science books ever written." –
gingerraspie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17325215>
 Rachel Carson, author of Silent Spring, at the typewriter in her library at 
home in Washington DC on 13 March 1963. Photograph: Bob Schutz/AP 
Emmy Noether via khatarnaak 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17324472>

Noether <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emmy_Noether> was an influential German 
mathematician known for her groundbreaking contributions to abstract algebra 
and theoretical physics. Described by Pavel Alexandrov, Albert Einstein, Jean 
Dieudonné, Hermann Weyl, Norbert Wiener and others as the most important woman 
in the history of mathematics, she revolutionized the theories of rings, 
fields, and algebras.

Christina Dodwell via confused23

Dodwell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christina_Dodwell> is an explorer, 
travel writer, and lecturer. She is Chairman of the Dodwell Trust and was 
awarded the Mungo Park Medal in 1989. "Her writings are always interesting, she 
comes across as very no nonsense, and always willing to throw herself into 
whatever community she is visiting. I love her books and i'm surprised she is 
not more well known." –confused23 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17324052>

Roz Savage via Bearfoot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17318867>

Savage <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roz_Savage> holds four Guinness World 
Records for ocean rowing, including first woman to row solo across the 
Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans. She has rowed over 15,000 miles, taken 
around 5 million oarstrokes, and spent cumulatively over 500 days of her life 
at sea in a 23-foot rowboat.
 Solo Atlantic Rower Roz Savage shows off her Gloves with Holes or Holes with 
Gloves. Photograph: Photo: Roz Savage 
Rosalind Franlin via youcantbeserious 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17317526>

Franklin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosalind_Franklin> was a biophysicist 
best known for her work on the X-ray diffraction images of DNA which led to 
discovery of DNA double helix. Her data was used to formulate Crick and 
Watson's 1953 hypothesis regarding the structure of DNA. "Without Rosalind 
Franklin there would have been no Crick and Watson."

Gertrude Bell <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gertrude_Bell> via @boyreporter
Ron Nurwisah (@boyreporter) 
@onthewag <https://twitter.com/onthewag> My inner history nerd comes out... 
check out Gertrude Bellbit.ly/hes7H <http://t.co/ou1J8kJ0>Basically the female 
Lawrence of Arabia
 <https://twitter.com/boyreporter/status/228126998525001728> July 25, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/boyreporter/status/228126998525001728> 
Amy Johnson via andyman85

"Amy Johnson, another pioneer and probably the better pilot, but she never did 
attempt or make a circumnavigation, unless I'm very much mistaken. However I 
agree her name deserves to be more famous than it is. She died young too, but 
unlike Earhart it was during WWII rather than on a record-breaking flight, 
which meant the press weren't quite so interested." –andyman85 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/17323677>
 Amy Johnson 
Now that we've started the list, we're handing the rest over to you, readers – 
what female explorers do you know of that we should add to our list? Tell us in 
the comments and we'll add your recommendations to this post.
 