
How can I convince you to watch American Crime 
<http://abc.go.com/shows/american-crime>, which starts its second season 
Wednesday 6 January at 10pm EST on ABC?


What if I told you that you don’t need to have seen the first season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/05/american-crime-classy-drama-multiple-viewpoints>
 to tune in tonight because it tells an entirely different story unrelated to 
last year’s events? What if I told you that last year’s tale about a robbery 
and murder of a young couple in working-class California was one of the 
freshest and most interesting things on television as a whole and network 
television especially? What if I told you that season two is even better than 
that?

What if I told you that this season is about whether or not a boy named Taylor 
(Connor Jessup <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2862041/reference>), a poor kid 
attending a tony private school in the Chicago suburbs, was sexually assaulted 
by the captain of the school’s championship basketball team? What if I told you 
that one accusation has a ripple affect across the community calling into 
question ideas about race, equality, sexual identity, education, politics and 
gender? What if you knew that it holds a shocking mirror up to our own society 
where stories likeRolling Stone’s fabricated story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/09/university-of-virginia-fraternity-sues-rolling-stone-rape-article>
 about a rape on a college campus are still a huge part of the narrative 
surrounding sexual assault?

Will that lure you in? What if you knew that underappreciated character actress
Lili Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/aug/01/comment.akinojumu>, 
who played a victims’ rights activist in the first season, gets an expanded 
role playing the boy’s mother and just absolutely knocks it out of the park? 
What about knowing thatFelicity Huffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/mar/11/features.weekend> deserves an 
Emmy for playing the shark of a headmistress at the school or thatRegina King 
<https://twitter.com/ReginaKing?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, who already won an Emmy for her role last season, deserves some sort of 
special award for bringing the same honest ferocity to playing a tough parent 
of one of the basketball players as she did to her outstanding work on the 
second season ofThe Leftovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/04/the-leftovers-what-happened-at-the-end-of-season-one>
? Or how about learning that Oscar winnerTimothy Hutton 
<https://twitter.com/timhutton?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 is having an amazing second act on this show, this time playing the school’s 
basketball coach?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkPQ87xNw_c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkPQ87xNw_c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkPQ87xNw_c&media=>
Do you need to know that John Ridley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/10/12-years-a-slave-john-ridley-steve-mcqueen-oscars-speech>
, the Oscar-winning screenwriter of12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/09/12-years-a-slave-review>, 
masterfully writes (and partially directs) the show? Do you need to know that 
it’s as narratively and cinematically inventive as shows likeThe Sopranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/jan/12/sopranos-best-tv-drama>, 
The Knick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/oct/16/steven-soderbergh-tv-series-the-knick-swanky-enjoyable-lacks-bite>
,The Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/jul/21/thewireisunmissabletelevis>
 andSix Feet Under <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/six-feet-under>? 
What about that scene in the first episode where Taylor fights with her son in 
his bedroom but it’s filmed from the still confines of her living room? How 
amazing was that? Oh wait, you’ll have to tune in to find out.

What if you are a fan of all the true crime dramas that are getting so much 
attention right now, likeThe Jinx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/20/jinx-robert-durst-murder-wealth-privilege-jarecki>
,Making a Murderer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/05/making-a-murderer-juror-steven-avery-framed-netflix>
andSerial <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>? Will it help to 
know this has as much ambiguity as all those other yarns, even if it is 
ficitional? It might be made up, but doesn’t that give it an element that 
somehow allows it to really get at the truth better than a documentary? It’s 
not about one specific crime (even though it is), it’s about all of us, right?

Do I need to remind you of all of those brilliant shows that we never watched 
until it was too late and they got cancelled? Should I trot out the likes ofMy 
So-Called Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/aug/09/my-so-called-life>
,Friday Night Lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/feb/13/friday-night-lights>
, andFreaks and Geeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/dec/31/box-set-freaks-and-geeks> 
and remind you of their fate? What if I told you that this was even better, 
that each episode leaves you wondering just who the heroes and villains really 
are and questioning how you would react if put in the characters’ shoes?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Famerican-crime-second-season-must-watch-tv-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa9eb978e58f61dc8cd204a0606ab1aa3027dbe2%2F0_76_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Crime%3A%20the%20first%20must-watch%20TV%20show%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Famerican-crime-second-season-must-watch-tv-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Crime%3A%20the%20first%20must-watch%20TV%20show%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Famerican-crime-second-season-must-watch-tv-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa9eb978e58f61dc8cd204a0606ab1aa3027dbe2%2F0_76_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 Felicity Huffman and Timothy Hutton in American Crime. Photograph: Bill 
Matlock/Getty Images 
Maybe I just need to tell you that if we don’t support the network’s making 
great prestige television that they’ll stop doing it and we’ll just be trapped 
withNCIS: Cleveland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/dec/14/wholovesncishttpwwwcbscompr>
 and four cycles ofThe Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-voice> every gosh darn year? How 
about I remind you that this is notAmerican Crime Story 
<http://www.fxnetworks.com/shows/american-crime-story/episodes>, the 
forthcoming FX show about OJ Simpson? I can’t promise you that’s any good, but 
I know for sure this one is.

What will it take? Will I have to pay you? Will I have to promise you that the 
winning Powerball numbers are somehow hidden in code in each episode? Should I 
tell you that if you watch, a unicorn will show up your door and you can pet 
it? I could suggest that Kate Upton wears a tight sweater in each episode, but 
that would be a lie, or would it? How about if I promise that if the show gets 
renewed for a third season Barack Obama has personally pledged to deport Ricky 
Gervais?

Have I convinced you? Because if you’re not watching this show, not only are 
you doing yourself a disservice, but you’re just ruining great television for 
everyone. If guilt works, I’ll take it, because if I’ve learned anything from 
American Crime, it’s that we’re all guilty, especially when we don’t act.
 