
The collapse of the multimillion-pound oyster industry in the Solent is being 
tackled by SirBen Ainslie <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie> and his 
America’s Cup racing team.

When the Land Rover Ben Ainslie Racing  
<http://land-rover-bar.americascup.com/>(BAR) team set up its base in 
Portsmouth, it identified a threat to the ecosystem that is needed for the 
oysters to thrive. It is thought that the decline in oysters has been caused by 
a combination of water quality and temperature, poaching and dredging.

Now a series of oyster cages is being installed on pontoons at the base where 
Ainslie and his team are building their racing yacht.

Sarah Alexander, Land Rover BAR spokeswoman, said: “The Solent had once 
supported an oyster trade worth millions of pounds but, in the past few years, 
it has seen a rapid decline in the native population, and the subsequent 
collapse of the oyster fishery.”

Relocated oysters were provided by the Southern Inshore Fisheries and 
Conservation Authority (IFCA) <http://www.southern-ifca.gov.uk/>, which worked 
with local fishermen to relocate oysters from an area which was due to be 
dredged to deepen the entrance to Portsmouth Harbour for the next generation of 
aircraft carriers.Jo Meekley, of MDL Marinas, explained: “MDL have developed a 
pontoon structure that can be attached to any standard pontoon that will house 
the oysters in an environment that will hopefully lead to their successful 
reproduction.”

At the end of November the first set of oyster cages was installed on the Land 
Rover BAR pontoon on the Camber in Old Portsmouth.

Dr Joanne Preston, of the Institute of Marine Sciences at the University of 
Portsmouth, said: “It’s fantastic to see stage one complete. The oysters are in 
so we can now start collecting the data to gain a better understanding into 
what is happening to the oysters and the ecosystem around them.”
 