
The Third International Conference on Financing for Development recently 
convened in Ethiopia’s capital, Addis Ababa. The conference came at a time when 
developing countries and emerging markets have demonstrated their ability to 
absorb huge amounts of money productively. Indeed, the tasks that these 
countries are undertaking – investing in infrastructure (roads, electricity, 
ports, and much else), building cities that will one day be home to billions, 
and moving toward a green economy – are truly enormous.

At the same time, there is no shortage of money waiting to be put to 
productive use. Just a few years ago, Ben Bernanke, then the chairman of the US 
Federal Reserve Board, talked about a global savings glut. And yet investment 
projects with high social returns were being starved of funds. That remains 
true today. The problem, then as now, is that the world’s financial markets, 
meant to intermediate efficiently between savings and investment opportunities, 
instead misallocate capital and create risk.

Development finance summit: milestone or millstone for the world's poor?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/16/financing-for-development-summit-outcome-addis-ababa-milestone-millstone-poverty>
There is another irony. Most of the investment projects that the emerging 
world needs are long term, as are much of the available savings – the trillions 
in retirement accounts, pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds. But our 
increasingly shortsighted financial markets stand between the two.

Much has changed in the 13 years since the first International Conference on 
Financing for Development 
<http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/overview/monterrey-conference.html> was held in 
Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002. Back then, the G7 dominated global economic 
policymaking; today, China is the world’s largest economy (in 
purchasing-power-parity terms), with savings around 50% larger than that of the 
US. In 2002, western financial institutions were thought to be wizards at 
managing risk and allocating capital; today, we see that they are wizards at 
market manipulation and other deceptive practices.

Gone are the calls for the developed countries to live up to their commitment 
to give at least 0.7% of their GNI in development aid. A few northern European 
countries – Denmark, Luxembourg, Norway, Sweden and, most surprisingly, the UK 
– in the midst of its self-inflicted austerity –fulfilled their pledges in 2014 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/development-aid-stable-in-2014-but-flows-to-poorest-countries-still-falling.htm>
. But the US (which gave 0.19% of GNI in 2014) lags far, far behind.

Today, developing countries and emerging markets say to the US and others: if 
you will not live up to your promises, at least get out of the way and let us 
create an international architecture for a global economy that works for the 
poor, too. Not surprisingly, the existing hegemons, led by the US, are doing 
whatever they can to thwart such efforts. When China proposed theAsian 
Infrastructure Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asian-infrastructure-investment-bank> to 
help recycle some of the surfeit of global savings to where financing is badly 
needed, the US sought to torpedo the effort. President Barack Obama’s 
administration suffered a stinging (and highly embarrassing) defeat.

The US is also blocking the world’s path towards an international rule of law 
for debt and finance. If bond markets, for example, are to work well, an 
orderly way ofresolving cases of sovereign insolvency 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/sovereign-debt-restructuring-by-joseph-e-stiglitz-and-martin-guzman-2015-06>
 must be found. But today, there is no such way. Ukraine, Greece, and Argentina 
are all examples of the failure of existing international arrangements. The 
vast majority of countries have called for the creation of a framework for 
sovereign-debt restructuring. The US remains the major obstacle.

Private investment is important, too. But the new investment provisions 
embedded in the trade agreements that the Obama administration is negotiating 
across both oceans imply that accompanying any such foreign direct investment 
comes a marked reduction in governments’ abilities to regulate the environment, 
health, working conditions, and even the economy.

The US stance concerning the most disputed part of the Addis Ababa conference 
wasparticularly disappointing 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/addis-ababa-international-tax-cooperation-initiative-failure-by-jose-antonio-ocampo-2015-08>
. As developing countries and emerging markets open themselves to 
multinationals, it becomes increasingly important that they can tax these 
behemoths on the profits generated by the business that occurs within their 
borders. Apple, Google, and General Electric have demonstrated a genius for 
avoiding taxes that exceeds what they employed in creating innovative products.

All countries – both developed and developing – have been losing billions of 
dollars in tax revenues. Last year, the International Consortium of 
Investigative Journalistsreleased information 
<http://www.icij.org/project/luxembourg-leaks/explore-documents-luxembourg-leaks-database>
 about Luxembourg’s tax rulings that exposed the scale of tax avoidance and 
evasion. While a rich country such as the US arguably can afford the behaviour 
described in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks, the poor cannot.

I was a member of an international commission, the Independent Commission for 
the Reform of International Corporate Taxation, examining ways to reform the 
current tax system. In areport 
<http://www.icrict.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/ICRICT_Com-Rec-Report_ENG_v1.4.pdf>
 presented to the International Conference on Financing for Development, we 
unanimously agreed that the current system is broken, and that minor tweaks 
will not fix it. We proposed an alternative – similar to the way corporations 
are taxedwithin the US, with profits allocated to each state on the basis of 
the economic activity occurring within state borders.

The US and other advanced countries have been pushing for much smaller 
changes, to be recommended by the OECD, the advanced countries’ club. In other 
words, the countries from which the politically powerful tax evaders and 
avoiders come are supposed to design a system to reduce tax evasion. Our 
commission explains why the OECD reforms were at best tweaks in a fundamentally 
flawed system and were simply inadequate.

Developing countries and emerging markets, led by India, argued that the 
proper forum for discussing such global issues was an already established group 
within the United Nations, theCommittee of Experts on International Cooperation 
in Tax Matters 
<http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/tax-committee/about-committee-tax-experts.html>, 
whose status and funding needed to be elevated. The US strongly opposed: it 
wanted to keep things the same as in the past, with global governance by and 
for the advanced countries.

New geopolitical realities demand new forms of global governance, with a 
greater voice for developing and emerging countries. The US prevailed in Addis, 
but it also showed itself to be on the wrong side of history.

•Joseph E. Stiglitz 
<http://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/joseph-e--stiglitz#JQibdD0T5sU7D8cL.99>
, a Nobel laureate in economics and University Professor at Columbia 
University, was chairman of President Bill Clinton’s Council of Economic 
Advisers and served as senior vice-president and chief economist of the World 
Bank.
 