
Congratulations to Amol Rajan for his historic appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/17/amol-rajan-independent-editor> 
as the first ethnic minority editor of a national British newspaper. Rajan, 
currently editor of Independent Voices, a comment, campaigns and community 
section, takes over from Chris Blackhurst at the Independent. It's a bold move, 
though not the first the Independent has made. It was also the first national 
broadsheet newspaper to have awoman, Rosie Boycott, as editor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosie_Boycott>.

Maybe it's the fact that the Indy is Britain's newest paper that makes it open 
to making dramatic statements such as this. Or maybe it's the fact that since 
its early years it has been struggling, and is desperately seeking to mark out 
its identity.

Whatever, I wish him every success. There are many senior figures in the 
British media who would take any sign of failure by Rajan to confirm their 
latent beliefs that non-whites simply aren't up to the job.

British newspapers have traditionally been run by home counties, public 
school, Oxbridge-educated, men. Rajan is himself a Cambridge graduate, and has 
been a member of Independent owner Evgeny Lebedev's inner circle for several 
years. So it's likely Lebedev considered him a safe pair of hands – despite him 
being only 29 years old.

To be really meaningful, though, Rajan has to make a difference to the output 
of the newspaper, which means getting beyond traditional narrow coverage to 
include a wider spread of stories across multicultural Britain – reflecting 
life as it really is for Britain's minorities, rather than just the typical 
shock headlines of terror, knife crimes and sexual grooming. Such stories 
provide a distorted image and fuel the stereotypes and prejudice lying behind 
so much commentary on immigration and multiculturalism.

It means having more minority opinion-forming voices too. Rajan's Independent 
Voices section <http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/> lists five 
ethnic-minority columnists of its total 45. That's not many – though it's an 
improvement on three years ago, when 40 of its 41 columnists were white. (At 
the Telegraph, by the way,all 31 listed columnists 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/columnists/> are white; at the Times 20 of 
21 <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/> are white, and at the 
Guardian and Observer,18 of its 20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/list/comment-columnists> listed 
columnists are white.)

An ethnic breakdown of other opinion-formers, from book reviewers to theatre 
critics, would be just as stark. Ultimately, the British public is being 
shortchanged by this lack of diversity. Stories that should be covered are not, 
and readers end up being kept in ignorance about important aspects of their 
country, with the prejudices of the cliques in control of the media – which go 
beyond race to class and gender too – held up as informed commentary.

I don't know if Rajan will do this – he is, after all, a former columnist for 
the notorious rightwing journalThe Salisbury Review 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Salisbury_Review>. And even if the will is 
there, the Independent is so short of cash it may not have the resources to 
make a significant change to its news and opinion output.

But it's important that Rajan is given time to make a change. And, even more, 
it's important that Britain's other nationals look at their own recruitment and 
promotion practices to ensure they're not inadvertently denying opportunities 
to other potential editors of the future.

• This article was amended on 18 June 2013 to take out a reference to Rosie 
Boycott being the only woman to have edited a national broadsheet.
 