
Amol Rajan, the columnist and former adviser to Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, has been appointed editor 
of the Independent – the first non-white editorial head of a UK national paper.

Rajan, 29, replaces Chris Blackhurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/chris-blackhurst>, in a surprise move less 
than two years since he was named editor. He is currently editor of the 
Independent's comment section.

Blackhurst has been appointed group content director across the Lebedev 
titles, including the London Evening Standard. Sarah Sands, the Evening 
Standard editor, continues to report directly to Lebedev.

It was also announced on Monday morning that Oly Duff, the executive editor of 
the Independent, has been made editor of its 20p sister title,i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/i>. Duff, 29, replaces Stefano Hatfield, who 
is in charge of overseeing the Evening Standard's London Live TV project.

The announcement was made by Levedev on Twitter shortly after 10am taking some 
journalists at the Independent by surprise. "It's come out of nowhere," said 
one source.

In a tweet <https://twitter.com/mrevgenylebedev/status/346564412628414464>, 
Lebedev wished the new editors luck and said of Blackhurst: "I thank him for 
all his work and leadership as editor of @Independent. Look forward to creating 
a 21st century media company with him."

In another move, Lisa Markwell, who was recently appointed executive editor of 
Independent on Sunday, has been named as editor of the title.

According to an internal memo announcing the appointments, Blackhurst will be 
responsible for "editorial integration and content creation processes" across 
the Independent, Evening Standard and the planned London Live TV station.

In other changes announced on Monday Ian Walker, currently deputy editor of 
the Evening Standard, moves to group head of news across the three 
Lebedev-owned titles.

Lebedev said: "Our businesses are at a critical stage and a bold approach is 
needed for our industry. Today I am continuing this approach by appointing as 
editors two highly talented young journalists. Their energy, creativity and 
resourcefulness will invigorate both the Independent and i.

"We are lucky to have in Chris Blackhurst a skilful and highly respected 
journalist with long experience of both the Independent and the Standard and I 
thank him for what he has achieved as editor of the Independent. Lisa Markwell 
has already made a impact at the Independent on Sunday in her short time in 
charge.

"Our goal is to develop a pioneering and integrated newsroom for the 21st 
century, providing print, digital and television output 24/7."

Blackhurst has been closely involved in the debate over Lord Justice Leveson's 
proposed reforms to press regulation and has been credited with returning the 
Independent's front page focus to news stories.

"Chris Blackhurst saved the Independent by ditching the vanity splashes and 
putting news back on the front page,"said Tim Shipman 
<https://twitter.com/ShippersUnbound/statuses/346563046640082945>, the Daily 
Mail's deputy political editor.

Rajan was born in Calcutta before moving to London when he was three years 
old. He grew up in Tooting, south London, and went on to read English 
literature at Cambridge University. After graduating, Rajan worked briefly for 
the Evening Standard and Channel 5, before moving to the Independent where he 
rose through the ranks from news reporter. He has been a member of Lebedev's 
inner circle for a number of years, acting as his private media adviser while 
writing columns for the title. He was made editor of Independent Voices four 
months ago following a round of redundancies on the comment desks.

Duff has worked at the Independent for nine years, predating the Lebedev 
takeover of 2010. Formerly a reporter and editor of the paper's gossip column, 
Duff went on to become news editor and help launch i. He also studied at 
Cambridge, where he edited the university newspaper, Varsity, before Rajan.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 