
Little more than a fortnight before his 30th birthday, newly-appointed 
Independent editorAmol Rajan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/amol-rajan> has 
become the first non-white journalist to run a UK national newspaper.

His place in Fleet Street history was confirmed in a tweet by Independent 
owner, Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/17/amol-rajan-independent-editor>, 
on Monday morning.

At 29, Rajan would also have been a contender for youngest national newspaper 
editor in recent memory – but that mantle was claimed by Piers Morgan when he 
was named editor of the News of the World in 1994 at the age of 28.

He inherits one of Fleet Street's smallest editorial teams, at a time when 
they are being asked to multitask and screen test for sister title the Evening 
Standard's London Live local TV service, due to launch next year.

The Independent title's ultimate owner, Egveny's father Alexander Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev>, also faces a possible 
jail sentence in his native Russia – although he has insisted the funding of 
his UK papers is secure.

Born in Kolkata in 1983, Rajan moved to London when he was three years old. He 
grew up in Tooting, south London, attending the comprehensive secondary school, 
Graveney. He read English literature at Cambridge University, and edited the 
student magazine Varsity after his Independent colleague, Oly Duff, who was 
named editor of thei <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> on Monday.

A well-liked and energetic editorial figure, Rajan has enjoyed a rapid rise 
through the ranks at the Independent, from rank and file news reporter to one 
of Lebedev's closest confidantes.

He was a media adviser for the young Russian proprietor for two years, helping 
reshape Lebedev's reputation from relative unknown to becoming one of Fleet 
Street's more vocal newspaper owners.

Under Rajan's stewardship, Lebedev gave a number of personal interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/05/evgeny-lebedev-evening-standard-oligarch>
 to the press and spoke out regularly in the debate around Lord Justice 
Leveson's proposals for industry reform.

Described by colleagues as politically astute and progressive-minded, Rajan 
possesses a number of traits favoured by Lebedev in his youthful senior 
editorial team. Fellow twentysomethings include Duff and Archie Bland, who 
returned to a writing role at the paper last month after a stint as deputy 
editor.

A keen cricket fan, Rajan is the author of a 2011 book on the sport called 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Twirlymen-Unlikely-History-Crickets-Greatest/dp/0224083236>
 Twirlymen: The Unlikely History of Cricket's Greatest Spin Bowlers. He is also 
a devoted foodie, writing a restaurant column for the Independent on Sunday and 
appearing as a judge on BBC1's MasterChef in April.

After graduating from Cambridge, Rajan worked briefly for the London Evening 
Standard before moving to Channel 5. Two years later, he joined the Independent 
as a news reporter, later moving on to stints as sports news correspondent, 
assistant comment editor and deputy comment editor.

Rajan also launched the Independent's Voices comment section 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/>, of which he was named editor four 
months ago.

In a tweet <https://twitter.com/amolrajan/statuses/346635627544076288> after 
his appointment on Monday, Rajan said: "Really don't care how trite this 
sounds: best thing about my new job is leading the most fantastic team of 
journalists in Fleet St."
 