
The Winter Olympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/winter-olympics> 
skeleton champion Amy Williams has called for Olympic hosts to allow equal 
access to facilities in the run-up to a Games after describing the Canadian 
approach for Vancouver as "sad".

Williams won gold in the skeleton despite minimal access to the sliding track 
in Whistler, where the male Georgian luger Nodar Kumaritashvili died on the eve 
of the Games. In contrast, the Canadians, including the women's skeleton world 
No1, Mellisa Hollingsworth, enjoyed the benefit of hundreds of runs.

"It is not right to compete against someone who has had 400 runs when you've 
only had 30, because to the athlete each run slows the process down in your 
head and your reactions get quicker," she told the Daily Mail. "I thought it 
was sad the way the Canadians acted.

"And what happened in the sliding sports was that the other nations began 
looking at it as the rest of the world versus Canada. You wanted your own 
country to win, but beyond that you didn't care who did as long as it wasn't 
Canada.

"The way the Canadians behaved united the rest and then they finished out of 
the medals in my event anyway. I hope people will now realise it is not fair. 
You should want to win but only if everybody has the same chance. It's not 
winning if you've given yourself an unfair advantage. The hosts should set out 
a level playing field, that's the point of the Olympics."

Williams also had to contend with Canadian claims that her helmet had illegal 
aerodynamic modifications on the eve of her gold-winning run. The protest 
failed and Williams says it was motivated by "sour grapes".

"It was only because Mellisa didn't win that they tried to claim my equipment 
was illegal," she said. "It was just sour grapes. I thought Mellisa was a 
friend but the Canadians could not bring themselves to say of me: 'She drove 
the best, she was dominating in training."'
 