
Amy Poehler <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> is trying to 
remember the last time something frightened her.

“What was I scared of the other day?” she asks herself. She puckers her brow, 
chews her lip, leans forward and rests her elbows on her knees. She looks at 
the glass coffee table in front of her as if it might suddenly release the 
answer. “What did someone say and I was, like: ‘Oh no way?’”

Poehler sits back on the sofa, still thinking. She is wearing a floral print 
dress and opaque tights. Her shoulder-length reddish-brown hair is cutely 
curled at the ends. She looks like everyone’s favourite primary school teacher 
until she says: “Oh fuck, I forget” and the swear word slices through the room. 
“Well, there you go. I think it was something physical.”

I’m not particularly surprised she can’t remember. After all, the 44-year-old 
Poehler has built a successful career out of conspicuously Not Being Scared. 
This is the woman who at the age of 21 travelled from her home town in 
Massachusetts to study improvisation in Chicago on a whim that she might be 
good at it (she was). This is the woman who, during her seven-year stint on
Saturday Night Live, performed a hardcore rap when she was nine months pregnant 
in front of the former Republican vice-presidential hopeful Sarah Palin (sample 
lyric: “Shoot a mother-humpin’ moose, eight days of the week”). And this is the 
woman who, whenco-hosting the 2015 Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/12/amy-poehler-tina-fey-golden-globes>
 with her long-term collaborator and comedy partnerTina Fey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tina-fey>, made a joke about Bill 
Cosby drugging Sleeping Beauty that was so hilariously off-colour, so precisely 
timed and targeted, that the audience didn’t know whether to laugh or gasp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1470f9b9a2b7e94cc6f970103af639306150df1a%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1470f9b9a2b7e94cc6f970103af639306150df1a%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Just for laughs: with Tina Fey on Saturday Night Live in 2005. Photograph: 
NBC/Getty Images 
“Don’t get me wrong,” Poehler says. “I did not breeze in there thinking: ‘I’m 
going to nail this.’ My heart rate was not low when I was doing the Golden 
Globes. I wanted to do well. It’s very bizarre to be in a room where everybody 
in your audience is famous. But also: it’s anawards show!”

She grins, as if the ridiculousness of the notion should be glaringly 
self-evident.

In Sisters, released this month, Poehler and Fey take their comic chemistry on 
to the big screen, co-starring as adult siblings who regress to adolescence in 
order to throw one last party when they discover their parents are planning to 
sell their childhood home.

The film, written by fellow Saturday Night Live staffer Paula Pell and partly 
based on Pell’s teenage diaries, is at its laugh-out-loud best when Poehler and 
Fey are interacting. They bounce off each other with ease – sometimes literally.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsisters-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757337974%2FKP_722231_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sisters%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsisters-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sisters%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsisters-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757337974%2FKP_722231_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Sisters - video review 
One scene depicts the two of them in a shop trying on party dresses, squeezing 
their middle-aged bodies into tight Lycra and zipped leopard print while a 
bored shop assistant insists everything looks “amazing”. Poehler and Fey turn 
to each other, stick out their tummies and bump them together affectionately. 
It’s basically the stomach equivalent of a high-five.

That’s pretty brave, I say, letting all your flabby bits hang out onscreen and 
not caring who sees it.

It takes years as a woman to unlearn what you have been taught to be sorry for

“Is it?” Poehler counters. “I don’t see that as brave, just funny. You know, 
as a comedian your body has to be – I need to think of a better term than ‘up 
for grabs’ – but you kind of use whatever you have to get the laugh. And if 
you’re worrying about how you look… Vanity is the death of comedy.”

Still, Hollywood is not renowned for its equal opportunities employment 
policies.

“Maybe,” says Poehler. “It kind of depends on whatever lens you want to look 
through. So one could say we are youth-obsessed – which, as a culture, we 
certainly are. And then one could also say: it’s never been a better time to be 
a woman in your 40s. I think from my lens ofwomen in comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/20/female-standup-comedy-void>, and 
the actresses and actors who are working right now, the material is so rich.”

Women talk about stuff on the way to the valet that it takes men 10 years to 
admit to each other

Besides, Poehler isn’t the kind of person who will sit around waiting for the 
phone to ring. If the work doesn’t come to her, she simply goes out and creates 
it. She wrote four episodes of the long-running sitcomParks and Recreation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/feb/15/park-and-recreation-amy-poehler>
, in which she also starred as chirpy middle-ranking bureaucrat Leslie Knope, 
and she is an executive producer on the female-driven comedy seriesBroad City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/apr/28/the-best-us-comedy-since-louie-broad-city-finally-arrives-in-the-uk>
 andDifficult People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/05/difficult-people-julie-klausners-new-show-revels-in-cringe-comedy>
. In 2008 she co-founded Smart Girls, a digital series and online community 
aimed at empowering and engaging young girls <http://amysmartgirls.com/> who 
might otherwise be disappearing down a rabbit hole of Justin Bieber YouTube 
videos.

Poehler’s book Yes Please <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/yes-please.html> 
was published last year and went straight to the top of theNew York Times 
bestseller list. The memoir has become a sort of miscellaneous advice manual 
for women who suffer from that post-feminist malaise of asserting themselves 
and then feeling pointless guilt about having done so.
 Trailer for Sisters 
“It takes years as a woman to unlearn what you have been taught to be sorry 
for,” Poehler writes. “It takes years to find your voice and seize your real 
estate.”

Looking at her now, one of the foremost female comedians of her generation, 
with film credits ranging fromBlades of Glory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/apr/06/willferrell.comedy> to Inside Out 
(Poehler voiced the character of Joy), it seems Poehler has not only seized her 
real estate but has bought out the entire neighbourhood, fixed it up and is 
ready to flip it for a huge personal profit.

“If you’re in a position of power or if you get to create and control and do 
your own thing and can find a way to do that,” she says, “then sometimes people 
will keep letting you do it.”

So, going back to what makes her scared: the answer seems to be, well, nothing.

“You know, it sounds like I’m bragging in some way, but as far as career 
stuff, there’s not that much stuff that scares me. I know what I can do well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062a4a8f92b2b99db3cd714838e7e9060de7d543%2F0_0_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062a4a8f92b2b99db3cd714838e7e9060de7d543%2F0_0_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
 On thin ice: in Blades of Glory, 2007, with her former partner Will Arnett. 
Photograph: Snap Stills/REX Shutterstock 
“I think I always feel like if everything went to shit, I would just teach 
improv at a theatre. I feel a healthy detachment from the idea of success and 
fame. If you feel like you have a skill, you feel: ‘OK, I’ll just go to another 
town – pack up my belongings and take my skill.’ And that’s a nice feeling to 
have and one that just maybe comes from having very blue-collar roots and 
having to work all the time and just knowing that you’ll be working all the 
time and also the combination of having a very long, slow, steady career that 
felt earned so then you didn’t feel you had to apologise for it.”

She catches herself.

“I’m saying nothing that’s very funny.” Pause. “You should say: ‘And then she 
did an amazing pratfall through the glass table.’”

We both laugh.

Poehler is one of those rare women who does not feel the need to 
self-deprecate or litter her speech with mitigation in order to make you like 
her. And you end up liking her more for it because she so obviously cares about 
women and making their lot better. She doesn’t put up with any bullshit – she 
once famously told herSaturday Night Life colleague Jimmy Fallon: “I don’t 
fucking care if you like it” when he objected to a joke she suggested in the 
writers’ room for not being cute enough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F610506cbc03c10164381a81aca76aecbac3020be%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F610506cbc03c10164381a81aca76aecbac3020be%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Vote for Amy: as Leslie Knope in Parks and Recreation. Photograph: NBC/Getty 
Images 
Where does she get that self-confidence? Partly, she says, it was her mother 
Eileen’s influence – “she’s a very smart, independent woman who was kind of 
coming into her own in the feminist movement of the 70s and 80s” – but partly 
it’s remembering what it was like not to care what people thought about you.

She speaks passionately about this – and it feels right to ask her about 
issues like body image and confidence because she acknowledges that her 
hard-won position in the industry is not the norm. She is at the top of her 
game, but Poehler has lots to say about the women who might not have got there 
yet. And – the true mark of a feminist, this – she is unaffectedly generous 
with her experience.

Poehler believes that true power comes from “ambivalence. If you can find a 
way to be truly ambivalent about what people think about you as an artist 
you’re completely freed up because you just end up doing things that turn you 
on creatively, and then as a person you really try and drown the noise. It’s a 
lot of noise, people’s opinions about you, whether or not you’re a public 
person. A regular person in life has to deal with everybody’s opinions about 
them: what kind of mother are you, what kind of wife are you, what kind of 
daughter, are you a good sister?”

That feeling of being watched, Poehler says, comes from a lifetime spent 
“under the male gaze”. As women “we’re used to being watched. And if you can 
tap into that feeling you had when you were a kid and doing things and not 
caring that you were being watched – that freeing feeling of living just the 
way you want – it’s almost getting back to that. Not that you always have to be 
having a joyful time, just: what was that feeling like for you? Without the 
judgement of others.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d902af662b915efdcd5c5ce9674c16e9d353261%2F0_0_5302_3184%2F5302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Poehler%3A%20%E2%80%98Vanity%20is%20the%20death%20of%20comedy%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Famy-poehler-interview-vanity-is-death-of-comedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d902af662b915efdcd5c5ce9674c16e9d353261%2F0_0_5302_3184%2F5302.jpg>
 Full of fun: Poehler voiced the character Joy in Inside Out. Photograph: 
Moviestore/REX Shutterstock 
She is so smart and eloquent on the topic that I find myself breezing through 
all the usual interview questions about where she grew up (Newton, 
Massachusetts with a younger brother, Greg), what her parents did (high-school 
teachers) and her past relationships (she’s recently split from fellow comedian
Nick Kroll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/22/adult-beginners-review-rose-byrne-bobby-cannavale>
 and is divorced from actorWill Arnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/09/will-arnett-im-done-with-super-dumb-teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles>
, with whom she has two sons, aged seven and five) simply because I want to 
hear more of what she thinks.

She says being in her 40s has given her a new level of appreciation for her 
female friendships because: “You just go to the deep end quicker. Whether 
through self-enlightenment, practice, therapy or trauma, you’ve got a little 
bit better sense of who you are.

“Women talk about stuff on the way to the valet that it takes men 10 years to 
admit to each other. The depth at which women talk to and about each other is 
invaluable to me. With your really, really close good friends you do that fast. 
Not that I’m saying men aren’t emotionally deep and don’t have access to their 
emotions, but I have two young sons and I’ve been around men my whole life in 
comedy and it’s fascinating what theydon’t talk about. I love working with 
women. Always have. And I seek it out all the time, as much as I can.”

It is no coincidence that Poehler’s longest-lasting and most successful 
professional partnership is with one of her oldest friends, Tina Fey. The two 
met in 1993 when they performed in the same improv troupe in Chicago.

“I like to say our relationship is as old as Lourdes Ciccone,” Poehler 
deadpans. She refers to Fey as her “comedy wife”.

Her first impression of Fey was that she was “really sharp, really funny, 
really talented, and we just became the people sitting in the back of the 
class, kind of rolling our eyes”. They did “shitty comedy for a long time until 
we got better” and then they went on to collaborate onSaturday Night Live, as 
well as the filmsMean Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/19/mean-girls-10-birthday-tina-fey-comedy>
 (which Fey also wrote) andBaby Mama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jul/25/comedy1>.

Working with Fey again on Sisters was “so nice. We have a shorthand. It’s 
great to be there with your friend.”

Interestingly neither Fey nor Poehler has a sister. She’s only half-joking 
when she says taking on the role was, in many ways, like “playing a fighter 
pilot”. She spent some time asking her friends with female siblings what it was 
like.

“There’s a lot of trying to disconnect and detach and saying: ‘We’re not the 
same.’ But I will say: when sisters are physically together they’re incredibly 
close and very fast in that way only family can be, and when you see them 
together they’re often grooming each other like monkeys or telling each other 
what to wear or who to date. There’s a protective element that happens with 
sisters that’s interesting as an observer.”

I’m not convinced Poehler needed to spend all that time preparing. Talking to 
her and hearing how supportive she is of other women, how cleverly she defines 
our desires and our self-doubt, our professional successes and our misplaced 
guilt, and how much she cares about equality and ownership and assertion, I 
think possibly the best thing aboutAmy Poehler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> is that she already knows how 
to be a sister without even trying.

Sisters is showing in cinemas now
 