
There’s no science to the saying that while two things are just a coincidence 
a third makes a trend, but the last three collections of short stories I happen 
to have read have all been full of open narratives, bursting with transcendence.

It started with Colin Barrett’s lyrical Young Skins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/26/guardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories>
, which won the Guardian first book award last year. Set mostly in County Mayo, 
these stories follow a cast of bouncers, drifters and drug dealers as they 
criss-cross the streets of a fictional small town – the threat of violence 
always at their shoulder. On the night of the award, thejudges and his editors 
lined up to praise not only his striking voice, but also his deft touch with 
narrative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2014/nov/28/guardian-first-book-award-winner-colin-barrett-podcast>
.

“Barrett is very good at the unexpected,” said Anne Enright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/26/guardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories>
. “You’re working through something that’s feels gritty and hard but by the 
end, each story has turned into something almost lyrical and open. That’s real 
writing.”

Another author who seems to be after a bit of real writing is Eliza Robertson. 
She won the 2013 Commonwealth short story prize with a slippery story of 
sibling rivalry,We Walked on Water 
<http://www.commonwealthwriters.org/we-walked-on-water>, in which the eventual 
disaster is gradually revealed in a series of echoes which begin in the second 
paragraph. A similar process of accretion is at work in Wallflowers, a first 
collection of short fiction published in the UK just last month. The flood 
announced in the first line of the opening story duly arrives as the story 
comes to a close on page 17, but offers little in terms of any resolution. 
There’s no easy moral captured in the trip to tag hummingbirds towards the end 
of Worried Woman’s Guide.

One of the stories in another January debut, SJ Naudé’s The Alphabet of Birds, 
lays out a recipe for this kind of fiction when the protagonist retires to the 
garden to write a “belated journal” of a holiday he took two years before.

“He is trying to remember, to figure out what happened during the trip, if 
anything, and what it has to do with what is happening here now.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fan-unexpected-ending-for-literary-progress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422964506987%2Fc476b015-9839-4dd6-8aed-503db9876423-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20unexpected%20ending%20for%20literary%20progress%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fan-unexpected-ending-for-literary-progress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20unexpected%20ending%20for%20literary%20progress%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fan-unexpected-ending-for-literary-progress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422964506987%2Fc476b015-9839-4dd6-8aed-503db9876423-1360x2040.jpeg>
 ‘Anyone who can discover new endings for plays will open up a new era’ ... 
Anton Chekhov writing to AS Suvorin in 1892. Photograph: Unknown/Bettmann/CORBIS
In Loose, another character despairs of a relationship without any “fixed 
shape”, feeling it’s not enough, that he needs “proper beginnings and endings, 
structure”. A Master from Germany features a beautiful room on the third floor 
of a ruined castle, an unsupported “box within a box” surrounded by dizzying 
space with “cellar stairs disappearing into the darkness below … [and] pigeons 
flashing through columns of light” above. This protagonist’s complicated 
relationship teaches him “One may linger in a beautiful room as long as 
possible. One does not have to open the door,” that “one must learn to live 
with open endings”.

There’s nothing new in a lesson that can be traced back to the “uncontestable 
father of the modern short story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/oct/30/abriefsurveyoftheshortst>
”, Anton Chekhov, and no shortage of 20th-century writers who followed 
Chekhov’s lead in refusing to tie their stories up in a great, big bow. But the 
hollow chorus of all those empty endings from Barrett, Robertson and Naudé sent 
me back to Virginia Woolf, andher description 
<https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/w/woolf/virginia/w91c/chapter16.html> of how 
Chekhov leaves us feeling that “we have overrun our signals … as if a tune had 
stopped short without the expected chords to close it”.

An authorial strategy now so widespread to have almost become the norm in 
literary fiction was so “unfamiliar” back in 1925 that Woolf suggested readers 
“need a very daring and alert sense of literature to make us hear the tune”. 
These days popular and genre fiction are still full of the “lovers united, 
villains discomfited, intrigues exposed” she evokes, but what about the effect 
she describes of tuning our ears to Chekhov’s strange melodies on the rest of 
our reading lives?

“Once the eye is used to these shades, half the ‘conclusions’ of fiction fade 
into thin air; they show like transparencies with a light behind them – gaudy, 
glaring, superficial. The general tidying up of the last chapter, the marriage, 
the death, the statement of values so sonorously trumpeted forth, so heavily 
underlined, become of the most rudimentary kind. Nothing is solved, we feel; 
nothing is rightly held together. On the other hand, the method which at first 
seemed so casual, inconclusive, and occupied with trifles, now appears the 
result of an exquisitely original and fastidious taste, choosing boldly, 
arranging infallibly, and controlled by an honesty for which we can find no 
match save among the Russians themselves.”

Way back in 1925, Woolf’s daring and alert sense of literature was already so 
accustomed to Chekhov’s sophisticated inconclusiveness that the conventional 
conclusions which found in most of the fiction that surrounded her had faded 
“into thin air”. What would she make of our own era, in which literary journals 
and prize shortlists are dominated by stories that might have seemed to many of 
her contemporaries “casual, inconclusive, and occupied with trifles”? Can you 
read the current fashion for open endings as an indication of literary 
progress? Or literary progression, at least. I’m not suggesting you could 
compare contemporary writers with the classics and say that one is better than 
the other, rather that Enright’s straightforward identification of open-ended 
stories as “real writing” might mean literary culture has covered some ground 
since the 1920s.

Speaking on the phone from South Africa, Naudé evokes the large numbers of 
contemporary writers and critics who feel the dramaturgy of traditional fiction 
has become largely irrelevant 
<http://www.nybooks.com/blogs/nyrblog/2013/oct/28/novel-trap>.

“Modernism and late modernism often attempt to go beyond that,” he says. “They 
often try to eschew the empty performance and find something which feels more 
authentic, which has some sort of new authority.” As the numinous receded from 
everyday life after the Enlightenment, he continues, it became harder for 
writers to imbue fiction with meaning. “One cannot write without grappling with 
this notion of where one finds one’s authority, and I’m not sure it’s found in 
the more traditional forms or shapes of novels or short stories at the 
beginning of the 21st century.”

He’s less convinced by the suggestion this shift reveals any kind of literary 
advance.

“Different readers have different temperaments,” he says. “There will always 
be readers, perhaps a majority, who are keen to have neat narrative resolution 
and read in order to experience a certain kind of escape. And there are other 
readers who are more interested in what is new, and what new modes of being 
might be explored through new forms, or new modes of writing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fan-unexpected-ending-for-literary-progress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422964626680%2Ff33c6ad0-c1dc-42d1-869e-839419e8d2b6-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20unexpected%20ending%20for%20literary%20progress%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fan-unexpected-ending-for-literary-progress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20unexpected%20ending%20for%20literary%20progress%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fan-unexpected-ending-for-literary-progress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422964626680%2Ff33c6ad0-c1dc-42d1-869e-839419e8d2b6-680x1020.jpeg>
 A ‘daring and alert sense of literature’ ... the writer Virginia Woolf. 
Photograph: AP 
Writers who follow Chekhov’s lead may certainly find it harder to “catch the 
ear” of a public “used to louder music, fiercer measures”, as Woolf suggests, 
but I’m not sure the division – between those who appreciate what she called 
his “little stories about nothing at all” and those who don’t – really captures 
the richness of our reading lives. My own, such as it is, stretches from SJ 
Naudé to Nick Harkaway, from Eliza Robertson to Alastair Reynolds and covers a 
fair amount of ground in between. Sometimes I’m looking for subtle harmonies, 
the glimpse of a fleeting melody, other times I’m after something a little more 
emphatic.

Perhaps all these musical metaphors are something of a clue. Maybe developing 
a taste for Chekhov is more like getting into a new band. Our playlist musical 
culture – patchwork listening driven by YouTube, Spotify and iTunes – seems 
unashamedly eclectic, straightforwardly unafraid to mix the highbrow and the 
low. Just as a passion for Bartók doesn’t rule out a keen appreciation of 
Beyoncé, there’s nothing to say an ear for Chekhov’s delicate resonances should 
prevent a reader from tapping a foot along to the stirring cadences of Ann 
Leckie. If we find in Chekhov that “as the tune sounded so he has written it” 
as Woolf suggests, then maybe all the progress literature requires is that 
authors should carry on singing whatever song they hear – just so long as they 
can keep from hitting any false notes.

 