
What connects union firebrand Arthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill>, maverick musician Mark 
E Smith and comedy actress June Whitfield? The answer is that they have all had 
early advocates in theObserver's search for Britain's National Treasures. Each 
has merit but, like the Americans and Osama, the hunt goes on.

It's been a wide range of bodies thus far thrown – gently – against the wall. 
Some, we might politely suggest, may not win universal approval – goalkeeper 
turned galactic lizard spotter David Icke, for instance. And one cannot help 
but feel that the commentator who labelled Bob Crow the "voice of reason" will 
want for followers.

There have been nominations for figures who would gain approval in most 
constituencies – SirDavid Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough>, for one. And 
unless Colin Firth's extended family logged on en masse, the increasingly vocal 
call for the fine actor also suggests he has a wide following. Timothy Spall 
likewise. And it's hard to disagree with the dames of the theatre being put 
forward. Imagine having to tell Maggie Smith or Judi Dench that they'd missed 
the cut.

But surely the woman who brought us Harry Potter – not to mention her 
post-Potter charity work – deserves more than one vote? It was cheering to see 
some resort to bargaining, the offer of Julie Walters (pictured) and Paul 
Merton, for example, being tempered by a refusal to accept either Billy 
Connolly or Ann Widdecombe.

But this is a celebration, not a critique, as we look forward to seeing the 
list, and debate, widen. There's more treasure out there. Help us find it.
 