
Andrzej Wajda <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrzej-wajda> had a viable 
claim to be Poland’s great national artist of modern times, a virtual cinematic 
folk memory, a man who sought to intervene in Poland’s history with his movies, 
converting the ashes of bitterness and historical agony into diamonds of film. 
He was a director with Poland written on his heart.

Andrzej Wajda: Ashes and Diamonds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/may/06/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm.derekmalcolm>
 In a staggeringly productive career, so much of which he pursued in the face 
of bureaucratic opposition and censorship — while working in uneasy harmony 
with the agencies of the state — Wajda took on the big themes of Polish 
history, from a country at the very heart of wartime conflict between Nazism 
and communism,and the cold war collision between west and east. The division of 
Poland, theMolotov-Ribbentrop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/06/devils-alliance-hitlers-pact-stalin-1938-1941-roger-moorhouse-review>
 pact, and the fact that his homeland was at the centre of the most toxic acts 
of geopolitical bad faith in modern history, was something that Wajda grew up 
with.

His father was one of the Polish officers murdered and buried in the Katyn 
forest by the Soviets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/26/russian-parliament-guilt-katyn-massacre>
 — and communist Poland’s government was for decades complicit in the lie that 
the Soviets were innocent, a propaganda-untruth whose poisonous byproduct was 
to help shore up Nazi revisionism and denialism. Wajda himself, like so many 
other Poles, knew the truth – and took the lead once the Soviet empire 
collapsed. He made a 1991 documentary on the subject of Katyń and then a 
vigorous and remarkable feature,Katyń 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/25/katyn-reel-history>, in 2007 — 
when he was 81 years old — which became one of his four nominations for best 
foreign language Oscar.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZuqPOluaJS8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZuqPOluaJS8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZuqPOluaJS8&media=>
Watch the opening sequence of Ashes and Diamonds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZuqPOluaJS8> 
He is known for two colossal trilogies on these two massive historical phases: 
his A Generation (1955), Kanał (1957) and Ashes and Diamonds (1958) took on the 
agonies and divided loyalties of wartimePoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>, pioneeringly taking on the 1944 
Warsaw uprising. Later his Man of Marble (1977), Man of Iron (1981) and Walesa; 
Man of Hope (2013) addressed trade unionism in terms of anti-statist dissidence 
and romantic patriotism.

A Generation is about the chaotic and fearful lives of Poles under the Nazi 
occupation, a film which brings in the Warsaw uprising, a subject fully 
addressed by the next film, Kanał, which was about a company of resistance 
fighters: the Home Army. The next film, Ashes and Diamonds, takes its audience 
to the day of Germany’s surrender in Poland, but makes it clear that the 
country’s allegiance is not simply transferred to the Soviets: on the contrary, 
some of the Home Army resistance are now the so-called “damned soldiers” who 
see it as their duty to carry on fighting — against communists. An 
assassination plot and its grisly, botched aftermath form the narrative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-director-had-poland-written-on-his-heart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f2111d8aa6549421560e4e85d6a2a12c4cfe738%2F0_0_5194_4176%2F5194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrzej%20Wajda%3A%20great%20director%20had%20Poland%20written%20on%20his%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-director-had-poland-written-on-his-heart%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrzej%20Wajda%3A%20great%20director%20had%20Poland%20written%20on%20his%20heart%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-director-had-poland-written-on-his-heart%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f2111d8aa6549421560e4e85d6a2a12c4cfe738%2F0_0_5194_4176%2F5194.jpg>
 Andrzej Wajda was honoured in Gdańsk, Poland, in March 2016. Photograph: East 
News/REX/Shutterstock 
The Man of Marble trilogy is in many ways his most formidable achievement, 
more fascinating for having been completed so late in its own historical span. 
It is a kind of eastern bloc Citizen Kane — and Wajda’s relationship toWelles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/orsonwelles> is an underappreciated part of 
his work. In Man of Marble, a young film-maker, Agnieszka, sets out to 
investigate the truth behind one of communist Poland’s most legendary figures: 
an inspirationalStakhanovite 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stakhanovite_movement> worker called Birkut, a 
heroic bricklayer commemorated in many marble statues, but whose whereabouts 
are now unclear. This young film-maker has to reconstruct what she can from 
newsreels, an official propaganda film and talking to people who knew him, and 
she uncovers a shabby story of official mistreatment.

In Man of Iron, Birkut’s son Maciej has married Agnieszka and is now a 
steel-worker, union activist and transparently a model for Lech Wałęsa. Wałęsa 
got his own unfictionalised treatment in the final film, which appeared 20 
years later:Wałesa: Man of Hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/17/walesa-man-of-hope-review>. 
Putting his name in the title broughtthis man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/lech-waesa-not-agent-spy-polish-security-services-interview>
 out of the metaphorical shadows. These films were instrumental in challenging 
the sclerotic Soviet rule and supplying some of the cultural energy which was 
to dislodge the first brick in theBerlin Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/06/-sp-fall-berlin-wall-what-it-meant-to-be-there>
. And Wajda played a clever game with the authorities. Dramatising union 
activity was not something to which Soviet communist rule could instantly take 
exception, and yet the fact that this unionism was in fact anti-Moscow made 
Wajda, like Wałęsa himself, a resonant figure in western circles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyVKdrnbmQlU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyVKdrnbmQlU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyVKdrnbmQlU&media=>
Watch a trailer for Man of Marble <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yVKdrnbmQlU> 
These films, weighty though they are, form a fraction of Wajda’s huge output, 
and he was an almost inexhaustible figure, taking on projects all the time, big 
and small, very often literary adaptations, both classic and relatively 
unknown. One of his most successful movies — another best foreign film Oscar 
nomination — was the rather Chekhovian and bittersweet 1979 drama The Maids Of 
Wilko, based on a short story by Polish poet and author Jarosław Iwaszkiewicz.

A middle-aged man, Wiktor, suffering what could be a personal or menopausal 
crisis, takes a sentimental journey to a family property called Wilko where he 
had once been tutor to some young sisters. But these women are now middle-aged 
like him, without the carefree gaiety of former times: their reaction to his 
reappearance is complicated and without the affectionate submission that he 
might secretly have hoped for. It is a lesson in the inaccessibility of the 
past.

Wajda is sometimes called a cinematic poet of lost causes: but he made Poland 
and Polish cinema a great found cause.
 