
Steven Ciobo has defended his predecessor as trade minister, Andrew Robb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-robb>, for leading a 
delegation to Beijing last week to spruik China’s “One Belt One Road” policy.

Ciobo said the meeting was a “private delegation”, although note takers from 
Austrade, the Australian government’s trade promotion agency, did attend.

Two months ago Robb was appointed a high-level economic consultant  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-chinese-company-operates-darwin-port>
at the Landbridge Group, the Chinese company thatwon a 99-year lease over the 
port of Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/13/chinese-company-secures-99-year-lease-of-darwin-port-in-506m-deal>
 last year.

Under the One Belt One Road policy and the complementary Maritime Silk Road 
initiative,China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> aims to increase 
links to economies in Eurasia and Australasia through infrastructure investment 
and trade.

Ciobo said it was a good outcome for former ministers including Robb and 
Labor’s Craig Emerson to work “together to promote Australia’s national 
interest, to see what extra business they can drive to Australian companies … 
by taking advantage of opportunities in Asia, including China”.

Andrew Robb did not tell prime minister about role with Chinese company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-did-not-tell-prime-minister-about-role-with-chinese-company>
Landbridge’s chairman, Ye Cheng, has previously said the company’s investment 
in the Northern Territory port helped serve Chinese interests as itprovides 
access to the Indian Ocean, the South Pacific, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea 
<http://www.aspistrategist.org.au/landbridge-darwin-and-the-prc/>.


Robb’s appointment raises questions about whether his Landbridge role will 
contravene the statement of ministerial standards, which states ministers 
should not lobby the government for 18 months after their retirement. Robb 
retired at the July election.

Ciobo told Sky News on Tuesday the delegation consisted of Australian and 
Chinese businesses and “wasn’t for one second an official government delegation 
at all”.

“This was an initiative of the Australia China Business Council, that has 
membership from the Liberal side, from the Labor side, and they went in a 
private capacity.”

He said the fact Austrade note takers had attended was unremarkable because 
they attend “all range of meetings between business and government authorities 
in China”.

According to a report in the Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/news/andrew-robb-under-fire-for-pushing-chinas-one-belt-one-road-policy-20161031-gservn>
 the meeting also included Victorian government officials and representatives 
from Infrastructure Partnerships Australia, the Business Council of Australia, 
BHP Billiton and several big Australian banks and law firms.

Ciobo said the private delegation discussed One Belt One Road at the meeting 
because it involves a “multibillion spend” on infrastructure in Asia, and 
Australian businesses are “very good at infrastructure”.

“Why wouldn’t Australian businesses be there?” 

The minister said he had met the Chinese vice-commerce minister in Norway last 
week who made it clear that the Chinese government knew Robb was coming and was 
no longer an Australian government official.

On Monday the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, revealed that the former trade 
minister had not discussed his new role at Landbridge with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-did-not-tell-prime-minister-about-role-with-chinese-company>
 before being appointed on 2 September.

At the time the Northern Territory port was sold Turnbull shrugged off concerns
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/19/malcolm-turnbull-shrugs-off-us-concern-over-darwin-port-lease-to-chinese-firm>
 expressed by the US about the sale, saying it was “no secret” China had been 
looking to invest in Australian infrastructure.

The secretary of the defence department, Dennis Richardson, later admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/darwin-port-deal-with-chinese-group-poses-no-threat-says-defence-official>
 it had been a mistake not to inform the US of the sale earlier.

Ciobo said the defence department and the foreign investment review board had 
signed off on the sale and Australia retained the right to access critical 
infrastructure.

In addition to banning lobbying, the rules also state that former ministers 
should not take personal advantage of confidential information to which they 
had access in their ministerial role.

Labor’s assistant treasurer, Andrew Leigh, and the Greens’ democracy 
spokeswoman, Lee Rhiannon, have called on Turnbull to explain how the 
government will ensure Robb doesn’t use such information in his new role.

Julie Bishop has rejected the idea Robb might use confidential information or 
lobby inappropriately in his new post.

“There’s a ministerial code of conduct, Andrew Robb has said he’s aware of 
[it] and will abide by it,” the foreign minister told ABC Radio on Monday.

“That provides constraints and restrictions on what cabinet ministers can do 
in their post-political life, but we shouldn’t get into a situation where a 
former trade minister is not allowed to take up post-parliamentary careers.”
 