
Andrew Miller is to stand down after almost five years as chief executive of 
theGuardian Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup> 
(GMG), during which time the company behind the Guardian and Observer 
newspapers and theguardian.com has expanded overseas and increased digital 
revenues.

Miller’s departure, at the end of June this year, means that the new 
editor-in-chief due to take over from Alan Rusbridger –who also stands down 
this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/10/alan-rusbridger-stand-down-guardian-editor-in-chief>
 – will work alongside a new commercial head of the business.

The disposal of the Guardian’s majority stake in Trader Media Group in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/21/guardian-media-group-to-sell-trader-media-group-stake>
 raised more than £600m. The sale of GMG’s stake, in a deal that valued the car 
sales site at £1.8bn, led to a £1.41m bonus for Miller, who had been chief 
financial officer of TMG before joining the Guardian group in 2009.

Miller pointed out at the time that the payout was contractual as he had 
“relinquished equity” in joining GMG. He has waived nearly £500,000 in past 
bonuses.

Alan Rusbridger to stand down as Guardian editor-in-chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/10/alan-rusbridger-stand-down-guardian-editor-in-chief>
Miller is to receive a short-term bonus of £226,000 deferred from 2014 but no 
other leaving bonus on top of his £696,000 salary, which will be paid for 12 
months, as per his notice period, unless he starts another job.

During his time in charge Miller disposed of non-core businesses and reduced 
losses at the Guardian and the Observer from £171m in the financial year prior 
to his appointment in 2010 tojust over £30m in the year to the end of March. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/08/guardian-observer-narrow-losses>

In a statement, Miller said: “Having achieved our strategy to streamline the 
group, secure its financial future and set it on the path to digital success, I 
have decided that mid-2015 will be the right time for me to explore new 
opportunities and for a new editor and chief executive to take the company on 
the next big phase of the Guardian’s digital growth and international expansion.

“My successor will inherit a business with very strong commercial foundations 
in place. It has been a privilege to help equip GMG for a sustainable financial 
future, securing the unique contribution made by the Guardian to national and 
international debate for many years to come.”

Thanking Miller, Neil Berkett, chair of GMG, said: “Andrew has done an 
outstanding job as chief executive, helping to transform the financial 
resources of GMG. His lasting legacy will include a strong investment strategy, 
a healthy increase in underlying revenues, and an ambitious vision for the 
Guardian’s future. We have an experienced management and editorial team in 
place to realise that vision.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422515655130%2F942848f7-7604-4e80-9ebb-feb8b0a47eba-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Miller%20to%20stand%20down%20as%20chief%20executive%20of%20Guardian%20Media%20Group&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Miller%20to%20stand%20down%20as%20chief%20executive%20of%20Guardian%20Media%20Group&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422515655130%2F942848f7-7604-4e80-9ebb-feb8b0a47eba-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Neil Berkett, GMG’s chair. 
In an email to staff Berkett credited Miller with “transforming the financial 
resources of GMG and safeguarding the long-term future of the Guardian”, adding 
that the “direction of travel … remains unaffected” by Miller’s decision to 
stand down.

“As we embark on that next major programme of transformation,” Burkett said, 
“the board was clear that it needed a chief executive who could see the process 
through. For reasons I entirely respect, Andrew is keen to move on to new 
challenges and was, as such, unable to give the board a long-term commitment.

“This, coupled with the arrival later this year of a new editor-in-chief, is 
therefore the right time for a new chief executive to take the Guardian through 
the next stage of its journey.”

Over the past five years GMG has all but completed selling off business 
interests not related to newspaper publishing. In 2012, a bidding war for GMG 
Radio – the third largest radio group in the UK – resulted inGlobal Radio 
paying £70m for the barely profitable operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/25/gmg-radio-sold-global-50m>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422515727643%2F10d03041-3dd7-4580-8560-f19954cce676-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Miller%20to%20stand%20down%20as%20chief%20executive%20of%20Guardian%20Media%20Group&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Miller%20to%20stand%20down%20as%20chief%20executive%20of%20Guardian%20Media%20Group&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422515727643%2F10d03041-3dd7-4580-8560-f19954cce676-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Liz Forgan, chair of the Scott Trust. 
The main non-core asset left is a 32.9% stake in Top Right, owner of 
businesses including the fashion forecaster WGSN, communications awards Cannes 
Lions and Drapers.

Liz Forgan, chair of the Scott Trust, the ultimate owner of the Guardian, 
said: “From his exceptional stewardship of our portfolio of assets to his 
unfailing support of our journalism, Andrew has been a tremendous champion of 
the Guardian. We owe him a great deal and wish him every possible success.

“GMG is entering a new period of growth, thanks to the strategic leadership of 
Andrew Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-miller> and Alan 
Rusbridger. Together, they have positioned the Guardian to build on its 
worldwide audience and to capitalise on its new commercial and digital 
opportunities.”

The board of GMG is expected to begin a search for a new chief executive 
shortly.
 