
The Liberal MP for Canning, Andrew Hastie, has spoken out after being sacked 
from the army reserve for using images of himself in uniform in election 
campaign material.

“It’s just a hint at, ‘Hey, for the past 13 years, I’ve been serving in 
uniform’ and my formative experiences as a leader were with the Australian 
Defence Force (ADF),” Hastie told 6PR radio on Thursday.

“I’m proud of that and I think it’s good to let taxpayers know that their 
money – a lot of it has gone into my professional development – has been well 
spent.”

Hastie said the ADF had “used a bit of policy to try and push me around, 
basically”.

“I had to decide whose authority I answered to. It was the people of Canning. 
As a federal parliamentarian, I don’t take orders from the military.”

The Coalition’s campaign spokesman, Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, also defended 
Hastie, arguing he was merely telling his constituents about his life story 
including his military service.

Australian election 2016: Labor hammers Coalition over budget numbers – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/09/australian-election-2016-malcolm-tunbull-defends-his-falling-popularity-politics-live>
A defence department spokesperson told Guardian Australia that ADF members 
were not permitted to participate in any political activity in uniform, unless 
they were pre-approved to do so, to ensure the organisation remained apolitical.

“Defence contacted [Andrew] Hastie, a member of the standby army reserve, and 
requested he remove imagery of himself in uniform from election campaign 
material.

“Regrettably, Hastie did not comply with this request. Accordingly, the army 
issued Hastie with a notice indicating the intention to terminate his service 
because he had failed to comply with directions and defence policy.

“Hastie’s service has since been terminated.”
Chris Johnson (@seearjay) 
#AndrewHastie <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AndrewHastie?src=hash> defies 
‘orders’ to take down uniformed campaign photoshttps://t.co/25UaCXTdZ2 
<https://t.co/25UaCXTdZ2> Defies policy ensuring the $ADF 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%24ADF&src=ctag> is apolitical.
 <https://twitter.com/seearjay/status/735635358369480704> May 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/seearjay/status/735635358369480704> 
Hastie is pictured wearing his uniform in posters and his campaign material 
says he is “trained to deliver for us” and is “not another politician”.

Labor’s candidate for Brisbane, Pat O’Neill, is another former soldier whose 
campaign material features himself in uniform. His signs on Abbotsford Road and 
Boundary Street which depict him in uniform have not been removed.

The defence department spokesperson said it had also contacted O’Neill and 
requested any imagery featuring him in Australian army uniform be removed.

The spokesperson said O’Neill removed electronic material featuring him in 
uniform and had undertaken to remove billboard signage, adding: “O’Neill has 
not removed the billboard signage and defence is considering further 
administrative action.”

At a doorstop in Canberra on Thursday, Cormann said: “Andrew Hastie is an 
outstanding member of parliament, he’s provided distinguished service to 
Australia as an SAS soldier, including in Afghanistan, before joining the 
parliament.”

“It is entirely appropriate for Andrew Hastie to present himself to his 
constituents, in the context of an election campaign, [by] putting forward his 
life story.

“Obviously his distinguished service as part of the SAS forces is part of his 
history.

“Andrew Hastie has made the right decision, in my view, I support him 100% in 
the judgment he has made. Obviously decisions the defence force has made are a 
matter for them.”

According to reports, Hastie earlier defended material showing himself in 
uniform 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/31798479/army-dumps-hastie-over-uniform-photo/>
 by arguing: “The ADF should be proud that they have former ADF personnel on 
both sides of politics.”

An independent lobby group on defence issues, the Australian Defence 
Association, has warned former military personnel should not campaign in 
uniform because the military must appear apolitical.

Its executive director, Neil James, said: “Such highly visible advertising, 
without any wider context or indeed other knowledge of the candidate, is 
particularly liable to be easily misconstrued as the ADF somehow endorsing that 
candidate or their political stance.”

The issue of campaigning in uniform has also impacted Greens candidate for 
Grayndler, Jim Casey, the state secretary of the Fire Brigade Employees’ Union.

In May, at the request of Fire and Rescue New South Wales, Casey removed a 
photo from social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/11/australian-election-2016-the-daily-telegraph-endorses-anthony-albanese-in-preferences-spat?page=with:block-5732cf4be4b08056de8fa15e#block-5732cf4be4b08056de8fa15e>
 which showed him in uniform reading the Daily Telegraph issue endorsing his 
opponent, Anthony Albanese.
 