
One can only imagine the untrammelled delight of the dental surgeon and mother 
of two, Jennifer Bate, partner of the British tennis playerMarcus Willis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/marcus-willis-roger-federer-wimbledon>
, when she caught the eye of the BBC commentatorAndrew Castle during Willis’s 
match against Roger Federer. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/30/bbc-wimbledon-andrew-castle-marcus-willis-girlfriend-sexism>
“It’s a pity my dentist doesn’t look like that,” commented Castle, later 
batting away tweeted criticism of his “creepy” remark as something he might 
expect from people who were “humourless, earnest and no fun at all”.

One could almost imagine Castle feeling rather pleased with how he’d handled 
the situation. After all, he hadn’t yelled “Phwoar!” at Bate or anything 
ghastly like that. (He wasn’t a football fan, was he?) Where was the harm in 
gallantly acknowledging publicly, from a BBC commentary box, the attractiveness 
of a young woman (a former beauty pageant contestant after all – some time ago, 
and completely irrelevant, but what does that matter?). He was supposed to be 
doing the job he was paid for – delivering an expert report on two male tennis 
professionals. But what’s “creepy” about that?

A whole, hard-won professional life was reframed as the formulation 'She's a 
looker'

Where to begin? No one is claiming that Castle’s remark was anything more than 
pathetic and grotty. If sexism were a universe, which unfortunately it kind of 
is, Castle’s remark would merely amount to one of those insignificant bits of 
debris that are sometimes sighted in space – say, half a hinge or a bent piece 
of aerial that have broken off a shuttle and gone adrift. Even those who 
denounced Castle’s remark as creepy and lecherous didn’t overreact. Rather, 
there was the almost palpable sensation of female eye-rolling at a national 
level.

Castle’s casual sexism, his mini-bite chauvinism, was the kind of trite, 
tiring, socially nightmarish stuff that few women escape from experiencing at 
some point. Now you’ll have to bear with me for a moment, because I’ll have to 
think back (and back) to when I was still considered attractive enough for such 
glorious life-affirming moments.

But, wait, yes, it’s all coming back now, as if in a “humourless, earnest, 
no-fun-at-all” vision: the involuntary tensing as one is approached, the brief 
sensation of brain freeze as the bizarre, chauvinistic, inappropriate remark is 
made and, in response, the involuntary half (nay, quarter) giggle. This is the 
giggle that says: “You’re fortunate that I’m too socially inhibited/well 
brought up to request loudly that you move away from me with great urgency and 
at great speed.” (I may have paraphrased that last bit.)

In Bate’s case, she didn’t even have this option, as the remark was made 
unbeknown to her, from the shelter of Castle’s commentary box. A remark that 
was heard all over the country and that basically synthesised years of training 
and graft into the only thing that mattered – that Bate was better looking than 
the dentist responsible for Castle’s enamel and gum strength. An entire 
hard-won professional life reframed as “she’s a looker” – and still this 
microphone-wielding throwback buffoon didn’t think that he’d done anything 
wrong.

Of course, most women enjoy compliments. They don’t, as anti-feminist myth has 
it, faint, scream or cry: “Objectification most foul!” if someone observes that 
they look nice. However, there’s a time and a place and, call me old-fashioned, 
but Wimbledon coverage is not that time and place. A woman, however attractive, 
should be able to sit in a crowd to support her boyfriend during an important 
match without being appraised, which after all is just posh-speak for “ogled”. 
She should be able to sit there just for her man, not for all men.

Castle overstepped the mark in every important way. He wasn’t Bate’s friend 
(given permission to joke), he was a stranger; this was no misguided naif, he’s 
a 52-year-old grown man. What’s more, Castle is a professional broadcaster, who 
should know to keep his creepy, foolish thoughts to himself.

Fashion’s mantra: let them laugh, so long as they look
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fandrew-castle-sexist-comments-wimbledon-marcus-willis-girlfriend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1693d98560625f86a6b316b524d8fb2babd3b8%2F0_40_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Castle%E2%80%99s%20casual%20sexism%20simply%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20tennis%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fandrew-castle-sexist-comments-wimbledon-marcus-willis-girlfriend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Castle%E2%80%99s%20casual%20sexism%20simply%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20tennis%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fandrew-castle-sexist-comments-wimbledon-marcus-willis-girlfriend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1693d98560625f86a6b316b524d8fb2babd3b8%2F0_40_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
 Enjoying the attention: Kate Moss in Absolutely Fabulous. Photograph: PR 
The Absolutely Fabulous film looks good value if you’re partial to celebrity – 
it has 60 cameos, including many from the world of fashion.

At the risk of incensing you with a semi-spoiler, it’s widely reported that 
something bad happens to a top model (stage whisper – Kate Moss) and there’s a 
shrine of booze and Hunter wellies (nice touch, even though one hears that 
Aigle is the go-to festival wellie now, darlings – do try to keep up).

Other fashion luminaries include Jean Paul Gaultier, Alexa Chung, Jourdan 
Dunn, Suki Waterhouse, Ozwald Boateng and Lara Stonecorrect.

The willingness of the fashion set to be lampooned has been attributed to the 
quality of Jennifer Saunders’s writing, but there appear to be other elements 
at play, too.

Not least that, contrary to popular belief, the fashion world loves a laugh at 
itself – or indeedanything to do with itself. It didn’t take long for Zoolander 
to become the fashionSpinal Tap, or for Blue Steel to enter the catwalk lexicon.

None of which should come as a surprise – who would ever accuse the fashion 
world of not enjoying a bit of attention?

The oh so murky matter of tipping
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fandrew-castle-sexist-comments-wimbledon-marcus-willis-girlfriend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce36bc61dfd2481a0591a22315f19def61367372%2F0_187_2082_1249%2F2082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Castle%E2%80%99s%20casual%20sexism%20simply%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20tennis%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fandrew-castle-sexist-comments-wimbledon-marcus-willis-girlfriend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Castle%E2%80%99s%20casual%20sexism%20simply%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20tennis%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fandrew-castle-sexist-comments-wimbledon-marcus-willis-girlfriend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce36bc61dfd2481a0591a22315f19def61367372%2F0_187_2082_1249%2F2082.jpg>
 They also serve: a line of Nippies, Lyons Corner House waitresses, in 1930 
Photograph: PA 
A poll for the Institute of Customer Service 
<https://www.instituteofcustomerservice.com> (ICS) says that most British 
people think that service charges should no longer be added to restaurant bills 
and that there should be tighter regulations about tipping. Two-thirds want 
discretionary service removed from bills, but if there is a tip, 58% think that 
employees deserve the entire tip, after tax.

I used to be a waitress so I know how tips can boost mediocre pay, though 
thankfully I was only doing it while I was still in education. Last year, there 
was uproar when it was reported thatcertain eateries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/21/how-much-of-your-tip-goes-to-staff-a-restaurant-by-restaurant-guide>
, including Pizza Express, Strada and Café Rouge, were skimming up to 8% to 10% 
off credit card tips, to cover “administration fees”.

However, it’s not always possible to leave cash and tipping this way ignores 
the contribution of other staff, though by rights those workers should be paid 
properly by the employer, as indeed should the waiting staff. And on and on 
this complicated situation goes. Moreover, tipping is a vexed matter for 
Britons at the best of times. Personally, perhaps because I was a waitress, 
perhaps because I’m afraid people aren’t paid properly, I have often ended up 
over-tipping in a bizarre overwrought way that suggests social anxiety rather 
than generosity.

Is the British confusion and awkwardness over tipping making the issue even 
murkier, enabling certain employers to get away with it?

Is it really so impossible to conceive of a system where discretionary service 
(and how it’s divided) appears on the bill, clearly explained, without 
ambiguity?

This is not a small issue, especially if you care about younger workers and 
the wider zero-hours work culture. The restaurant industry is full of younger 
workers and the disappearing tip is one way of exploiting and underpaying them.
 