
Ivan’s Childhood is a double gateway into filmic pastures of unimaginable 
richness. It is the most accessible introduction to the work of Russian 
film-makerAndrei Tarkovsky <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky>, 
whose sprawling 70s masterpieces Mirror and Stalker it prefigures in its 
audacious imagery and elliptical narrative technique. There’s his catalogue of 
images: moving water reflecting the sky, silver birch forests, cast-iron bells, 
religious icons, horses, apples, mud, war; the fluid, serpentine camera 
movements of impressive duration and sensuality; and the prodigally poetic 
method of storytelling, with unsignposted dream sequences and flashbacks. It 
stands among the greatest directorial debuts ever made.

Ivan is 12, parentless, alone in the war zone along the river Dnieper, 
drifting between partisan bands and regular Red Army units, offering himself as 
a scout. He is seeking vengeance against the Nazis who killed his family. But 
he is still a child and Tarkovsky never loses sight of the disjunction between 
the boy and the world: it is here that he finds his poetry, in childlike wonder 
set against horror and deprivation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTK4Ys219CHQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTK4Ys219CHQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTK4Ys219CHQ&media=>
Ivan’s Childhood is also a door to one of the most fascinating backwaters of 
world cinema: Soviet cinema during the late 50s to mid-60s. Soviet film-makers 
– in Moscow and in the satellite states – seized a new kind of formal freedom. 
Thus Russia was suddenly making realist war movies such as The Cranes Are 
Flying and Ballad Of A Soldier, and not-so-realist ones like Ivan and Larisa 
Shepitko’s 1966 debut Wings.

The Andrei Tarkovsky Collection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/24/andrei-tarkovsky-collection-dvd-review>
After Ivan’s Childhood, the Georgian-Armenian director Sergei Parajanov was 
inspired to break with officially sanctioned Soviet realism and make his 
revolutionary tone poem Shadows Of Forgotten Ancestors. In Poland,Andrzej Wajda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrzej-wajda> and his protege Roman Polanski 
forged new paths, both dissident and surrealistic, while in Hungary, Miklós 
Jancsó’s My Way Home and The Round-Up embraced all things fluid and painterly. 
The Czech film-makers had such a good time of it that the Russians marched in 
and crushed them along with Dubček.

Here ended The Thaw. After the ascent of Brezhnev, all these film-makers would 
suffer severe problems with authorities over their next movies: Tarkovsky on 
Andrei Rublev, Parajanov for The Colour Of Pomegranates, Shepitko with You And 
I, and Wajda with pretty much everything. Polanski’s second feature was made in 
exile, where most of the Czechs joined him after 1968, and Tarkovsky 10 years 
later. But for a short, ecstatic decade, Soviet film-making set the pace for 
the rest of the world. Avail yourself of it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fandrei-tarkovsky-its-time-to-immerse-yourself-in-the-work-of-a-true-auteur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46a100beb368cc44ff01093511301ec122c013bc%2F0_66_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrei%20Tarkovsky%3A%20it's%20time%20to%20immerse%20yourself%20in%20the%20work%20of%20a%20true%20auteur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fandrei-tarkovsky-its-time-to-immerse-yourself-in-the-work-of-a-true-auteur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrei%20Tarkovsky%3A%20it%27s%20time%20to%20immerse%20yourself%20in%20the%20work%20of%20a%20true%20auteur&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fandrei-tarkovsky-its-time-to-immerse-yourself-in-the-work-of-a-true-auteur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46a100beb368cc44ff01093511301ec122c013bc%2F0_66_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Andrei Tarkovsky.  