
Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> has had a complicated 
relationship with Lech Walesa. The love-hate of past years, however, is danger 
of fading into indifference and neglect. Poles are often surprised when 
foreigners ask after him, as if he is a half-forgotten uncle.

Now Andrzej Wajda <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrzej-wajda>, a veteran 
Oscar-winning film director and, at 85, something of a national treasure 
himself, has decided enough is enough. A jaundiced, dyspeptic, post-modernist 
nation will be made to look again at "the hero in its midst", with a biopic 
recounting the Solidarity struggle.

"The Walesa figure is necessary nowadays in the reality of contemporary Poland 
where everyone is quarrelling with each other. There is a nasty atmosphere of 
accusation flying around and we need to be able to refer back to a figure from 
national history," Wajda said at his Warsaw studios. "Poles have an explanation 
for everything. Everyone is to blame except themselves, so Walesa is also 
guilty."

The film is still being cast. Wajda, who is collaborating on the project with 
novelist and playwright Janusz Glowacki, has yet to find an actor to portray 
the union leader in his shipyard prime. He wanted to persuade Walesa to 
represent himself in old age, to give his own perspective on the events 
recounted, but he is playing hard to get.

"I know I have to avoid Wajda, so I don't have any influence on what he does" 
the ex-president told the Guardian. "I don't want anybody to make any 
accusations that I put pressure on him so, when I find out that Wajda is 
around, I escape to the other side of the room."

Wajda's intention is to demonstrate how it came to be that, after the 
generals, students and intellectuals had failed, it was an uneducated worker 
who finally triggered the collapse of communism.

"The communist authorities fell victim to their own propaganda. This was the 
'workers-peasants government' and the 'workers-peasants government' could 
obviously only talk to workers and peasants," Wajda said.

"But they didn't take into account that the workers' experience of the world 
was the most brutal of all. They worked in the worst conditions, earned the 
least. They got up at four in the morning to get in at five to work. They 
worked 10 hours a day, sometimes more. This wasn't the worker that they thought 
he was."

Two years ago, Wajda took on another giant historical subject, the Katyn 
massacre of the Polish officer corps in 1940 by the Soviet NKVD, who blamed it 
on the Nazis. His gruelling film, Katyn, generated a outpouring of emotion not 
just in Poland but in Russia, too, where 12 million cinemagoers watched it, 
many of them becoming aware of Russia's role for the first time.

But where Katyn united, Walesa is likely to divide. Wajda's film will be 
scrutinised in particular for its treatment of the most controversial episode 
in Walesa's life â€“ his run-ins with the communist secret police when he was an 
inexperienced union agitator arrested in the aftermath of the bloody 
suppression of riots in December 1970.

Glowacki, who like Wajda witnessed Solidarity's ultimate victory over 
communism first-hand, said: "He didn't know what he was doing. He was lost and 
he signed some papers which he never wanted to follow. In 1976, he finally said 
to the secret police: fuck off, I don't want to talk to you, and then became an 
official enemy of communism. He has this moment of weakness when he was 27 and 
he completely changed. That is what we want to show."

Sitting around a table at the studio it is clear that Wajda and Glowacki have 
some differences of approach that have yet to be ironed out.

Wajda seems to view the conversations with secret police not as a mistake, but 
as the only way Walesa could make his views known the authorities. "Nobody else 
was interested in talking to him," he says.

When Wajda says: "This is not going to be a critical film about Walesa. I see 
no point. It's not the moment," Glowacki is visibly uneasy.

Speaking alone, after the interview, Glowacki said: "This is not just going to 
be romanticism. There will be irony, too. Don't worry."

If two veterans of the Polish underground, collaborating on the depiction of 
events they saw with their own eyes, cannot agree, it is unlikely that film 
itself is going to heal many rifts.

But Wajda gives the impression he is past caring. "Those who want to be 
divided, nothing can help," he said. "A film least of all."
 