
Polish cinema burst upon the world in the 1950s with Andrzej Wajda’s war 
trilogy, A Generation, Kanał and Ashes and Diamonds, with the director becoming 
the voice of disaffected postwar youth. A generation later, Wajda, who has died 
aged 90, was the voice ofPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> 
again, as the country struggled to survive political and economic turmoil.

Wajda was born in Suwałki, in north-east Poland, the son of Aniela (nee 
Białowąs), a schoolteacher, and Jakub, a cavalry officer killed by the Soviets 
in 1940 in what was known as theKatyn massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/apr/24/katyn-massacre-poland-president>
. It was many years before Wajda decided to cover the tragedy, making the film
Katy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/19/katyn-andrzej-wajda-film-review>ń 
<> (2007).

During the second world war, Wajda had joined the resistance at the age of 16, 
and after liberation he enrolled at the renowned film school in Łódź. On 
graduating in 1952, he worked as assistant to Aleksander Ford on Five Boys from 
Barska Street (1954), a rather preachy piece that paralleled the rehabilitation 
of juvenile delinquents with the reconstruction of Poland.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZuqPOluaJS8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZuqPOluaJS8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZuqPOluaJS8&media=>
 Ashes and Diamonds, 1958. Wajda became the voice of disaffected postwar youth. 
Wajda’s first feature gave a very different view of Polish youth. A Generation 
(1954) forcibly expressed a youthful bitterness and an anti-romantic attitude 
to the war. The title refers to Poland’s “lost generation”, those who had been 
teenagers during the war. Kanał (1957), literally translated as “sewer”, 
starkly created the claustrophobic nightmare of Polish patriots escaping the 
Nazis in the sewers of Warsaw during the uprising of 1944. In this, his second 
film, Wajda’s great technical skill was immediately apparent from the 
remarkable opening tracking shots. Some weaknesses in characterisation and 
heavy-handed references to Dante’s Inferno did not lessen the powerful theme 
and imagery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7495d8747d9ae0eb880f5c0ee71f9eb1f2ba1e65%2F0_173_3104_1862%2F3104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrzej%20Wajda%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrzej%20Wajda%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7495d8747d9ae0eb880f5c0ee71f9eb1f2ba1e65%2F0_173_3104_1862%2F3104.jpg>
 Andrzej Wajda in 2016. During the second world war, Wajda had joined the 
resistance at the age of 16. Photograph: East News/Rex/Shutterstock 
The crown of the trilogy and perhaps Wajda’s finest work, Ashes and Diamonds 
(1958), takes place on the last day of the war. Its enigmatic, twilight world 
communicated the “Polish experience” beyond the frontiers as few films have 
done. The brilliant young actorZbigniew Cybulski 
<http://culture.pl/en/artist/zbigniew-cybulski> embodied the sceptical new 
generation in his anti-heroic role of a nationalist ordered to kill a communist 
leader. The assassination scene, Cybulski’s death and the slow motion polonaise 
climax are stunningly realised. The great theme of Polish cinema – the 
occupation and resistance movement – was shown in a new light. “The war was no 
longer regarded as a heroic necessity, but a supreme example of suffering made 
up of individual tragedies which could never be wiped out by either a common 
faith or the victorious outcome of the war,” wrote the critic Antonín Liehm.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnVedEkQIXLU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnVedEkQIXLU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnVedEkQIXLU&media=>
 A Generation, 1955 
Cybulski also appeared in Wajda’s Innocent Sorcerers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ETkNWL2pFwc> (1960), an ironic sex comedy 
which uncompromisingly dealt with modern Polish youth. Sadly, the shortsighted 
Cybulski was killed while running for a train in 1967, at the age of 40, and 
Everything for Sale (1969) was Wajda’s film-within-a-film homage to the actor.

Driven by “censorship behind closed doors”, Wajda made films from the 
mid-1960s to the mid-70s that were mainly adaptations of Polish allegorical 
novels, but even in his period films (The Birchwood, The Wedding, The Young 
Ladies of Wilko), he was able to comment obliquely on contemporary Poland 
through the use of symbolism and ironic allusions. Landscape After Battle 
(1970) was taken from the stories of Tadeusz Borowski, an Auschwitz survivor 
who took his own life in 1951, aged 28. The film, made in a non-realist, 
lyrical style using subdued colour, not only portrayed a tender love story but 
raised a polemical voice on the ambiguity of Polish behaviour during the war.

With the slight relaxation of censorship, Wajda returned to overt political 
subjects, reflecting on the immediate past with Man of Marble (1977), a bold, 
no-frills, no-holds-barred story on the life of a worker-hero of the Stalinist 
50s who falls from official favour, relevant in audiences’ minds to the 
crushing of the workers’ action in Gdańsk in 1970.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58677099e6c673b966531da922fd5a972a181e83%2F0_81_2685_1611%2F2685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrzej%20Wajda%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrzej%20Wajda%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrzej-wajda-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58677099e6c673b966531da922fd5a972a181e83%2F0_81_2685_1611%2F2685.jpg>
 Kanał, 1957. Photograph: Allstar 
Like his hero, Wajda was thought to have gone over the official limits, and 
the film’s release was held up for four years. “His theatrical and film output 
and the interviews he gives demonstrate that, in ideological and political 
terms, he is not with us. He takes the stand, often met with in artists, of an 
impartial judge of the history of our days.” So read a passage from the file on 
Wajda kept by the censors’ office.

Man of Iron (1981), the sequel to Man of Marble, leapt off the screen as 
freshly as the day’s headlines. Filmed under enormous pressure during the 
actual events, it took the personal story of the son of the hero of the first 
film (played by the same actor, Jerzy Radziwiłowicz), and set it against the 
wider struggle for the recognition of Solidarity. The interest of the two “Man” 
films, told in a straightforward, unfussy narrative technique, depended to a 
large extent on their political topicality. Yet Wajda’s recognition of the 
fragility of the people making history, and his avoidance of heroics, continues 
to keep a hold after the events depicted have moved into the dim past.

It is a theme he returned to in Danton, which was made in France in 1982. At 
the time of its release, the central ideological conflict between the warmly 
idealistic Danton (Gérard Depardieu) and the coldly pragmatic Robespierre 
(Wojciech Pszoniak) seemed analogous with that of Lech Wałęsa andGeneral 
Wojciech Jaruzelski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/25/general-wojciech-jaruzelski>, 
although the film was based on a 1931 Polish play.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du-b7Rtu-nuk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du-b7Rtu-nuk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du-b7Rtu-nuk&media=>
 Danton, 1983 
At the end of Man of Marble, a film director and a shipyard worker walk arm in 
arm to face the controlling bureaucrats together, a symbol of the unity of 
workers and artists and of the significant part played by the Polish cinema in 
bringing it about. By 1990, the symbol had become a reality when Wałęsa won the 
presidency and Wajda became a senator.

Wajda’s post-communist films had less urgency, but he was able to take a sober 
look at the past. Korczak (1990) told the story of the eponymous Jewish 
physician and educator who protected Jewish orphans during the war. “Jewish 
themes in Polish culture had been virtually banned for 20 years,” Wajda 
explained. Among the best of his later films was Tatarak (Sweet Rush, 2009), a 
50s set romance between a middle-aged woman (Krystyna Janda) and a younger man. 
But it also became about film-making when the cinematographerEdward Kłosiński 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/22/obituaries.poland> (Janda’s 
husband), who had worked on many films with Wajda, died during the shooting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFO0QJWMYmys&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFO0QJWMYmys>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFO0QJWMYmys&media=>
 Wałesa: Man of Hope, 2013 
In 2013, Wajda made Wałęsa: Man of Hope, a biopic of his national and personal 
hero. “I thought I would die in that system,” Wajda remarked. “It was so 
surprising and so extraordinary that I lived to see freedom.” His last film, 
Afterimage (2016), about the avant-garde painter Władysław Strzemiński, has 
recently become Poland’s official entry for best foreign language film for the 
2017 Oscars. Wajda received an honorary Oscar in 2000.

He was married four times. His first three marriages, to Gabriela Obremba, 
Zofia Żuchowska and the actor Beata Tyszkiewicz, ended in divorce. He is 
survived by his fourth wife, the costume designer Krystyna Zachwatowicz, and 
his daughter, Karolina, from his third marriage.

• Andrzej Wajda <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrzej-wajda>, film 
director, born 6 March 1926; died 9 October 2016

• This article was amended on 13 October 2016. It is at the end of Man of 
Marble, rather than Man of Iron, as originally stated, that the film director 
and shipyard worker walk arm in arm to face the bureaucrats.
 