
The former trade minister Andrew Robb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-robb> has been appointed a 
high-level economic consultant with the Chinese company that operates Darwin 
port.

The ABC reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-30/andrew-robb-joins-chinese-company-with-control-of-darwin-port/7978648>
 it had obtained and translated a statement from the Landbridge Group company, 
which said Robb had been appointed by the company’s chairman, Ye Cheng, two 
months ago.

The Landbridge Group won a 99-year lease over the port of Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/13/chinese-company-secures-99-year-lease-of-darwin-port-in-506m-deal>
 last year in a $506m deal with the Northern Territory government.

At the time Malcolm Turnbull shrugged off concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/19/malcolm-turnbull-shrugs-off-us-concern-over-darwin-port-lease-to-chinese-firm>
 expressed by the US about the sale, saying it had been “no secret” that China 
was looking to invest in Australian infrastructure. The secretary of the 
Defence department, Dennis Richardson,later admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/darwin-port-deal-with-chinese-group-poses-no-threat-says-defence-official>
 it had been a mistake not to inform the US of the sale earlier, but denied it 
had any negative security implications.

Darwin port deal with Chinese group poses no threat, says defence official
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/darwin-port-deal-with-chinese-group-poses-no-threat-says-defence-official>
The ABC’s translation of the Landbridge statement from 2 September said “the 
process of internationalisation of the Landbridge Group and the results 
achieved had greatly impressed [Robb].

“Working for Landbridge Group was a wonderful and pleasing thing, and that he 
wanted to jointly write a wonderful new chapter together with Landbridge,” the 
statement said.

Cheng was quoted in the statement as saying that “it will be necessary [for 
Landbridge] to draw on experts such as Mr Andrew Robb who have global vision 
and global influence”.

As trade minister Robb helped secure Australia’s free trade deal with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in 2015.
Former ministers are forbidden from taking personal advantage of confidential 
information they had access to as a minister and banned from lobbying the 
government for 18 months after leaving office.


Robb retired at the July federal election, choosing not to recontest his 
Victorian seat of Goldstein.

The Greens democracy spokeswoman, Lee Rhiannon, said Turnbull must “reveal his 
plan” to ensure that Robb does not advocate for the Landbridge Group on trade 
matters for another year.

Rhiannon demanded to know whether Turnbull was aware of the appointment, and 
whether he sought advice from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet 
about whether it could give rise to a potential breach of the ministerial 
standards.

She noted that department officials said in Senate estimates the prime 
minister had not sought such advice whenIan Macfarlane was appointed chief 
executive of the Queensland Resources Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/26/former-minister-ian-macfarlane-takes-job-with-mining-industry-lobby-group>
.

“There is no point in having a set of ministerial standards if the prime 
minister takes no notice of them, and if ministers and former ministers are not 
held to them.”

On ABC Radio in Melbourne on Monday, Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop> rejected the idea 
Robb might use confidential information in his new post. She noted the federal 
government had “nothing to do” with the lease of Darwin port.

“There’s a ministerial code of conduct, Andrew Robb has said he’s aware of 
[it] and will abide by it,” the foreign minister said.

“That provides constraints and restrictions on what cabinet ministers can do 
in their post political life, but we shouldn’t get into a situation where a 
former trade minister is not allowed to take up post-parliamentary careers.”
 