
Andy Murray rushed from the scene of his latest disappointment against the 
best player in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-grand-slam-roger-federer-rafael-nadal>
, Novak Djokovic, here on Sunday night to be with his pregnant wife, Kim, in 
Surrey. After one of the shortest press conferences of his garlanded career, 
Murray went straight to the airport for the first available flight home and is 
due to arrive at Heathrow on Monday evening.

Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win the 2016 Australian Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
Djokovic beat the British No1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
 for the fourth time in a Melbourne final, 6-1, 7-5, 7-6, an uneven match that 
delivered the world No1 his sixth Australian title, and afterwards a tearful 
Murray paid tribute to Kim during the courtside presentation: “You’ve been a 
legend the past two weeks. Thanks for your support and I’ll be on the next 
flight home.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F31%2F1454247254367%2FKP_1600920_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Novak%20Djokovic%20wins%20Australian%20Open%20after%20beating%20Andy%20Murray%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Novak%20Djokovic%20wins%20Australian%20Open%20after%20beating%20Andy%20Murray%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F31%2F1454247254367%2FKP_1600920_crop_640x360.jpg>
Novak Djokovic wins his sixth Australian Open title after beating Andy Murray 
6-1, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3) in Melbourne on Sunday. Murray became only the second man 
to lose five finals at one major 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights>
Later he told journalists he was desperate to get back to Oxshott as the birth 
of their first child was imminent. Kim has had for company the past week her 
father, Nigel Sears, whocollapsed during a match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/andy-murray-father-in-law-nigel-sears-collapses>
 here last weekend and flew back after treatment and examinations at a local 
hospital.

A car sped Murray through the emptying Melbourne streets to Tullamarine 
airport, where he was aiming to board a flight at 1am local time.

“I’m quite looking forward to getting home now,” he said. He explained how 
difficult it has been to concentrate on the tournament while awaiting news from 
the UK. “Regardless of today’s result, it’s been hard. Had I lost in the third 
or fourth round it still would have been difficult with everything that’s 
happened.

Unstoppable Novak Djokovic is making the impossible seem possible again | 
Simon Cambers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-grand-slam-roger-federer-rafael-nadal>
“She’s been amazing, handled everything unbelievably well. I have to thank her 
for allowing me to play and stay here with everything that was going on.”

As for his hurried departure, he said, “I’ve been held on flights for, like, 
five days. I’ve been held on almost every single flight. So the first one out 
of here, I’m leaving. It’s at 1am.”

During a dreadful first set Murray had muttered in earshot of his coach, 
Amélie Mauresmo, “This is the worst match of my life.” He regrouped, fought 
back and, despite 65 unforced errors, made a contest of it over two hours and 
53 minutes.

For Djokovic, his sixth Australian title moved him alongside the local legend 
Roy Emerson. It was his 11th major, putting him three short of Rafael Nadal and 
six behind Roger Federer, whom hethrashed in the semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/novak-djokovic-roger-federer-australian-open>
. Djokovic, who said beforehand he expected a long battle in the final, was 
relieved it was over in three sets, although there were plenty of long rallies 
in between some that were curtailed by unforced errors.

“I need to pay respect to Andy for another great tournament. Tough final, 
tough luck, Andy. You’re a great player, great friend. I would also like to 
wish you and Kim a very happy delivery of your baby and I hope you will 
experience a feeling like no other, because that’s what happened to me and my 
wife.”

Djokovic v Murray: Australian Open men's final 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jan/31/djokovic-v-murray-australian-open-mens-final-2016-in-pictures>
Later he added: “He definitely made me work. There were a lot of long rallies, 
long exchanges. We were both breathing heavily towards the end of the second 
and the third sets. But that’s what you expect. I knew coming into the match 
against Andy I’m going to have to be patient and construct the point, as well 
as trying to be the one to take the first initiative and be more aggressive. It 
wasn’t possible at all times because he would change up the tactics and he was 
playing better in the third. But on the big points I managed to find a way.

“Every grand slam title is very significant in its own way – here, because of 
the fact I managed to make history and equal Roy Emerson’s sixAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> titles. I am very honoured 
to be mentioned alongside legends of our sport, Bjorn Borg, Rod Laver, to win 
as many grand slams as they did.

“I can’t lie and say I didn’t think about it. It was in the back of my mind. 
Coming into the court I knew I have a chance to make history. It served as a 
great motivation, as a great imperative to play my best.”

Murray, meanwhile, had only the burden of personal worry.
 