
12.54pm GMT 

Yes, after overcoming the game's greatest, now just the small matter of 
outlasting the toughest man in tennis on Sunday. It'll be Murray's third 
successive grand slam final and the second straight major final to be contested 
by him and Djokovic. More evidence that these two are now superseding Federer 
and Nadal's rivalry. We'll have a report up on the site from our man in 
Melbourne, Kevin Mitchell, shortly, but that's it from me. Thanks for all your 
emails, sorry I couldn't use them all. And apologies for the radio silence 
towards the end, hopefully the result more than made up for it. Bye!

Updated at 12.54pm GMT

12.50pm GMT 

And it goes a little something like this ... "When his back was against the 
wall at 6-5 he came up with some unbelievable shots. I just stuck in ... Having 
never beaten Roger in a big match until the Olympics, that obviously helped ... 
This is the court Novak has played his best tennis on, this is his third final 
in a row. I'm going to have to play my best tennis to win ... I'm going to have 
to recover. Every time we play each other it's a physical match. I hope it's 
going to be a painful match because it means it'll be a good one."

Updated at 12.50pm GMT

12.46pm GMT 

Murray wins 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-7, 6-2!

The lights could be about to go out for Federer too. Serving to stay in the 
match, he slumps 0-30 down. His wife Mirka has her hands in her mouth. 15-30. 
15-40, courtesy of a dismissive swat on the forehand side. A winning return 
down the line.Two match points. First match point saved with a service bomb. 
But Federer goes long on the second! Murray has beaten Federer for the first 
time in a grand slam and is into the final of theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> for the third time in four 
years!Lendl breaks into a wide smile. A performance of real maturity. Murray 
was always in front, even though it went the distance. Federer departs to a 
huge ovation, Murray steps up to speak to Jim Courier ...

Updated at 12.46pm GMT

12.41pm GMT 

Fifth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-7, 5-2 Federer* (*denotes next server)

What a service game from Murray. 15-0, 30-0, 40-0, game. Murray's attacking 
the ball so early (credit his fitness for that), Federer's not getting any time 
to think, let alone get the ball back. But then my computer makes a pitiful 
little sound and dies. Completely. That wasn't in the script. Arrggh. And by 
the time I've whirred up another one, Federer has held. And Murray is 30-15 up 
on his serve. My pulse slows. But not much. Murray holds to 15. Quite some play 
from Murray, far more professional than this game-by-game. Apologies. What a 
time for a minor power cut.

Updated at 12.41pm GMT

12.34pm GMT 

Fifth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-7, 3-1 Federer (*denotes next server)

Not satisfied with one break, Murray wants another. At 30-all, he has a great 
chance to bring up the break point, but nets. He then waves his racket like a 
wand to conjure up a majestic forehand winner. Deuce. Advantage Federer. 
Federer squeaks through. "It's Braveheart time," emails Gareth Brown. 
Meanwhile, I've just thought it's Burns Night tonight. Is that any kind of omen 
for the Scot?

12.30pm GMT 

Fifth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-7, 3-0 Federer* (*denotes next server)

12 minutes played in the decider, Murray already leads 3-zip. Nada. Zilch. For 
the umpteenth time in this match, Federer is going to have to come from behind. 
"Shall I try for a hat-trick of jinxes?" asks Adam Hirst. No, go away. "Please 
don't publish any more Adam Hirst e-mails, and ask anyone in his general 
vicinity to punch him. Quite hard," requests Eamonn O'Connor.

12.27pm GMT 

Fifth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-7, 2-0 Federer (*denotes next server)

An early break chance for Murray. 30-40. Heavy, heavy hitting from him. 
Federer frames it. Murray breaks! "Roger must be really lucky or very talented. 
I was sure Murray was going to win the fourth set, but alas! Murray has to be 
careful now if he wants to win because I sense Federer is going for the kill 
now. Here is when we see what champions are made of. Whoever wins, this has 
been a very entertaining match," emails Frankline, presumably before Murray 
just broke.

12.21pm GMT 

Fifth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-7, 1-0 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Predictions for the final set? I think if this was a few years ago, Murray 
would probably buckle. But the way he outlasted and outpsyched Djokovic over 
those five sets in the US Open final last year suggests he's not going to do 
the same here. He's fitter than Federer, he's younger than Federer, he should 
be able to find a way through. But he has to put that fourth set out of his 
mind. Murray gets on the board first in the decider by holding to 30.

12.16pm GMT 

Federer wins the fourth set tie-break 7-2!

... short Murray serve, treated with complete disdain by Federer, who swats it 
away like an irritating fly, 2-5 ... make that 2-6 ... four set points. Federer 
only needs one. Wow. What a turnaround. Murray was two points away at 6-5, now 
he's into a decider. The Djoker must be laughing.

Updated at 1.22pm GMT

12.13pm GMT 

Fourth set tie-break Murray 2-4 Federer*

What a time for a tie-break. The momentum is all with Federer as he charges 
ahead, 0-2 ... but Murray finds a way to come back, 2-2 ... but is still 
understandably ruffled by the events of the past game as he sends a loose 
backhand long, 2-3 ... he then breaks a string, 2-4 at the changeover ... the 
crowd are chanting Federer, Federer, Federer, they want a fifth ...

Updated at 1.21pm GMT

12.09pm GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-6 Federer* (*denotes next server)

I don't know whether it's my inability to focus on the computer screen after 
four hours of game-by-gaming, but all I can hear on the first point is squeak, 
squeak, squeak, as the duo duke it out from the back of the court. Murray's 
shoes emerge victorious. 15-0. 15-all. 30-15. Two points away. 30-all. Several 
oohs and aahs on the next point, which Federer wins with a delightful backhand. 
30-40. And Murray is broken! Federer pulls an outrageous return out of the bag. 
Murray clearly didn't think it was coming back at him and he hoiks wide. Murray 
attempts to smash the ball into the court in frustration but totally shanks it. 
Nothing's coming off for him.

12.02pm GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 6-5 Federer (*denotes next server)

Remember, Murray has never beaten Federer in a grand slam match. They've met 
in three finals – at the 2008 US Open, the 2010 Australian Open and 2012 
Wimbledon – with Federer winning. The. Whole. Lot. I'm willing to wager that 
won't happen today, because Federer slips 0-40 down. Or Murray charges 0-40 up, 
depending on your loyalties. Three break points. The point is probing, 
punishing, brutal and Federer can't last the distance. The match is on Murray's 
racket. He'll serve for a place in the Australian Open final.

"My namesake Niall is a real optimist isn't he?" says Niall McLean. "Murray 
has still had to play Nadal, Federer and Djokovic regularly all when they have 
been at the top of the game. We have so few world class sportsmen and they 
should be celebrated. Boo, Niall Mullen , boo!"

Updated at 12.06pm GMT

11.59am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 5-5 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Federer, at the net, goes behind Murray, he thinks he's done enough to 
wrong-foot his opponent, but Murray's athleticism wins through as he not only 
gets it back but does so with interest, conjuring a passing winner. The 
highlight of a game in which Murray holds to love. Who will blink first?

11.56am GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 4-5 Federer (*denotes next server)

A game of nuances. Murray bounds 0-30 ahead. Federer bounds back. 30-all. A 
heavy kick serve flummoxes Murray. 40-30. "IDIOT," he shouts. But he finds a 
way to deuce. Federer, however, finds a way to win the game. "Funny how all 
those people who used to bemoan Murray being born in the 'wrong era' aren't 
banging on about how lucky he is to have an injured Nadal, a slightly past it 
Federer and a straightforward draw," says an underwhelmed Niall Mullen.

11.51am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 4-4 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Here's Adam Hirst to tempt fate once more: "That was a top-class break back 
game from Murray, his wobble is over and the final now awaits. Done it again 
haven’t I?!" Possibly. At 30-all, Federer goes for broke with a beautiful 
backhand down the line. And it's break point. The court opens up for Federer, 
it looks like a gimme, but hejust misses with the inside-out forehand! Deuce. 
Federer again flirts with the lines, a strategy which doesn't come off. 
Advantage Murray. Deuce. This is hit and miss tennis from Federer, he's going 
for the winners, working with such fine margins. Then it's Murray's turn to 
come up with an unstoppable backhand, which again batters the side line to 
within about a millimetre of its life. Outstanding strike. Advantage Murray. A 
moment of Hawk-Eye controversy follows, Federer is given the point. Deuce. 
Murray is furious. Advantage Murray. Deuce. Advantage Murray. Game Murray. That 
hold could prove to be vital.

11.40am GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 3-4 Federer (*denotes next server)

But Murray, generously wanting to prevent a 31-year-old from the physical 
trauma of playing two successive five-set matches, does the decent thing and 
breaks. He forges his way to 30-all, make that 30-40, as he somehow stretches 
for a forehand return, Federer comes to the net, but Murray's got his opponent 
under plenty of pressure. Federer nets. Federer then tempts Murray with the 
short ball and Murray gobbles it up, lancing a shot past Federer's backhand 
wing. Murray's head went somewhere else for a few minutes, but he's back in the 
zone.

11.36am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 2-4 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Murray holds to 15 with little drama. They've been on court for nearly three 
hours now. "Somewhere Novak is smiling/sleeping," parps Sports Illustrated'sJon 
Wertheim <https://twitter.com/jon_wertheim> on Twitter. Incredibly Federer has 
never played back-to-back five set matches. That could change today.

11.32am GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 1-4 Federer (*denotes next server)

But Federer ups the intensity now. Buoyed by that break, he produces one of 
his best forehands of the match. 15-0, 30-0, 40-0. 40-15. Game. Break 
consolidated. And from a position of apparent control, Murray is ruffled. I 
blame Adam Hirst. The ebbs and flows of five-set grand slam tennis. Murray 
played one poor service game there and he was punished.

11.29am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 1-3 Federer* (*denotes next server)

But then, look. Federer sends a reminder that he shouldn't be underestimated. 
How dare we question the 17-times grand slam winner. 0-15. 0-30. 0-40, as an 
errant Murray backhand goes long. And after one break point all match, Federer 
has three in the same game. Murray saves the first with an unreturned Exocet 
down the middle, the second with an ace out wide, but he can't do anything 
about the third. Murray dices with danger as his shot clips the net, it goes 
over but few baseline blows later Murray shanks a forehand wide. More Murray 
error that break than a rise in intensity from Federer.

11.24am GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 1-2 Federer (*denotes next server)

Federer reminds Murray he's going to have to work for this win. Federer holds 
to 15. And here's Adam Hirst to tempt fate: "Murray’s not going to lose this, 
he’s playing too well. The guard is changing finally and the next tournament 
will be the first one for 10 years with neither Federer or Nadal in the two 
favourites." The signs certainly point that way. The last decade was about 
Federer v Nadal, this one could well turn into Djokovic v Murray. Our manKevin 
Mitchell wrote a good piece 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/12/golden-era-andy-murray-novak-djokovic>
 about it before the tournament started.

Updated at 11.32am GMT

11.20am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 1-1 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Federer pushes, getting to 30 on Murray's serve. But it's taking a lot out of 
him. And it's still not enough. Murray's faced only one break point throughout 
this match. He's been in superlative touch on serve.

11.18am GMT 

Fourth set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 6-3, 0-1 Federer (*denotes next server)

A big game, this one. Murray will be looking to turn the screw on Federer, 
while Federer will be striving to restore parity. At 30-all, Federer slaps a 
tired-looking backhand into the net. 30-40. Break point. Murray has Federer on 
the ropes, but then Murray slips, he's down on the canvas. He seems OK though, 
no damage done. Except for to Murray's ego. He looks furious. Deuce. Advantage 
Federer. Deuce. Advantage Federer. Game Federer. But there's doubt that Federer 
looks fatigued. Cue the wonderfully-named Valentine Montagnani. "If the Fed 
Express was a delivery truck, I’d say he’s now winding around the approach 
roads to his tennis village retirement destination. Yes, still some way to go 
till we arrive at the final destination… but the gears are starting to wind 
down a little now." You'd have to say a 25-year-old in his prime, in the shape 
and form of his life, is going to beat a 31-year-old, even if said 31-year-old 
is the greatest we've ever seen.

Updated at 11.19am GMT

11.06am GMT 

Murray wins the third set 6-3

A tight shot on the first point though, 0-15. A much longer exchange on the 
second, Murray settles things with a backhand down the line. We've not seen too 
many of them today, but that one was effective, Federer can only chip long. 
15-all. Murray opts for his favourite serve down the T to the deuce court, 
30-15. Then his second favourite serve out wide to the backhand, 40-15. And 
from 0-15, here are three set points. Just the one will do. Murray's back in 
charge. He skips off court for a quick break. Federer then decides to follow 
his lead. In the meantime, fancy some Murray v Federer Jedi fighting?Sure you do
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WIwl9ket8pA>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWIwl9ket8pA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWIwl9ket8pA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWIwl9ket8pA&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWIwl9ket8pA&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWIwl9ket8pA>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWIwl9ket8pA&media=>
close 
Updated at 11.08am GMT

11.01am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 5-3 Federer (*denotes next server)

A tremendous return from Murray as he pulls off a winner on the backhand side. 
Federer didn't even move. He wasn't expecting that. 15-all. But that soon turns 
into 40-15. A hoiked Federer forehand goes a foot or so long, 40-30. Murray 
nets the return, game. But nae bother for the Scot, he's got the chance to 
serve this third set out. And the way he's been serving, you've got to fancy 
him to do just that.

10.58am GMT 

Third set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 5-2 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Murray, of course, has other ideas. He backs up the break with a quicker than 
quick service hold to love. What answer have you got, Rojaair?

10.57am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 4-2 Federer (*denotes next server)

Murray finds his way to 0-30 on the Federer serve. What can he do? Break, of 
course. First, Federer sees a lazy forehand loop long. But instead of 
chastising himself he has a little pop at the umpire. Three break points. The 
first comes and goes, but Murray makes no mistake on the second. "Murray's at 
his peak, Fed can still improve during this match," notes Raymond Pluijmen. 
"Whoever wins it, I hope they will not make it an an epic 5-set duel because 
the winner will have to face nadal 2.0 : Djokovic." Yeah Djokovic must be 
sitting in his hotel, kicking back, hoping this one goes all the way.

10.51am GMT 

Third set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 3-2 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Right, normal service resumed. Murray has a chance to take command at 30-15, 
but he goes wide with his cross-court forehand. 30-all. His body language isn't 
quite what it was. He was also gasping a bit for air after a 26-shot rally a 
few points ago. But if this goes the distance, surely he has to be considered 
the favourite? He's such a well-oiled machine these days. Murray gets to 40-30 
and lets out a "CMON." Lendl sits there impassively. As ever. Murray hurtles 
into the net and puts away a fairly easy volley to hold.

10.47am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 2-2 Federer (*denotes next server)

Federer holds to 15. Not much giving there. I was having a little mid-morning 
snack, mind, so I can't add much more. Sorry. But a pertinent question from 
Chris Paul. "Does anyone apart from Brad Gilbert call Murray the "Muzzard"? I 
find it irritating for some reason." Me too Chris. Me too.

Updated at 10.52am GMT

10.46am GMT 

Third set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 2-1 Federer* (*denotes next server)

But then the new, improved and measured Murray returns. He rattles through to 
love. But Klaus Reinstein is only interested in star-spotting. "Is Miss P 
Middleton spotted or anywhere near?" he asks. Afraid not Klaus. Will Kevin 
Spacey do? The cameras have just zoomed in on him. Or the non-Chris Martin? 
He's back again: "Phooey. Did you have to publish my email just after Fed won 
the 2nd set?! I'm staying schtum from this point on."

10.40am GMT 

Third set: *Murray 6-4, 6-7, 1-1 Federer (*denotes next server)

Federer finds himself in a bit of a predicament at 0-30. But he forges his way 
back to 30-all. A draining baseline duel follows, they send each other from 
hither to thither, before Murray runs into the net, putting the pressure on 
Federer, and Federer hits into the tramlines. 30-40. Break point. Murray's 
first for some time. Deuce. And Federer goes on to hold. Cue some Murray 
mutterings. Of which there have been very few up until this point, it has to be 
noted.

Updated at 10.42am GMT

10.36am GMT 

Third set: Murray 6-4, 6-7, 1-0 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Right, so we're back to square one. A set apiece. Murray, unruffled by how the 
tie-break played out, holds to 15. "I've always found Fed easy to admire, but 
hard to love," emails Chris Martin. But notthe Chris Martin. Strangely Guardian 
game-by-games don't seem to attract the A-listers. "As a Scot living in 
Switzerland, I'd love nothing more than if Andy wins today. My wife had to stop 
me from dancing around our garden draped in a saltire when he beat Roger at the 
Olympics. Probably helped to keep our relations with the neighbours civil. 
Anyway, I'll whisper it from the safety of my office C'MON ANDY! *fist-pumps, 
gurns*" 

10.29am GMT 

Federer wins the second set tie-break 7-5

... both flirt with the lines on the next point, the dalliance pays off for 
Murray, 3-4 ... back to the Federer serve, and he nets! Under little pressure. 
He was all leaden footed there. Murray has the mini-break back, 4-4 ... but 
nets his return, 4-5 ... a vicious Murray forehand and Federer can only prod 
high and wide, 5-5 ... Murray slam-dunks a smash but Federer not only gets it 
back but pulls off a ridiculous backhand passing shot! Incredible. 5-6, set 
point Federer on his serve ... Murray goes long and it's a set all. Murray will 
be having nightmares about that point at 5-all if Federer goes on to win this. 
Remarkable.That had shades of the second-set denouement 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jul/08/andy-murray-roger-federer-wimbledon-live>
 in the Wimbledon final, the way Federer pulled out a ridiculous shot when he 
needed to. Let's hope the eventual result isn't the same.

Updated at 10.31am GMT

10.24am GMT 

Second set tie-break: Murray* 2-4 Federer

Murray gets the first mini-break on the first point, 1-0 ... but is then 
wayward and wild on the forehand side, 1-1 ... another forehand error from the 
Murray racket and it's Federer with the mini-break, 1-2 ... Murray nets,again 
on the forehand side, 1-3 ... Federer shows Murray how it's done with a vicious 
forehand drive volley, 1-4 ... Murray scrambles a point back with a strong 
serve, 2-4 ... they change ends ... "LET'S GO ROGER, LET'S GO, LET'S GO ROGER, 
LET'S GO, LET'S GO ROGER, LET'S GO," scream the Aussies ...

10.20am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 6-4, 6-6 Federer (*denotes next server)

At 30-0, Federer fires an inside-out forehand. The Melbourne patrons liked 
that. 30-15. But an ace out wide brings up game point, which Murray duly takes. 
A tie-break it is then. And an email from Arran Watson entitled "Federer 
swearing <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvSgXp-cwTg>". 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvSgXp-cwTg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvSgXp-cwTg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvSgXp-cwTg&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvSgXp-cwTg&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvSgXp-cwTg>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwvSgXp-cwTg&media=>
close 
Updated at 10.41am GMT

10.17am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 6-4, 5-6 Federer (*denotes next server)

Federer wins the first point. "Are you sure it's 100% out?" Murray asks the 
umpire, who answers in the affirmative. 15-0. 30-0. 40-0. Game Federer. He 
grabs his towel purposefully and struts back to his chair. This has been a 
top-class set, and one Federer surely has to win if he's to have a chance in 
this match. But a word of warning for Murray fans: this match has so far played 
out pretty much like the Wimbledon final. And we all know what happened then.

10.13am GMT 

Second set: Murray 6-4, 5-5 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Murray sends a fierce serve out wide on the first point, Federer gets it back 
into play, but Murray has all the initiative and finishes things off. 15-0. 
"The one thing Muzzard has been doing all tourney is serving better then I have 
ever seen higher % and better placement,"says Brad Gilbert 
<https://twitter.com/bgtennisnation>. And he should know, having previously 
coached the Scot. An exhausting rally on the second point, Murray makes the 
error, appeals to Hawk-Eye, but is rebuffed. 15-all. Federer chips and chops on 
the third point, looks to have bamboozled Murray, but out of nowhere Murray 
pulls off a half-volley backhand winner done the line. Wow. 30-15. 40-15. Then 
Federer goes all sweary, most out of character. It doesn't help him. Murray 
takes the game.

10.08am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 6-4, 4-5 Federer (*denotes next server)

That's 27 winners for Murray now compared to Federer's 13. But at least, for 
Federer's sake, he's now found his serving groove. A classic one-two punch, 
straight from the tennis textbook, helps him take the game to 15. It's an 
advantage for him that he's serving first in this set, Murray must now hold to 
stay in it.

10.05am GMT 

Second set: Murray 6-4, 4-4 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Murray doesn't give Federer a sniff. 15-0. A 10th ace of the match, 201kph, 
30-0. 40-0. Finally a lengthier point, Murray runs forward like a greyhound to 
chase down a drop shot, aims as though he's going to go down the line, before 
flicking his wrists over and going for the cross-court backhand kill. Game.

Updated at 10.06am GMT

10.01am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 6-4, 3-4 Federer (*denotes next server)

Great stuff from both players, rat-a-tat, rat-a-tat, rat-a-tat, Murray comes 
through. But a clever change-up from Federer gets him to 30-15. Make that 
40-15. The first signs of frustration from Murray. He shouldn't curse himself 
too much, though, he is a set up against the Greatest Player of All Time after 
all. But these are the standards Murray has now set himself. Federer holds to 
30. The Swiss is starting to settle into his serving rhythm.

9.58am GMT 

Second set: Murray 6-4, 3-3 Federer* (*denotes next server)

"I'm from Kenya sitting in the office following the match on the internet," 
emails the monikered Frankline. "Federer is currently being bullied out there. 
He will need to something different to have a chance at winning this." I think 
Federer's listening, because he tries to draw Murray into the net. The ball 
isn't short enough, though, which allows Murray to dispatch the volley with 
ease. Then from 30-all, Murray is again dragged into the net, Federer looks 
like he's got him on a piece of string, but suddenly the line slackens when 
Federer nets. Danger for Murray, but he comes through to 30.

9.53am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 6-4, 2-3 Federer (*denotes next server)

Federer finds himself in a bit of a hole at 0-30. A lengthy rally follows, 
well-constructed by both players, with lovely changes of pace. Murray blinks 
first. 15-30. He blinks again. 30-all. The pair again go toe-to-toe at the 
baseline, Federer prevails. And lets out a huge "allez". Deuce. Advantage 
Federer. He edges through again, but these service games are proving 
exhausting. When's Murray going to give him a bit of a break? "Andy looks like 
he isn't even winded yet," says Shawn McLean. "Can Federer push through? My 
guess is no."

Updated at 10.03am GMT

9.48am GMT 

Second set: Murray 6-4, 2-2 Federer* (*denotes next server)

"Fedfan starting to get the wake-up call and is hitting the ball much more 
aggressive," saysBrad Gilbert on Twitter <https://twitter.com/bgtennisnation>. 
Right on cue, Federer then unleashes an absolute thunderbolt of a forehand. 
That's more like the Federer we know. Murray gets nowhere near it. 30-15. But 
Federer can't make any further inroads as Murray once again comes through to 15.

9.44am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 6-4, 1-2 Federer (*denotes next server)

Anything Murray can do ... Federer also holds to 15, rounding things off with 
his first ace of the day. The commentators have just mentioned Martina 
Navratilova was asked yesterday who would win between Murray and Lendl (the 
Lendl of the 80s I presume, rather than the Lendl of now). Murray will be 
displeased to hear she leaned towards Mr Lendl.

9.42am GMT 

Second set: Murray 6-4, 1-1 Federer* (*denotes next server)

There was always a chance Federer's five sets against Tsonga would leave him a 
little tired coming into today. Perhaps that's the problem, though it's a 
little tough to tell because Murray is playing supremely well. And talking of 
the physical side of things, how imposing is Murray these days? He's toned, 
tuned and strengthened body to perfection. And he wasn't exactly a slouch 
before. Murray holds to 15.

9.39am GMT 

Second set: *Murray 6-4, 0-1 Federer (*denotes next server)

Federer needs to do something different out there. He duly obliges, mixing 
things up at 30-15 by serve-volleying, a tactic which pays off. 40-15. But that 
becomes 40-30, which becomes deuce when he throws in his first double fault of 
the day. Federer gives himself a little talking to and it does the trick. 
Unreturned serve, advantage Federer. Deuce. Advantage Federer, with another 
serve-volley. Game. But Murray's been pushing and probing in almost every one 
of Federer's service games so far. There's no respite for the world No2. And an 
email from Fed fan Shrey Jain: "Feddy seems tired today. The energy and stamina 
he showed against Tsonga is lacking today. Hope he fights back in the second 
set."

9.33am GMT 

Murray wins the first set 6-4

It's not just the big groundstrokes, Murray has been so attacking on his serve 
as well. He quickly charges 40-15 ahead, two set points. Plenty of "C'MON 
Andys" and "C'MON Rogers" follow. The crowd seem fairly divided. Another big 
first serve and Federer can only prod long. And that's the first set wrapped up 
in 45 minutes. Murray's hit five aces to Federer's 0, 16 winners to Federer's 
six. A solid and supreme set from the world No3.

9.29am GMT 

First set: *Murray 5-4 Federer (*denotes next server)

Murray has hit almost twice as many winners as Federer. Which is not something 
I would have written during a match between these two in years gone by. 
Murray's a different machine now. He asks a few more questions on Federer's 
serve here, getting to 30, but Federer holds to force Murray to serve this one 
out. "Nobody kicked a ballboy yet then?" parps Gary Naylor. No Gary, but 
hopefully these previous run-ins will keep you entertained: Federer inspiring 
the best and worst in ballboys – fromgreat catches 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SjP01ns0ASQ> to poor concentration 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fzFAEnF1f7o>. Federer even losing a point to a 
ballboy <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LL5MaljWmH0>. Perhaps Novak Djokovic 
shouldtake note. 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=agbFGgLIOH4&feature=player_detailpage#t=12s>

9.24am GMT 

First set: Murray 5-3 Federer* (*denotes next server)

15-0, 30-0, 40-0, game. Move on ladies and gents, there's not much to see 
here. Federer must hold serve to stay in the set.

9.23am GMT 

First set: Murray 4-3 Federer* (*denotes next server)

Federer isn't winning too many of the longer rallies at the moment. He can't 
find a way through Murray's defence, he's not finding the winners. 0-30. 15-30. 
Wonderful play from Murray to get to 15-40. Federer charges to the net but 
Murray rolls his wrists over the ball on his backhand and smacks it down the 
line. Two break points. But Federer has saved his best play for the break 
points so far. He fends off the first and then the second after a superb point, 
as Federer stretches every sinew to get a backhand overhead back into play (one 
of the hardest shots in the book) and Murray, probably not expecting it to come 
back at him, makes the error. And from deuce Federer survives. "Hi Katy - any 
chance you can change the photo on the webpage please? - it's beginning to 
haunt me! Cheers, Rich Stones" Is this one better Rich? Thought not.
 Andy Murray gets his best face on. Photograph: Julian Smith/EPA 
Updated at 1.17pm GMT

9.16am GMT 

First set: Murray 4-2 Federer* (*denotes next server)

11 winners have skipped off the Murray racket in only five games. I like this 
new attacking Murray. From 15-all, the pair duke it out from the back of the 
court, Murray keeping the ball deep, slicing and dicing Federer's backhand into 
submission, eventually Federer obliges with an error. 30-15. 175 kph ace, 
40-15. Murray's backhand is then called wide, he appeals to Hawk-Eye, which 
confirms it landed out by about 0.000001mm. The crowd collectively gasp. But a 
good body-jamming serve seals the game.

Updated at 9.17am GMT

9.12am GMT 

First set: *Murray 3-2 Federer (*denotes next server)

Federer's most comfortable service game by some distance. 15-0. 30-0. 40-0. 
Game. And an email from Kevin Comber. Which I think he sent yesterday but has 
just landed in my sluggish inbox. I blame all these early starts. "I haven't 
seen anywhere near as much tennis as I'd like over the last few years (damn you 
employment!). The main four players still appear to be totally dominant 
(presuming Nadal returns as the same player after his injuries). Is there 
anyone in your opinion who could break the main four's stranglehold on majors 
this year?" In a word: no. These four (assuming Nadal comes back in good shape) 
are untouchable. Superhuman. They've sent tennis into another stratosphere.

9.08am GMT 

First set: Murray 3-1 Federer* (*denotes next server)

There have already been some brutal rallies, but the difference now compared 
to a year or so ago, is that Murray is now more willing to pull the trigger 
earlier and finish off the point. Credit Lendl for that. Three big serves get 
Murray to 40-0. But he concedes the next point with an errant backhand, the 
next with another backhand error and the next with a stray backhand volley. 
40-0 one minute, deuce the next. Andanother backhand into the net, after a 
heavy slice from Federer, gives Federer a chance to break back. Where did this 
come from? Murray dismisses the danger with an ace. Deuce. Advantage Murray. 
Deuce. Advantage Murray. Game. But there was a little lapse in concentration 
for a couple of minutes there.

9.00am GMT 

First set: *Murray 2-1 Federer (*denotes next server)

An uncharacteristic error as Murray, under little pressure, sends a backhand a 
foot or so long. But he then unwinds on the forehand side, stepping into court, 
Federer can only net. 15-30. Another glimmer. The pair trade cross-court blow 
after cross-court blow, backhand to backhand to backhand, Murray pulls the 
trigger, Federer spins, slides, does the splits and nets. 15-40, two break 
points to add to the one he had in the first game. A passing shot chance for 
Murray, but he overcooks the forehand. And then misses the next break point 
too. He'll be disappointed, Federer didn't get a first serve in on either of 
those points. A sign the great man is a little nervous, his first-serve 
percentage tends to go down when he's feeling edgy. A third break point goes 
begging. But not a fourth, as Murray ups the pace with a cross-court forehand. 
Finally he breaks through.

8.53am GMT 

First set: Murray 1-1 Federer* (*denotes next server)

A message from Federer on the opening point, as he steps in to attack Murray's 
second serve. Murray eventually prevails, but it was a sign of intent from 
Federer. 15-0. Which soon becomes 30-15. Which quickly becomes game, as Murray 
sends down his first ace. It's a fairly windy night in Melbourne and the 
temperature has dropped to around 22C. Which may be good for Murray. The balls 
aren't going to fly off Federer's racket quite as quickly.

8.50am GMT 

First set: *Murray 0-1 Federer (*denotes next server)

Ready? Let's play. Federer will serve first. Murray broke Federer in the 
opening game of the Wimbledon final, he’ll be hoping to repeat the trick. He 
slaps a forehand into the net on the opening point, though. A lengthier 
exchange ensues, they go down the middle, down the middle, then Murray mixes 
things up with a piercing inside-out forehand. Great attacking play. Federer 
then sees Murray's aggression and raises it. 30-15. A Federer forehand clips 
the net and skips into the tramlines, 30-all. A sniff for Murray here. A 
wonderful rally, 28 shots, Murray constantly probing, eventually Federer 
over-pushes on a forehand. 30-40. Break point. This is top-quality tennis from 
the off. Federer swats away the danger with a drive volley. Deuce. Advantage 
Federer. Federer squeezes through, but Murray posed plenty of questions there.

8.41am GMT 

Tik, tok, tikity, tok. They're warming up. Murray is clad in black with 
flashes of yellow, Federer has once again opted for his grey and pink number.

8.39am GMT 

"Morning Katy," chirps positivity's Simon McMahon. "I'll be following the GBG 
on the sly this morning – damn pesky work – and willing Andy to do it. 
Hopefully in four sets, don't think I could bear a five set, five hour 
marathon, though I'm sure Djokovic could. C'MON ANDY!"

8.36am GMT 

Here they are, weaving and winding their way through the corridors. Murray is 
a few steps ahead of Federer; long may that continue. He looks mean and moody. 
He's got his Lendl face on. Federer looks calm and relaxed, but there again he 
always does. A small victory for Federer as he wins the battle of the standing 
ovations as they walk on.

8.33am GMT 

While we wait for the players to make their entrance (how dare they keep us 
waiting),hopefully this will get you in the mood for some tennis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lrBWS__Culk&feature=youtu.be>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrBWS__Culk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrBWS__Culk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrBWS__Culk&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrBWS__Culk&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrBWS__Culk>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlrBWS__Culk&media=>
close 
8.29am GMT 

Tactics time. There aren’t any secrets here. Murray knows what he needs to do 
to beat Federer, Federer knows what he needs to do to beat Murray. Sometimes in 
the past Murray’s been accused of being too passive against Federer in the big 
matches, but this is the new attacking Murray V2.0. He’s unlikely to retreat 
today.

8.26am GMT 

Stat attack. Murray’s record against Federer is good. But also bad. Good in 
that he’s won 10 of their 19 matches (there’s not a player on tour Murray has 
played more often), bad in that he’s lost all three of their grand slam 
meetings (all in finals, the last of which was at Wimbledon,lest we need 
reminding 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jul/08/andy-murray-roger-federer-wimbledon-live%20>
). Good in that he then went on to beat Federer in the Olympic final, bad in 
that he then lost at the O2 in November. Take from that what you will.

8.22am GMT 

Andre Agassi is with you Steve. He's also gone for Murray in four. And who 
could argue with Andre? Some interesting words from the great man today, he's 
also been marvelling at the standard at the top of the men's game:

It's been amazing watching the standard continually get better. You wonder how 
it's possible to continue at that sort of rate. What Federer did when he came 
and when I said goodbye, a lot had to do with what I knew was untouchable.

It's just a different standard of tennis. It's different rules of engagement 
when guys can do what these guys can do.

I would have had to be a different player, would've had to have a different 
body. It means the game has gotten a lot better. Fed raised it; Nadal matched 
and raised it; Djokovic, for that intense little period of time, even raised 
it. It seemed like last year settled down a bit, and now all of a sudden Murray 
is in the equation.

When I see those top three guys, I see what history will say is the golden age 
of tennis. You're talking about arguably the three best guys. Djokovic will 
still need some distance to cover, but best of all time, if you're having that 
discussion in the same generation, it's remarkable.

8.16am GMT 

A quick plug. "Hi Katy," writes Steve Pye. "I wondered if you’d be interested 
in my blog on the 1985 Australian Open 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.com/2013/01/1985-australian-open-stefan-edberg.html>
, a tournament in which Mats Wilander was going for three Australian Opens in a 
row (like Djokovic) but came up just short against Stefan Edberg (who won his 
first grand slam), and an expensive visit to Australia for John McEnroe. John 
Lloyd also gave us Brits a pleasant surprise when he reached the 
quarter-finals, only to be hammered by Murray’s coach in straight sets, back in 
the days when if anyone from Britain won two matches we’d be delighted. By the 
way, I’m going for a Murray win today in four sets."

8.13am GMT 

Predict this one at your peril. Murray has collected the biggest prizes of the 
past six months. The composure he showed during his Olympic and US Open 
coronations suggests he’s not going to blink come the big moments today. He’s 
yet to concede a set at this Australian Open. But the way the draw opened up 
for him means it’s difficult to gauge exactly where his game is at. There’s 
also a danger he’s had it too easy. Is he battle ready? Look at Maria 
Sharapova; she had dropped only nine games en route to the last fourbefore 
losing in straight sets yesterday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/24/azarenka-li-na-australian-open>
. Sometimes easy draws can be a poisoned chalice. Federer, meanwhile, has 
already been to war,having needed five sets to overcome the firepower of 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga on Wednesday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/23/federer-beats-tsonga-australian-open>
.

7.57am GMT 

Preamble

Morning. If any mere mortal dedicated themselves to a goal and shed 20 years 
of blood, sweat and tears before achieving it, they would probably then heave a 
huge sigh of relief, give themselves a self-congratulatory pat on the back and 
jump on the first bus back to a normal life. But not Andy Murray, just asRoger 
Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>, Rafael Nadal and 
Novak Djokovic didn’t either. For these superhuman athletes, success makes them 
chase more success. It motivates them to work harder and demand even more of 
themselves. Won a grand slam for the first time? I want another. Ranked at No3 
in the world? I want to be No1.

After his US Open win last year, Murray could have been forgiven for lying on 
a beach for a month and basking in his triumph. Yes, he did go to Miami, but 
for his annual off-season training camp, where he pushed himself (and our 
tennis correspondent Kevin Mitchell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/dec/13/andy-murray-olympics-boost>) to 
the limit. 2012 was the best year of his career, but he was determined to put 
in the groundwork to make 2013 even better.

“Winning the US Open was a huge motivation,” he said in December. “I realised 
after that match that all of the stuff I do in the off-season was worth it in 
the end. We lose 10 to 15 times every year. You need to learn to deal with that 
and to be able to use that as motivation. But I now know that winning is more 
motivational than losing. I learned that because I always thought that, wow, 
losing the Wimbledon final – so now I want to win it even more. But I went on 
to another level of motivation after the Olympics and the US Open.”

Crucially, the pressure is off now. Murray no longer has to field questions 
about when he’s going to win his first grand slam. He breathes a little easier, 
he walks with his head held higher, he stands taller. But no one has ever stood 
taller than Federer. The rankings will tell you he's no longer the best in the 
game, but he's still the greatest.

Play begins at: just after 8.30am GMT.

Awaiting the winner in the final is: Superman Novak Djokovic.
 