
Andy Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, the Channel 4 
chief executive, quietly slipped out of the broadcaster for the final time on 
Tuesday, five years and five months since joining from the BBC in July 2004.

Duncan has handed over his responsibilities to Channel 4's finance director, 
Anne Bulford, who will be acting chief executive until his replacement is 
appointed by new chairmanLord Burns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lord-burns>.

The outgoing chief executive is expected to return next week for a low-key 
leaving drinks party at Channel 4's Horseferry Road headquarters in central 
London, which other directors are holding for him.

But he will not be at next Monday's board meeting, the first attended by 
Burns, chairman designate,who does not take over from Luke Johnson formally 
until 27 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/05/lord-burns-channel-4-chairman> 
but has already started work at Channel 4 and is leading the search for the new 
chief executive.

There is understood to be a sense of relief among staff at the broadcaster, 
after the protracted nature of Duncan's departure, which came after months of 
speculation about his future.

A Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> spokesman said Duncan 
was out of London and travelling. His payoff is expected to be a year's salary, 
which was £683,000 in 2008, plus any other settlement arranged, in line with 
the agreement to present him leaving by mutual consent from a one-year rolling 
contract. The details of Duncan's payoff will be published next spring in 
Channel 4's 2009 annual report.

Duncan's most positive legacy includes a suite of free to air digital channels 
and time-shifted +1 services, which each add around a further 10% to viewing 
figures, for no extra cost except paying for the broadcast spectrum.

Channel 4 insiders say the economics of these are bound to be reevaluated, to 
see whether an element of subscription now makes sense, as the outlook for 
advertising remains uncertain.

However, Duncan's strategy of lobbying government and Ofcom for financial 
assistance for Channel 4 failed to deliver, leaving the broadcaster vulnerable 
to potential privatisation or partial sale.

His lack of experience of television programming and broadcasting is also 
understood to have helped create a divide within the company between the 
commissioning team and the commercial departments.

It is expected that in the selection of a new chief executive, a knowledge of 
the television industry will be essential. In due course, as vacancies arise, 
Burns is also expected to refresh the Channel 4 board with new non-executive 
directors.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 