
Andy Murray believes beating Roger Federer in the final of the Australian Open 
on Sunday would be the perfect way for him to win his first grand slam. A 
resilient Murray overcame early nerves yesterday tobeat the Croat Marin Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/28/andy-murray-marin-cilic-australian-open>
 3-6, 6-4, 6-4, 6-2 and reach the final of one of the sport's four biggest 
events for the second time in his career.

Federer, the world No1, has to get past the challenge of the French 10th seed 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/28/jo-wilfried-tsonga-roger-federer-australian-open>
 today before Murray can decide on his gameplan. On paper, taking on the man 
who has won 15 grand slams [to Tsonga's none] and who Murray feels is the 
greatest ever to play the game would be the tougher task but the Scot is aiming 
big, not least because it was Federer who beat him in his only other grand slam 
final appearance, at the US Open in 2008. "It would be the best way ever [to 
win the first grand slam]," he said. "If you win against him, if you beat him 
in a slam final, it's an unbelievable achievement so I would obviously love to 
win against him. He's probably going to be the tougher opponent but I don't 
know who it is yet so I am just focusing on trying to win right now and then 
after [the Federer v Tsonga match], I will sort the tactics out."

The Scot looked out of sorts early on as he dropped the first set in the face 
of a barrage of brutal groundstrokes from the 21-year-old Cilic. But Murray 
astutely changed tactics, attacked more and eventually ran out a convincing 
winner over a tiring opponent to reach the final here for the first time. "This 
is the best I've played at a slam, I think," he said. "I feel good and 
physically I'm going to be fresh for the final [on Sunday]. It just comes down 
to who plays the better tennis on the day. It's my job to do that."

Murray advanced when the defending champion Rafael Nadal retired hurt in the 
previous round but when he dropped the first set to Cilic, memories of his 
defeat by the Croat in the fourth round of the US Open last September must have 
come flooding back. Cilic was attacking strongly and Murray had no answer 
until, holding a break point in the third game, he chased down a lob, spun 
round and fired a stunning forehand over his shoulder for a winner down the 
line.

From that moment, Murray relaxed and grew in confidence and, with Cilic 
tiring, he eased to victory. "I'd had a few chances early in the first set and 
didn't take them. He started playing great, he was taking it to me and that 
shot really changed it. I felt a lot more comfortable after that, more 
confident, started going for my shots and managed to turn it around."

Murray's win over Cilic lifts him above Nadal to No3 in the rankings and 
should he win the title he will regain the No2 spot he lost after last year's 
US Open. "Whoever wins, it's important against both of them to play a solid 
match," Murray said. "Both can go through phases where they play unbelievable 
tennis so you've got to make sure that you maintain your level and not go for 
silly shots."

The way Murray turned it around has convinced many that this could be his 
time. "I said before the tournament that we could see great things fromAndy 
Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>," said Darren Cahill, who 
coached Lleyton Hewitt and Andre Agassi to the No1 ranking. "He looks good and 
it is going to take someone playing some great tennis to beat him."

And one of Murray's coaching team, Alex Corretja, who watched the match at 
home in Spain, said Murray had "found the right balance between defence and 
attack. That was the most important thing. At the start it was very hard for 
him because Cilic's game is so different to Nadal's but Andy raised his level. 
If it's Federer in the final then he would have to be the favourite because of 
his experience playing so many grand slam finals. If it's Tsonga it will be 
much more open. But whoever he plays there will be nerves on both sides."
 