
Crooner Andy Williams has admitted he is suffering from bladder cancer, making 
the announcement from the stage on Saturday â€“ but theMoon River 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=flm4xcOyiCo> singer has sworn to "get through 
this thing", returning for more gigs next autumn.

The 83-year-old was the surprise guest at his own show on Saturday, at the 
Moon River theatre inBranson, Missouri <http://www.branson.com/>. Williams 
hadn't performed for months, cancelling a series of gigs due to an unspecified 
illness, and organisers had warned that he "might not" perform at the annual 
Andy Williams Christmas Show. When he appeared, he was met with a standing 
ovation.

"I do have cancer of the bladder," Williams told the crowd. "[But] people with 
cancer are ... kicking it, and they're winning more and more every year. And 
I'm going to be one of them." He then performedChestnuts Roasting on an Open 
Fire <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=khWvxVEhcMQ>, promising to celebrate his 
singing career's 75th anniversary next year. "I really have missed this an 
awful lot," he said.

Williams is reportedly undergoing chemotherapy treatment 
<http://www.spinner.ca/2011/11/03/andy-williams-cancer/> and is considering 
moving to Malibu, where he will be closer to "top-flight cancer treatment".

Famous for his versions of Music to Watch Girls By 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aKdOotrQ_Hw> and Can't Take My Eyes Off You 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GkRakKjrP6U>, Williams was also an Emmy-winning 
variety show host. Besides 18 hit singles at home in the US, the singer has 
seen considerable success in the UK, racking up 14 top-25 singles including two 
hit reissues in the past 15 years.
 