
Channel 4 paid its former chief executive Andy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/19/andy-duncan-exit-channel-4> just 
under £1.5m for his final 11 months in the post, MediaGuardian.co.uk can reveal.

The payment is made up of last year's salary, for 11 months to the end of 
November 2009, of about £510,000, plus an equivalent amount of a full year's 
salary of £580,000 in lieu of notice for 2010, because Duncan was on a one-year 
rolling contract.

Other remuneration included a £255,000 payout under a two-year long-term 
incentive plan, running from July 2007 to July 2009. Duncan agreed to waive 
half the figure he was due under this scheme. The balance is made up of other 
benefits, including pension payments.

Duncan's final pay packet will be revealed when Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> publishes its annual report and 
accounts for 2009 next month.

His remuneration stems from a tortuous mutually agreed departure deal he 
struck with the network's former chairman Luke Johnson last summer, after it 
was clear Duncan's strategy to win financial assistance from the government or 
the BBC had failed.

Duncan, a marketing executive by background, ran Channel 4 between 2004 and 
2009. He championed a move into commercial radio which was cancelled in 2008 
after millions of pounds had been spent on the project.

One of the architects of the Freeview project in his previous job as head of 
marketing at the BBC, Duncan was on surer ground when he took the strategic 
decision to convert E4 and Film4 from subscription to free, with More4 adding 
to the digital mix.

Channel 4's board, now chaired by Lord Burns, has had to delay the annual 
report because of the general election, and the fact there is no parliament 
sitting, but it is keen to distance itself from the previous regime. The new 
chief executive, David Abraham,starts on Tuesday, 4 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2010/apr/22/david-abraham-hello-monkey>
, on a less generous package.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 