
It has been a week of anguish and struggle in Andy Murray’s life. But a 
tortuous, five-set victory over Milos Raonic here on Friday night that pitches 
him into a fifthAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final will have seemed the 
most worthwhile of professional sacrifices.

He could so easily have gone home, to be alongside his father-in-law, Nigel 
Sears,whose collapse in the stands  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/andy-murray-father-in-law-nigel-sears-collapses>
last weekend was seriously distressing for his brother, Jamie, and mother, 
Judy, in Melbourne – and his heavily pregnant wife, Kim, waiting at their home 
in Oxshott, Surrey. He had already pledged to leave Australia if their first 
child arrived early.

Andy Murray beats Milos Raonic in five sets to reach Australian Open final – 
live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-v-milos-raonic-australian-open-2016-semi-final-live>
But this is what he does for a living : suffer on a tennis court – and there 
almost certainly is more to come againstNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> on Sunday. History beckons, 
and Murray has little time for the restrictions of the past. If he beats the 
world No1, he will become the first man in the Open era to win a slam after 
losing four finals at the same venue: against Roger Federer in 2010, and 
Djokovic in 2011, 2013 and 2015.

He was not going to let Raonic, the world No14, stand in the way of that so he 
did his business. He beat Raonic 4-6, 7-5, 6-7 (4-7), 6-4, 6-2 in a tick over 
four hours. The Canadian, struggling with a leg injury himself at the end, 
forced Murray to leave it all on Rod Laver Arena, and now the Scot has the 
challenge of finding enough energy to give the best player in the world a good 
fight on Sunday night.

“It was tough, but in the tie-break he didn’t miss one first serve,” Murray 
said courtside. “He has one of the best serves in tennis but I got a slightly 
better read on it as the match went on. That was the key. He definitely slowed 
down in the fifth set, which was unfortunate for him. He was struggling with 
his movement. You just have to deal with your side of the net as best you can.”

As for his fourth Australian final against Djokovic, he said: “A lot of things 
are important when you’re playing against the best player in the world. I need 
to not have any lapses in concentration. We’ve played a bunch of times here. 
Hopefully this time it can be a different result.”

“I’ve never seen Murray so tied up in a tennis match before,” one of his 
former coaches, Darren Cahill said, as the world No2 was forced, serve after 
serve, to get the ball back as best he could in a tense, high-grade contest, 
sometimes looking like Alastair Cook fending off Dale Steyn.

The opening exchanges flew by in a blur of rasping Raonic head-high snorters, 
a portent of the barrage to follow, as he broke to love then saved three break 
points to hold through deuce with a commanding smash.

Murray, struggling to hold his own in open court, got on the board after 10 
minutes, acing and holding to 15, but these were dangerous moments for the Scot.

While Raonic had slightly the upper hand, it was developing into a intriguing 
battle of wits and muscle between one of the biggest servers in tennis, a 
25-year-old Canadian in his second slam semi, and one of the game’s two or 
three best returners, appearing in his 18th slam semi-final at 28, with two 
majors to his name.

Raonic, second in the tournament aces count only to John Isner, with 84 from 
five matches, was body-serving Murray relentlessly, and the Scot did well to 
get most of them back, although the line judges had trouble seeing a few. There 
was a brief argument over his fourth ace, a 143mph howitzer down the T at 40-30 
in the 10th game, Raonic’s challenge confirming its legality, to seal the set 
after 37 minutes.

Murray needed some easy points on his own serve and an extended run of 
consistency off the ground to capitalise on Raonic’s slowly mounting tally of 
unforced errors – 20 after 50 minutes – but his groundstrokes lacked their 
usual precision.

He cleverly twisted Raonic on the baseline at the net to fashion another break 
point in the fifth game but Raonic escaped for 3-all.

After an hour and 20 minutes, the first real pressure landed on Raonic’s 
racket, as he served to stay in the set. They jousted to deuce, where his big 
serve got him to 5-all.

The last thing Murray needed against such a serving monster was a tie-break, 
so a hold and a break was his best route to levelling the match. He managed the 
former to love, and a cracking crosscourt winner to pass at the net after a 
quality exchange gave Murray set point. Raonic obliged by netting his next 
backhand volley.

The Scot’s relief was palpable, his resolve intact.

Seven of Murray’s eight wins in slam semi-finals went four sets, five from a 
set down. He doesn’t half relish a fight, and he had one here.

When he stepped up to the line in the fifth game of the third set, he brought 
a 16-point winning stretch on his serve. When he went to his chair, it was 19 
on the spin – his sixth hold to love clinched with his fourth ace.

Raonic, still tough to crack on his own serve, smashed a couple of aces for 
3-all, and stopped Murray’s run at 20 points, but couldn’t break him. The Scot 
had gone into full stubborn mode.

After two hours they were dead even – but for the second time in half an hour, 
Raonic was serving to stay in a set. He aced to hold, his sixth of the set, 
12th of the match, as he marginally cut his speed in search of precision.

Raonic had not broken Murray since the first game of the match; two and a 
quarter hours later, he had another look at 5-all in the third – but netted a 
backhand from deep off a Murray drive that clipped the tape. Murray held with 
an outswinger down the T.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e59f5875a17e8ea89ccc30f9839ca56c9970d5%2F446_250_4482_2882%2F4482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray%20battles%20back%20to%20beat%20Milos%20Raonic%20in%20five-set%20Australian%20Open%20semi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%20battles%20back%20to%20beat%20Milos%20Raonic%20in%20five-set%20Australian%20Open%20semi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fandy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e59f5875a17e8ea89ccc30f9839ca56c9970d5%2F446_250_4482_2882%2F4482.jpg>
 Andy Murray in action on his way to victory. Photograph: Joe Castro/AAP 
Raonic blew it at 5-6 in the second. He did not blow it at 5-6 in the third, 
and they went to the tie-break, where Raonic held a 2-1 head-to-head advantage. 
When he made it 3-1 with a 137mph ace down the middle to lead by a set, Raonic 
went to the fourth with a one-set lead and fresh bounce in his slow-moving 
step. It was his match to lose.

Raonic left the court for a five-minute medical timeout at 2-1 up in the 
fourth for treatment to his leg. On his return, he got into a state over a poor 
line call, and said to the chair umpire:“Do your friggin’ job.” It was not 
quite Lleyton Hewitt level of abuse but it was out of character for the 
normally mild-mannered Canadian. The pressure was building on both sides of the 
net.

Murray, 11-18 when down 2-1 in five-set matches but 2-9 in his last 11, badly 
needed a break, and Raonic, becoming visibly agitated, handed it to him in the 
seventh game with a limp netted backhand.

Two poor misses dragged Murray to deuce on his serve, a dumped backhand gave 
Raonic break point, but he saved at the net, celebrating with a multiple 
lawnmower fist-pump, and tidied it up with a forehand into the empty deuce 
corner.

Raonic fought through deuce three times and saved one set point in the ninth 
game before holding with a beautiful drop shot. In the break, he took more 
on-court treatment to his right groin, which appeared to hamper his movement, 
but not dramatically so.

Serving for the set at 5-4, Murray dug himself a 15-40 hole, fought back and 
held with a big serve. They went to the fifth, where he was 18-7 in his career, 
Raonic 6-4. This was Murray Country, no question and, when he broke at the 
start, Raonic smashed a racket. It was as if he sensed what was coming.

Raonic was wilting. His serving power dropped, his movement grew increasingly 
stiff and pained, his temper shortened to the point of combustion. And, 
although he fought to the end, Murray cut him down with all the ruthless intent 
he could muster, a rapier forehand drawing final blood. He had other places to 
be.
 