
In the end it was a bridge too far for Andy Murray in Melbourne – possibly 
even a bridge-and-a-half judging by that stroppily decelerating final set of 
the championship. And, as ever with one of Britain’s most inexplicably 
under-cherished sporting stars, there will be those who react as though 
personally let down by Murray’s inability to push the world No1, Novak 
Djokovic, to the very limits in losing 7–6, 6–7, 6–3, 6–0 in the final of the
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.

Australian Open 2015: Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/01/australian-open-final-2015-novak-djokovic-andy-murray>
Better surely to conclude that Murray had done enough just by walking out once 
again with a racket in his hand on the final Sunday. If this sounds a little 
too British, a little too Pimms-on-Henman Hill, then it is sometimes necessary 
to keep perspective. There is no disgrace in losing to Djokovic. He is, by some 
distance, the most relentlessly creative, physically irrepressible player 
around. Sometimes all-time greats just need to be allowed to win like all-time 
greats.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fandy-murray-frustrated-novak-djokovic-australian-open-final-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F1%2F1422801315252%2Fcrop_KP_83270_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray%20%E2%80%98frustrated%E2%80%99%20after%20losing%20to%20Novak%20Djokovic%20in%20Australian%20Open%20final%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fandy-murray-frustrated-novak-djokovic-australian-open-final-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%20%E2%80%98frustrated%E2%80%99%20after%20losing%20to%20Novak%20Djokovic%20in%20Australian%20Open%20final%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fandy-murray-frustrated-novak-djokovic-australian-open-final-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F1%2F1422801315252%2Fcrop_KP_83270_640x360.jpeg>
 Murray ‘frustrated’ after losing to Djokovic in Australian Open final – video 
For Murray, meanwhile, there is a huge personal significance in simply being 
in the position to notch up a sixth losing major final, and his first in five 
convalescent grand slam events since the 2013 US Open. The last 18 months have 
seen an extended process of retrenchment and reconditioning at the end of which 
the Scot can at least now be sure hispost-surgery physique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/19/andy-murray-surgery-back>, 
pared-down coaching staff and minutely evolving game – a combined entity we 
might call Murray 3.0 – is fit for purpose as he enters the final third of his 
career.

Kim Sears wears Explicit Content T-shirt for Andy Murray’s Australian Open 
final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/01/kim-sears-parental-advisrory-explicit-content-murray>
Hence the extended celebrations after the semi-final win against Tomas Berdych 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/29/andy-murray-tomas-berdych-australian-open>
, Murray taking the applause with a look of relief as much as triumph. This 
time next year Murray will be 28 and creeping up on a decade as British No1, a 
feat of longevity some might suggest is right up there with being crowned the 
tallest smurf in the forest but one that conceals within its decade of 
sustained excellence three separate Murray incarnations.

Murray Mark 1 seems an intriguingly distant figure now, the quirky kid who 
made his professional debut in 2005, slipping in without a ripple as the World 
No405 and the same year reaching the third round at Wimbledon. Reporters at his 
early press conferences recall a vague sense of bafflement at this angular, shy 
teenager with the skinny legs, a Murray-in-progress that was soon to receive a 
thorough and transformative overhaul.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fnovak-djokovic-australian-open-victory-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F1%2F1422806823281%2Fcrop_KP_83330_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Novak%20Djokovic%20on%20%E2%80%98deeper%20meaning%E2%80%99%20of%20Australian%20Open%20victory%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fnovak-djokovic-australian-open-victory-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Novak%20Djokovic%20on%20%E2%80%98deeper%20meaning%E2%80%99%20of%20Australian%20Open%20victory%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fnovak-djokovic-australian-open-victory-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F1%2F1422806823281%2Fcrop_KP_83330_640x360.jpeg>
 Djokovic on ‘deeper meaning’ of Australian Open victory – video 
By the start of 2008 Murray had already begun to mass his armies, the split 
with Brad Gilbert leading into the Rat Pack years, with a revolving team of 
attendants, fluffers and micro-specialists employed to break down his presence 
on court into separate, perfectible compartments. There was still the odd 
levelling off, the lurking note of whimsy – those terrible drop shots, the 
sudden dips in intensity – before Ivan Lendl brought a final veneer of 
orneriness to go with the muscles and ignite the golden spell that culminated in
grand slam victories in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/11/andy-murray-us-open-novak-djokovic1>
 and London.

Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray in Australian Open men's final – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/feb/01/andy-murray-v-novak-djokovic-australian-open-mens-final-live>
And so here we are. Sunday’sfinal in Melbourne provides a note of closure on 
the doldrum period of this latest Murray Mk3. Quite what he can still achieve 
from here remains uncertain. But there is at least a sense of progress towards 
a fresh competitive peak as Murray becomes the last member of the old Big Four 
to reassemble once again at the top of the world rankings.

There is also a slight but significant sense of evolution, of a slightly 
different Murray to come. With the backroom boys dispersed he has reached a 
stage in his careerwhere Amélie Mauresmo’s light-touch approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/31/amelie-mauresmo-mental-approach-andy-murray-australian-open>
 is perhaps exactly what he needs, leaving that champion tennis brain less 
cluttered. The stamina and defensive mobility remain but in his best moments in 
Australia, Murray played a senior statesman’s game, the slice ever thicker, the 
angles acute, the promptings of his own in-game intelligence given full rein, 
so much so that against Berdych and Nick Kyrgios his opponent was often left 
looking like a precocious 10-year-old having an argument with an older brother 
who is always right.

Australian Open men's final: Andy Murray v Novak Djokovic – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/feb/01/australian-open-mens-final-andy-murray-v-novak-djokovic-in-pictures>
Perhaps Murray can even hope for a little wider credit outside his immediate 
fan base.

If Murray’s career tells us anything, it is that the best way to succeed as a 
British tennis player is to get out of British tennis, just as Murray 
extricated himself aged 16 to train at the Sánchez-Casal academy in Barcelona 
(the final straw was learning that his pal Rafael Nadal was training with 
Carlos Moya while Murray was still knocking around with his mum).

Britain’s greatest modern player has, in effect, been in a state of constant 
evolution ever since. The question now is whether Murray has what it takes 
actually to win another grand slam as the big four of his golden years enters 
its own final phase.

It has always been Murray’s way to leave no aspect of his abilities 
unexplored, to wring everything from that angular talent. Third time around we 
can at the very least be sure of more of the same.
 