
A peak audience of more than 5 million viewers watched Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> suffer an agonising defeat in 
his bid to win a second Grand Slam in the Australian Open tennis final on BBC1 
on Sunday morning.

BBC1's live coverage of Murray's four-set defeat to Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/27/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-australian-open>
 averaged 4.1 million viewers, a 38% share of the audience, between 8.15am and 
12.45pm, with a 15-minute peak of 5.1 million between midday and 12.15pm. This 
was up to four times BBC1's typical audience on a Sunday morning.

On Sunday evening, BBC2's Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> returned for its 19th 
series on BBC2 with 5.3 million viewers, a 17.9% share, between 8pm and 9pm, 
including 929,000 viewers on BBC HD.

Top Gear was neck and neck with ITV1's Dancing on Ice: the Skate Off, which 
also had 5.3 million viewers, a 17.4% share, between 8.30pm and 9pm.

Earlier, the main Dancing on Ice show had 7 million viewers (28.8%) between 
6.15pm and 7.45pm.

Top Gear may have given a leg-up to BBC2's latest series with Professor Brian 
Cox, Wonders of Life, which followed it at 9pm.

The first of a five-part series, Wonders of Life had 3.1 million viewers 
(12.3%), including 422,000 viewers onBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
 HD.

At the same time on 9pm, ITV1's Mr Selfridge held the whip hand over BBC1's 
Ripper Street in the battle of the Sunday night dramas.

Mr Selfridge, the fourth of a 10-part run, had 6 million viewers, a 23.6% 
share, ahead of Ripper Street's 5.2 million (20.7%).

Later, BBC1's Holocaust Memorial Day documentary Prisoner Number A26188: Henia 
Bryer was watched by 1.9 million viewers, a 13.3% share, between 10.25pm and 
11.05pm.

Channel 4's terrestrial movie premiere The Fighter, with Christian Bale, was 
watched by 1.2 million viewers (5.9%) between 9pm and 11.20pm.

It was matched by Channel 5's US drama Person of Interest, which also had 1.2 
million viewers (4.8%).

Butter fingers

Earlier, ITV's live coverage of Oldham Athletic's 3-2 fourth round FA Cup 
giant-killing over Liverpool proved a ratings winner with a 15-minute teatime 
peak of nearly 7 million viewers.

FA Cup Live had an average of 4.5 million viewers, a 25.8% share, between 
3.30pm and 6.05pm.

Live coverage of the match itself, which kicked off at 4pm, averaged 5.2 
million with a peak of 6.8 million for its climax between 5.45pm and 6pm.

Popular midwifery

BBC1's Call the Midwife was the most watched programme of the day across all 
channels, with 8.7 million viewers, a 29.6% share, between 8pm and 9pm, down 
from last week's series opener (and all-time high) of 9.3 million.

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk/> overnight figures, including 
live, +1 (except for BBC channels) and same day timeshifted (recorded) viewing, 
but excluding on demand, or other – unless otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, 
ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 generally include ratings for their HD simulcast 
services, unless otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 