
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> maintained his 
hardline stance on Maria Sharapova’s conviction for taking a banned substance – 
on the day she announced her appeal against the two-year ban handed down a week 
ago.

Speaking after he advanced to the second round at Queen’s with a two-set win 
over the Frenchman Nicolas Mahut, the world No2 said: “My thoughts haven’t 
changed really from March [when he condemned the Russian for failing a drug 
test at the Australian Open].I spoke quite a lot about it then 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/10/maria-sharapova-andy-murray-ban-drugs-test-meldonium>
.

“I do feel like if you’re cheating and are caught, and you are gaining 
advantage on your opponents, then you have to be punished for that. It’s not 
what’s fair or not, in terms of time. That’s up to the governing bodies, the 
courts and stuff and the lawyers, to decide. But my view hasn’t changed since 
March at all.”

Andy Murray wins at Queen’s in first match since reuniting with Ivan Lendl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/14/andy-murray-ivan-lendl-queens-win>
Nor would he accept it as a defence for athletes to claim they were ignorant 
of what drugs they were taking, banned or not.

“I don’t really see that as being a valid excuse. If you’re taking any 
medication, it’s your responsibility as the athlete to check and make sure what 
you’re taking is legal. There can be the odd case where, if you were given 
something by a doctor, he tells you, “Oh, this is, I don’t know, a vitamin’, 
and it’s not, then that’s different. But if you’re taking medication, there is 
absolutely no reason why you shouldn’t know whether it’s on the banned list or 
not.”

He said he would not entrust ask his management to monitor what he took, 
either – as Sharapova has done with her agent, Max Eisenbud, who claimed he did 
not alert the player to a warning about the banned drug meldonium because he 
was holidaying during a personal crisis and did not see the emails from the 
InternationalTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Federation.

“No, Dr Turner, who works at the LTA [would inspect any drug he took]. I only 
take an anti-inflammatory now and then if I’m having problems with my back or 
my hips. But he would be the guy I would speak to about that, for sure.”

Murray declined to say if Sharapova should be allowed to compete at the 
Olympics if her appeal, to be heard on or before 18 July, were successful in 
overturning her conviction.

“It’s not up to me to decide what’s appropriate or not. That’s up to whoever 
the governing body is, and I guess it’s Cas [the court of arbitration for 
sport] who are looking into it now, and they will come to a decision. It’s not 
up to me to decide what’s fair or not. But my position and my views on it 
haven’t changed since March one bit.”
 