Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z0nix2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z0nix2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F01z0z0nix2q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Andy Murray put so much into his preparation for this Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, it was cruel to see him 
cut down by a failure to his body that was not entirely of his making. But 
Murray – the big toe on his right foot swathed in bandages and a tight 
hamstring tugging at him too – could hardly object to the ruthless way in which 
Novak Djokovic made him suffer during the closing stages of the four sets they 
played over two hours and 13 minutes. He would have done the same.

In fact, four months ago he did. At Flushing Meadows, it was Murray who 
tortured Djokovic in the final of the US Open, forcing him to run so much in 
the first two sets that his legs were reduced to rubber. On the Rod Laver 
Arena, it was Djokovic's turn as the defending champion forced Murray to twist 
and turn, winning 6-7, 7-6, 6-3, 6-2.

It was plain in the aftermath that Murray's pain ran deeper than that which 
throbbed through his body. He had utterly believed after beating Roger Federer 
in the semi-final that he had Djokovic's measure. Their rivalry is not 
diminished, though. They will play many more finals. This completed Djokovic's 
hat-trick of championships in Melbourne (the first to do so since Roy Emerson), 
and he is back to his roaring best. In three of his four victories overall, he 
has come back from losing the first set. The Serb is some fighter when roused.

"His record here is incredible," Murray said, managing a smile. "Very few 
people have managed to do what he's done, a deserved champion."

Djokovic said: "Congratulations to Andy. We have played so many thrilling 
matches the past two years and there will be many more to come. What a joy, 
it's an incredible feeling to win once more. This is definitely my favourite 
grand slam. I love this court."

Watching Murray and Djokovic play each other is never going to be a night at 
the ballet and, in their second grand slam final in a row, they again dragged 
us through the emotional hedge, their sinews, wills and patience stretched like 
elastic. Murray's body snapped but not his spirit. The quality was not anywhere
near as high as in New York 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/sep/10/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-live>
, where Murray won in four hours 54 minutes, but this was just as tense, a 
closer contest that ebbed throughout.

There was nothing much in it after half an hour. Djokovic applied the more 
menacing pressure, forcing Murray deep and he had to save four break points to 
hold in the sixth game. Djokovic allowed himself a smile after slipping, 
retrieving and then hunting down a chip for 30-15 in the seventh. It was rare 
levity as the contest grew more intense. Djokovic was getting more depth and 
fizz on his ground strokes and Murray had to dig in again to hold in the eighth.

After an hour, the struggle was pretty even, although the edge in power was on 
Djokovic's racket, and Murray had yet to hitthe serving rhythm that had 
destroyed Federer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jan/25/andy-murray-roger-federer-australian-open>
, so he was hugely grateful for a Djokovic double fault at the start of the 
tie-break. It was at that very point that Murray's tennis clicked. The first 
serves went in, the forehands stretched deeper on either wing, and Djokovic 
lost focus, hitting a couple of loose shots under no pressure, the last one 
gifting Murray the set, after 68 minutes.

All tournament, in nearly every set of every match, Murray's serve has been 
strong. In four hours against Federer, he hit 21 aces; this time it took him 
half an hour to hit his first, another hour to hit his second – followed by a 
third within a couple of minutes. The power was there; he just needed to tap 
into it, like a batsman searching for his timing.

And so, a second tie-break: this time Murray cracked and Djokovic's face was a 
mixture of relief and renewed belief when he forced his opponent to net a limp 
backhand and level the score.

During the break between sets, Murray had running repairs on his toe, the gory 
work blown up on the big screen: not an image you would want to linger on. Thus 
hobbled, he resumed the engagement.

The serving cycle had reverted to Djokovic in the third and stayed that way as 
still we waited for a service break. That looked a real possibility in the 
eighth game when Murray pushed a forehand into the tramlines to give Djokovic 
three break points. Murray got back to 30-40 and, not for the first time in 
recent days, a comedian shouted out in his ball toss. He steadied himself for 
the re-set, served and then watched in disbelief as a forehand argued with the 
net before dropping back on his side of the court, and he had given Djokovic a 
chance to serve for the match at 5-3.

When he hit the net again, the ball sat up for Djokovic to put away, 
untroubled. A big serve got him to three set points. Again, a fan chose to 
shout. But Murray hit his return long and Djokovic took the set 6-3 in a 
relatively whizzbang 41 minutes. Murray complained to the umpire about the 
interruptions. It was a reflection of his frustration rather than a realistic 
plea.

He now had a hurting soul and an injured toe. Djokovic broke for 3-1 with 
marionette tennis, pulling Murray this way and that, throwing in teasing drop 
shots among angled ground strokes.

Murray was now in serious trouble but still swinging, like an angry man in a 
pub brawl he knew he could not win. And there was little he could do about the 
wickedly-slashed backhand that left him rooted to the spot on his next service 
game, and he trailed 1-4, with defeat inevitable.

Murray refused to lie down, serving through the pain to stay in the fight at 
5-2 in the fourth. Djokovic was going to have to slide the knife in himself.

Serving for the championship, Djokovic strode imperiously to the net behind a 
solid serve – and dumped the volley on his own side. Ramping down the power on 
the next serve, he could only watch as Murray banged the return down the line. 
When Murray pulled off another miracle get, Djokovic nearly bungled the smash, 
this time the ball dribbling on to Murray's side.

Murray's will was extraordinary, running after lost causes as he might have 
done chasing the last bus home as a child in Dunblane. It was gloriously 
pointless, perhaps, but he did it and the exaltation when Murray stuck his 
final backhand of the tournament into the net was a spectacle to behold.
 