
12.03pm GMT 

Roger Federer's prize is a chat with Jim Courier a place in the semi-final of 
theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. It's 
his first grand slam semi-final since last year's tournament. But to get there, 
he'll have to do something he hasn't achieved since 2007: beat Rafael Nadal in 
a grand slam. It's a tall order but if he plays like this, anything is 
possible. Murray fought so hard but he wasn't at his best physically and the 
consequence was that Federer, with a nifty, bemusing serve-volley gameplan, was 
able to dominate. Nadal will be the favourite, though. Murray? He'll be 
disappointed but he'll perhaps accept it wasn't realistic to win his first 
grand slam back after surgery. He'll regroup and recover and can take heart 
from his refusal to lie down. Thanks for reading. See you tomorrow.

11.58am GMT 

ROGER FEDERER WINS 6-3, 6-4, 6-7, 6-3!

Once again, Roger Federer serves for the match. Is this to be the end? Maybe. 
Maybe not. A thrashing forehand from Murray makes it 0-15 and then a forehand 
pass from Murray makes it 0-30! This guy, honestly. Federer's looking at him 
and thinking, "Why ... won't ... you ... just ... die?" A smash from Federer 
makes it 15-30, though, and then a bouncer of a serve leads to Murray groping 
helplessly at the ball and lobbing it out. 30-all. Murray then sends a forehand 
long to give Federer match point, his third of the match. Surely it's over. 
Surely now. It is. Federer rattles an ace out wide and finally Murray's fight 
is stamped out! The Rod Laver Arena goes wild. You know why? We've got a 
semi-final betweenRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> and Rafael Nadal to look 
forward to.

11.54am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-5 Federer (*denotes server): Murray, low 
down, nets a forehand. Another grimace. A grab of the back. And then he swipes 
a similar forehand wide to make it 0-30, before almost falling over as another 
goes long. 0-40. Three break points. Again. He saves the first with a big serve 
down the middle. He follows that up with a 203kmh ace down the middle. Blimey. 
But he can't save a third! Federer this time waits for the serve, cracks a 
forehand away and although Murray reaches it and gets the ball back, Federer 
drops the shot. Murray sprints forward but Federer is in the right place to put 
the backhand away and quite possibly finish Murray off.

11.49am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-4 Federer* (*denotes server): From 40-0, 
Federer is suddenly dragged back to 40-30 - but holds with a smash. His service 
games are far more comfortable and he's making Murray run a lot. Clever, 
clever."Mark Bender is a splendid name for a physiotherapist for that is what 
he is," says Duncan Critchley. "We physios get quite protective about this sort 
of thing!" Damn you, Eurosport!

11.45am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-3 Federer (*denotes server): After the 
ridiculousness of the second game of this set, the four-hour epic on Murray's 
serve, now they're racing through the games. Murray breezes into a 30-0 lead 
but Federer then drills a forehand down the line to make it 30-15 - Murray 
decides to mount a hilariously inept challenge, just to buy him some time. 
Murray then misses a backhand to make it 30-all, but Federer drops a slice long 
to make it 40-30. But we go to deuce as Federer reads a Murray second-serve, 
runs around it and wallops a forehand past a stranded Scot. Murray's annoyed 
that they're showing his grimaces on the big screen; it's not really on. 
Federer then tries a lob and Murray's awkward volley hits the top of the net 
and lands on his side. It's Federer's seventh break point of the set, but 
Murray shows great positivity to charge forward and punch a volley away. Deuce. 
Oh God. It's happening again. Hold me? Somebody? Murray then comes up with a 
stunning, spinning, looping second serve and Federer nets and then sends a 
backhand wide. Murray holds. Oof. "Is he the most naturally gifted tennis 
player ever?" says Ed Lewis. It's not even a debate.

11.35am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 2-3 Federer* (*denotes server): The 
commentator informs us that Murray's chiropractor is called Mark Bender - he's 
pleased with that and so am I. Federer holds to 15. Here are some nice pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2014/jan/22/australian-open-2014-andy-murray-roger-federer-pictures>
.

11.32am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 2-2 Federer (*denotes server): Last night I 
was at West Ham v Manchester City - paid cash money and everything. It's fair 
to say there's a bit more dramatic tension on offer in this contest than there 
was at Upton Park. Murray holds to love. What a relief for him and, more 
importantly, for me. As I'm sure you'll all agree.

11.28am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 1-2 Federer* (*denotes server): Federer 
holds to love, just what everyone required after the previous mini-marathon.

11.27am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 1-1 Federer (*denotes server): Federer 
slaps a forehand into the corner to make it 0-15 and then charges on to a 
cautious slice - a nothing shot, really - from Murray to put a forehand away 
for 0-30. Murray then nets a forehand to make it 0-40 and I can't stop thinking 
about that forehand he missed at 15-30 in the previous game. He saves the first 
break point with a drop-shot and then Federer nets a return. Murray demands 
that winning ball back. And why the hell not - a storming backhand down the 
line makes it deuce, three break points saved! Then, an ace. Advantage 
Murrance. But we stay on deuce for a while. A Murray forehand down the line 
goes wide, though, and Federer has a fourth break point but nets a backhand. 
What spirit from Murray. He's clearly hurting after all those months out. Only 
natural. On deuce, a second serve from Murray is called out, only for the 
umpire to correct the call. Federer challenges but it was in and it gives 
Murray a first serve, which is a weird rule. Murray takes advantage to gain the 
advantage. Deuce again. Deuce for a while. Tension grows. There's a 22-shot 
rally. Then Federer takes control with a backhand which allows him to finish a 
point with a volley to earn a FIFTH break point - and Murray digs deep to save 
it with a smash! He needed two goes at it, mind you. Deuce. Ace. Then Murray 
misses a volley, taps the net in frustration and breaks the middle of the net! 
Three helpers have to come on to fix it! What a farce! What a moment for farce! 
Finally we're good to go and Murray sends a backhand pass wide to give Federer 
a sixth break point. Sorry, aSIXTH break point. Incredibly Murray saves it with 
an excellent drop-volley that Federer dabs wide. This game. It's gruelling, to 
say the least. I'm tired watching it; imagine how the players feel - more 
tired. But they'll not show it and Murray ekes out the advantage with a 
forehand winner. Will it end? Will it ever end? Federer flays a backhand into 
the corner but Murray reads it and eventually he's able to send an easy 
backhand past Federer. That game took around 20 minutes. Some sets end quicker. 
But what will that hold do to Murray's physical and mental resources? 

11.06am GMT 

Fourth set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 7-6, 0-1 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray took 
a comfort break between sets. And as I write that, I suddenly realise I should 
have taken one. Oh well. Here's hoping for another 63-minute set! Suddenly 
Federer is missing - two shocking errors make it 15-30 to Murray, who then 
wastes a glorious chance to make it 15-30, missing a forehand with Federer 
stranded! 30-all, then. Murray then drags a backhand wide. He'll be rueing that 
miss. Federer sees through the hold with a drop-shot.

11.00am GMT 

ANDY MURRAY WINS THE THIRD SET 7-6 TO TRAIL 2-1 IN SETS

Third-set tie-break: Murray 8-6 Federer* (*denotes server): Federer blinks! He 
thumps a forehand long and we go into a fourth set! What a gloriously stubborn 
git Murray is.

10.59am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray* 7-6 Federer (*denotes server): Brilliant 
forehand! Brilliant! Murray finds the line and he has a set point, albeit on 
the Federer serve. Federer challenges but to no avail.

10.58am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray* 6-6 Federer (*denotes server): Murray to serve. 
He misses his first serve. Trouble. But Federer wonks a backhand wide! Two 
match points are saved! Murray played them superbly, pinning Federer back. 

10.57am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray 5-6 Federer* (*denotes server): A baseline rally. 
No one's budging. It's completely even ... and then Murray hits a brutal 
forehand and Federer blocks his forehand wide! One more match point.

10.55am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray 4-6 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray stretches 
with a kicker of a second serve and sends his backhand long. Two match points.

10.55am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray* 4-5 Federer (*denotes server): A big forehand 
down the line from Murray and Federer slices into the net. But Federer has two 
serves and needs two points.

10.54am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray* 3-5 Federer (*denotes server): Federer nets a 
forehand return.

10.53am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray 2-5 Federer* (*denotes server): A Murray return 
dribbles into the net. Brilliant serving from Federer, who sliced it out wide.

10.52am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray 2-4 Federer* (*denotes server): Outstanding 
defence from Federer denies Murray, who hit some superbly angled forehands, and 
eventually Murray smacks one long. Huge.

10.51am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray* 2-3 Federer (*denotes server): A second serve ... 
and wouldn't you know it, Murray sends a backhand long. The first mini-break 
goes to Federer.

10.50am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray* 2-2 Federer (*denotes server): No messing from 
Murray as he batters a smash away.

10.50am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray 1-2 Federer* (*denotes server): An ace from 
Federer. Murray challenges but it caught the line.

10.49am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray 1-1 Federer* (*denotes server): A second serve but 
Murray's too tight and his backhand goes long.

10.48am GMT 

Third-set tie-break: Murray* 1-0 Federer (*denotes server): A forehand winner 
of the serve from Murray, a good start.

10.48am GMT 

Third set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 6-6 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray could 
probably do without a tie-break given that he's lost all three of the ones he's 
played previously against Federer at the Australian Open. So, if he could just 
break again, that would be dandy. But it's soon 30-0. Two more good serves sees 
Federer hold to love - and that accuracy is why he'll probably win this 
tie-break.

10.45am GMT 

Third set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 6-5 Federer (*denotes server): Right. This match 
has been light on drama but we've just had our first dollop of the stuff and 
now Murray's fist-pumping and he has the crowd on his side. They'd like a 
classic, if possible. Classic please! Thanks! Ta! We go to 15-all. Federer nets 
a backhand. 30-15. Federer, duped by a change of direction, then sends a 
backhand into the net and it's 40-15. And then a return goes long. Murray has a 
tie-break at least. Wellity wellity wellity. Now Federer has to serve to stay 
in the third set. Will losing that last game play on his mind? Stay tuned, 
people, stay tuned, don't go changing the channel!

10.41am GMT 

Third set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 5-5 Federer* (*denotes server):Andy Murray has not 
had a single break point in the entire match and now he needs to break to stop 
Federer from winning. No biggie. Piece of cake. And would you look at this - 
two errors from Federer makes it 0-30! I believe it's the first time he's had 
0-30. That sums it all up and Federer immediately brings it back to 15-30 with 
a huge serve but then Federer sends a backhand long to give Murray two break 
points! At last, he has some break points. What now? What now is that Federer 
saves the first with a smash. He's still ice-cool. No nerves there, at least 
not to the naked eye. The next point is a war of attrition - and Federer 
eventually hits long! Murray breaks! Wow. As I said, piece of cake.

10.37am GMT 

Third set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 4-5 Federer (*denotes server): Lose this game and 
Murray's cooked. At 15-all, Murray has a look of amazement on his face. He 
thought he'd won the point with a spinning volley - there was nothing wrong 
with it - but Federer skates forward and somehow scoops the ball over Murray 
before it bounces a second time. Murray reaches - and he can't get there! 
Incredible! 15-30. And a miss from Murray makes it 15-40 to give Federer two 
break points. They're effectively match points - and Murray cracks, netting a 
forehand! Oh dear. Murray is cooked. That shot at 15-all, though. Is this guy 
for real? Is he human? This superman, this alien, this Federer will serve for 
the match. What a joy it's been to watch him play today.

10.33am GMT 

Third set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 4-4 Federer* (*denotes server): Still, there's no 
hope of a break for Murray. Federer's serving is aggressive that it's 
impossible for Murray, who's such a good returner, to get a foothold in the 
first three points. But with nothing to lose, he whacks a forehand winner down 
the line off a serve. 40-15. Net-based shenanigans follow, the pair trading 
volleys before a Murray smash almost takes off Federer's head. 40-30. But 
Federer won't let him any closer than that. He smashes a forehand away and he 
holds. 

10.28am GMT 

Third set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 4-3 Federer (*denotes server): Federer nets a 
backhand to make it 15-0, but Murray then gets in a tangle trying to slice. 
15-all. Pounding groundstrokes from Murray make it 40-15, though, and Federer 
then nets another backhand. Federer He's playing better in this set. But 
Federer remains betterer.

10.24am GMT 

Third set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 3-3 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray has changed 
shirts. He's in white now, a blue stripe across his shoulders. Federer is 
clearly unnerved by these sartorial mind games and shanks a forehand at 15-0. 
But he manages to survive this excruciating mental test and yet more stunning 
play at the net makes it 40-15. He then leaves a Murray looper which lands long 
and he holds. Federer has been granite on serve.

Updated at 10.26am GMT

10.21am GMT 

Third set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 3-2 Federer (*denotes server): Federer has come 
to the net around 35 times. He's playing 20th century tennis in the 21st 
century and he's winning! Isn't evolution, even back-to-the-future evolution, 
great? Murray holds to 30. There are a few signs he's giving Federer more to 
think about. But now he has to do something when returning."You're right about 
Murray's fitness levels," says Simon McMahon. "Andy in five."

Updated at 10.28am GMT

10.17am GMT 

Third set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 2-2 Federer* (*denotes server): It's all very well 
holding in dogged style, though, but Murray also needs to break and he's not 
had a chance to do so yet. Partly that's because Federer has played well but 
also because he's produced some dreadfully lame shots at key moments. Federer 
holds to love. Didn't take long.

Updated at 10.28am GMT

10.14am GMT 

Third set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6, 2-1 Federer (*denotes server): Mats Wilander is 
analysing Murray's backhand and concluding that it's not as strong after 
surgery on his back. Probably right. You'd hope that power will return with 
time. It's such a weapon, but not today. From 30-0 down, Federer gets back to 
30-all and then scorches a forehand down the line to earn a break point. Murray 
screams at himself for targeting the forehand. At least he knows - but he can't 
stop himself in the heat of the action. He saves this break point with some 
forceful play, though. Deuce becomes advantage Murray after an ace, and he 
holds as a Federer return goes long. He won't lie down. You don't win grand 
slams by lying down and Murray has won grand slams (Federer has won more, 
though).

Updated at 10.28am GMT

10.09am GMT 

Third set: Murray 3-6, 4-6, 1-1 Federer* (*denotes server): It'll be 
interesting to see whether Federer can sustain this level against an opponent 
who is so physically fit. You can be sure that Murray won't tire, even if he is 
outplayed. He also doesn't look as anxious as he used to in the pas, perhaps 
the consequence of his success. But the bloke on the other side of the net also 
doesn't look particularly flustered. He lost the first point but an ace seals 
this game to 15.

Updated at 10.28am GMT

10.06am GMT 

Third set: Murray* 3-6, 4-6 1-0 Federer (*denotes server): Murray has come 
back to win from two sets down seven times in his career but never against this 
opponent. I'm trying to think of times it's Federer has lost from this position 
- I can't think of anything more than against Tsonga at Wimbledon in 2011 and 
Djokovic in the US Open in 2011. Any more? Do share. I think that's it, though. 
And while I'm pondering that, Federer carves out a chance for an instant break 
in this third set, a gorgeous flicked backhand confounding Murray and making it 
15-40. For the first time in the match, though, Murray saves a break point with 
a pinpoint forehand and then Federer sends a slice long to bring it back to 
deuce. Federer then gets a third chance with a volley at the net. He's 21 from 
29 trips to the net. Murray saves a third break point with a two-handed 
backhand volley down the line. A big serve from Murray follows and then thumps 
a forehand winner away to hold. Boy, did he need that? Yes, answers boy, he 
needed that.

Updated at 10.09am GMT

9.58am GMT 

Roger Federer wins the second set 6-4 to lead 2-0 in sets

A bizarre start to this game as Murray somehow retrieves a Federer forehand 
that really should be a winner. Federer thinks it's going out and watches it 
all the way, only for it to land just inside the baseline. Once it does, he's 
in a spot of bother and Murray is able to punish a forehand into the corner for 
0-15. Federer responds in the best way, a big serve and a charge into the net 
for 15-all. A huge, swerving Federer forehand is enough to win the next rally 
to make it 30-15. Two more points - but then he shanks a backhand long to make 
it 30-all. Mats Wilander notes that Federer's first-serve percentage is 
falling. This game is crucial. There follows a ridiculously long rally but 
Federer won't budge an inch and Murray blinks first, going for a big backhand 
winner and missing. It's not happening for him. It is happening for Federer. 
Set point. And Murray thumps a forehand long! Federer leads by two sets! He's 
surely on his way to a semi-final against Rafael Nadal now - he's never lost 
from this position against Murray before.

9.51am GMT 

Second set: Murray* 3-6, 4-5 Federer (*denotes server): Murray's in a 
pick-pick-pickle <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c6DjN_QrcOs>. He has to hold 
to stay in the second set. He wins the first point, though. Onwards and 
upwards. This is on! And then it's off, a Murray forehand going wide. Bah. And 
then it's on again, Federer netting a forehand, Murray staying in the point 
with excellent defensive work. 30-15. Murray then totally mis-hits a forehand 
to make it 30-all, though, slashing at the ball like a park player, or me. But 
Murray holds. Now to break. To do so, he will need to earn his first break 
point of the match.

9.46am GMT 

Second set: Murray 3-6, 3-5 Federer* (*denotes server): We have new balls and 
an error from Federer makes it 15-30. Another wee chance for Murray to test 
Federer's serve then - but he wafts a tame backhand long off a second serve. 
Dismal. What a waste. "Stupid!" he shouts. He knows. 30-all becomes 40-30 as 
another Murray backhand goes long. He's tied up in knots. Another Murray 
forehand whizzes long and Federer holds.

9.41am GMT 

Second set: Murray* 3-6, 3-4 Federer (*denotes server): Oh, this is just too 
good. It's not fair! At 15-all, Murray must think he's won the point with a 
pass but even though Federer's wrong-footed and almost slipping over, he keeps 
his balance and produces a volleyed backhand winner. Murray demonstrates his 
resolve by bringing it back to 40-30 and then finds an ace to hold. Just the 
one break, then.

9.38am GMT 

Second set: Murray 3-6, 2-4 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray's taken his cap 
off. He means business. Now Federer's in trouble. Oh, he's in trouble. Or not. 
A blink from me and it's 40-15. But Murray drags it back to deuce, a lob from 
him and a missed slice from Federer making it so. This is the first time 
Federer has really had to work to hold and Murray's digging in but he doesn't 
need this, a battered forehand in the net to give Federer the advantage. An ace 
down the middle seals the hold. Murray hasn't had one break point yet.

9.32am GMT 

Second set: Murray* 3-6, 2-3 Federer (*denotes server): Savour Federer in this 
form; a huge forehand from Murray into the corner should be the end of the 
first point but Federer not only reaches it but sends back an amazing scooped 
backhand. Murray's in trouble - but then Federer raps a forehand into the net. 
Huh? 15-0. That turns into 15-all, but Murray finds an ace at a good moment - 
but Federer levels it at 30-all and Murray then nets an inside-out forehand to 
give Federer a break point. Big moment. MASSIVE MOMENT. And Murray, drive to 
distraction by Federer, goes for too much on his forehand and pings it wide. 
Federer breaks and he's in danger of running away with this match. "With 
Djokovic out, Nadal looking a bit out of sorts and Berdych v Wawrinka (who I 
really hope gets to the final), what do you think are the chances of the winner 
of the tournament coming out of this match Jacob?" says Kevin Comber. Nadal's 
going to win. Murray's not in the right shape to win a slam, I think, and it's 
hard to see Federer beating Nadal over five sets.

9.27am GMT 

Second set: Murray 3-6, 2-2 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray hops and 
admonishes himself after missing a chance on a second serve. 15-0. But two 
misses follow from Federer to make it 15-30. Interesting. Very interesting. 
This is the first time Murray's put any real pressure on Federer's ser... oh, 
wait, 30-all, a pummelling forehand down the line from Federer. Forget I said 
anything. A wide serve then draws an error from Murray and Federer holds.

9.23am GMT 

Second set: Murray* 3-6, 2-1 Federer (*denotes server): Wow. Murray's at the 
net and Federer sends his backhand pass wide. 15-0.Murray, reprieved, reaches 
into a box of tricks and produces a sublime backhand lob to make it 30-0 - so 
Federer responds by with a magical, stretching forehand winner down the line to 
make it 30-15. Federer then blooters a forehand long to make it 40-15. Murray 
holds to 30.

9.18am GMT 

Second set: Murray 3-6, 1-1 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray's gradually 
feeling his way into this, but whacks a forehand long at 15-all, and Federer 
takes advantage with some solid serving. Murray's not being given a look on 
Federer's serve. "I was a simpleton last Saturday evening at Melbourne Park." 
says Matthew Hall. "We turned up 1hr before play was due to start but because 
of woeful crowd control at Hisense Arena, our night session match began with 
the court virtually empty and most of the crowd left outside. We eventually 
were admitted once the first set was pretty much over. Reading your post I 
couldn't help but think tonight's simpletons had undergone a similar 
experience." 

9.15am GMT 

Second set: Murray* 3-6, 1-0 Federer (*denotes server): As well as Federer 
played in that first set, it was also poor from Murray. That was bad old 
Murray. Passive Murray. The Murray of the 2008 US Open final or the 2010 
Australian Open final. He has won grand slams because he has attacked and 
sitting back against Federer isn't going to work. At 30-all, some absurdity: 
Federer tries a lob, Murray hits an overhead backhand volley, the pair trade 
blows and then Federer nets a forehand. An ace from Murray seals an important 
hold.

"The Hewitt match you refer to was the 2004 USO final, which Federer won 6-0 
7-6- 6-0," says Amar Breckenridge. "Hewitt was a warrior, and came into that 
match not having dropped a set, but I still remember the look of utter terror 
in his eyes as the first 8 games passed him by. It was a bit like Bambi vs 
Godzilla. I don’t think Fed is back at that level, I just think Andy is a bit 
off the pace as you would imagine he might be after major surgery. Lots to play 
for still – Stan looked overwhelmed by Djokovic in the first set yesterday."

Here it is, if you've got a spare 90 minutes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGe17unv-XrI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGe17unv-XrI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGe17unv-XrI&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGe17unv-XrI&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGe17unv-XrI>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGe17unv-XrI&media=>
close 
9.10am GMT 

Roger Federer wins the first set 6-3

Murray needs something big here and he almost gets it on the first point. 
Federer fails to put away a smash and Murray batters a forehand back, only for 
Federer to pick it up and Murray to net at the net. More volleying magnificence 
from Federer, who's making it up as he goes along, but in a good way, makes it 
30-0. Cat-and-mouse baseline tennis follows. And then Federer pounces, 
absolutely creaming an inside-out forehand into the corner. "Come on!" he 
bellows. Hello! He's up for this! He sure is up for this! Where have you been 
these past few years, then? Nice to have you back, Roger. Three set points. And 
he only needs one, Murray netting a backhand. That was scarily good from 
Federer. But then he is the GOAT.

9.06am GMT 

First set: Murray* 3-5 Federer (*denotes server): So, Murray has to hold serve 
to stay in the first set, and he begins it by clunking a backhand into the net. 
0-15. Whoops. Federer then misses two backhand returns, though, and some 
offensive play from Murray makes it 40-15 and Federer nets one more backhand.

9.02am GMT 

First set: Murray 2-5 Federer* (*denotes server): If you watch old vidoes of 
Federer, especially on hard courts, there are matches in which his opponent did 
not have a clue, in which they hardly won a point - there was one such game 
against Lleyton Hewitt at the Australian Open in 2004 or 2005. It was 
preposterous. Look it up, I don't have time. Point is, I'm reminded of those 
moments now, because he is playing some supreme tennis at the moment. A 
backhand lands plum on the line. 15-0. Murray brings it back to 15-all but is 
then unnerved by Federer sneaking forward, sending a backhand long. 30-15. He 
makes up for it with a cracking backhand winner to make it 30-all but Federer 
wins the next with a lovely drop-volley. He holds as Murray, dragged hither and 
tither across the baseline, whacks a desperate forehand miles past the 
baseline. Murray is being being taken to school! He's being taken to tennis 
school!

8.58am GMT 

First set: Murray* 2-4 Federer (*denotes server): Now then, Murray could do 
without being broken again,says your resident Professor in Stating the Bleedin' 
Obvious. Problem is how poor his second serve is. Federer is gobbling it up and 
he'll be delighted to see how passive Murray is being. That;s never a good look 
on him. It almost cost him against Fernando Verdasco, for example, at 
Wimbledon. A Federer backhand makes it 0-15, but Murray levels it up with an 
easy forehand pass. A big serve makes it 30-15. Federer then slashes a sort of 
sliced drop-shot into the corner - a shot only he'd make - and Murray bends a 
forehand wide. 30-all. Federer comes forward again, planting a backhand volley 
into the corner, but this is too good from Murray, a forehand down the line on 
the run. 40-30. Federer then knocks a return long.

Updated at 8.58am GMT

8.54am GMT 

First set: Murray 1-4 Federer* (*denotes server): Murray nets two returns to 
make it 30-0. Federer is serving accurately and he's hitting his groundstrokes 
with murderous intent. Murray is going to have to play extremely well to 
extract himself from this pickle of a situation. Though, in this sort of mood, 
he might also require Federer's level to drop. It has been known to happen. Not 
yet, though. Federer holds to 15, racing through the points, skipping through 
them as if he's got a prior engagement he really does need to get to, awfully 
sorry, old boy.

8.52am GMT 

First set: Murray* 1-3 Federer (*denotes server): The umpire admonishes 
latecomers, telling them to "find any seat from now". But these simpletons are 
absolutely determined to find their seat. Only their seat will do. Have to have 
their seat, even though they couldn't be bothered to get there for the start. 
So the players wait. Once we resume, Murray thumps an ace out wide for 15-0. 
Federer raises the stakes by attacking the second serve, rasping a forehand 
into the corner that is returned into the net for 15-all. Federer's finding his 
angles nicely. He takes a backhand early and hits a flat diagonal from left to 
right. Murray scampers after it but Federer is there to put away the smash. 
Federer is in the mood, ominously so, and he earns the first two break points 
with a clever one-two, wrongfooting Murray with a forehand and then putting 
away the volley at the net. Murray then plops a forehand long and Federer 
breaks! It's been coming, you'd have to say. Murray is yet to get going. He'd 
better think about getting going sharpish.

8.47am GMT 

First set: Murray 1-2 Federer* (*denotes server): There's a feeling this one 
is unfolding slowly, taking its time to come to the boil. Be patient, friends. 
Federer quickly races into a 30-0 lead and then rattles down another ace, this 
time down the middle, for 40-0. Then Murray goes on the front foot, jabbing 
away a volley to make it 40-15, but Federer then wrong-foots his foe with a 
feathery forehand at the net to hold. Meanwhile Barney Ronay knows what he 
wants.
Barney Ronay (@barneyronay) 
@JacobSteinberg <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg> come on Steinberg. I want 
13-11 in the fifth at least one major injury break two smashed rackets and a 
weeping Lendl
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/425910121491750913> January 22, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/425910121491750913> 
8.44am GMT 

First set: Murray* 1-1 Federer (*denotes server): The court isn't full up yet. 
Imagine having a ticket for this and not using it. Anyway. Murray to serve. He 
loses the first point after a lengthy rally, flapping a backhand into the net, 
and it's soon 0-30 as he pulls one wide. Hmm. Murray looks slightly 
underpowered and Federer looks relaxed. A big serve which Federer blocks long 
gets him out of a hole, though. 15-30. He misses a first serve and a second 
serve clips the not of the net and lands just inside the baseline! My! Federer 
then nets a forehand, though Murray is not striking the ball with much venom. 
He makes it 40-30 when Federer whips a forehand line and then Federer drops a 
backhand wide. Not far from being a winner, though. That's an excellent hold 
from Murray from 0-30 down.

8.39am GMT 

First set: Murray 0-1 Federer* (*denotes server): Here we go then. If you own 
a hat and you are currently wearing it, then hold on to it. Firmly. It's 
Federer to serve first - and he's removed his red tracksuit top to reveal a 
blue shirt, the crafty bugger. Murray starts well, drilling a classic backhand 
down the line for 0-15, a good sign, but then hits a forehand wide under 
pressure. Federer then serves excellently to make it 30-15, before Murray's 
attempted backhand pass drifts inches past the baseline. Federer wasn't too 
sure about leaving that. No matter, it was out. And Federer polishes off a 
comfortable hold with an ace, the first of many, no doubt.

8.35am GMT 

"Whoa dude," says Peter McLeod. "Big call. That's just quite a strange thing 
to read, you know? I mean, clearly, Federer's best best was better than 
Murray's best best, right? And while Federer probably won't play like he could 
in, say, 2007, who can say what Federer's best now is?"

Whatever it is, it's not been good enough in the last year or so. As I say, 
Murray is currently the better player. Who would win if this was Current Murray 
v 2003-10 Federer? Obviously Federer. But this is 2013 Federer. 

8.32am GMT 

Tok! Tok! Tok! They're knocking up. The Rod Laver Arena is filling up nicely. 
What a match we've got in prospect here.

8.31am GMT 

The players are out. Murray is in blue, Federer is in red. If we're going for 
a Chelsea v Manchester United vibe here, or a Manchester City v Manchester 
United vibe, or an Everton v Manchester United vibe, then Federer is in trouble.

8.28am GMT 

"The heat getting to you, is it, Jacob?" methinks Ian MacCandless Carry. 
"Murray at his best is now better than Federer at his best." Putting your neck 
on the line there, methinks."

Incontrovertible fact, methinks. Murray has won two grand slams and Olympic 
gold since Federer last won his and has been to a final and a quarter-final. In 
that time, Federer has not reached a final and was knocked out of Wimbledon in 
the second round and the US Open in the fourth round. So there. Also, I'm in 
London, so no, the heat is definitely not getting to me. 

8.19am GMT 

"Morning Jacob," says Simon McMahon. "Murray might be playing down his 
chances, as you seem to be yourself, but you're not fooling me. Andy to win in 
four. C'MON ANDY!!!"

It's tight, of course. Murray at his best is now better than Federer at his 
best. But it remains to be seen if he's in the right place to beat Federer, who 
won't need much encouragement to seize the initiative if he senses that Murray 
is playing tentatively.

8.13am GMT 

Enjoy while we wait: the best points from Murray v Federer last year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcynrv0ZgvNc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcynrv0ZgvNc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcynrv0ZgvNc&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcynrv0ZgvNc&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcynrv0ZgvNc>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dcynrv0ZgvNc&media=>
close 
1.09pm GMT 

Crash! Bang! Wallop! That's the sound of one of the big guns hurtling out of 
this Australian Open and one more - for Roger Federer remains a bazooka in a 
world of revolvers despite his middling form in the past few years - is 
guaranteed to go today. Now we've reached the last eight, this tournament is 
hotting up all right, and finally not because of the weather. Yesterday Novak 
Djokovic, the four-time champion, was slain at last by the magnificent 
Stanislas Wawrinka - what a backhand on him, eh - and today one ofAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> or Federer is bound to follow. 
What a changing landscape we've got on our hands, with young Grigor Dmitrov 
giving him quite the scare in today's other quarter-final.

But Nadal is through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/22/rafael-nadal-grigor-dimitrov-australian-open>
 and will face the winner of this match. Who that will be is an intriguing 
question. Before the US Open, I would have been certain in telling you that 
Murray would win comfortably. But nothing is certain these days. Murray has not 
hit the heights since winning Wimbledon, which was perhaps to be expected, and 
is still regaining his sharpness after surgery on his back. He has looked in 
good nick in Australia, though, and beat Federer in the semi-final here last 
year, one of the most one-sided five-setters you'll ever see. He also has an 
11-9 winning record against Federer and there can be no argument that he's been 
the better player over the last couple of years. 

Then again, he has a 3-1 losing record against Federer in grand slams, two of 
those defeats coming in the final of this tournament. And did you see Federer 
against Jo-Wilfried Tsonga on Monday? My word. A masterclass. A 
tantalising glimpse of the glory days of old. He's still a genius, he's still 
got it, and that bigger racket seems to be suiting him perfectly. Murray will 
have his work cut out if Federer plays like that again – equally this is a 
different level of opposition compared to Tsonga, who has dipped since losing 
in the French Open. I make Federer the slight favourite but it's so tight. Get 
ready for more fireworks.

Play begins: soon.

Updated at 7.42am GMT
 