
Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby>, the man 
running HBOS when it had to be rescued by Lloyds Bank in 2008, has taken his 
third job since leaving the lender – this time with a small online and mail 
order pharmaceuticals business.

The former wunderkind of British business, who unexpectedly quit his 
£1m-a-year comeback job as chief executive of healthcare group Alliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/25/andy-hornby-quits-alliance-boots>
 last year, is to take a "two to three day a month" role as non-executive 
chairman of a private company called Pharmacy2U.

Daniel Lee, the firm's managing director and founder, said: "We are delighted 
to welcome Andy Hornby as the new chairman of Pharmacy2U's board of directors 
and look forward to benefiting from his experience of the pharmacy industry and 
online retail businesses. The imminent transition to electronic prescriptions 
across the NHS represents an exciting opportunity for Pharmacy2U, and Andy's 
insights and leadership will be of significant value in helping us meet the 
challenges ahead."

Lee refused to disclose Hornby's salary – or the size of the equity stake in 
the company that he will now be gifted. He added that while the company was not 
currently planning a sale or a flotation, "ultimately we are trying to achieve 
shareholder value to be realised for shareholders in the business".

Hornby was said to be shattered by the near collapse of HBOS, but swiftly 
returned with the job at Alliance Boots. However, before he celebrated his 
second anniversary in the role he quit, with insiders saying he was struggling 
with stress. Four months laterhe became boss of the bookmaker Coral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/18/andy-hornby-new-boss-coral>.

His latest position follows the publication earlier this year of a damning 
critique by the Financial Services Authority into the way Bank of Scotland, an 
HBOS division, was run. The regulator stated that the bank only escaped a "very 
substantial penalty" because the taxpayer would have had to foot the bill as it 
found it guilty of "very serious misconduct" in the run up to its taxpayer 
bailout and rescue by Lloyds Banking Group. While the FSA made it clear that it 
had now closed its investigation into the bank, it added it wasleaving the door 
open to action against individuals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/09/bank-of-scotland-fsa-serious-misconduct>
.

In its most recent accounts, Pharmacy2U showed pre-tax profits of £740,000 in 
the year to March 2011, down from £844,000 the previous year. Revenues rose 
slightly to £19.96m from £19.52m.

The company's largest single shareholder is technology group Emis, which owns 
just under 20% of the company, followed by Lee and his wife Andrea, with around 
15% and Barrie Haigh, whose 14% holding is part of an £185m fortune made from 
farming and pharmaceuticals, according to this year's Sunday Times Rich List.
 