
Andy Flower has accepted the ultimate responsibility for England's Ashes 
shambles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/05/ashes-2013-14-australia-england--whitewash>
 in resigning as the Test team director but said his main reason for doing so 
was to allow a new coach to lead the rebuilding process across all formats and 
"ensure complete clarity and continuity across the squads".

That would seem to leave Ashley Giles, who has been in charge of the 50-over 
and Twenty20 teams since November 2012 marking him out as Flower's obvious 
successor, in pole position â€“ despite the poor performances that continued with 
aheavy T20 defeat in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/31/australia-england-twenty20-worst-tour-performance>
 on Friday, hours before Flower's departure was confirmed.

But in a statement issued through the England and Wales Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board which revealed that he was in 
the "advanced stages" of discussions over a new administrative role, probably 
based in Loughborough, Flower was unequivocal that Alastair Cook should remain 
as captain.

"Following the recent very disappointing Ashes defeat it is clear to me that 
this is now time for England cricket, led by Alastair Cook, to rebuild with a 
new set of values and goals," said Flower, who informed Paul Downton, the ECB's 
new managing director of England cricket, of his desire to stand down in a 
meeting at Lord's on Thursday. "The opportunity to start with a clean slate and 
begin to instil methods to ensure England cricket is moving in the right 
direction will be an incredibly exciting challenge for someone but I do not 
feel I am in a position to undertake that challenge.

"In order for England cricket to make significant progress I believe that the 
team director, together with the respective captains, needs to be responsible 
across all formats in order to positively influence the rebuilding process. 
This will ensure complete clarity and continuity across the squads and, having 
stepped aside from the limited overs squads 14 months ago, that is not 
something I am able to do and I do not therefore feel that starting the process 
would be in the best interests of all involved at what is a pivotal time for 
England cricket.

"This has been a very difficult decision to make and I remain committed to 
England cricket and would like to wish Alastair Cook and Paul Downton every 
success. I will remain in my position as a selector for the time being and am 
currently exploring possible roles within the ECB. The priority must now be to 
establish the direction and personnel needed to ensure England cricket moves 
forward."

That statement invited further conjecture about Kevin Pietersen's future with 
England, at least in Test cricket. He has also met Downton as part of the 
inquest into what went wrong in Australia, even though Downton does not 
officially start his job until Monday.

The Pietersen picture should become clearer this week when England name their 
squad for 50-over and T20 matches in the West Indies, which will then lead into 
the T20 World Cup. He is still expected to be in that squad but the uncertainty 
over his Test future will need to be resolved, for the sake of all parties, 
before the Indian Premier League auction on 12 February.

Flower's statement would seem to represent two major changes of heart. The 
decision to introduce a separate limited-overs coaching job was made largely to 
ease the workload on him and less than a month ago, in the immediate aftermath 
of England's fifth-Test defeat in Sydney, he told the BBC: "I'd love a part in 
rebuilding English cricket ... as the coach."

There have been suggestions for some time that he would stand down after the 
Ashes tour, whatever the result, but they were regularly denied by ECB 
officials, with the chief executive, David Collier, recently backing him to 
continue until the next Ashes series in 2015.

That was largely because of his outstanding record in almost five years as 
coach before this winter. He took the job in exacting circumstances in early 
2009 after Pietersen effectively ousted Peter Moores from the job but also cost 
himself the captaincy, and England were all out for 51 in his first match in 
caretaker charge in the West Indies. But from those grim beginnings Flower 
steered England to three Ashes victories and the top of the world Test 
rankings, as well as a World T20 triumph.

"Andy has been the most successful coach in England's history," said Downton, 
adding that the ECB was "very disappointed to see him leave the role as team 
director".

Giles Clarke, chairman of the ECB throughout Flower's tenure, added: "Andy 
Flower has not only shown himself to be a coach of great quality but also a man 
of great integrity. He has led England to great successes during his reign as 
team director and I look forward to his continued input in the ECB's coaching 
structure.

"I am sure he will be every bit as successful in that role as he has been in 
his five years as England Team Director. I thank him for his contribution to 
England's cricketing history and wish him well in the future and his continued 
role in England's cricketing success."
 