
Singer Andy Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/andy-williams> has 
died after suffering from bladder cancer. He was 84.

Williams, who was one of the most popular vocalists of the 60s, died at home 
in Branson, Missouri, on Tuesday. He owned the Moon River theatre there, named 
after one of hissignature songs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=flm4xcOyiCo> 
(written by Johnny Mercer and Henry Mancini).

Williams was also well-known in the 70s and 80s for his Christmas TV specials 
in the US, and hosted the Grammys, the Golden Globes and the People's Choice 
awards many times. Former president Ronald Reagan once called him "a national 
treasure".

The singer broke the news of his illness himself 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/nov/07/andy-williams-bladder-cancer> at 
the Moon River theatre last November. Organisers had warned that he might not 
perform at the annual Andy Williams Christmas Show after he had cancelled a 
series of gigs owing to an unspecified illness. When he did appear on stage, he 
was met with a standing ovation.

"I do have cancer of the bladder," Williams told the crowd. "[But] people with 
cancer are â€¦ kicking it, and they're winning more and more every year. And I'm 
going to be one of them." He then performed The Christmas Song (Chestnuts 
Roasting on an Open Fire), promising to celebrate the 75th anniversary of his 
singing career in 2012.

Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/embed/flm4xcOyiCo>

Williams is survived by his wife, Debbie, and his three children by ex-wife 
Claudine Longet. Williams and Longet divorced in 1975; the following year she 
was charged with fatally shooting her boyfriend, alpine ski racer Spider Sabich 
in Aspen, Colorado. Williams made headlines as he stood by her side throughout 
the public trial.

Besides 18 hit singles in the US, the singer enjoyed considerable success in 
the UK, scoring 14 top 25 singles including two hit reissues in the last 15 
years.
 