
Andy Hornby, the former chief executive of HBOS, has stepped down from the 
board ofHome Retail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/homeretailgroup> 
Group, which controls the Argos and Homebase retail chains.

Hornby's resignation as a non-executive director comes just a week after the 
former bank boss – whose career in business had looked over as a result of the 
HBOS bail-out – wasnamed as the new chief executive of Alliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/14/andy-hornby-alliance-boots-bos-crash>
. In his new role he will have a salary package of some £800,000 a year.

In a statement to the stock exchange, HRG said Hornby was leaving because 
"there would be a clear conflict by continuing to serve on the Board of Home 
Retail Group".

Oliver Stocken, chairman of HRG, said that Hornby had made a "significant 
contribution … as a retailer and a business leader" over the years. Stocken 
added: "He leaves with our gratitude and respect. (We) wish him every success 
in his new role."

Hornby, along with his HBOS chairman Lord Stevenson and their counterparts at 
Royal Bank of Scotland, Sir Fred Goodwin and Sir Tom McKillop, arethe four 
executives most closely associated with last autumn's near meltdown in the UK 
banking system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dan-roberts-on-business-blog/2009/feb/10/mps-grill-bank-bosses>
. However, Hornby refused any sort of pay-off from the bank and has since kept 
a low profile – in stark contrast to the £700,000-a-year pension negotiated by 
Goodwin, which hasturned the former RBS chief into something of a pariah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/apr/23/mp-fred-goodwin-honour>.

The former bank bosses have also been under pressure over their roles at other 
quoted companies.McKillop stood down as director of oil group BP rather than 
face an embarrassing vote against his place on the board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/apr/02/tom-mckillop-bp> and Sir 
James Crosby,Hornby's predecessor at HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/james-crosby> who is widely regarded as 
sharing responsibility for the bank's failed strategy, faced criticism from ITV 
investors at the broadcaster's annual shareholders' meeting.

Hornby will officially leave HRG at its annual meeting on 1 July.
 