
Andy Duncan quit on Monday as chief executive of upmarket car dealership HR 
Owen <http://www.investegate.co.uk/Article.aspx?id=20111003093000P9831> after 
almost a year to the day in the role. The 49-year-old certainly has a varied CV.

He has run Flora margarines, chaired the Tea Council, been a big wig at the 
BBC, chief executive of Channel 4, and then switched to car dealing.

His departure was announced on Monday although Duncan will stay until the end 
of the month before taking up his new role as managing director of Camelot in 
the UK. He will be responsible for all of Camelot's operations for the National 
Lottery in the UK and report to Dianne Thompson, Camelot group chief executive. 
She said

He is an instinctive marketer with undoubted flair and a proven track record 
in growing brands and running businesses. Combine that with his experience in 
the digital sphere and I know that, under Andy's leadership, Camelot will 
continue to deliver responsible and sustainable growth for The National Lottery.

Duncan, who got a Â£1.5m payment from Channel 4 after he left in November 2009, 
is known as a marketing specialist who spent 17 years at Unilever before 
joining the BBC and becoming one of the architects of the Freeview project.

While the brands he ran at Unilever were household names - such as I Can't 
Believe It's Not Butter, PG Tips and Bachelors Supernoodles - he did not become 
a household name in his own right until the Celebrity Big Brother row in 
January 2007 when there were allegations of racist bullying of the Indian 
housemate Shilpa Shetty.

His role at HR Owen, which sells Aston Martins, Bentleys, and other flash 
cars, is to be taken by Joe Doyle, who was regional managing director of HPI 
and Audatex. The car dealership admitted that "market conditions have 
deteriorated" but reckons its trading is still in line with current market 
expectations.
 