
Andy Murray says he will not panic or make any rash decisions as he looks to 
get over his disappointing defeat by Novak Djokovic in the final of the
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. The Scot's 
6-4, 6-2, 6-3 defeat was his third in grand slam finals and though there are 
sure to be calls for him to make some changes to his game or perhaps his 
coaching set-up, Murray is determined to do things the way he sees fit – and 
even said it would not be a disaster if he never won a grand slam.

"I'm not desperate to put it right," Murray said when asked to express the 
significance of a third final defeat. "I don't think that is the right way to 
go about it. I want to enjoy myself away from the court, I want to enjoy myself 
when I am at the tournaments, I want to enjoy all the training. It is balancing 
the two to make it as best and as fun as possible."

Over the coming weeks and months, and particularly as the French Open and 
Wimbledon get closer, there will be inevitably those who say Murray does not 
have what it takes to win one of the sport's biggest prizes. The 23-year-old's 
talent is not in question but when a player loses three finals, the questions 
follow.

Murray has always said that winning a grand slam title is an incredibly 
difficult thing to do, especially in an era when Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal 
have been dominant. As he flew out of here tonight, he will doubtless have had 
plenty of time to consider what went wrong and what he can do about it but one 
thing that is certain is he will make up his own mind.

"It doesn't faze me what everybody else thinks," he said. "I gave the best I 
could every time. I would like to have played better but I didn't. It's not an 
easy thing to get to a grand slam final. It is very, very difficult to win one 
as well. I know that. Everyone can say whatever they think but I will go away 
and enjoy myself while they are worrying about that."

The phones of Andre Agassi, Goran Ivanisevic and Ivan Lendl may be ringing 
often over the next few weeks. All three men lost their first three grand slam 
finals – four in Lendl's case – but each of them managed to become a grand slam 
champion; in the case of Agassi and Lendl, several times. When the link was 
pointed out to Murray he said: "I'm not Andre Agassi and I don't pretend to be 
any of those guys. But I work hard and I try my best. If I don't get there, 
it's not the end of the world."

Immediately after his defeat by Djokovic, Murray said he may not return to the 
tour until March at his next two mandatory events, the Masters 1000 tournaments 
in Indian Wells and Miami. He is wary of repeating what happened last year, 
when he returned too soon and lacked motivation, but he is scheduled to play 
next week in the ABN/AMRO WorldTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis>
 Tournament in Rotterdam, a lucrative indoor event.
 