
It might not be the best preparation for taking on Novak Djokovic but Andy 
Murray made a late, late appearance at Melbourne Park to see his brother Jamie 
Murray win his first grand slam doubles title. The Scot, whose final against 
the world No1 starts on Sunday at 8.30am UK time, arrived in Jamie’s player box 
well after 1am local time, to see his brother and partner Bruno Soares collect 
their trophy aftera 2-6, 6-4, 7-5 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/jamie-murray-wins-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-bruno-soares>
 over Canada’s Daniel Nestor and the Czech Radek Stepanek.

Jamie Murray wins Australian Open men’s doubles title with Bruno Soares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/jamie-murray-wins-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-bruno-soares>
Spotting the world No2 in the stands as he made to give his acceptance speech, 
Jamie Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamie-murray> offered his 
younger brother a bit of advice. “Andy, you should be in bed, I don’t know why 
you’re here taking photos” but Murray Jr then stood for a few minutes posing 
for photos with fans at the end of the match on Rod Laver Arena before the 
brothers caught up with a celebratory hug off-court.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20Murray%20and%20Bruno%20Soares%20win%20Australian%20Open%20men's%20doubles%20title%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20Murray%20and%20Bruno%20Soares%20win%20Australian%20Open%20men%27s%20doubles%20title%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights&media=>
Jamie Murray and Bruno Soares win Australian Open men’s doubles title – video 
highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jan/30/jamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights>
“It was funny to see Andy there at the end,” Jamie said later. “He’d obviously 
been watching the match in the locker room. I didn’t know that. I thought he 
left to go back to the hotel, obviously. Maybe he came back when he thought we 
had a chance.

“We were [all] in the locker room for a little bit before. He was obviously 
practising. We kicked him off the court. He was having food and stuff. I 
thought him and the guys had left to go back to the hotel. I was shocked to see 
him there.”

Having lost to Djokovic in three previous Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> finals – and one other one 
to Roger Federer – Murray is desperate to get over the line. Jamie said he 
hoped Andy could make it a family double.

“It will be an exceptionally difficult match,” he said. “It’s the greatest 
challenge in tennis right now, to beat Novak over five sets. I just want him to 
win. I know how much hard work he puts in all the time, the sacrifices that 
he’s made, how much he’s dedicated himself to his career. I really hope all 
that will pay off tomorrow and he can play a great match.”
 