
The merger talks between Ladbrokes and Gala Coral raise the prospect of Andy 
Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby> once again working as 
a senior executive at a public company. The former boss of HBOS is chief 
operating officer at Gala Coral and could opt to stay on after a deal is 
completed.

Hornby was once feted as the boy wonder of British banking, becoming chief 
executive of HBOS in 2006 at the age of 39. But two years later the bank almost 
imploded and was rescued by Lloyds. Hornby and other HBOS directors were 
condemned by the parliamentary commission on banking standards in 2013 for 
mistakes that led to the bank’s “colossal failure”. They are likely to suffer 
fresh criticism when a long-awaited regulatory inquiry intoHBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> is finally published, although no 
formal publication date has yet been given.

Ladbrokes and Coral in talks to create UK's biggest bookmaker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/ladbrokes-and-coral-in-talks-to-create-biggest-bookmaker>
Hornby, who worked at Asda before HBOS, ran Alliance Boots for almost two years
until he left in March 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/25/andy-hornby-quits-alliance-boots>
, saying he needed to take a break from corporate life. His chairman at Boots 
later said Hornby had suffered from stress and had returned to the business 
world too early after HBOS.

His appointment as chief executive of Coral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jul/18/andy-hornby-new-boss-coral> 
three months later was a surprise. There was speculation that he would lead a 
private equity buyout of the betting division from Gala Coral, but the business 
remained intact and Hornby was promoted to chief operating officer late last 
year.

After the banking standards commission report, the then business secretary 
Vince Cable asked civil servants to examine whether Hornby, his predecessor as 
HBOS chief executive James Crosby and former chairman Lord Dennis Stevenson
should be barred from serving as company directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/07/vince-cable-seeks-ban-hbos-bosses>
. The ban never materialised.

Like Boots, Gala Coral is privately owned and Hornby has stayed out of the 
limelight, but if he remained after a merger he would again wield considerable 
power at a company owned by pension funds. Gala Coral said Hornby does not sit 
on the company’s board.

Richard Buxton, head of equities at Old Mutual Global Investors, said Hornby 
deserved another chance if he was given the opportunity to work at a public 
company. “Everyone agrees that he is a very good retailer. One can absolutely 
question the judgment of the board of HBOS in appointing him to a banking role. 
Should it be the case that he can never have a retailing role at a quoted 
company ever again? I think that would be quite a harsh judgment.”
 