
She may never have won the Booker, but the late Angela Carter's masterpiece 
Nights at the Circus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099388616/nights-at-the-circus>
 has just been named the best ever winner of Britain's oldest literary prize, 
theJames Tait Black award <http://www.ed.ac.uk/news/events/tait-black>.

Running since 1919, the James Tait Black embarked on a quest this autumn to 
find the best novel from amongst a roll call of former winners who include 
Graham Greene, Walter de la Mare, EM Forster and Aldous Huxley. Students 
studying at Edinburgh University narrowed the extensive list of former winners 
down to their favourite six, with Carter's novel competing withThe Heart of the 
Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099478423/the-heart-of-the-matter>
 by Greene,A Disaffection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330307369/a-disaffection>
 by James Kelman,The Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330513005/the-road> by 
Cormac McCarthy,Crossing the River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099498261/crossing-the-river>
 by Caryl Phillips andThe Mandelbaum Gate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780140027457/the-mandelbaum-gate>
 by Muriel Spark.

Nights at the Circus, the story of winged circus performer Sophie Fevvers's 
travels through 19th-century Europe, was the eventual choice of a judging panel 
that included the broadcaster Kirsty Wark and author Alan Warner. They said the 
1984 novel showed a "fabulous exuberance" with "wonderfully drawn characters" 
and writing which showed "vitality, lightness, passion and fun".

Carter, a novelist and journalist, died in 1992, leaving behind a wealth of 
acclaimed works includingThe Bloody Chamber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9781405896160/the-bloody-chamber>
,The Magic Toyshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780860681908/the-magic-toyshop>
 andWise Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099981107/wise-children>
. Laura Hassan, editorial director at her publisher Vintage Classics said: 
"Novel of the century? 'Lor, love you sir!' as Fevvers might say. We're 
delighted to hear that the magnificent Angela Carter has been recognised by 
such a prestigious award. Long may Fevvermania continue."

The best of the best prize was awarded to celebrate the 250th anniversary of 
English literature studies at Edinburgh University.

"Since 1919, the James Tait Black awards have represented the very best in 
fiction and biographies and it was a great honour to be able to revisit and 
celebrate these wonderful pieces of work," said the prize's chair professor 
Greg Walker.
 