
To fully understand the love affair between Paris Saint-Germain and Ángel di 
María, a glance at the bigger picture is needed. Since the club from the French 
capital began to be financed with a flourish by the investment arm of the Gulf 
state of Qatar, their domestic dominance has almost got out of hand. They have 
been title winners for three seasons in a row. The margin ofsupremacy over the 
rest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ligue1football/table> this term 
means they could play in flip-flops for half of their remaining Ligue 1 games 
andstill win the league comfortably 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/19/psg-caen-ligue-1-match-report>
. Their goal difference is on course to be preposterous.

The reason Qatar Sports Investments took over PSG in 2012 was not to become 
the best team in France. They want PSG to become the best team in Europe. There 
is a long-term strategy to be a brand worth one billion dollars and to win the 
Champions League, and the purchase of Di Maríafrom Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/06/angel-di-maria-joins-psg-manchester-united>
 was a key stepping stone towards that aim.

Cavani misses condemn Paris Saint-Germain to draw with Lille
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/psg-lille-ligue-1-match-report>
The club president, Nasser al-Khelaifi, articulated that connection when the 
player signed last summer, proclaiming: “With him, we are more confident and 
closer to our dream of winning theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.” Manager Laurent Blanc 
echoes that idea. “With Di María’s arrival we moved from ‘PSG can’t win the 
Champions League’ to ‘With him PSG can win the Champions League’.”

That seems like considerable pressure to put on a player who had just emerged 
from a difficult season and a period of disenchantment. But so far, Di María has
taken to life in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/22/paris-saint-germain-guingamp-match-report>
 in a way that suggests the club’s excitement was not entirely misplaced.

The Argentinian maverick, quite apart from being admired for playing in a 
style that haswon the hearts of fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/paris-saint-germain-malmo-champions-league-match-report>
 at the Parc des Princes, has changed a few broader perceptions about the club, 
as was the plan. Zlatan Ibrahimovic was in his 30s when he joined the Paris 
project. At the opposite end of the scale Marco Verratti was in his teens. Di 
María arrived in his peak years, an A-lister who carries with him the stamp of 
success with Real Madrid andexcellence with Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/23/olympics2008.argentina>, and for 
PSG he has been superb.

Di María has this season rediscovered the zest and joy of playing that marked 
his time at the Bernabéu. He has a good relationship with a manager that 
understands him, and team-mates that click with him. He has become a pivotal 
cog in the way PSG play. So many moves go through him or to him, and goals and 
assists (some glorious to behold) have come freely. Recently, an outrageous 
volley against Angers, and a slick combination with Ibrahimovic to construct 
and finishthe matchwinner at Marseille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/07/paris-st-germain-marseille-ligue-1-angel-di-maria>
, demonstrated his renewed confidence perfectly.

The forgettable season at Manchester United is being filed away as an 
aberration. With hindsight, the oddest thing about that experience is not the 
fact it did not work out – a bad fit is not such an inexplicable thing in 
football, where a player and club are not actually cut out to bring the best 
out of each other. The curiosity was the speed of the break up. Having spent a 
club record fee on a player with excellent pedigree, there seemed to be a 
certainty that under Louis van Gaal it was not worth persevering with. Plenty 
of fine players need time to adapt before they feel at home enough to be 
themselves. But this was a one-season write off.

United and Di María clearly did not see the point in working at this 
relationship. They just filed for a quickie divorce, allowing Di María to fall 
into the arms of someone new.

Ángel Di María’s fine solo effort earns PSG victory at Marseille
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/07/paris-st-germain-marseille-ligue-1-angel-di-maria>
His influence since arriving in Paris has convinced the powers that be that 
more of the same is on the agenda for the club to push towards their biggest 
aim. After three successive quarter-final eliminations in the Champions League, 
it is a work in progress to try to reach the levels set by clubs such as 
Barcelona and Bayern Munich. Do not be surprised if PSG are aggressively in the 
hunt for any major attacking talent that could be tempted by a big money, 
ballooning salary move. Cristiano Ronaldo? Thomas Müller? Neymar? Any hint of a 
possibility and PSG intend to more than match the best offers around.

That is the next stepping stone they want to reach. Blanc, who has extended 
his contract at the club to 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/11/laurent-blanc-two-year-contract-extension-paris-saint-germain>
, is under no illusions about what is expected. “Continuing the adventure is a 
show of faith but also a big responsibility,” he says.

If PSG were underdogs when they met Chelsea last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/11/chelsea-psg-champions-league-match-report>
 in the last 16, the tie feels set up very differently this time. With their 
huge lead in Ligue 1, they are able to rest and rotate, and are fuelled by 
abundant confidence.

They have lost only one game this season, in the Champions League at Real 
Madrid in the group stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/03/real-madrid-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
. But as it happened they were superb that night, dominating possession and 
playing scintillating stuff at the Bernabéu. They were beaten 1-0 but came off 
the pitch entitled to think that on another night they would have been worthy 
winners.

Ultimately, that they lost meant they would be runners up in the group behind 
Real, and so in theory face a tougher last 16 opponent. But there was a 
psychological gain that came out of that game in Madrid. PSG know how good they 
can be, how unafraid of the kind of opponent they have found it difficult to 
match in recent years.

Since that strangely undeserved result in Madrid last November, PSG have gone 
on a run that makes convincing seem like an understatement. After Saturday’s0-0 
home draw with Lille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/13/psg-lille-ligue-1-match-report>
 they have won 20 and drawn just three of their last 23 games. For PSG, the 
league can take care of itself for now. Champions League progress is imperative.

Last-16 first legs: Tuesday: Benfica v Zenit St Petersburg; Paris Saint-Germain
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> v Chelsea*; Wednesday: 
Gent v Wolfsburg, Roma v Real Madrid*;23 Feb: Arsenal v Barcelona*; Juventus v 
Bayern Munich;24 Feb: Dynamo Kyiv v Man City*, PSV Eindhoven v Atlético Madrid 
(All 7.45pm, *Asterisked matches BT Sport Europe, rest BT Sport 2)
 