
Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> has filed for 
divorce from Brad Pitt, her attorney has said.

“This decision was made for the health of the family. She will not be 
commenting, and asks that the family be given its privacy at this time,” Robert 
Offer said in a statement on Tuesday.

According to the website TMZ.com, which first reported the story, the actor 
and director cited irreconcilable differences as the cause for the split. The 
couple have been together since 2005 and married in 2014.

Here's looking at me: Does Angelina Jolie’s By the Sea qualify for Hollywood’s 
Hall of Vain?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/angelina-jolie-by-the-sea-hollywood-personal-obsessions>
Jolie has reportedly asked for physical custody of their six children, with 
Pitt allowed visitation rights. She is not asking for spousal support. The date 
of separation is listed as 15 September.

In a statement to People 
<http://www.people.com/article/angelina-jolie-pitt-brad-pitt-divorce?xid=socialflow_twitter_peoplemag>
 magazine, Pitt said: “I am very saddened by this, but what matters most now is 
the wellbeing of our kids. I kindly ask the press to give them the space they 
deserve during this challenging time.”

They originally met on the set of the action comedy Mr and Mrs Smith and were 
also seen on screen together in 2015’s By the Sea, a drama about an ailing 
marriage, written and directed by Jolie. While Mr and Mrs Smith was warmly 
received by critics and a commercial hit, making $478m worldwide, By the Sea 
was less of a success. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw called it“indulgent” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/by-the-sea-review-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie>
 and it made $3.3m at the box office.

Despite the film’s focus on relationship problems, Jolie was quick to deny it 
was a reflection of their marriage.

“Brad and I have our issues, but if the characters were even remotely close to 
our problems we couldn’t have made the film,” she told theTelegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/film/by-the-sea/angelina-jolie-interview-marriage-brad-pitt/>
. “To be clear: we have fights and problems like any other couple. We have days 
when we drive each other absolutely mad and want space, but the problems in the 
movie aren’t our specific problems.”

Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt: a marriage which started – and ended – on screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
Jolie was previously married to the actor Jonny Lee Miller after meeting on 
the set of Hackers in 1996 and Billy Bob Thornton after the pair made Pushing 
Tin in 1999.


The actor vehemently denied that she began an affair with Pitt when they 
worked together as he was still married to Jennifer Aniston. “To be intimate 
with a married man, when my own father cheated on my mother, is not something I 
could forgive,”she said 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20060207100110/http://www.nydailynews.com/front/story/387860p-329048c.html>
. “I could not look at myself in the morning if I did that. I wouldn’t be 
attracted to a man who would cheat on his wife.”

Rumours of a split have been circulating since 2010, when they successfully 
sued the News of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/22/brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-news-of-the-world>
 after false allegations that they were separating.

Pitt will next be seen in Allied, a thriller about the second world war, 
alongside Marion Cotillard while Jolie is working on Netflix documentary First 
They Killed My Father: A Daughter of Cambodia Remembers.
 