
Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> and Brad Pitt 
have reached an agreement to handle their divorce in a private forum and will 
work together to reunify their family, the actors announced in a joint 
statement.

The statement released on Monday said that they will keep future details of 
their divorce confidential by using a private judge.

Brad Pitt, Angelina Jolie and the search for the perfect PR Hollywood divorce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/24/brangelina-divorce-pr-feeding-frenzy>
“The parties and their counsel have signed agreements to preserve the privacy 
rights of their children and family by keeping all court documents confidential 
and engaging a private judge to make any necessary legal decisions and to 
facilitate the expeditious resolution of any remaining issues,” their statement 
read.

“The parents are committed to act as a united front to effectuate recovery and 
reunification.”

The statement is the first joint comment from the actors on their divorce 
since Joliefiled to end their marriage in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
.

Custody of their six children has been the primary issue in the divorce, with 
Jolie initially seeking sole physical custody. California law favours joint 
custody in divorce cases, although final arrangements are often agreed to by 
parents and formalised in a written agreement.

Pitt and Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/21/how-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame>
 were married for two years andtogether for 12 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/brangelina-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce-love>
 after becoming close while filming 2005’s Mr & Mrs Smith.

Their divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
, and every filing in it, has attracted international attention. Last month, 
Pitt sought to seal custody records in the case, and a hearing had been 
scheduled for next week on the issue.

Both actors have kept a relatively low profile since their breakup was 
announced, although Pitt made an appearance onstage at Sunday’s Golden Globes 
to spirited applause.

Private judges are often used in high-profile divorce cases, keeping many 
details of a breakup out of the public eye while a final judgment is negotiated.
 