
Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> Pitt is to 
examine sexual violence in conflict and women’s health, while Mary Berry will 
discuss topics including gardening as therapy and beekeeping, in their roles as 
special guest editors of BBC Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour.


Jolie, a United Nations special envoy who was appointed a visiting professor 
at the London School of Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/23/angelina-jolie-new-role-visiting-professor-lse-william-hague>
 last month, will host the final edition of the week in which Woman’s Hour is 
taken over by five guest editors, from 13-17 June.

Berry, the co-host of BBC1’s The Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off>, will 
cover an eclectic range of topics including the legacy ofthe Guides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/girl-guides> and how you can express 
yourself with homemade presents and handwritten notes.


“I have chosen subjects close to my heart. I still have my cooking badge and 
wonder how guiding has changed from my day,” Berry said. “Gardening as therapy 
– after a busy day recipe testing or filming inside, I cannot wait to get into 
the garden. And I’m thinking of keeping bees.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fangelina-jolie-pitt-mary-berry-guest-edit-radio-4-womans-hour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51240a808c706697d62ddb5ee02d770108ed8085%2F0_221_2624_1574%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angelina%20Jolie%20Pitt%20and%20Mary%20Berry%20to%20guest%20edit%20Radio%204%20Woman%E2%80%99s%20Hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fangelina-jolie-pitt-mary-berry-guest-edit-radio-4-womans-hour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angelina%20Jolie%20Pitt%20and%20Mary%20Berry%20to%20guest%20edit%20Radio%204%20Woman%E2%80%99s%20Hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fangelina-jolie-pitt-mary-berry-guest-edit-radio-4-womans-hour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51240a808c706697d62ddb5ee02d770108ed8085%2F0_221_2624_1574%2F2624.jpg>
 Mary Berry. Photograph: Jonathan Hordle/Rex/Shutterstock 
The other guest editors include Jackie Kay, Scotland’s makar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/20/jackie-kay-scotland-poet-new-makar>
, the country’s poet laureate, who will examine topics such as how writers are 
responding to the stories of refugees, and living with a skin condition.


The England and Chelsea footballer Eniola Aluko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/21/england-eniola-aluko-double-first-norway-womens-world-cup>
 will explore subjects including encouraging girls from deprived backgrounds 
into sport to develop their confidence, and balancing a social life with a busy 
job.

It is the third year that the BBC has run a takeover week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/10/jk-rowling-guest-editor-womans-hour>
, with the first featuring JK Rowling andDoreen Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/17/doreen-lawrence-stephen-chides-met-chief-over-inquiry-into-undercover-policing>
, mother of the murdered teenager Stephen Lawrence.


Last year’s guest editors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/01/michelle-mone-kim-cattrall-bbc-radio-4-womans-hour>
 included Kim Cattrall and the Ultimo lingerie founder Michelle Mone.


The daily magazine programme, presented by Jane Garvey and Jenni Murray, 
launched a newLate Night Woman’s Hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/21/lauren-laverne-radio-4-late-night-womans-hour-bbc>
 strand last August, fronted by the DJ and writer Lauren Laverne.

 