
Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> will continue 
to have sole custody of her six children with Brad Pitt in a joint agreement 
reached by the actors, a representative for the actress has said.

The agreement calls for the former couple’s six children, who range in ages 
from eight to 15, to continue to have “therapeutic visits” with Pitt.

Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie: a marriage that started – and ended – on screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
Jolie filed for divorce in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
, days after Pitt was involved in a disturbance during a private flight with 
his family. She cited irreconcilable differences as the reason for the breakup, 
and an attorney said at the time she filed for divorce “for the health of the 
family.”

The new statement said the agreement was reached more than a week ago in 
consultation with childcare professionals. It says no further details could be 
provided, and it makes no mention of an investigation by child welfare workers 
into the plane incident.

Pitt and Jolie reached a temporary custody agreement in late September that 
included at least some of the same terms – visitation with his children and 
both sides agreeing to meetings with therapists.

“We believe that all sides are committed to healing the family and ask for 
your consideration during this difficult time,” the statement said.

A representative for Pitt declined comment.

Brad and Angelina proved there's no such thing as the perfect marriage: so why 
do we pretend?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-no-such-thing-perfect-marriage-why-pretend>
The actor filed a legal response to the divorce on 4 November and sought joint 
custody of the children. Whether a judge will have to weigh in on the agreement 
was not known, although many parents are able to reach custody agreements 
without a formal hearing.

Pitt’s filing does not include new details about the couple’s breakup. Pitt 
cited irreconcilable differences and makes no mention of a prenuptial agreement 
that will govern how the pair divides their assets. He also cites 15 September 
as the day of their separation, one day after the alleged plane altercation 
between Pitt and his 15-year-old son, Maddox.

The actors were married for two years and together for 12 years after becoming 
close while filming 2005’s Mr & Mrs Smith.
 