
Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> has made a 
surprise appearance at a major UN peacekeeping summit, where she told delegates 
from 80 countries that the organisation’s reputation had been undermined by 
intolerable cases of sexual abuse by peacekeepers.

The UN special envoy and actor described being moved by the desire for justice 
and accountability of refugee women she had met who had been abused by 
international troops. Jolie said on Thursday: “We all know that the credibility 
of UN peacekeeping has been sadly undermined by the actions of a few 
intolerable cases of women and children being sexually exploited by the very 
people in charge of protecting them.”

War disproportionately affects women, so why so few female peacekeepers? | 
Fiona Hodgson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/07/war-disproportionately-affects-women-female-peacekeepers-fiona-hodgson>
Calling for the prosecution of peacekeepers who commit abuses, she said a new 
approach to peacekeeping was needed that had the “rights and protection and 
involvement of women at its heart”. She also called for more women to 
participate in missions. “Peacekeeping forces can only gain and keep the trust 
of local populations if they are able to engage with women as well as men in 
that community,” she said.

Sexual abuse and exploitation by peacekeepers, and the participation of women 
in missions, were among the key themes of the summit, following allegations of 
sexual assault in countries includingHaiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti> and Central African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic>. 


The defence minister, Michael Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-fallon>, called for a 
“zero-tolerance approach” to the issue. There had been some “some shocking 
examples of poor performance that we can all deplore”, he said, which risked 
losing the “hearts and minds” of the people that missions aimed to protect.

Officials said the UN is taking sexual violence and other breaches of 
discipline increasingly seriously, and had set up a separate unit to 
investigate allegations that was separate from personnel on the ground. Where 
anyone misbehaves, the whole contingent will be sent home, and in some cases 
individuals have been prosecuted in their home countries.

But campaigners said this was just smoke and mirrors. “The problem is that the 
UN has a conflict of interest: it’s allowed to police itself, and it’s allowed 
to act as judge and jury,” said Paula Donovan, co-director ofAids-Free World 
<http://www.aidsfreeworld.org/>, an NGO that runs a campaign, Code Blue 
<http://www.codebluecampaign.com/>, on sexual abuse in the UN. 

Code Blue has called for independent organisations to be set up to receive, 
investigate and prosecute allegations of abuse by peacekeepers. Officials said 
this would be more cumbersome to implement than a UN-based team that already 
had the diplomatic status allowing it to act quickly.

The summit, which UN undersecretary general, Hervé Ladsous, described as the 
largest gathering in the history of peacekeeping, follows an event last year at 
which 50 nations pledged toincrease their contribution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/27/un-peacekeeping-obama-countries-pledge-troops-counterterror>
 to UN missions to deal with increasingly challenging and diverse threats.
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> called on 
peacekeepers to play a more aggressive role, particularly on tackling Islamist 
insurgent forces in countries such asSomalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> and Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>.


Delegates pledged more than 40,000 personnel – including soldiers and police 
officers – last year, on top of the 125,000 peacekeepers already operating 
around the world. Fallon said the aim was now to “turn pledges from paper into 
soldiers”.

The UN is also aiming to increase the speed with which it can react to crises 
as they emerge, Ladsous said. Currently it takes about six months to set up a 
peacekeeping mission, but pledges from last year’s event and Thursday’s summit 
mean the UN now aims to have a stock of pre-approved personnel so that it can 
deploy a “substantial brigade” within 60 days.

Britain has about 270 troops in a decades-long peacekeeping operation in Cyprus
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>, and is now shifting its attention 
to Africa. Fallon announced on Thursday morning a planned deployment to South 
Sudan next year would now number 400 – up from 300 – along with about 40 
personnel in Somalia. There are about 25 women involved in UK peacekeeping 
operations. Challenged on the comparatively small number of people the UK 
contributed, Fallon pointed out Britain was the sixth-largest financial 
contributor.
 