
When Angela Carter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/angelacarter> died – 
aged just 51, on 16 February 1992 – her reputation changed from cultish to 
canonical. Herobituaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1992/feb/17/fiction.angelacarter> in the 
British press received more space than any others that year except Francis 
Bacon, Willy Brandt and Marlene Dietrich. Their tone was rhapsodic. “Angela 
Carter … was one of the most important writers at work in the English 
language.” “She interpreted the times for us with unrivalled penetration.” “Her 
imagination was one of the most dazzling of this century.” Three days after she 
died,Virago, <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virago> the publishing house 
with which her name was most closely associated, sold out of her books. Over 
the course of the next academic year, the British Academy received 40 proposals 
for doctoral research into her work – compared with three on the literature of 
the entire 18th century.

Her friends and long-term admirers regarded this torrent of posthumous acclaim 
with a touch of exasperation. For more than 25 years Carter had been producing 
novels, short stories, drama and journalism that stood defiantly apart from the 
work of her contemporaries. At a time when English literature was dominated by 
sober social realists, she played with disreputable genres – gothic horror, 
science fiction, fairytale – and gave free rein to the fantastic and the 
surreal. Her work is funny, sexy, frightening and brutal, and is always shaped 
by a keen, subversive intelligence and a style of luxuriant beauty. She was 
concerned with unpicking the mythic roles and structures that underwrite our 
existences – in particular the various myths of gender identity – and by the 
end of her life she was starting to acquire a devoted following. But only once 
her voice had been silenced was she accorded the status of a great novelist and 
feminist icon.

At a time when English literature was full of sober social realists, she gave 
free rein to the fantastic and the surreal

As Carter’s first biographer, a large part of my task has been trying to look 
beyond some of the certainties that have settled around her since her death – 
to see her once again as mutable, vulnerable, unfinished. “I’m in the 
demythologising business,” she once wrote, and as I worked on my book, my 
purpose increasingly became to demythologise her: to recapture the fluidity of 
her identity and the unpredictability of her mind, and in doing so, to tell a 
story about how she came to write some of the liveliest and most original books 
of the last hundred years.

***

One of the central themes of Carter’s writing is the contingency of personal 
identity. She believed that our selves are neither false nor true, but merely 
roles we either master or are mastered by. Her characters wear their 
personalities like fancy dress costumes. She was explicit about viewing 
femininity as a “social fiction”, part of a culturally choreographed 
performance of selfhood. She wasn’t the first to make this observation – but 
she may have been the first to greet it so warmly, as a licence for boundless 
self-invention.

The story of her life is the story of how she invented herself, of how she 
progressed from a shy, introverted childhood, through a nervy, defiantly 
unconventional youth, to a happy, self-confident middle age. She consistently 
flouted expectations of women, creating instead, by sheer force of will, the 
lifestyle and circumstances that suited her. It wasn’t a straightforward 
process. Born in 1940 – just before the Luftwaffe unleashed its first wave of 
bombs over Britain – she grew up in the shabbily respectable south London 
district of Balham, the second child of an eccentric journalist father and a 
neurotic housewife mother. As a young girl she was spoiled and zealously 
sheltered by her parents, and in particular by her mother, who placed a 
handkerchief behind Angela’s head whenever she sat down in a public place, 
rubbed so much Zam-Buk ointment on her chest that her top was permanently 
stained green, and indulged her with so many edible treats that by the time she 
left primary school she was extremely overweight. (Not an easy thing to achieve 
in a decade when meat, sugar, chocolate, butter, cheese and cooking fat were 
all strictly rationed.)

As she approached adolescence, her mother’s obsessive cosseting only became 
more pronounced. Even when she was 10 or 11, Angela wasn’t allowed to go to the 
lavatory on her own. She was made to wash with the bathroom door open well into 
her teens. Her mother was terrified that some catastrophe would befall her if 
she let her out of her sight: she would slip and injure herself, or drown in 
the tub.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fangela-carter-far-from-fairytale-edmund-gordon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe8b9d4790e7501ab709b5937c1f13b82629613%2F0_0_4648_3040%2F4648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Carter%3A%20Far%20from%20the%20fairytale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fangela-carter-far-from-fairytale-edmund-gordon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Carter%3A%20Far%20from%20the%20fairytale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fangela-carter-far-from-fairytale-edmund-gordon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fe8b9d4790e7501ab709b5937c1f13b82629613%2F0_0_4648_3040%2F4648.jpg>
 Tom Bell as Uncle Philip in the film adaptation ofThe Magic Toyshop (1987). 
Photograph: ITV / Rex Features 
When she was 17 decided that the time had come to put some emotional distance 
between herself and her mother. She sought a doctor’s advice about losing 
weight and was put on a rigorous diet: at the start of 1958, she weighed 
something between 13 and 15 stone; by that summer, she was around 10 stone. She 
also took up swearing and smoking, both of which dismayed her socially 
conservative parents (as she had calculated that they would), and began 
choosing her own clothes, opting for close-fitting black garments that were “a 
positive sign of depravity” in the late 1950s (a typical outfit consisted of 
“black-mesh stockings, spike-heeled shoes, bum-hugging skirt, jacket with a 
black fox collar”). It was the first of many times when, faced with adverse or 
repressive circumstances, she forcibly asserted her identity.

But on that first occasion she may have exerted too much force: her weight 
loss seems to have accelerated into anorexia shortly after she left school. By 
then she was working as a journalist – an overwhelmingly male profession in the 
late 1950s – on a local south London paper, which, she wrote, “functioned as a 
kind of benign day-clinic, where my patent insanity was taken in good part”. 
One of her duties was writing the paper’s music reviews: that was probably how 
she first encountered Paul Carter, an industrial chemist by profession, but 
also an amateur producer and recordist of folk records, whom she later 
remembered as being “a simple, artsy Soho 50s beatnik”. Through him, she became 
involved in the English folk revival (she wrote sleeve notes to several of the 
records he produced, performed with him at singarounds, and even briefly ran a 
folk club with him) and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. He represented a 
clear escape route from her parents’ home: shortly after her 19th birthday, she 
accepted his proposal of marriage.

When Paul was offered a lectureship in chemistry at the newly formed Bristol 
Technical College in 1961, Carter quit her job and went with him. But the 
marriage soon faltered. Paul had a depressive streak, and had quickly begun to 
exhibit what Carter came to know as his “indrawn moods”, which could last for 
days at a time. These moods were extremely difficult for her, not least because 
she felt (or was made to feel) that she was responsible for them. And after she 
began publishing novels (her first,Shadow Dance, a gothic murder story set in a 
distinctly Bristol-like city, appeared in 1966), his silences lengthened: she 
told a friend that he didn’t speak to her for three weeks after one of her 
books came out. “I admit it,” she wrote in her journal less than two years 
after their wedding. “Marriage was one of my typical burn-all-bridges-but-one 
acts; flight from a closed room into another one.” By her mid-20s, she was 
already plotting her second escape from an oppressive domestic situation.

In 1969 she received the Somerset Maugham award for her third novel, Several 
Perceptions. The rules (laid down by Maugham himself) stipulated that the money 
had to be spent on foreign travel. Carter decided to visit Japan. Shortly after 
arriving in Tokyo (which she thought was “the most absolutely non-boring city 
in the world”), she met a 24-year-old Japanese man who was hoping to become a 
novelist. After breaking up with Paul by letter, she lived with the man for the 
best part of a year. When the relationship ended she moved in with a 
19-year-old Korean man, while working for a period in a hostess bar. The two 
years that she spent in Japan were among the most crucial periods of Carter’s 
life, one of the great hinges on which her story turns: she wrote two of her 
most dazzling books,The Infernal Desire Machines of Dr Hoffman (1972) and 
Fireworks (1974) while living there. Her new sense of personal independence had 
given rise to a new artistic freedom.

After returning to Britain in 1972, she lived in London (renting the spare 
room of the poetFleur Adcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/15/fleur-adcock-poetry-dragon-talk> 
for a while) and became increasingly interested in the emerging women’s 
liberation movement. She always felt happier “sniping from the sidelines” than 
toeing the party line, however. “I suspect,” she told an interviewer, “that 
when my sisters think of me, they see me as a bit of an Uncle Tom. I think it’s 
all terrible. I think it’s terrible for everyone, not just women.” Carter’s 
1979 work of cultural history,The Sadeian Woman – in which she used the Marquis 
de Sade as her exemplar of a “moral” pornographer – was dismissed by the 
radical critic Andrea Dworkin as “pseudofeminist”. (It was also stickered by 
the Federation of Alternative Bookshops for having an offensive cover: a 
painting by the surrealist artist Clovis Trouille featuring several half-naked 
women, some of whom are being whipped.) Even so, she found one of her closest 
friends and most ardent supporters inCarmen Callil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/26/featuresreviews.guardianreview2>
, the founder of the feminist publishing house Virago.

At the same time as writing for Spare Rib she was selling erotic short stories 
to men’s soft porn magazines

During this period, Carter had a series of disastrous love affairs, and at 
least one abortion, while living hand to mouth on the proceeds of journalism 
and the odd royalty cheque from her early novels. After one particularly 
tempestuous relationship ended she fled London for Bath, and her father loaned 
her the money to buy herself a small house in the city (her mother having died 
in 1969).

She eventually found domestic happiness with her second husband, Mark Pearce. 
He was a builder, 15 years her junior; they met when he was constructing an 
extension for the house opposite hers in Bath. She ran across the street to ask 
for his help with a plumbing emergency. “He came in,” she told her friends, 
“and never left.”

***

Carter was deliberately messy, awkward, even paradoxical in her behaviour: she 
never allowed herself to settle into any predictable guise or attitude for 
long. At the same time in the 1970s as she was writing for the feminist magazine
Spare Rib <https://www.theguardian.com/media/spare-rib>, she was also 
contributing smutty articles and erotic short stories to the soft porn 
magazines Men Only and Club International. She voted Labour and loathed 
Margaret Thatcher, but when she attended a meeting of leftwing writers and 
intellectuals in 1988, she felt badly out of place, and barely said a word. She 
refused identification with any movement, and resisted attempts to absorb her 
work into any genre (she always denied that she was a magical realist, for 
example, arguing that the phrase was meaningless when used outside the specific 
context of Latin American literature). She believed that “integration means 
giving up one’s freedom of being, in that one becomes mastered by one’s role”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fangela-carter-far-from-fairytale-edmund-gordon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc764b28fdd0586c7b28093973731760d91cb0e5d%2F0_77_2765_1659%2F2765.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Carter%3A%20Far%20from%20the%20fairytale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fangela-carter-far-from-fairytale-edmund-gordon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Carter%3A%20Far%20from%20the%20fairytale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fangela-carter-far-from-fairytale-edmund-gordon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc764b28fdd0586c7b28093973731760d91cb0e5d%2F0_77_2765_1659%2F2765.jpg>
 Micha Bergese and Sarah Patterson in the film adaptation of The Company of 
Wolves (1984). Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
But if we invent ourselves, we also invent one another – and writers’ 
personalities can quickly solidify in the popular imagination, especially once 
they’re no longer around to surprise us with new work. As Auden wrote of 
Yeats’s death: “he became his admirers”. Carter has become hers in ways that 
have often ignored her wish not to be defined by her roles. Her obituaries 
demonstrated an impulse towards myth-making and sanctification. They emphasised 
her gentleness, her wisdom and her “magical” imagination, at the expense of her 
intellectual sharpness, her taste for violent and disturbing imagery, and her 
exuberant sensuality.

“She had something of the faerie queene about her,” wrote Marina Warner in the 
Independent, “except that she was never wispy or fey.” In the New York Times, 
Salman Rushdie identified her straightforwardly with “the fairy queen”, adding 
that “English literature has lost its high sorceress, its benevolent white 
witch”. Margaret Atwood, writing in the Observer, went even further: “The 
amazing thing about her, for me, was that someone who looked so much like the 
fairy godmother … should actually be so much like the fairy godmother. She 
seemed always on the verge of bestowing something – some talisman, some magic 
token you’d need to get through the dark forest, some verbal formula useful for 
the opening of charmed doors.”

This mythic version of Carter soon became the prevailing one. But the 
otherworldly figure conjured by her obituarists doesn’t do justice to her 
complexity. Her fundamental vigour, determination and courage all emerge 
powerfully from the story of her life; her wild, often gleefully crass sense of 
humour and her strong sexual energy are both conspicuous in her books; and her 
quick wit and personal charm are apparent in surviving TV footage. In her 40s, 
newly confident, Carter allowed her hair to turn grey, and grew it down to her 
shoulders. She became a mother just as she began to look like the cartoon image 
of a grandmother: her son, Alexander, was born in 1983. He brought her a great 
deal of joy, and the last decade of her life was also the happiest. She 
returned to live in south London, not far from where she had grown up, and 
between teaching stints in Australia and the US she produced some of her 
richest and most affecting work, including the screenplay for the Neil Jordan 
filmThe Company of Wolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
 (1984), which was based on one of her short stories, and the novelsNights at 
the Circus <https://www.theguardian.com/books/1984/sep/27/fiction.angelacarter>
(1984) andWise Children (1991). As her friend Lorna Sage observed: “by the end 
her life fitted her more or less like a glove. But that’s because she put it 
together, by trial and error, bricolage, all in the (conventionally) wrong 
order.”


• Edmund Gordon’s The Invention of Angela Carter: A Biography is published by 
Chatto & Windus on 13 October. To order a copy for £20.50 (RRP £25) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/invention-of-angela-carter.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 