
Angry Birds creator Rovio Entertainment is preparing for another round of 
layoffs, announcing plans for up to 260 redundancies followingthe departure of 
110 staff in late 2014 
<http://www.rovio.com/en/news/press-releases/587/rovio-employee-negotiations-concluded/2014>
.

The new layoffs will be accompanied by a previously-announced focus on games, 
media and consumer products, which seemingly spells the end for the company’s 
efforts in the education sector.

The company’s chief executive Pekka Rantala said: “Rovio’s growth and 
eagerness to explore new business opportunities over the past few years have 
been exceptional. As a result, we did too many things.”

Angry Birds revenues fell in 2014 due to sharp decline in merchandise sales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/19/angry-birds-revenues-2014-rovio>
He added: “In our current financial condition we must now put focus on where 
we are at our best: in creating magnificent gaming experiences, in producing an 
amazing animation movie and in delighting our fans with great products.”

Jobs are at risk in Espoo, where the Finnish company has its headquarters, and 
at its offices in Shanghai, Stockholm, London and Tokyo but staff working on the
Angry Birds <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/angry-birds> Movie in the 
US and Canada are exempt.


Rovio’s revenues fell by 9% in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/19/angry-birds-revenues-2014-rovio>
 to €158.3m (£114.3m) as sales of Angry Birds toys and other merchandise fell 
by 43.4% – outweighing a 16.3% increase in spending within its mobile games.

If Rantala’s comments and the narrower corporate focus sound familiar, that’s 
because they mirror the announcement of Rovio’s previous round of redundancies 
by his predecessor, Mikael Hed.

“We have been building our team on assumptions of faster growth than have 
materialised,”he said in October 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/02/angry-birds-rovio-layoffs-growth>
. “As a result, we announced today that we plan to simplify our organisation 
around our three key businesses with the highest growth potential: games, 
media, and consumer products.”

At the peak of its growth in 2013, Rovio added 300 new employees taking its 
headcount to 800. The October 2014 plans to lay off 130 staff were later 
reduced to 110, which suggests the new round of 260 redundancies amounts to 
nearly 38% of Rovio’s current workforce.

Angry Birds 2 review – new twists on a familiar friend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/06/angry-birds-2-review> 
Rovio is still working on its Angry Birds movie, which is set for release in 
2016. Rantala was optimistic about the performance of the company’s latest game
Angry Birds 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/06/angry-birds-2-review>, 
pointing to 50m downloads in its first month after release.

“Fundamental changes are needed to ensure Rovio succeeds in its global 
ambitions to be the leading entertainment company with mobile games at its 
heart,” he said. “This is personally a difficult decision. However, it is 
certain that a leaner and more agile Rovio is absolutely necessary to move 
forward and take the company to new successes in the future.”

Angry Birds 2 may have an impressive downloads total, but the game is still 
finding its feet commercially. In the key market of the US, for example, it is 
currently the 58th top-grossing app in Apple’s App Store. In the UK it is 44th, 
and in its nativeFinland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland> it is 29th.
 