
If you can’t beat them, join them. Angry Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/angry-birds> remains one of the most 
popular mobile game series in the world, but its financial success has been 
dwarfed by that of match-three puzzle games like Candy Crush Saga and Puzzle & 
Dragons.

Developer Rovio has clearly noticed: it has soft-launched two new Angry Birds 
games that ditch its familiar bird-slinging gameplay for... match-three 
puzzling.

Angry Birds Stella Pop! 
<https://itunes.apple.com/ca/app/angry-birds-stella-pop!/id937718942?mt=8> has 
been released in Canada, whileAngry Birds Fight! 
<https://itunes.apple.com/th/app/angry-birds-fight!/id933958078?mt=8> is 
available in Thailand. Single-country debuts have become the standard way for 
mobile publishers to test and refine new games before giving them a global 
release.

First reported on by fan-site Angry Birds Nest 
<http://www.angrybirdsnest.com/angry-birds-2015-sneak-peek-2-new-puzzle-games-from-rovio/>
, the new games are both “freemium” titles: free to download, and making their 
money from in-app purchases of virtual items.

Angry Birds Stella Pop! is a bubble-popping game in the same vein as console 
classic Bust-a-Move (also known as Puzzle Bobble), or perhaps more relevantly, 
the Bubble Witch Saga game that’s been a hit on mobile for Candy Crush 
publisher King.

Angry Birds Fight! involves matching lines of three or more birds to battle 
enemies, taking its inspiration from Puzzle & Dragons,which has been a 
lucrative success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/may/14/puzzle-and-dragons-gungho-revenues>
 for its publisher, Japanese firm GungHo Online.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fangry-birds-candy-crush-mobile-puzzle-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F30%2F1422619943715%2F6101b15f-ded2-4bfb-a0ef-c74c272459b9-765x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angry%20Birds%20set%20sights%20on%20Candy%20Crush%20with%20new%20mobile%20puzzle%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fangry-birds-candy-crush-mobile-puzzle-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angry%20Birds%20set%20sights%20on%20Candy%20Crush%20with%20new%20mobile%20puzzle%20games&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F30%2Fangry-birds-candy-crush-mobile-puzzle-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F30%2F1422619943715%2F6101b15f-ded2-4bfb-a0ef-c74c272459b9-765x1020.jpeg>
 Angry Birds Stella Pop! Photograph: PR 
The two games are the latest efforts by Rovio to build on the popularity of 
the Angry Birds games, which at its peak in late 2012had 263 million monthly 
active players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/apr/03/angry-birds-rovio-financials-2012>
.

By September 2014, that had shrunk to 200 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/30/angry-birds-players-200m-rovio>
 – still one of the biggest mobile franchises – with Rovio announcing the 
following month that it waslaying off 16% of its staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/02/angry-birds-rovio-layoffs-growth>
 after making “assumptions of faster growth than have materialised”.

In 2013, Rovio’s revenues increased slightly to €156m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/28/angry-birds-rovio-financial-results-2013>
 (£128.4m), but its annual profits halved to €26.9m as the company invested 
heavily in its ToonsTV animation network and the first Angry Birds film, which 
will not be released until 2016.

By contrast, King reported revenues of $1.9bn for that year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/06/king-digital-entertainment-ceo-riccardo-zaconni>
 on the back of Candy Crush’s success, and proceeded to go public in an IPO 
valuing the company at more than $7bn. Meanwhile, GungHo is estimated to have
made more than $1.4bn from Puzzle & Dragons alone 
<http://www.pocketgamer.biz/asia/news/57076/its-official-puzzle-and-dragons-is-the-first-mobile-game-to-1-billion-in-revenue/>
 that year.

Rovio has already switched to a freemium model for newer Angry Birds games in 
new genres, including racing gameAngry Birds Go! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/11/angry-birds-go-review>, 
roleplaying gameAngry Birds Epic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/12/angry-birds-epic-rovio-rpg>
, and branded action titleAngry Birds Transformers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/21/angry-birds-transformers-review-rovio>
.

Those games have yet to deliver a Candy Crush-sized hit, but by emulating that 
game more closely, Rovio’s strategy of spreading Angry Birds’ eggs among 
multiple baskets will continue looking for a financial reward to match the 
popularity of its characters.

• How Candy Crush gets you hooked - six addictive tricks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/04/candy-crush-angry-birds-mobile-games>


• Angry Birds: Rovio talks freemium games, Stella and Toons disruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/10/angry-birds-epic-stella-toons-freemium-sxsw>


• Why Angry Birds are slightly miffed: mobile gaming in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/03/mobile-games-ten-things-you-need-to-know>
 