
The problem with interviewing Angus Deayton 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angus_Deayton> is neatly summed up in a one-line 
email from the PR before we meet. "Angus would like to keep the interview 
current, so he doesn't wish to talk aboutHave I Got News For You 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006mkw3>." What this really means, of course, 
is that he doesn't want to talk about whyhe got sacked from the show nine years 
ago <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2002/oct/29/broadcasting.bbc6>. And who 
could blame him?

When 2002 drew to a close, Deayton recalls thinking to himself "that the words 
annus horribilis didn't really cover half of it". That summer,the News Of The 
World had splashed with a classic cocaine-and-hookers kiss'n'tell 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/2005881.stm>, involving the presenter and a 
woman he'd met in a bar. For Deayton, it came as news that she was a call girl; 
for the rest of us, that he wasn't quite the pillar of moral rectitude many had 
supposed. Only a solemn promise of no further revelations – and a pay cut from 
£50,000 to £25,000 a show – saved his job. But that autumn another woman told 
the tabloids she'd had an affair with him for two and a half years, during 
which time his partner was pregnant, and his 12-year reign in the HIGNFY chair 
was over.

As Deayton observes more than once when we meet, "It all feels like a very 
long time ago now." And if we have learned anything fromthe Leveson inquiry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/leveson-inquiry> by now, it's that tabloid 
scoops are not always reliable. But the fact remains that we probably wouldn't 
be talking to each other if he were merely an actor ina new BBC3 series 
<http://www.comedy.co.uk/guide/tv/pramface/>, or the presenter of a new series 
ofa Radio 4 panel game <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00yrv9d>. It was 
HIGNFY that made Deayton famous – and the scandal amplified fame into infamy – 
thus leaving quite an elephant in the room between us.

To anyone with access to Wikipedia, let alone a television set, it can be no 
secret that Deayton has worked pretty consistently for the past nine years. He 
has, among other things, starred in the award-winning dark BBC comedyNighty 
Night <http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/nightynight/>, presented Hell's Kitchen 
<http://www.itv.com/Entertainment/reality/hellskitchen/default.html> and a quiz 
show for ITV, anchored and starred in severalComic Reliefs 
<http://www.comicrelief.com/>, hosted the BBC panel show Would I Lie To You? 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007r3n8>, presented the British Comedy Awards 
<http://www.britishcomedyawards.com/> and appeared in two feature 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1502420/> films 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0452643/>. "As wildernesses go," he points out, 
"it's been quite populated, really." And yet every new show he's made has been 
described by one or other critic as a "comeback vehicle" and almost every press 
interview presented as a watershed moment, signifying – at last! – the 
disgraced star's rehabilitation.

"Yes," he agrees drily, "I appear to have had more comebacks than Status Quo. 
And been 'welcomed back by the BBC', too. And you think, well, I was working at 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> about two months after Have I 
Got News For You. I never even left." The observation is delivered in the same 
ironic tone of detachment with which he used to read out his old show's more 
bizarre news items – but doesn't it annoy him? "Er, yes. Yeah. I've never quite 
understood it, other than it makes an interesting story to maintain there's 
been some great redemption. It's not like audiences suddenly stopped laughing, 
or – like it was made out in the tabloids – that I was walking down the street 
and people would shun me as I passed. Actually, it was the opposite. And I 
never stopped working."

His latest project is Pramface <http://www.comedy.co.uk/guide/tv/pramface/>, 
a comedy drama in which he plays the father of a well-heeled 18-year-old girl 
who gets pregnant from a rebelliously drunken one-night stand with a less 
well-heeled 16-year-old virgin. I've seen the first episode and it is very 
funny – sharply written, quite rude and ideal for Deayton, a master of the 
urbane middle-class British husband role, whose disappointment and anger is 
betrayed with subtle economy. He hasn't yet seen it himself and admits, "You 
just hope, when it goes out, you don't think, 'Oh God, I wish I'd done it 
completely differently.' There's no audience feedback, so you're kind of in the 
hands of the director."

Which does he finds more exposing, acting or presenting? "Presenting, I think, 
definitely. If you mess up, everyone sees you messing up and it's your fault. 
Acting, you're hiding behind a character, and I've always thought if it isn't 
any good, then there are all sorts of other people you can blame." He laughs. 
"You can offload responsibility."

When I ask how close he thinks his presenting persona approximates to his own 
character, he says, "It's probably easier for you to tell, because I feel as if 
I'm the same person." I've had limited exposure to the material, I point out, 
whereas he's had decades to analyse it, so isn't he better qualified to answer?

"Yes," he confesses, laughing, "desperately trying to pass the buck. OK. So, 
is the persona of the guy behind the desk the same as me? Um, no, I don't think 
it is. I fell into presenting after doing about a decade of parody shows of 
presenter-based shows, and a lot of it was me parodying a presenter, so when 
I started doing Have I Got News For You, I carried on that persona. So in some 
ways it's a sort of pastiche of my own pastiche – if that doesn't sound too 
arseholic. Er, which I think it does, actually."

He is a presenter in his other current project – a new series of the Radio 4 
panel game It's Your Round <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00yrv9d>, in which 
every week four guests each devise their own comic round. It didn't sound to me 
like an idea that would work, until I heard it. Deayton agrees. "You never 
really know if any show's going to work within the series, depending on which 
rounds the guests turn up with. But in a way that's built into the format, so 
if something isn't working, it's quite fun to be able to talk about the fact 
that it's not really working – and that it's not really," he adds with a laugh, 
"your fault. It does help if I can turn to the person on my left and say, 
'Well, I'm sorry, the reason this is crap' " – and he starts to laugh again – 
" 'is because you brought it along, and you maintained that it was going to be 
good.' So it's nice to be able to offload any kind of responsibility – again."

Deayton has a comedian's instinct for a running gag, and this motif of endless 
buck-passing sounds to me just like that. Further into the conversation, 
however, I begin to realise it can be read in one of two ways – depending on 
what you think about the scandal that cost him his old job. "The great British 
public," he claims at one point, "can tell when someone's being victimised." 
But that's not how everyone saw it. If you believe Deayton had only himself to 
blame, then the running gag will probably sound less like a joke than further 
evidence of an arrogant refusal to accept responsibility. If, on the other 
hand, you think the scandal was either largely tabloid lies, or none of our 
business, you'll think he is simply being funny.
 Deayton with Have I Got News For You team captains, Ian Hislop and Paul 
Merton. ‘For years I got stick for the amount I earned. I was often tempted to 
say, “If you cast your gaze to either side of me, there are others earning the 
same.” ' Photograph: BBC 
Before we met, I'd wondered if he would turn out to be nothing like the 
Deayton we know from our screens – bone dry, understated, impenetrably poised, 
with a surgical wit that can be cutting to the point of cruel, but rarely if 
ever unfunny. I would say now that he's warmer than you might expect, less 
intimidating, and perhaps more sensitive, but otherwise any distinction between 
performer and person is barely discernible. His laugh sounds like an unusually 
grown-up giggle, and he has a gift for injecting it into a word, mid-syllable, 
making almost everything he says sound amusing. When I ask about his domestic 
life, which he shares with his long-term partnerLise Mayer 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0562453/>, a comedy writer, and their son Isaac, 
10, he comes across as the rather droll headmaster of north London's comedy set.

"I bumped into Julia Davis 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/profiles/julia_davis.shtml>'s husband the other 
day – they live near us in Islington – and he had one of their twins with him. 
I said, 'Which one's this?' " – Deayton mimes the father peering into the 
pushchair, looking back up and spreading his hands in a baffled shrug. 
Laughing, Deayton adds with a sly grin, "A lot of our friends are drifting west 
now, though. They've passed away to Notting Hill. We do use Notting Hill as an 
adjective, in a slightly derogatory way. 'It's a bit Notting Hill' means a bit, 
'We'll wait and see what else is happening before we commit.' They'll always be 
the last people to reply to any invites, while they wait to see all their 
different invitations come in." He affects to check himself with a brisk cough. 
"I'm being terribly rude about most of my friends."

Some of his former friends have been quite rude about him. Paul Merton 
<http://paulmerton.com/> and Ian Hislop 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/ian-hislop>, HIGNFY's team captains, were 
widely reported to resent their chairman's pay packet and to have been 
influential in his dismissal, with Merton describing him as "arrogant". It's 
Deayton who brings this up, when I remark that it's funny how presenters' 
salaries make scandalised headlines, whereas no one ever seems to mention how 
much actors earn.

"Or team captains, interestingly, I've noted over the years. This is, er, 
yeah, something that I've noted quite a lot in the many years I've been behind 
a desk," he quips. Why does he think that is? "I genuinely don't know. I find 
it baffling that for years and years I got tremendous stick for the amount of 
money I earned. I was often tempted to say" – and he starts to laugh again – 
" 'If you just cast your gaze to either side of me, there are some other people 
earning exactly the same as I am. We are on parity.' "

Hislop and Merton were on the same as him? "Yes. And some of them wander in at 
four in the afternoon of that recording, and other people have been working on 
it for four days." Again, the clipped dry laugh. "And he's the one who's 
getting the stick for earning all the money. So it did seem curious – and still 
does."

Why didn't he get on with them, then? "We always got on terribly well." That's 
not what I'd heard. "Yes, well, that's another urban myth," he laughs. 
"Bizarrely perpetrated by them. Which is odd. Certainly Paul has rewritten 
history a bit in terms of our relationship. We were always the last ones out of 
the bar on a Thursday night. We were clapping each other on the back, saying 
how wonderful the show was. 'A phenomenon – it's a phenomenon,' Paul always 
used to say. So, yeah, we always got on very well."

Urban myths are a recurring theme, because Deayton maintains that most of 
what's been written about him isn't true. "The Sun once did 20 things you never 
knew aboutAngus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton>
 – and I didn't know 16 of them. The Daily Mail wrote something about me a few 
years ago and it had 36 sentences in it, and 33 of them were lies. The only 
three that weren't were quotes. Everything else you could put a 'not' in the 
sentence and you'd be closer to the truth." Almost the only much-quoted fact he 
will confirm was that at the age of five he decided he wanted to be either "a 
funny man or an advert".

That ambition was quickly forgotten, though. Born in 1956 into a traditional 
middle-class home counties family – with an ex-naval father and a teacher 
mother – he attended minor public schools, was good at sport and studied 
languages at Oxford. But though a big comedy fan, he'd never thought of having 
a go at it until an Oxford contemporary,Richard Curtis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/richard-curtis>, asked him to stand in for a 
last-minute drop-out in an Edinburgh festival revue. Deayton enjoyed it, toured 
Australia with aspoof Bee Gees band <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T-gZKRKNy4w>
, and began writing for comedy sketch shows.

He spent the 80s writing scripts, doing radio voiceovers and commercials, 
playing the straight man in bigger stars' shows –Rowan Atkinson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rowan_Atkinson>, Alexei Sayle 
<http://www.alexeisayle.me/> – and making the Radio 4 comedy series Radio Active
 <http://www.britishcomedy.org.uk/comedy/radioactive.htm>, which transferred to 
BBC2 asKYTV <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWtPEXfQki0> in 1989. But he was 
basically unknown until 1990, when a part inOne Foot In The Grave 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/onefootinthegrave/> and the chair of HIGNFY turned 
him into a household name more or less overnight.

Looking back at his career in the 90s, certain ironies are inescapable. He 
fronted a programme calledThe Lying Game 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00gzwq4>, and another called The Temptation 
Game <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0164291/>, and when asked by one interviewer 
if fame had brought temptations his way, replied, "Actually, there are plenty 
of reasons why you should not give in. Someone could sell their story to the 
Daily Mail." So when I now ask if fame had brought with it concerns about his 
privacy, what I really mean is how did he think he could get away with cocaine 
trysts with strangers – or a long-running affair – without the papers finding 
out? But he interprets the question quite differently.

"Well, towards the late 80s, I started working quite closely with Rowan 
[Atkinson] and I think I learned from him how to deal with fame. He's intensely 
thoughtful about the whole thing, and private, and quite aloof. I think I 
probably learned from him how to conduct myself." This is a surprise, given how 
disastrously public Deayton's private life became.

"Yes, but sadly not anything I could do anything about. You have to kind of 
put your trust in someone – you can't be mistrustful of everyone you meet and 
everyone you come across. And sometimes that trust is ill-founded, and what can 
you do, short of actually never, ever putting your faith in anyone again?"

Some would say the answer's easy – you stay faithful to your partner. 
"Ye-e-e-es. Yes. Hmm. Well, I think that's kind of being wise after the event. 
There are definitely people I wish I'd never met, and I wish I'd never placed 
any trust in. But as I say, unless you go through life expecting everyone to 
behave in the worst way that you could ever imagine, then, er, there's only so 
much you can do about it."

A tabloid reader might think Deayton has some nerve to complain about betrayal 
of trust. The story his former mistress sold in 2002 wasn't pretty: she said 
she joined him and Mayer on holiday at their Italian villa, where they would 
sneak off for sex, leaving an unsuspecting six-months-pregnant Mayer lying by 
the pool. She claimed he enjoyed a threesome with her and a friend the night 
before his son was born, and would often hire prostitutes to join them in bed 
when she was unable to satisfy his Olympian sexual appetite.

Deayton says that so many outrageous lies were printed, "it would take an 
entire book the length of War And Peace to actually unravel it all". But he 
declines to identify any – "I think it's too little too late, and I don't feel 
as if I really want to start unpicking it all" – so there's no way to judge his 
indignation, or to tell if his reticence really might be a rare celebrity 
example of wisdom and self-control. "I always kind of expected that at some 
stage someone would explode the myths, but no one really has. And I don't think 
it should be me who does it."

He did consider giving evidence to the Leveson inquiry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/leveson-inquiry>, but didn't want to 
"regurgitate everything again". When I ask if he's been following the hearings, 
though, his face lights up. "The gift that keeps on giving? Yes, every day." He 
laughs. "It is extraordinary, reading Hugh Grant's witness statement, I just 
thought, that's what life was like for me for six months. And, to be honest, 
it's the tip of the iceberg, because phone hacking is horrendous and ghastly, 
but what about hacking into bank accounts and medical records, entrapment, 
blackmail, blagging your way into someone's house or making threatening phone 
calls to elderly relatives?" He experienced all of that? "Yes."

Deayton tried to stop his ex-mistress selling her story by taking out an 
injunction, and says criticism of gagging orders "is always dressed up as being 
about a woman's right to – but to what, though?"

To do with the story of her own life as she chooses, is usually the answer. 
"Ye-e-e-e-es, but on the whole what they're doing is simply revealing details 
of a private relationship. I suppose it's technically anyone's right to do 
that, but you can't divorce the fact that they're making shedloads of money by 
doing it. And why would anyone," he adds with an expression of utter distaste, 
"want to do that?"

It's impossible to know if Deayton was more sinned against than sinning. What 
comes across very clearly, however, is his assumption that most people believe 
he was. His reluctance to reopen the whole saga is entirely understandable, and 
probably very sensible. But in the absence of any actual rebuttal, I suspect 
many readers may infer from all his complaints about betrayal and intrusion not 
bad luck or injustice, but self-pity.

He looks taken aback, thinks for a moment and for once the air of ironic 
amusement gives way to a flash of real feeling. "Right. Well, OK. I would say 
that I've suffered a fair amount of punishment over the years, one way or 
another. Yes, I would plead guilty to having had an affair which I shouldn't 
have had. But it's not really anyone else's business than mine. No one is in my 
relationship, so they can't make judgments about my relationship. There was one 
two-night stand, and there was an affair. Well, I don't think that's completely 
unheard of, either in the realms of relationships, or indeed television 
presenters. There are many who have done as much, if not worse."

I wonder if he was ever tempted to retaliate by identifying some of them. 
"Certainly on the drug front, yes. It would be like looking at the Manchester 
United team and pointing at Bobby Charlton as being the alcoholic because he 
had a glass of beer. I know a lot of people within the business find it quite 
amusing that I, of all people… well, I'm not necessarily talking about the 
current crop of presenters, but certainly 10 years ago, it was slightly odd to 
pick me out. With the exception ofClive Anderson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clive_Anderson>." He pauses to think. "I can't 
actually think of anyone else. I've never said so before, but now I have. He's 
the only one."

• Pramface starts on BBC3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3>, on 23 
February, at 9pm
 