
One company will supply nearly a third of the world’s beer from next year, 
after drinks giant Anheuser-Busch InBev reached a final agreement for its £71bn 
takeover of Britain’sSABMiller <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller>.

The Budweiser owner AB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> employs 155,000 people, 
compared with 70,000 at SAB Miller. Their combined revenues total $73bn, which 
is higher than companies such as Google or PepsiCo.

The deal is expected to be completed in the second half of 2016, pending 
clearance from regulators and shareholders. AB InBevwill pay £44 a share for 
SABMiller, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/oct/13/sabmiller-ab-inbev-deal-megabrew-bad-taste-mouth>
 up from its initial offer of £38 made privately in September. SABMiller will 
sell its 58% stake in US joint venture MillerCoors to Molson Coors for £8bn, to 
allay competition concerns in the US.

The FTSE 100 firm, which owns Peroni and Grolsch, could also be forced to 
offload its market-leading Snow brand in China, where the country’s drinkers 
account for a quarter of global beer consumption.

Beer titans opt to merge as trend for smaller craft brews comes to a head
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/17/sabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs>
The takeover will allow Belgium’s AB InBev, which also makes Stella Artois, to 
tap into SABMiller’s strength in fast-growing African and Asian markets.The new 
company will supply nearly one in three beers sold around the world. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/17/sabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs>

Carlos Brito, the chief executive of AB InBev, said: “Our combination with 
SABMiller is about creating the first truly global beer company and bringing 
more choices to beer drinkers in markets outside of the US.”


The combined firm, due to be listed in Belgium, is expected to make cost 
savings of $1.4bn (£920m), some of which will come from reducing staff numbers. 
The two firms are yet to announce a name for the combined business, which has 
been nicknamed “MegaBrew” in the City of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/sep/18/megabrew-merger-refreshes-parts-of-the-city-other-deals-fail-to-reach>
.

Agreement on the deal ends months of discussions during which the takeover 
panel granted three extensions to its usual time limit on mergers and 
takeovers. AB InBev’s first offer of £38 a share was rejected,prompting Brito 
to make a public plea to SAB Miller investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/08/beer-merger-ab-inbev-says-sabmiller-board-has-refused-to-engage-with-us>
. AB InBev subsequently raised its bid four times.

Bankers involved in the deal are expected to rack up fees of more than $250m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/14/bankers-to-enjoy-fees-bonanza-from-sabmiller-and-ab-inbev-deal>
, according to the New York-based Freeman Consulting Services.
 