
The government has been accused of introducing a useless ban on using animals 
to test cleaning products after it emerged that the new prohibition will not 
apply to all ingredients.

The coalition promised to end animal testing on household products in its 
programme for government in 2010. On Thursday Lynne Featherstone, a Home Office 
minister, announced that the ban would come into force in October but said it 
would not apply to all the ingredients that go into the products, which include 
detergents, polishes and cleaning products, laundry products, household 
cleaners, air fresheners and toilet cleaners.

The ban will apply to any chemical where more than half of its usage is 
expected to be as an ingredient in household products.  Featherstone said 
testing of such ingredients on animals would be banned unless there was a legal 
requirement or an exceptional justification could be made in advance.

This appears to be a significant U-turn after consultation with industry over 
the course of the parliament. In 2011, Featherstone said: “The prohibition will 
apply to both finished household products and their ingredients, although in 
practice mainly the latter are tested.”

Animal rights groups condemned the new proposals as useless and a sham because 
it is the ingredients that are the problem. They said no household products 
themselves had been tested on animals since 2010.


Jan Creamer, president of the National Anti-Vivisection Society, said: “People 
will feel betrayed that the government has not taken action to prevent animals 
being harmed in household product tests despite its promises. After almost five 
years of waiting, we have been given legislation which will not save any 
animals from suffering.”

Michelle Thew, chief executive of the British Union for the Abolition of 
Vivisection (BUAV), said the government “promised a ban but today failed to 
deliver on that promise”.

Thew said: “This ‘ban’ will not include animal testing for [all] ingredients. 
After many years of campaigning on this issue securing strong public and 
political backing, we ask the government: what will now change? There are major 
loopholes in this announcement which will allow industry to continue the cruel 
use of animals in tests to produce a new brand of washing-up liquid or window 
cleaner. It is a wasted opportunity to make a real and effective difference for 
animals.”


The BUAV says the effects of animal testing on household products can be 
appalling, including vomiting, seizures, internal bleeding and organ damage, 
meaning that even when the test is not fatal, animals are routinely killed 
afterwards.

Mimi Bekhechi, director of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (Peta), 
said: “The government’s intention to ban the use of animals for testing 
finished household products is a baby step in the right direction, but far more 
needs to be done.

“Finished products themselves have not been tested on animals in Britain since 
2010, and the public was promised an animal testing ban for both products and 
ingredients by the minister in 2011.

“We already know that we shouldn’t swallow bleach or put it in our eyes – we 
don’t need to force chemicals down animals’ throats or drip chemicals into 
their eyes to confirm it, which is why fewer than one in 10 people in the UK 
supports the use of animals for testing non-medical products such as home 
cleaning products.”

Featherstone said the testing of ingredients of household products on animals 
would be allowed without prior notice if the testing of that ingredient was 
required under the law.

Companies would then have to notify the Home Office of any such test after it 
had taken place. If a firm wanted to test an ingredient that was not required 
for regulatory approval, it would have to apply to do so.

Featherstone defended the ban, saying it applied to ingredients under certain 
conditions. “This ban fulfils our commitment to end the testing of household 
products on animals in the UK. We have gone further by also banning the testing 
of ingredients, unless there is a legal requirement necessary to protect 
humans, animals or the environment,” she said.

“Beyond this, any organisation wishing to test an ingredient for other reasons 
will have to prove there is a “strong justification” for testing in animals and 
there is no alternative. We will apply a robust harm-benefit analysis before 
taking a decision and expect there to be very few examples where this can be 
justified.

“It is obviously important to ensure chemicals used in the household are safe. 
However this announcement provides a clear statement that the coalition 
government is firmly committed to reducing the use of animals in this area of 
testing.”

• This article was amended on 18 March 2015. An earlier version said the ban 
on animal testing would not apply to the ingredients that go into household 
products. In fact the ban includes any chemical where more than half of its 
usage is expected to be as an ingredient in household products.
 