
As planning applications go, it would be fair to say that case #10/90250/FULODA
 
<http://planning.london2012.com/publicaccess/tdc/DcApplication/application_detailview.aspx?caseno=L313TJSZ01400>
, submitted to the London boroughs of Newham and Waltham Forest planning 
committees in May 2010, stood out somewhat. In among the loft conversions and 
Victorian conservatories that mark the staple fare of the weekly planning 
agenda in this part of east London, this particular file put the sober case for 
a 115m steel tower in the form of a vast, deconstructed spiral, painted bright 
red, lit up at night and visible from 10km away. Did the neighbours mind?

By the time it reached the application stage, the creators of the 
ArcelorMittal Orbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/oct/28/arcelor-mittal-olmpic-tower-grower>
 on the Olympic site (or "Boris's Folly", as it was generally known on the blog 
sites) had already invited as many neighbours as possible to comment. TheBig 
Opportunity <http://www.thebigopportunity.org.uk/>, a conglomeration of 
interest groups in the vicinity, with 56 members ranging from the East London 
Inventors Club to the Ladies' Wing of the Followers of His [Hindu] Holiness 
Swaminarayan Mandir, had been consulted. Responses had been invited from 
interested individuals from the Orbit's "region", which stretched as far as 
Milton Keynes, Brighton, Canterbury and Southampton. From all this reaching 
out, 118 comments had been received and noted by the time of the full planning 
application: 39% wrote in favour of a design variously described as 
"beautiful", "fragile" and "feminine". The rest argued in forceful terms that 
it was "ugly" and "not symmetrical" and objected in no particular order to the 
fact that it was red, pointless, expensive and an advert for Arcelor Mittal 
(and quite a cheap one at that).

At an open planning meeting, one of the tower's creators, the engineer Cecil 
Balmond <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cecil_Balmond>, who is responsible for 
some of the world's most inspired and innovative structures, recalls how he 
thought they had lost it. "From the floor, people just seemed to be lining up 
with complaints, one after the other," he recalls. "It looked pretty bad at one 
point. We don't want this and what is the point of that? But then after a while 
came the counter-arguments: Britain needs something different and new, we can't 
bury our heads in the sand, all that. I just stood back and listened."

By the time of that public debate, Balmond and his fellow Orbit-creator, the 
artistAnish Kapoor <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor>, had 
become rather used to explaining their ideas to committees and taking feedback. 
They had (mostly calmly) addressed the concerns of critics, conservationists, 
health and safety officers and legacy deliverers one by one. Rather than 
calling it a tower, they liked to refer to the Orbit as "the tallest sculpture 
in the UK". In response to a suggestion that this sculpture had no relevance 
for London or the Olympics, it was argued that "the Orbit will take on a 
relevance of its own" after the Games had ended. As detractors had correctly 
observed, the colour red was chosen "intentionally for it not to blend with its 
surroundings". Charged with asymmetry, they argued that it was "meant to look 
unstable or fluid". Those who were standing up for the beleaguered bat colonies 
in the area had little cause for concern either: the low levels of light on the 
Orbit "would have no discernible effect on the bat assemblage over the Olympic 
site" or, indeed, on human assemblages in the neighbouring streets.

Last week, in advance of the tower's opening, I went to talk to Balmond and 
Kapoor at their respective studios about how they managed to stay sane and see 
this strange project through. In a way, they are typical Londoners. Balmond was 
born in Kandy, Sri Lanka, Kapoor in Mumbai, India. They both came to England as 
students and never left. Balmond has his hi-tech base, all 3D printers and 
biomorphic structures, on the edge of Hackney, a mile or two from the Olympic 
park; Kapoor's studio is a linked complex of factory spaces that stretches all 
the way down a road in Camberwell, south of the river (as his fame and ambition 
have spread so hashis workshop 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/daily-news/caseyfierro-unwraps-anish-kapoor-studio/8625145.article>
; it now has the feel of a kind of aerospace lab manned by medieval guildsmen). 
In each man's office, scale models of the Orbit have pride of place. And 
despite what has been a gruelling process, both Kapoor and Balmond retain a 
sense of boyish excitement – or perhaps simple relief.

Kapoor started out in his teens with ambitions to be an engineer and this 
project has more than satisfied any remaining vestiges of those dreams: "I 
hope," he says, "I always will have a fascination with that archaic, elemental 
need to feel like an ant in an ant colony. To climb up the pyramids and just 
feel awe at man-made structures. That was the attraction of this for me."

For a role model in that enthusiasm, Kapoor needed to look no further than the 
project's driving force.Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> was almost lost for superlatives 
when announcing that work was starting on his great scarlet tower in 2010: "It 
would have boggled the minds of the Romans," the mayor declaimed. "It would 
have dwarfed the aspirations of Gustave Eiffel, and it will certainly be worthy 
of the best show on Earth, in the greatest city on Earth."

That was certainly the idea to begin with. The story goes that Johnson, keen 
to make his mark on the Olympic site that had become the fiefdom of the Tory 
peer Lord Coe, bumped into Britain's richest man,Lakshmi Mittal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lakshmi-mittal> in the lavatories at the 
World Economic Forum in Davos in 2009. Grasping his opportunity with both 
hands, the mayor buttonholed the steel magnate about the possibility of funding 
a lasting symbol of London 2012, boggling the minds of Romans etc. Mittal 
himself confirms to me that "Boris might have even taken less time than he says 
to convince me... sometimes you just hear an idea that resonates with you - 
this was one of them." Soon thereafter, Mittal pledged £17m of his fortune to 
Boris's priapic fantasy and the mayor sent out a notice inviting the artists 
and architects of his realm to find a way of spending that money.

"Anish called me up that morning," Balmond recalls. The pair had long been 
friends and had collaborated on various projects including Kapoor'sMarsyas 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?q=Marsyas&hl=en&client=safari&sa=X&rls=en&biw=1763&bih=1025&tbm=isch&prmd=imvnsb&tbnid=8Cu3gD68UzkrLM:&imgrefurl=http://www.0lll.com/architecture-exhibitions/%3Fgal%3D15&docid=B6ZBrU0swOHKxM&imgurl=http://www.0lll.com/architecture-exhibitions/gallery15/marsyas_01.jpg&w=638&h=479&ei=nXCiT6qLL_OM4gSVn8zeCA&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=597&vpy=188&dur=547&hovh=194&hovw=259&tx=136&ty=120&sig=112012202402260910257&page=1&tbnh=140&tbnw=186&start=0&ndsp=48&ved=1t:429,r:3,s:0,i:87>
, the brilliant crimson horn that filled the Turbine Hall at Tate Modern in 
2002. "He said, 'Have you seen this one?' I hadn't. Then he said, 'Shall we get 
together and do this? You know, rival the Eiffel Tower and so on?' And I 
thought, 'Well, no one's going to say no to that.' So we joined up. And then 
realised that there wasn't the money for the Eiffel Tower."

Kapoor and Balmond sat down with a sketch pad and thought what the reference 
points might be. As well as Eiffel, they thought ofTatlin's Tower 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tatlin's_Tower> (the vast constructivist monument 
conceived for Petrograd in the year of the Russian Revolution, but never 
built). And they thought, too, of the Tower of Babel, particularlyBruegel's 
version 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Tower+of+Babel+Bruegel&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&prmd=imvns&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=_nGiT9SIFcj74QS52unUCA&ved=0CDgQsAQ&biw=1763&bih=1025>
 of it, an irregular mass of stone and humanity reaching chaotically 
heavenwards, like some termite's mound. And then they thought: how can we make 
a mythical tower new?

"Anish was saying, 'Well, all towers go up, but what can we do that is 
different?'" Balmond recalls. He couldn't imagine to start with. "But then I 
thought, everything that goes up is concentric, essentially. That's what we 
need to get away from. So I thought 'orbit', just as a metaphor originally." He 
sketched a loose ellipse on a piece of paper. "Now planetary orbits are highly 
unstable things, whirling around, but they are stable in the sense that they 
follow a fixed path. So then I drew an orbit that comes back on itself but 
keeps touching itself. So that was the idea."

It was to be 180m high, the platforms just stuck in as and where. With this 
sketch, from a starting line-up of 60 proposals, Balmond and Kapoor made the 
last three, alongside Antony Gormley, looking to recreate the success of his 
Angel of the North, and the Hackney-based architectsCaruso St John 
<http://www.carusostjohn.com/>. Just before he walked in to present to the 
first of many committees, Balmond recalls: "Someone from the mayor's office 
said to me, 'Do you know the budget?' And I didn't. She said it was around 
£25m. And I thought, 'Oh Christ!' Because what we had I knew would cost £50m to 
£80m. So straight away we brought it down to as low as we could go and still 
get a good sightline into the stadium: 115 metres."

That was only the first of a series of compromises. In this sense, as Kapoor 
observes the Orbit is very much of its political moment: "The basic premise was 
to do everything you promised for about half the money," he says, with a grin. 
Earlier in the week he had watched the Olympic mockumentaryTwenty Twelve 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/proginfo/2012/16/Twenty-Twelve-4.html>'s take 
on the process. "The organising committee on the show come up with the idea 
that Orbit should be a symbol for promoting sexual health," he says. "But sadly 
they copped out half way through and don't end up putting a condom on it as 
planned. What is astonishing about it is how accurate it was in terms of some 
of the meetings we all had..."

As Balmond says, with a similar sense of weary mischief: "I suppose the story 
behind the story is that the competition seemed to go on for ever, round after 
round." The decision process lasted the best part of a year. "At one of these 
meetings, I said to Boris, 'Just choose someone, for God's sake. Otherwise 
nothing will get built.'"

Balmond and Kapoor not only had to convince Nicholas Serota and his aesthetic 
jury of the value of the design, but also the "legacy committee", who, full of 
Dome-shaped nightmares, didn't want a "white elephant, still less a red one". 
So there was insistence on maximum retail and restaurant areas. The elevator 
had risen up the outside of the tower in the original plan but that cost too 
much so they put it inside one of the legs. The walkways that spiral up to the 
viewing areas were originally open but health and safety insisted they be 
covered. Gaps between stair treads were also removed. "First, any space had to 
be too narrow for a mobile phone," Balmond recalls, "then it was a 50p piece."

After that, the Olympic delivery people, who were building the stadium site, 
"were instinctively against it because they had done a brilliant job of getting 
things ready on time and they didn't necessarily want this huge art piece in 
the middle of it all, potentially screwing all their plans up".

In order to minimise disruption, the Orbit was put up without scaffolding, and 
essentially by three men: one in a crane and two rising slowly on cherry 
pickers, bolting the ultimate Meccano together piece by piece. And, despite all 
the earlier compromises, both Balmond and Kapoor are immensely satisfied with 
the result, though they are tired of the question: "What is it?"

"The fact is that you will never get Orbit in 2D," Balmond says. "Its richness 
and its over-layers can look excessive to a certain kind of mind. But 3D and 
the scale are the only way to judge the piece. Even then, it's a tough 
aesthetic for some."

"The problem with models," Kapoor says, "is that you can't pretend scale. You 
have to experience it."

With this in mind, early on the morning after I had spoken to Balmond and 
Kapoor, I drove east to have a look at their creation. As I came down from the 
A12 flyover, the Orbit was rising into the gloomiest morning, like some strange 
helter-skelter, defiantly red against the black storm clouds (Boris Johnson's 
greatest regret is that it did not incorporate a slide to whizz down). The 
Olympic development has sought to make sense of the particularly chaotic bit of 
urban landscape that the tower presides over; it hasn't succeeded quite and the 
tangle of the Orbit seems, from all the vantage points I could find, to add to 
the confusion. The closer you get to it, the less sense you can make of it, 
beyond a smile-inducing kind of energy and movement. Which is, for better or 
worse, exactly what Kapoor and Balmond (and perhaps Boris and Mittal) had in 
mind.

You can see in it what you want, as Balmond observes. Mittal tells me that to 
him the Orbit "represents the essence of what the Olympics are about, pushing 
yourself to the limit... building the unbuildable..." (though he also likes the 
fact that the structure that bears his name is "a showcase for everything steel 
has to offer...") Pandering a little to his sponsors Balmond admits he did one 
"cheeky presentation" where he extrapolated the five Olympic rings from the 
swirl, "a bit of post-rationalisation, but they are there". More than that, 
though, he claims to see "a kind of semi-organised flux, which was a pretty 
good way of describingLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> in the 
21st century, and all its energy frothing and bubbling round and around." That 
kind of thing.

Kapoor's worst nightmare, he said, would have been to create a logo or, worse, 
a national symbol in the manner of the Beijing Olympics. "I can clearly make 
sleek objects but this was not meant to be one of them." So whatwas it meant to 
be?

"It's a series of discrete events tied together," Kapoor says, which again is 
something approximating his idea of London. "We didn't want an icon, we wanted 
a kind of moving narrative. You start under this great domed canopy that sits 
above you, almost ominous darkness, sucking you in. Then you come up slowly to 
light. At the top, there is a room with two very large concave mirrors, 
bringing the sky in, as if you are in the lens room of a telescope. There are 
moments, walking round, when it looks a jumbled mess, and then at certain 
points you might see little harmonies and clarity. That is the kind of thing we 
wanted, not something that gave itself away all at once."

Kapoor and Balmond can talk about their creation in this way because they have 
had to. But they prefer simpler notions really. "It was just an attempt to 
answer the question: how do you go up if not in straight lines?" says Balmond, 
who plans to watch the 100m final from the top. Kapoor, meanwhile, sums up his 
sense of his creation with a final laugh. "Don't you think it's just amazing 
that they actually let us build this?" he asks, with undimmed incredulity. And 
the more you look at it, the more you agree.

• More on Anish Kapoor and the construction of the Orbit
 <http://www.anishkapoor.com/>
The Orbit opens on 28 July, with tickets available to those who already have 
tickets to Olympic events, and after the Games to the general public.
www.arcelormittalorbit.com <http://www.arcelormittalorbit.com/>
 