
The architect and artist Anish Kapoor has exhibited at the Yinchaun biennale 
in China despite planning to boycott the event in solidarity with his friend 
and fellow artist Ai Weiwei, who wasdropped from the program 
<http://theartnewspaper.com/news/ai-weiwei-dropped-from-biennial-in-china-/> 
for political reasons.


Ahead of the biennale’s opening last week, Kapoor told journalists in Seoul 
that he was considering to withdraw: “Since they’ve excluded Weiwei, I think 
it’s problematic [to show at the biennale],” he said. “To be honest, I’m 
wondering if I’m going to take part.”


After it emerged that Kapoor’s work was still part of the biennale, which 
opened on Friday, Ai responded on Twitter by saying that no artist had reacted 
to the political victimisation of a fellow artist. “Unsurprising for the 
Chinese art market,” he said, addadded that 
<https://twitter.com/aiww/status/775272014428966912> “of the over 70 artists, 
most of them from outside of China, none have publicly given their opinion on 
this issue”.
艾未未 Ai Weiwei (@aiww) 
No artist has reacted to the political victimization of a fellow artist. 
Unsurprising for the Chinese art market.https://t.co/nVbE9bq5Do 
<https://t.co/nVbE9bq5Do>
 <https://twitter.com/aiww/status/775272609252511744> September 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/aiww/status/775272609252511744> 
The two artists had joined hands as they walked through London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/17/ai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees>
 last year, in a march to show solidarity with refugees around the world.


Ai Weiwei and Anish Kapoor lead London walk of compassion for refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/17/ai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees>
Over lunch in Seoul on 31 August, before a new exhibition of his work at the 
Kukje Gallery, Kapoor said artists needed to take a stand against censorship, 
and showing at the inaugural Yinchuan biennale implied that they sided with the 
Chinese government’s alleged censorship of Ai.


“I’m going to dare to say what I really think about it ... I think censorship 
is not acceptable. We need to stand against it,” Kapoor said. “So even though 
the work’s on the way I’m not sure I’ll show it. One wants to support these 
things because it’s a fledgling biennale and they’re trying to do the right 
thing. But to take part means to be on the side of the authorities. I don’t 
want to make too much of it, but at the same time it’s problematic.”

His stand was widely reported in the art media, but his work opened at the 
Yinchuan biennale on Friday. Kapoor has yet to give a statement about his 
involvement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanish-kapoor-in-china-art-show-despite-plan-to-pull-out-in-support-of-ai-weiwei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca8ed8c8707ddceae22b1b53a7ce24eb748eef55%2F0_0_4500_2994%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor's%20work%20on%20display%20in%20China%20biennale%20despite%20plans%20to%20boycott%20in%20support%20of%20Ai%20Weiwei&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanish-kapoor-in-china-art-show-despite-plan-to-pull-out-in-support-of-ai-weiwei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%27s%20work%20on%20display%20in%20China%20biennale%20despite%20plans%20to%20boycott%20in%20support%20of%20Ai%20Weiwei&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanish-kapoor-in-china-art-show-despite-plan-to-pull-out-in-support-of-ai-weiwei%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca8ed8c8707ddceae22b1b53a7ce24eb748eef55%2F0_0_4500_2994%2F4500.jpg>
 New work by Anish Kapoor at the MOCA Yinchuan biennale, which opened on Friday 
9 September. Photograph: MOCA Yinchuan Biennale 
Organisers of the biennale had invited Ai to exhibit a sculpture made from 
steel bars 
<http://www.rfa.org/english/news/china/ai-weiwei-hits-back-after-being-dropped-from-art-show-in-chinas-ningxia-08292016120500.html>
 taken from the rubble of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake that left 80,000 people 
dead – but the work was then excluded from the show a month before the opening. 
Writing on his Instagram account, Ai said, “I have just learned that my artwork 
has been excluded due to my ‘political sensitivity’.”

He said a “vague” letter <https://twitter.com/aiww/status/768142612331192320> 
from the artistic director Hsieh Suchen confirmed that his participation had 
been cancelled – a move that he said “comes as a surprise for an ‘international 
art biennale’, with over a hundred international artists and a foreign curator”.

He continued: “China is trying to develop into a modern society without 
freedom of speech, but without political arguments involving higher aesthetic 
morals and philosophies, art is only served as a puppet of fake cultural 
efforts.

“Therefore I am happy not to be a part of that effort as a political 
decoration. I believe the real effort we should make, is in defending freedom 
of speech for our humanism. Only by doing so, art is worth making.”

Kapoor and Ai have been contacted for further comment by Guardian Australia.

Ai Weiwei's statement on being removed from the MoCA Yinchuan Biennale: I have 
just learnt that my artwork has been excluded due to my "political 
sensitivity". Censorships in communist regions have been present since the 
existence of the power. Yet it still comes as a surprise to me for an 
"international art biennale", with over a hundred international artists and a 
foreign curator participating, to remove a single artist for the reason of 
defending human rights and freedom of speech. This shows what we face is a 
world which is divided and segregated by ideology, and art is used merely as a 
decoration for political agendas in certain societies. China is trying to 
develop into a modern society without freedom of speech, but without political 
arguments involving higher aesthetic morals and philosophies, art is only 
served as a puppet of fake cultural efforts. Therefore I am happy not to be a 
part of that effort as a political decoration. I believe the real effort we 
should make, is in defending freedom of speech for our humanism. Only by doing 
so, art is worth making. <https://www.instagram.com/p/BJfuZXNDytn/>

A photo posted by Ai Weiwei (@aiww) on Aug 24, 2016 at 8:00am PDT
 