
Anne Hathaway will reprise the role of a US air force pilot tasked with 
operating an unmanned drone in a film version of Grounded, a play she appeared 
in off-Broadway. The Oscar winner for Les Misérables will also produce the 
picture, according toVariety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/anne-hathaway-drone-movie-grounded-1201767579/>
.

Julie Taymor directed Hathaway in the 2015 production of the play by George 
Brant. No director has yet been locked for the film adaptation.

The one-woman play was first seen in Edinburgh in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/04/grounded-review> and 
off-Broadway in 2014, followed by Taymor’s collaboration with Hathaway at the 
Public theatre in New York. Variety reports that Hathaway secured the film 
rights before her first performance, for which she later earned a nomination 
for a Critics Circle award.

Grounded review – Anne Hathaway goes full throttle in one-woman show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/27/grounded-review-anne-hathaway-julie-traymor-public-theater-broadway>
The production received strong reviews at the time, with the Guardian’s Alexis 
Soloskicalling Hathaway’s performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/27/grounded-review-anne-hathaway-julie-traymor-public-theater-broadway>
 “consciously chameleonesque”.

“The script demands a heightened performance, especially as the pilot grows 
increasingly unstrapped from observable reality, and Hathaway delivers,” she 
wrote. “Monomania is one of her specialties, and she goes full throttle here.”

The ethics of drone warfare were also the subject for Eye in the Sky, Gavin 
Hood’s thriller starring Helen Mirren and the late Alan Rickman, which is one of
the highest-grossing independent films of the year 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/highest-grossing-indies-independent-film-2016-box-office-20160405>
 in the US.

Hathaway will reappear as the White Queen in Alice Through the Looking Glass, 
Disney’s sequel toTim Burton’s blockbuster Alice in Wonderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/25/alice-in-wonderland-film-review>. 
She last starred in the Nancy Meyers’ romantic comedy The Intern, opposite 
Robert De Niro.

 