
Oscar-winning actor Anne Hathaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anne-hathaway> is the latest Hollywood star 
to try her hand at television, signing on to star in the forthcoming 
mini-series The Ambassador’s Wife.

Produced by the Mark Gordon Company, The Ambassador’s Wife is an adaptation of 
Jennifer Steil’s novel of the same name. Based on Steil’s experiences as the 
wife of the British ambassador to Yemen, it tells the story of the kidnapping 
of an American woman in a fictional Middle Eastern country, and her struggle to 
be reunited with her husband. The series is likely to be sold to TV and digital 
outlets in the near future.

“The Ambassador’s Wife is an incredible story that pulls you in immediately 
and resonates with all of us based on the images and news headlines that are 
pervasive in our lives today,” said Mark Gordon in a statement. “We are so 
fortunate to have Anne starring in this timely, gripping and compassionate 
drama. She is in a league all her own and we cannot think of anyone who can 
better portray Steil’s complex heroine.”

While Hathaway began her career in TV with the late-90s family drama Get Real 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TEtPXXWUfwY>, which also starred a young Jesse 
Eisenberg, she has rarely appeared on the small screen since, bar a handful of 
guest appearances on The Simpsons, Saturday Night Live and Family Guy.

However, the lure of the limited or mini-series, which lacks the open-ended 
commitment required by traditional series, has proved powerful to Hollywood 
stars in recent years.True Detective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective>, with its 
single-season storylines, pulled in Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson in 
its first season, and Vince Vaughn, Colin Farrell and Rachel McAdams in its 
second. Meanwhile Maggie Gyllenhaal starred in the 2014 BBC and Sundance series
The Honourable Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/honourable-woman-episode-recaps>
.

Hathaway appears next on the big screen alongside Robert De Niro in The 
Intern, and has also signed up tostar in forthcoming monster movie Colossal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/12/anne-hathaway-signs-on-for-godzilla-meets-lost-in-translation>
, which is being described as a cross between Lost in Translation and Godzilla.
 