
Anne Hathaway is the latest Hollywood figure to be appointed by the United 
Nations as a global goodwill ambassador to promote gender equality and the 
empowerment of women. The Oscar-winning actor joins Nicole Kidman, Emma Watson 
andPrincess Bajrakitiyabha Mahidol of Thailand 
<http://www.unwomen.org/en/partnerships/goodwill-ambassadors/princess-bajrakitiyabha>
 as fellow women’s goodwill ambassadors.

Hathaway has been brought on board to shed a spotlight on what UN Women’s 
executive director,Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/nov/13/phumzile-mlambo-ngcuka-violence-women-un>
, described in astatement 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/8b57db89c56a4ea48fcc026aa642b621/actress-anne-hathaway-named-goodwill-ambassador-un-women>
 as the “motherhood penalty”.

“It is a particularly insidious demonstration of gender inequality in the 
workplace,” Mlambo-Ngucka said on Wednesday. “The appointment of Anne is timely 
because this year UN Women is driving hard to foster more positive mindsets and 
practical arrangements around workplaces that build and support equality for 
women.”

Anne Hathaway to play air force pilot in drones drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/06/anne-hathaway-to-play-air-force-pilot-in-drones-drama>
Hathaway, who said in a statement that she feels “honored and inspired by this 
opportunity to aid in advancing gender equality”, is no stranger to advocating 
on behalf of women’s rights: the actor previously served as an advocate for the
Nike Foundation <http://news.nike.com/nike-foundation>, formed to support 
programs to empower adolescent girls in the developing world, and in 2011 
traveled to Kenya to raise awareness on sexual violence in the area.

“Girls who are raped are afraid to tell anyone for fear of shame, being blamed 
or being branded as ‘unmarriageable’ by their families and communities,” 
Hathaway wrote in a guest column, published in the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2011/08/23/anne-hathaway-maria-eitel-what-african-girls-fear-more-than-drought.html>
, and co-authored by Maria Eitel. “As one – anonymous – woman in Dadaab put it: 
‘If you tell, no one will help. It is better to be safe and tell no one.’”

Hathaway also lent her voice to the 2013 CNN documentary Girl Rising 
<http://www.cnn.com/specials/world/girl-rising/>, about the power of female 
education.

“Significant progress has already been made, but it is time that we 
collectively intensify our efforts and ensure that true equality is finally 
realized,” Hathaway said about her appointment.
 