
Maybe Tom Stoppard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard> and Ken 
Follett would disapprove of using a blog to talk about their respective 
bugbears – the decline in the printed word and of writing standards.

Whether they would or not, I am clearly a hostage to fortune should I put a 
colon in the wrong place: as I will.

Stoppard 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/jun/21/tom-stoppard-warning-printed-page> 
wonders this week if the emphasis on online communication is seriously damaging 
our children's relationship with books. Is there, he asks mildly, a way we can 
make children familiar with the joys of the printed page without undermining 
the march of technology?

He believes the important thing is to make English classes interesting to 
young people, saying: "I want to support the whole idea of the humanities and 
teaching the humanities as being something that – even if it can't be 
quantitatively measured as other subjects – it's as fundamental to all 
education."

The playwright is making a popular case when he calls for more commitment to 
the humanities. A recentletter to the Observer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/feb/28/outcry-threat-cuts-humanities-universities>
, signed by other arts luminaries and leading academics, claimed that funding 
cuts and a decision to focus on the sciences have left subjects such as 
philosophy, literature, history, languages and art facing "worrying times". 
They urged action to stop the country's intellectual heritage being diminished.

Follett, the bestselling novelist and New Labour donor, entered similar 
territory last year when he raised the curtain onan award for good writing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2009/oct/25/britain-best-writing-award>, though 
it was accompanied by somelaughter from the wings 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-1223148/In-plain-English-I-bring-Follett-Follies.html>
.

The prize, consisting of a Montblanc pen, was suggested by the author in his 
capacity as a patron ofThe National Academy of Writing 
<http://www.thenationalacademyofwriting.org.uk/>, and was devised to reward 
someone for both their written clarity and their sense of nuance.

"We have a lot of emphasis on reading skills in our schools," said Follett at 
the time, "but the standards of writing are quite a bit lower. When you look at 
the results of Sats tests taken by children at the age of 11, the same pupils 
are often several points behind when it comes to writing. This is a national 
issue and there ought to be something we can do about it."

I can now announce that a panel, which included parliamentary sketch writer 
Matthew Parris and the leading literary agent Ed Victor, has chosenAnne Fine 
<http://www.annefine.co.uk/> as the winner. A former Children's Laureate, Fine 
is responsible for books including Ivan the Terrible, The Road of Bones and Up 
on Cloud Nine.

"Anne's writing is charming and engaging, making her books a pleasure to 
read," said Parris on handing over the pen. "She's best known as a leading 
children's author, but she has also written eight highly praised novels for 
adults, of which the latest is Our Precious Lulu."

Fine has responded by saying she is "over the moon" and that her aim "is to 
write books that I would like to read, irrespective of the target audience, be 
it children or adults."

Follett also wanted to shame those who had written badly, but there is no word 
yet on the winner of this prize. Perhaps they will have their pen taken away.
 