
This April, Anne Hathaway will team up with prize-winning director Julie 
Taymor for the play Grounded in New York. Hathaway,who won a best supporting 
actress Oscar for Les Miserables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/25/anne-hathaway-supporting-actress-oscar-les-miserables>
, will play an elite fighter pilot reassigned after becoming pregnant to 
operate drones from a trailer in the Nevada desert.

The 70-minute monologue, by George Brant <http://georgebrant.net/>, explores 
the pilot’s emotions as she does 12-hour shifts aiming at targets thousands of 
miles away, then returns to her husband and infant daughter at night.

The Public Theater <http://www.publictheater.org/> will stage the New York 
production. Artistic director Oskar Eustis said: “Grounded is a brilliant and 
important play, a meditation on the human and moral costs of our astonishing 
military technology. This promises to be an unforgettable theatrical event, and 
an important addition to our national conversation.”

Written in 2012, the play won the 2012 Smith prize for works about American 
politics. A production at Edinburgh the following yearwas named one of the 10 
best plays of the year by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/26/best-theatre-of-2013-no-5-grounded>
. Thanks to the NNPN’sRolling World Premiere programme 
<http://www.nnpn.org/about/programs/continued-life-of-new-plays-fund>, the play 
was staged10 times in 10 months around the world 
<http://wp.tdf.org/index.php/2014/01/george-brant-grounded/>. 

Hathaway, a board member of the Public Theater, was last seen on stage as 
Viola in a 2009 production of Twelfth Night by New York’s Shakespeare in the 
Park. Julie Taymor won a Tony for directing The Lion King, while her production 
of Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark, made headlines around the world – though not 
always for reasons its team may have enjoyed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/05/spiderman-turn-off-the-dark-delays>
.

Eustis said: “Anne Hathaway and Julie Taymor are amazing, unique artists, and 
we are honored to produce them at the Public Theater.”
 