
It’s Coachella season in Palm Springs and, at one particular rave, there’s a 
surplus of palm trees. Inflatable palm trees. Some are being ridden in pools by 
girls in fluro bikinis and guys with washboard stomachs. We’re at a Spring 
Breakers-style outdoor party, where pumping piano house stirs the mid-morning 
calm of a resort usually renowned for golfing. “I’m going to take one for my 
garden in London,” says Annie Mac, showing off a tree she’s just blown up. The 
DJ, Radio 1 broadcaster and tastemaker is enjoying the final leg of a 
three-week US tour under herAnnie Mac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/annie-mac> Presents moniker. Her aim, 
she says, is to bring “house music back to America”. Actually, she shouts it, 
trying to be heard over SBTRKT’s deafening, high-energy set.


Annie Mac: 'Skream &amp; Benga are like the Sex Pistols!'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/20/annie-mac-rules-of-the-booth> 
She’s joined around the pool by chart-topping house producer Duke Dumont, whom 
she introduces as “the man with the whitest legs on the desert”, and Jamie xx, 
who is dressed in all-black. Producers such as these comprise the dance music 
underground that Annie’s helped push overground, whether through her annual 
compilation albums, her curated live events or, as of this year, her festival, 
held in Malta for 7,000 house-hungry fans (“I chose the emoji poo signs for the 
loos,” she laughs.) Oh and she’s just taken over the most influential show on
Radio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1>, too.

Annie insists that “being responsible for a musical landscape is terrifying”, 
but to be fair she’s pretty good at it. Disclosure and Clean Bandit are just 
two of the acts that have gone from getting a big-up from Mac to No 1 records. 
Labels are said to delay their release announcements if it means a premiere by 
Annie. She’s vital to breaking new artists. “Dance has become pop,” she says. 
“I’ve never seen anyone go off like Disclosure. I brought them on tour years 
ago, tried to give Howard [Lawrence] a beer. He was 17.”

As the tastes of younger generations have moved towards bedroom-produced 
beats, Annie has been the ringleader shaping that shift. In Palm Springs, her 
lineup is the opposite of what Annie terms “EDM babylon”, where faceless 
producers queue up to press play on derivative beats across the festival 
circuit. Instead, she says, she champions DJs with their own style . “Just ’cos 
it’s a top 10 dance record doesn’t mean it’s good,” she says, as she leaves the 
pool party to ready her midnight Coachella set. “EDM is about Vegas 
residencies. I’m excited by whatever doesn’t fit in that box.”
 Up in the valley: Annie Mac with Duke Dumont at Coachella. Photograph: PR 
When we first speak, Annie is just three weeks into her new job at Radio 1. 
She bagged her first show on the network in 2004, aged 26, specialising in 
dance. She still delivers her Friday night show to over a million listeners - 
“Bonkers,” she says – but after holding a specialist role for a decade, on 15 
February it was announced that Annie would inherit the Monday to Thursday 
nightly programme, previously fronted by Zane Lowe and with a lineage that goes 
back to John Peel. It’s a big job.

“My first reaction was, ‘Fuuuuuuuck!’” says Annie, who still refers to the 
slot as “Zane’s show”. Her main fear was that Radio 1’s audience wouldn’t think 
she’d be up on her new bands. It may surprise people that, in fact, this dance 
evangelist spent much of her 20s moshing in the rock venues of Camden Town. “I 
told my boss years ago, I’m more than just the ‘dance girl’,” she recalls. To 
reinforce the point, Annie opened her first ‘Zane show’ with London grungers 
Wolf Alice.

Being responsible for a musical landscape is terrifying
Annie Mac 
Annie insists she will use the show to play what she wants to play, even if 
that’s no longer just electronic music. She points to the Sunday night slot she 
held until recently as proof that she’d already started to broaden her remit, 
playing more hip-hop and folk music, for example. Despite that, her first 
moments in the hotseat were accompanied by a panicked “Who am I?!” A 
requirement to play singer-songwriter Jake Bugg could provoke a backlash from 
an audience previously accustomed to hearing dance acts such as Tiga. “All I 
can do is play music I love and hope others invest in my opinion. I need to not 
overthink it,” she sighs. “The first three weeks were a hangover from Zane. I’m 
going to get stuck in. I’ve done as much as I can in the dance field. Now I 
have to backtrack.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fradio-1-dj-annie-mac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433951313206%2F484333c1-46be-4df7-af65-4f57f455abb5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Mac%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20more%20than%20just%20the%20dance%20girl%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fradio-1-dj-annie-mac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Mac%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20more%20than%20just%20the%20dance%20girl%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fradio-1-dj-annie-mac%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433951313206%2F484333c1-46be-4df7-af65-4f57f455abb5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 More than a dance scene queen: DJ Annie Mac. Photograph: Sara Lee 
A month later, we’re inside Radio 1 on a Thursday night. “You’ve got 29 
seconds before Darwin Deez arrives for Hottest Record,” says producer Matt 
Fincham. Annie does a lot with those 29 seconds: downing some sushi, teeing up 
a Disclosure single, cutting an edit of a chat with A$AP Rocky, checking her 
iPhone … “You know who Rastamouse is?” she asks, showing me a picture of the 
cartoon rodent on turntables. A palm tree looms behind. “T [Toddla T, her 
partner] isobsessed.”

Annie takes the same legs-akimbo stance at her desk as she does behind the 
decks, pressing buttons, flicking faders, belting out choons. She enthuses 
about new French pop star Petite Meller, whose gig left her gobsmacked the 
night before, then sets up Merseyside beatsmith Melé’s high-octane track 
Ambience. “That’s been going off like mad in my DJ sets,” she says. “Mega 
carnival vibes, babe.” (To Annie, everyone is “babe”.) A listener’s tweet pops 
up on a screen. “I forgive Annie for taking over from Zane,” it reads. “Ha! 
Love that,” she shrieks. Like most things Mac enthuses about, the sentiment is 
genuine.

Today, Annie’s stopped calling it “Zane’s show”. “Just about,” she laughs. 
Gruff crooner George Ezra is here for One On, One Off, a party anthems game 
Annie came up with. It gives her the chance to slip alternative songs into 
encounters with mainstream guests but Ezra doesn’t play ball and goes down the 
Kings Of Leon route. Clearly it depends on the the guests as to the level of 
rebellion that ensues.

Annie also gets amped up in the studio when playing Aussie noiseniks Violent 
Soho and Pretty Vicious from south Wales. That said, she still seems 
self-conscious delivering recommendations to the masses. “I want listeners to 
feel like they’re with me,” she says, a bit vaguely. “I’m not like: ‘Guys, 
howwwww have you not heard about Gengahr?’”

All I can do is play music I love and hope others invest in my opinion
DJ Annie Mac 
Having the perspective of a club DJ gives Annie a different currency on radio. 
She builds momentum by “placing one song next to another” the sequence of music 
as important as the songs. “Zane would play Bring Me The Horizon then Laura 
Marling, get his Kaoss pad out and go: ‘Z-z-zane Lowe-Lowe’, but I’m not that 
broadcaster,” she says. “I still play every type of music but when Matt says: 
‘Play this next.’ I say: ‘Babe, we need to get there.’ Getting there is my 
whole vibe.”

While her choice of music is inclusive, that doesn’t mean Annie doesn’t have 
her own way. She can play a song she likes three times over and is largely free 
from the constraints of a playlist. She is also vocal about the music she 
doesn’t like, which instantly sets her apart from the stereotype of the 
relentlessly enthusiastic Radio 1 presenter who has exclamation marks for 
eyeballs. The most obvious contrast is with her predecessor Lowe and his 
fannish manner. “I’m slightly different from Zane,” she says carefully. Annie 
spent an early part of her career as Lowe’s assistant producer. She’s 
understandably cagey when prompted on his uncontroversial style where 
EVERYTHING! IS! AMAZING! But her own style of presenting is quite different.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fradio-1-dj-annie-mac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433951529645%2F48742f3f-2b99-40c3-975d-e566ee4a94af-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Mac%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20more%20than%20just%20the%20dance%20girl%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fradio-1-dj-annie-mac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Mac%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20more%20than%20just%20the%20dance%20girl%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fjun%2F13%2Fradio-1-dj-annie-mac%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433951529645%2F48742f3f-2b99-40c3-975d-e566ee4a94af-1360x2040.jpeg>
 DJ Annie Mac. Photograph: Sarah Lee 
Her outspoken attitude isn’t just reserved for the radio. Last November, Annie 
wrote a tongue-in-cheek article for Vice about the tiresome questions she’d 
receive as a “female” DJ. “‘Can you DJ in a dress and heels?’” was one of them. 
Her answer? “Fuck off.” At last year’s Mercurys, she told a reporter she finds 
Fall Out Boy “personally offensive.” This is not something she’s about to stop 
doing. “The most important thing about being a broadcaster is believability, 
someone knowing that everything that comes out your mouth is real,” she says. 
“You’re a music fan. Have an opinion. That’s your job.”

Getting there is my whole vibe
DJ Annie Mac 
By Annie’s admission, Radio 1 is in a strange place – and in recent weeks one 
that’s become even more precarious. Reports have shown that the station’s 
listenership is at a low ebb. Zane, meanwhile, has gone to Apple and will be 
launching competition, in the shape of its live station Beats 1. The pressure 
is on. “That’s a major move,” says Annie. “We need to be worried. Definitely.”

While Radio 1’s future seems beset by challenges, the Mac machine charges on. 
Her AMP brand attracts the youth audience that Radio 1 struggles to maintain; 
for every lost listener there’s a bunch more who’ll come out to see her play. 
So, is the BBC holding her back? “I don’t wanna DJ for ever,” she says. 
“Broadcasting is how I wanna growold. Look at Jo Whiley. She quietly killed it, 
never courted fame, lives on a farm and has the life of Riley, babe.”

Annie claims never to have been a business person, but with impending festival 
takeovers, her next compilation and an ever-expanding line of merch (“Oh babe, 
you haven’t seen the Annie Macs yet…”), I beg to differ. That’s part of her 
charm, though. Annie Mac knows how to make a hard sell without you even 
noticing.

Annie Mac, Mon to Thu, 7pm, Radio 1. Annie Mac’s Sunset Mix in aid of Kids 
Company is out now viawww.anniemacpresents.com/sunsetmix 
<http://www.anniemacpresents.com/sunsetmix>
 