
Unmissable show?

I'm a documentary freak. I love documentaries and also, weirdly, anything 
involving prisons. That Trevor McDonald series on prisons, we were obsessed 
with. Anything by Louis Theroux is a must-watch, and any of the music 
documentaries on BBC4. AndOne Born Every Minute. It's the most beautifully 
mundane thing in the world – midwives chatting about where they're going on 
holiday – and the next minute, you know, procreation has happened and babies 
have come into the world. That juxtaposition of the mundane and the profound – 
I'm a sucker for that.

Earliest TV memory?

There's a show on Irish TV called The Late Late Show, which is like the 
national chat show, and was hosted by this guy called Gay Byrne for years. 
Every year, two or three weeks before Christmas they'd have a whole show 
dedicated to toys. It was the one night when you got to stay up and watch. So 
that reminds me of being a kid and getting really excited. I'd love to watch it 
now, to see as an adult what it was really like.

I cried when…

Musharaf conquered his stutter in the final episode of Educating Yorkshire. It 
felt like the whole country was crying simultaneously. Afterwards, I sought him 
out on Twitter. I needed to tell this guy on telly how amazing he was. I ended 
up sending it to some false account and had half an hour of trying to get this 
message to Musharaf and failing miserably.

Pitch us a TV show…

When I was young I used to watch TFI Friday. It felt really irreverent and 
raucous and just exciting. You never knew what was going to happen next. So I'd 
like to see an exciting chat show with music. Something that is not afraid to 
break some rules, but at the same time not be really try-hard. It needs the 
right presenters. A popular culture youth TV show on a Friday night that is 
wild and fun.

4Music Launched At Red Bull Studios continues Wednesday, 12.05am, Channel 4
 