
A quarter of a century old next year, Annie Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> brought happiness to a number of 
people. The two small British exhibitors, who took the movie on when United 
Artists showed no interest in releasing it, made a fortune and were each able 
to lease another couple of cinemas. Popular audiences, who had never much cared 
for Allen (despite his earlier pictures' indebtedness to Bob Hope), took him to 
their hearts more warmly than before or since. As for Woody himself, the 
picture picked up four major Oscars (best film, direction, screenplay and 
actress) though it didn't exactly make him happy. His working title for the 
movie was Anhedonia (a clinical term for the inability to experience happiness) 
and he spent Oscar night playing his clarinet at Michael's Pub in New York.

 The movie gave a fresh confidence to Woody and a generation of solipsistic 
stand-up comics and it created a new genre, what we might call 'the 
relationship picture', that dispensed with formal narrative. Annie Hall is 
openly autobiographical, Allen (as comedian Alvy Singer), his one-time lover 
Diane Keaton (as Annie Hall ) and his best friend Tony Roberts (as Rob) playing 
versions of themselves, though the actual production was a chaotic affair and 
the picture only came into focus when its editor Ralph Rosenblum reduced the 
first cut of 140 minutes to a tight 95 in which the real and the surreal 
co-exist. If the movie has a message, it's the same as most later Allen movies 
- that love inevitably fades and only Louis Armstrong and the Marx Brothers 
abide.
 