 Some years ago I met a young Jewish American woman who told me she could never 
travel by train in Europe because of what happened in the Holocaust. European 
trains were tainted for her by the horrible past. She was born in the US and 
was much too young to have had personal memories of the war, but to her Europe 
was a toxic place, still filled with hidden terrors.
I was reminded of this encounter a few months ago, when some US columnists 
reacted to anti-semitic vandalism in several European countries by breaking out 
in hysterics. Charles Krauthammer wrote in the Washington Post: "In Europe, it 
is not very safe to be a Jew." Nat Hentoff, a jazz critic for the Village 
Voice, warned of a second Holocaust. And such conservative journals as 
Commentary and the Weekly Standard consistently presented a picture of 
Europeans not only as wimps but anti-semitic wimps.

The old shtetl cry of "Gewalt!" sounds a little odd coming from America in 
2002. At no time and in no place have Jews been safer than in America today. 
Perhaps that is why the rest of the world, in contrast, appears so menacing. 
Jewish-American hysteria is a form of deep parochialism. And 9/11 served to 
confirm the most paranoid fears.

The notion that only US power can save us from the second Holocaust has had 
peculiar political consequences. It explains why an alliance has been forged in 
Washington between rightwing Christian fundamentalists (not traditional friends 
of the Jews) and neoconservative Jewish intellectuals. And this has had a 
profound effect on the nature of American conservatism.

Conservative US administrations in the past were inclined to put business 
interests first and shy away from idealistic projects to change the world. The 
idea that American power should be used to spread American values abroad was 
more a Democratic dream, associated with John Kennedy more than Eisenhower, or 
even Nixon. This began to change with the Reagan administration and the rise of 
neoconservatism. Some of the more prominent neoconservatives were Jewish 
intellectuals who had been leftists, often Trotskyists, before.

Traditionally, of course, the left was far more appealing to most Jews than 
the right. Marxism, even communism, promised a liberation from rightwing 
nationalism, which was never good for the Jews. The left was internationalist 
and opposed to social and racial discrimination. That is why so many Jews took 
part in the civil-rights movement and why the majority still vote for the 
Democrats today.

The left, on the whole, was also more pacific than the right. Military swagger 
was not a Jewish characteristic. Many Jews may have served bravely in both 
world wars, but John Wayne was not really a role model in most Jewish families. 
The reason this began to change is not hard to fathom. It was the astonishing 
and to many people - Jewish and gentile - heartwarming military success of 
Israel. Macho images of suntanned Jewish soldiers gathered round laughing tough 
guys such as Ariel Sharon wiped out, as it were, 2,000 years of beingWoody Allen
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>.

This is when some old New York lefties began to think that US military power 
and tough Israeli nationalism were the best ways, or even the only ways, to 
protect Jews from further catastrophes. They no longer supported the kibbutznik 
socialism of early Zionism, but the hard line of the Likud. And at home they 
rallied round Reagan, and now Bush fils.

Bush p√®re was more an old-fashioned country-club Republican and thus too 
namby-pamby for the new tough guys on the block. The current split on the war 
on Iraq between some of his old advisers, such as Brent Scowcroft and James 
Baker, and the rather bookish hawks wheeling around his son is not surprising. 
Country-club Republicans are rarely zealous. They want to be left alone to make 
money and perhaps do some good. The new Bushies, on the other hand, are serious 
about wanting to change the world with American firepower.

And this is where Christian millenarians and secular, neoconservative Jewish 
intellectuals, such as Richard Perle and Paul Wolfowitz, find themselves in the 
same bed. Christian zealotry is driven by visions of messiahs and Armageddon. 
The neoconservative mission still gives off echoes of the old leftwing zeal to 
change the world. Such missions tend to end in disaster. Zealotry has already 
produced a brutal impasse in Israel and the occupied territories. And a 
botched, ill-conceived war in Iraq might set in motion the very catastrophes we 
were supposed to avoid.
 