
Let it be noted that the scientific community is not without a sense of 
humour. Itemerged yesterday 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/science/article4641239.ece> that, since the 
1970s, boffins have been sneakily insertingBob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> song titles into their research 
papers. From a stem cell investigation entitled Like a Rolling Histone to a 
paper called Tangled up in Blue: Molecular Cardiology in the Postmolecular Era, 
our boffins have been getting better at working in their little joke, creating 
a masterly fusion of science and Dylanology. It won’t be long before they start 
pitching for research projects purely for the sake of working in the titles: a 
study on the recurring effects of precipitation on tarmac named Highway 61 
Revisited, perhaps?

Readers recommend - songs about science
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2008/may/09/readersrecommend9508> 
These scientists, however, are merely displaying a penchant for dropping pop 
lyrics in to high-minded proceedings here, there and everywhere.Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift>, the lady Madonna perhaps 
wishes she could be in the 21st century, was the subject of a plagiarism 
lawsuit that was thrown out by the judge, Gail Standish, who cheekily worked in 
lyrics from Swift’s hits, including We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together, 
Blank Space and Bad Blood. And I love her payoff line: “Defendants have shaken 
off this lawsuit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fanother-cite-bob-dylan-why-scientists-cant-stop-namedropping-his-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F338849e33c7e6b53df14a7f5a00183b2a31d1203%2F0_0_2640_1584%2F2640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Another%20cite%20of%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20why%20scientists%20can%E2%80%99t%20stop%20namedropping%20his%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fanother-cite-bob-dylan-why-scientists-cant-stop-namedropping-his-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Another%20cite%20of%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20why%20scientists%20can%E2%80%99t%20stop%20namedropping%20his%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Fanother-cite-bob-dylan-why-scientists-cant-stop-namedropping-his-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F338849e33c7e6b53df14a7f5a00183b2a31d1203%2F0_0_2640_1584%2F2640.jpg>
 Taylor Swift, who recently shook off a court case. Photograph: Stringer/Reuters
A day in the life of a footballer, especially in the lulls between games at 
tournaments, can be dull indeed. So it was that, at the 1998 World Cup,the 
England team entertained themselves by shoehorning as many song lyrics into 
their otherwise workaday, cliche-addled interviews as possible 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6C9NxPkyVsU>, including I’m So Excited, Ghost 
Town and Magic Moments. It was remarkable, because no one cottoned on – at 
least not until Alan Shearer tried to work The Orb’s A Huge Ever Growing 
Pulsating Brain That Rules from the Centre of the Ultraworld into an answer 
about the 4-4-2 formation.

Even the police are in on it. In 2014, when they needed help solving the case 
ofthe theft of an Oasis painting 
<http://www.gmp.police.uk/content/WebsitePages/E138523DDB3BB5DF80257D7F005301B3?OpenDocument>
 from Manchester Art Gallery, Greater Manchester police amused themselves by 
issuing a statement to the public referencing two Oasis songs: “Quite what the 
masterplan behind this theft is I don’t know … some might say we are therefore 
looking for an Oasis fan.” It’s all too much. Can’t they just get back to 
issuing monotone appeals for assistance, drowned out by the sounds of flashing 
camera bulbs? I know it’s only Oasis, only a northern song-and-dance outfit, 
but, even so, please.

Please me it does to highlight the exemplary case of Chris Packham, the 
wildlife expert and clandestine hipsterwho snuck in no fewer than 49 mentions 
of David Bowie songs 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/music-news/9352144/Rebel-Chris-Packham-sneaks-David-Bowie-song-titles-into-BBCs-Springwatch.html>
 into a single 12-episode series of Springwatch in 2012. He’d previously done 
the same thing with the Smiths, Manic Street Preachers and the Cure. The Bowie 
songs included Wild is the Wind, Be My Wife and even Unwashed and Somewhat 
Slightly Dazed (in an item about a nuthatch). This is, for someone ostensibly a 
specialist in ornithological species such as the blackbird and the blue jay, 
way above and beyond the call of duty.
 