
There’s no stopping the ice bucket challenge, as more and more celebrities 
throw buckets of ice cold water on their heads on camera.

The challenge, in aid of ALS or motor neurone disease as it’s known in the UK, 
has enjoyed considerable support from a whole raft of celebrities. The likes of 
David Beckham and Lady Gaga have now been joined by the creator of the Game of 
Thrones saga, George RR Martin, actorBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch> and even Kermit the 
Frog.

Neil Gaiman and Amanda Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/music/amanda-palmer>
 chose to speak about a person they knew who suffered from ALS before taking 
part in the challenge while Patrick Stewart remained dry by writing a cheque 
donation to the cause and using his ice for a spot of whiskey instead.

As for Cumberbatch – not content with taking the challenge once, he’s shown 
absolutely drenched in cold water four times in total.

So far the challenge has raised almost $80m (£48m) for the ALS Association in 
the US <http://www.alsa.org/>. It has raised at least £250,000 for the UK-based 
Motor Neurone Disease Association <http://www.mndassociation.org/>.

We’ve already rounded up past celebrity challenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/21/10-more-of-the-best-celebrity-takes-on-the-ice-bucket-challenge-als>
 and they keep rolling in. So here are 10 more celebrity ice bucket challenges 
you may have missed:

George RR Martin
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmJYx2UtPTWc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmJYx2UtPTWc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmJYx2UtPTWc&media=>
Amanda Palmer
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWcxTcZH07hs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWcxTcZH07hs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWcxTcZH07hs&media=>
Neil Gaiman
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTScZ-AUOmBs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTScZ-AUOmBs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTScZ-AUOmBs&media=>
Kate Moss

Benedict Cumberbatch
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYOa7ZjxRuKM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYOa7ZjxRuKM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYOa7ZjxRuKM&media=>
Tina Fey
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTdsFEbucorw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTdsFEbucorw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTdsFEbucorw&media=>



Victoria Beckham
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwGjdEp7sVVE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwGjdEp7sVVE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwGjdEp7sVVE&media=>
Kermit the frog
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DydQkOe-R7k8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DydQkOe-R7k8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DydQkOe-R7k8&media=>
Naomi Campbell

Patrick Stewart
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwkO4NIqAMss&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwkO4NIqAMss>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwkO4NIqAMss&media=>
Anthony Carbajal

And as a final note, here’s one ice bucket challenge video you may want to 
watch as a reminder of why everyone is dumping cold water over their heads.

Anthony Carbajal isn’t a celebrity – he is a US-based photographer 
<http://anthonycarbajal.com/> who was diagnosed with ALS five months ago aged 
just 26. After a light-hearted take on the challenge, the 26-year-old is 
incredibly candid about what life is like when you are diagnosed with ALS and 
the fear you have when your family members suffer from the disease too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcK7UUYt_vRI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcK7UUYt_vRI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcK7UUYt_vRI&media=> 