
When British director Edgar Wright quit Ant-Man in May last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/may/23/edgar-wright-departs-marvels-ant-man-due-to-differences-in-vision>
, just weeks before cameras were due to roll on the long-gestating film, many 
predicted that the result would be Marvel’s first turkey of the modern 
superhero movie era. Not so, according to analysts: replacement director Peyton 
Reed’s film is predicted to earn $62m (£40m) during its debut at the US box 
office this weekend, and to continue the Disney-owned studio’s impressive 
box-office run.

“The Marvel brand is strong enough to bring a familiarity to any movie they 
shepherd to the marketplace,” said Paul Dergarabedian, senior media analyst at 
Rentrak, of the predicted figures.He told Variety 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/ant-man-box-office-marvel-trainwreck-1201540456/>
: “It carries weight with an audience. It acts like a sequel would and makes 
audiences feel more comfortable.”

A $62m US bow would place Ant-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man> a 
long way behind recent Marvel efforts such as Avengers: Age of Ultron, which 
opened to $191.2m in May, or Guardians of the Galaxy, which debuted to $94m in 
August 2014. But it’s roughly in line with the openings posted by the studio’s 
2011 films Captain America: The First Avenger and Thor, both of which were 
considered respectable hauls at the time. Given the negative publicity faced by 
the studio following the departure of Wright and co-writer Joe Cornish, after 
an eight-year development process, a No 1 opening in excess of $60m looks like 
a very tidy return indeed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel's%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel%27s%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Ant-Man trailer 
Ant-Man review: diminishing returns for latest expansion of Marvel universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-michael-douglas>
Ant-Man was met with decent reviews and currently has a “75% fresh” rating on 
the review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/antman/reviews/?type=top_critics>. But British 
critics have generally been more muted in their praise. The Guardian’s 
Catherine Shoarddescribed Reed’s film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-michael-douglas>
 as a “cut-and-shut muddle, haunted by a ghost, produced by a high-end hot dog 
factory, by turns giddying and stupefying”, adding: “Watching it is like 
channel-surfing between Hot Fuzz, a duff early-90s Michael Douglas drama and 
the very schlockiest bits of Interstellar.”



Reed’s film (the US director was previously best known for the middling 2008 
Jim Carrey comedy Yes Man) stars Paul Rudd as the size-shifting superhero, with 
Michael Douglas as genius inventor Hank Pym, and Evangeline Lily as the genius 
inventor’s daughter. Ant-Man opens in UK and US cinemas on 17 July.
 