
For the past month, physicist and oceanographer Helen Czerski has been 
blogging for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/scientific-log-southern-ocean> 
about her experiences onboard the James Clark Ross in the Southern Ocean. She 
hasstruggled with temperamental instruments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/mar/27/penguins-sheep-faulty-bubble-detector>
,prayed for rougher weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/apr/03/bubbles-oceanographer-rougher-seas>
 and more bubbles (the subject of her research), and pondered thecomplex 
interactions between rock, air, ocean and life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/apr/23/reminder-strengths-frailties-species-southern-ocean>
 that underpin the future of our species on planet Earth.

Helen and her colleagues are standing by to answer your questions about their 
work and careers on Tuesday, 1-2pm. Please leave questions in the comments 
field below.

Here's a brief summary of the scientists and the research they've been doing 
over the past month.

Helen Czerski <http://www.helenczerski.net/> of the University of Southampton, 
Ian Brooks <http://homepages.see.leeds.ac.uk/~lecimb/> of the University of 
Leeds and their research partners from the National Oceanography Centre have 
been gathering data on gas and tiny particulates exchanged by the ocean and the 
atmosphere and how this varies with wind speed and wave conditions. These 
transport mechanisms are important for understanding the weather and climate. 
Helen has focused on bubbles made by breaking waves under different wind and 
wave conditions.

Claire Allen 
<http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/about_bas/contact/staff/profile/4f12441885b18bddad76805a4c16313e/personal/>
 of the British Antarctic Survey and her fellow geologists have collected 32 
sediment cores from the seabed around South Georgia and the Falklands. These 
can be used to work out what the local environment and climate were like when 
the sediments were deposited.

Hugh Venables 
<http://www.antarctica.ac.uk/about_bas/contact/staff/profile/4d70f9b9a28fbe1536c1046389bc35bd/>
 of the British Antarctic Survey and his team have surveyed the water column 
along a 400 mile-long line from the Weddell Sea to South Georgia. Temperature 
and salinity can be used to follow water masses travelling in different 
directions at different depths. They were particularly interested in a cold 
body of water that forms near the Antarctic continent and flows along the 
seafloor into the world's major ocean basins, playing a crucial role in 
regulating how heat and carbon move around the planet.
 