
It’s hard to believe, but it’s taken over half a century into the careers of 
Sir Ian McKellen and Sir Anthony Hopkins for the revered duo to collaborate. 
The pair co-lead the new Starz and BBC movie The Dresser,which aired in the UK 
late last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/23/ian-mckellen-calls-for-more-plays-to-be-broadcast-on-television>
, and premieres in the US this summer. The actors were joined by director 
Richard Eyre (Notes on a Scandal) and executive producer Colin Callender at the 
film’s Television Critics Association (TCA) winter press tour panel in 
Pasadena, California, on Friday.

Ian McKellen: 'I’m like a carpenter who can be relied on to make a good chair'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/30/ian-mckellen-interview-mr-holmes-im-like-a-carpenter>
Like the acclaimed play of the same name by Ronald Harwood on which it is 
based, The Dresser takes place over the course of one night in a small English 
regional theater during the second world war as a frantic troupe of actors try 
to keep their production of Shakespeare’s King Lear afloat, despite the worries 
of its lead star, played by Hopkins. McKellen plays his doting dresser.

Hopkins said he was drawn to the material because of how it explores “that 
peculiar nature of why actors want to act. This play more or less answers 
that,” he said. “That you have to go half mad to survive that kind of life. The 
man I play is one who is obsessed with the art and obsessed with Lear.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWVW-eUWam4g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWVW-eUWam4g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWVW-eUWam4g&media=>
McKellen said The Dresser is the only film that succeeds at truly capturing 
what it means to be a performer. “I think every actor recognized their past in 
this play,” McKellen said.

Hopkins confessed to having an “odd relationship with Shakespeare in the 
theater”, before embarking on The Dresser. Hopkins recalled having an “uneasy” 
time working as a theater actor in the UK, before making a move to the US early 
in his career to pursue film. He described making The Dresser as “a painless 
revisit to a world I knew 50 years ago. Now I can understand why so many great 
actors like Shakespeare.”

Hopkins added: “I now get it. Although I did Lear a long time ago, I wasn’t 
very happy with that. Now I really understand because I’m as old as Lear. They 
say all old men should play Lear.” The actor added that revisiting Lear for The 
Dresser gave him “the courage of a lifetime”. “I’d been hoping I hadn’t lost 
it.”

The week in TV: The Dresser; Catastrophe; Detectorists; Homeland; Jekyll and 
Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/01/week-in-tv-the-dresser-catastrophe-detectorists-homeland-jekyll-hyde->
Asked if he’d ever wanted to quit acting altogether, Hopkins said he has in 
fact tried to several times. “Every day I think about quitting, but they come 
and offer me a job, and I say OK, because I’m an actor,” he elaborated. “We are 
mad. All actors want to be loved – I think that’s in all actors. We want more, 
more, more …”

“I never wanted to quit,” retorted McKellen. “What would I do? It’s one of the 
thrilling things about acting – you don’t necessarily have to stop. There will 
always be the part for some old geezer in the corner of the script. You’ve got 
me for as long as I’m mobile.”

 * The Dresser debuts on Starz in the US this summer.
 