
Anthony Caro <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro> was great with 
titles: who can forgetEarly One Morning or Twenty-Four Hours? They seem full of 
promise and optimism, and perfectly reflect the vibrant balance of the works, 
which hover or balance in the air, like planes or beams of solid colour, 
poised, ready to move on, but holding their position for as long as you want to 
enjoy them.

Caro worked for Henry Moore in his early years, and later came to occupy an 
equivalent position, the grand old man of British sculpture. But the "silver 
fox", as he was affectionately known, was never too portentous, even if he was 
tough, ambitious and knew how to get his way. Like Moore his beginnings were in 
figure-drawing. In the days when he used to drive Moore back from his teaching 
in London to his studio in Hertfordshire, Moore would sit in the car and 
correct Tony's drawings.

Caro's work has conventionally been seen as heralding a new era in sculpture, 
but I think it increasingly occupies a midway point, Janus-like, looking back 
to Moore and also to Calder and constructivism, as well as forward, especially 
to large-scale colour-field abstract painting. His work was so good, so early, 
that it was hard for him to equal it, though he never stopped trying, endlessly 
setting himself new challenges. He was blessed by a stable home and studio 
life, and those around him were faithful and effective in allowing him to 
devote himself to an almost constant cycle of production. I first met him after 
he had visited Leeds CityArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
Gallery when I had just arrived and reinstalled the sculpture collection. He 
admired the new display, but regretted that Leeds did not have a better work of 
his. He offered to give us one, and invited me to the studio to make a choice. 
Even if I had naively hoped to choose one of the works from the 60s, which were 
either already owned, or too precious to give away, I was happy to take a later 
work and to add it to our display. This was a gesture characteristic of the 
artist, both generous but also self-concerned, to ensure he came out well. More 
recently I saw the same determination, more firmly expressed, when he demanded 
that the Royal Academy remove the barriers from aroundEarly One Morning. He 
made his argument, almost like a lawyer, and changes were made.

Caro has perhaps been most excitingly shown in recent years on the roof of the 
Metropolitan Museum in New York; the combination of colour and structure in the 
air above the city allowed his work to sing again in a way which was not always 
the case. Therooftop platform 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/en/exhibitions/listings/2011/anthony-caro-on-the-roof>
 allowed the work to be outdoors, and thus to expand, but the architectural 
framework suited it much better than the "natural surroundings" of the 
sculpture park. This summer his work waspresented in the Correr museum 
<http://correr.visitmuve.it/en/mostre-en/mostre-in-corso-en/caro-at-correr/2013/05/9648/anthony-caro/>
 in Venice; the last work, with its sheet of deep maroon perspex made a 
fantastic link over 50 years of work, which it seemed hard to imagine would 
ever end, such was Caro's vigour, self-belief and durability.

Â© Penelope Curtis
 