
It was Anthony Caro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/24/sir-anthony-caro-dies>'s 
tragedy to be the wrong kind of modern artist in the wrong kind of modern 
world. He made abstract art at the very moment when abstraction was ceasing to 
look like the holy grail of the avant garde. The serious art world that 
contemplated his welded steel sculptures in tweedy pipe-puffing silence was 
about to be blown away in a purple haze of pop.

Critics can screw you up. At the end of the 1950s Caro, a young and promising 
sculptor, was visited in his studio by theAmerican art critic Clement Greenberg 
<http://jonfinearts.com/images/essays/clement_greenberg.jpg>, an 
extraordinarily powerful observer of art who hadchampioned Jackson Pollock 
<http://media.aphelis.net/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/POLLOCK_1950_Lavender_Mist.jpg>
 before anyone else.Greenberg had a grand vision of modernism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/mar/11/clement-greenberg-art-critic>
. He said it evolved in an inevitable ascent of ruthless truth from Cezanne to 
abstraction. After their meeting, Caro became a bold sculptor who freed his art 
from the pedestal and from all figurative echoes. Greenberg hailed him as 
modern art's messiah. The trouble was, modern life was starting to infect 
modern art.

When Caro was making his gloriously free and open red steel and aluminum 
constructionEarly One Morning in 1962 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/caro-early-one-morning-t00805>, the pop 
art movement was well under way. It was six years since Richard Hamilton had 
put the wordpop in a collage of modern stuff 
<http://jumpedonthebandwagonlate.files.wordpress.com/2011/09/rh11.jpg>. In the 
very same year that Caro welded Early One Morning, a Los Angeles gallery showed
Andy Warhol's soup cans 
<http://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/andy-warhol-campbells-soup-cans-1962>. 
In October that year,the Beatles released Love Me Do 
<http://www.beatlesbible.com/1962/10/05/single-release-love-me-do-ps-i-love-you/>
.

Pop was the future. Caro's pure and lofty modernism was born old. It imagined 
an audience of patient, contemplative aesthetes – but other artists were 
discovering a younger, faster, more sexual audience.

Yet Caro had the backing of a powerful critical elite. The impressive holdings 
of his art in museums all over the world bear witness to how helpful that can 
be. At his best, Caro was a powerfully difficult and austere modern artist. 
Early One Morning is not a work you can sum up in a sentence, or even 10 – it 
is of itself and beyond language in a similar way to such great postwar 
paintings as Pollock's Lavender Mist and Mark Rothko's Seagram murals. It was 
in fact extraordinary that a British sculptor should become the natural heir to 
these mighty American painters. What would a world look like in which modern 
art stayed loyal to Greenberg's abstract vision, andAnthony Caro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/caro> rather than Andy Warhol had 
defined our age? Some of us might like it there, but we'd miss the shops.
 