
Dear Mister Cranston,

I've just finished a marathon of watching 'BREAKING BAD' – from episode one of 
the First Season – to the last eight episodes of the Sixth Season. A total of 
two weeks (addictive) viewing. I have never watched anything like it. 
Brilliant! Your performance as Walter White was the best acting I have seen – 
ever.

I know there is so much smoke blowing and sickening bullshit in this business, 
and I've sort of lost belief in anything really. But this work of yours is 
spectacular – absolutely stunning. What is extraordinary, is the sheer power of 
everyone in the entire production. What was it? Five or six years in the 
making? How the producers (yourself being one of them), the writers, directors, 
cinematographers... every department – casting etc... managed to keep the 
discipline and control from beginning to the end is awesome.

From what started as a black comedy, descended into a labyrinth of blood, 
destruction and hell. It was like a great Jacobean, Shakespearian or Greek 
Tragedy.

If you ever get a chance to – would you pass on my admiration to everyone – 
Anna Gunn, Dean Norris, Aaron Paul, Betsy Brandt, RJ Mitte, Bob Odenkirk, 
Jonathan Banks, Steven Michael Quezada – everyone – everyone gave master 
classes of performance... The list is endless.

Thank you. That kind of work/artistry is rare, and when, once in a while, it 
occurs, as in this epic work, it restores confidence. You and all the cast are 
the best actors I've ever seen. That may sound like a good lung full of smoke 
blowing. But it is not. It's almost midnight out here in Malibu, and I felt 
compelled to write this email.

Congratulations and my deepest respect. You are truly a great, great actor.

Best regards,
Tony Hopkins

Breaking Bad: full coverage
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>Anthony Hopkins 
interviewed last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/23/anthony-hopkins-composing-music>
 