
Having just turned 77, Anthony Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> would be forgiven for taking 
things a tad slower at this stage of his career, especially given that he’s 
been acting for 55 years now. But the Oscar-winning actor is entering arguably 
his busiest year ever with four films out as well as a TV movie and a key role 
in HBO’s new Westworld series.

His first appearance of 2015 is in the true crime drama Kidnapping Freddy 
Heineken, released this week, where he plays a lager tycoon kidnapped by a 
group of childhood friends. It’s not his finest work but what is? Here’s our 
pick of the five definitive Hopkins performances.

Magic
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dli78BwTgFEM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dli78BwTgFEM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dli78BwTgFEM&media=>
Villainy has played an important part throughout his career and while he might 
have received the most attention for playing a cultured cannibal, his work in 
Richard Attenborough’s 1978 thriller is just as creepy. He plays a 
ventriloquist who finds himself at the mercy of his dummy and this scene shows 
his skill at managing both sides of a very precarious balancing act.

The Silence of the Lambs
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D99Ptctl5_qQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D99Ptctl5_qQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D99Ptctl5_qQ&media=>
His most famous role yet also one of his smallest (his screen time barely 
covers 16 minutes), Hopkins’ take on Hannibal Lecter is still nightmarishly 
good. In thismuch-parodied scene <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ha7EB5Y_RT0>, 
he displays why a best actor Oscar was pretty much in the bag despite the 
film’s early in the year release date. The power might have diminished by the 
third time he brought the character back but his ferocity here is undeniable.


The Remains of the Day
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D34bCs92ACpk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D34bCs92ACpk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D34bCs92ACpk&media=>
Aside from mastering the art of playing a psychopath, Hopkins was also a dab 
hand at playing awfully polite yet awfully repressed English gents, as shown in 
his Oscar-nominated work in this Merchant Ivory drama. In this scene, we see 
his steely facade falter slightly as he says goodbye to Emma Thompson’s 
character.

Shadowlands
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrmLS43DIFIk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrmLS43DIFIk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrmLS43DIFIk&media=>
Hopkins worked with Richard Attenborough again for this biographical romance 
between CS Lewis and American poet Joy Davidman. Again, his reserved demeanour 
is challenged by a feisty love interest, this time played by Debra Winger. This 
scene shows him struggling to deal with her impending death and breaking down 
while imagining a life without her.

Nixon
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds62PeTxELL4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds62PeTxELL4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds62PeTxELL4&media=>
The Welsh actor was an unconventional choice to play Californian Richard Nixon 
and this was a feeling shared by the studio who wanted either Tom Hanks or Jack 
Nicholson in the role. Yet Oliver Stone insisted and the gamble paid off, 
bringing the actor another Oscar nomination. This clip shows Nixon falling 
apart and Hopkins managing to nail the breakdown without resorting to theatrics.
 