
Name: Antibiotic-free meat.

Age: Brand new.

Appearance: A smiling pig’s face.

Oh good, I’m so hungry. Are you? Hungry for meat?

Yes, I love meat! Yum! Meat that has been intensively farmed? If so, there is 
a very strong chance that it has beensystematically pumped full of antibiotics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/19/uk-farmers-to-cut-antibiotic-use-to-combat-drug-resistance>
.

Good! I don’t want to eat a poorly animal. It’s not so much because they’re 
poorly, more that the antibiotics – when administered in subtherapeutic doses – 
improve feed conversion efficiency. They might be brimming with penicillin or 
bambermycin or salinomycin or virginiamycin or carbadox, all because they make 
the animal bigger.

Thank God for that! Big animals means more meat for me! That’s not a good 
thing. All theseantibiotics are entering the food chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/18/mrsa-superbug-in-supermarket-pork-raises-alarm-farming-risks>
. They are in your body now.

Great! I’ll never be ill again! You might be very, very ill. This blanket use 
of agricultural antibiotics is thought to be blunting the effectiveness of 
these drugs on humans. And if antibiotics stop working on humans, then we might 
all start dying from infections again.

Well, that doesn’t sound great. No, it doesn’t. But Karro – which bills itself 
as one of the leading pork processors in the UK – has just registered an
“antibiotic-free” trademark with the Intellectual Property Office 
<https://www.ipo.gov.uk/tmcase/Results/1/UK00003164805>.

What does that mean? It means that some meat will soon come packaged with a 
picture of a smiling pig, which will show that the animal wasn’t treated with 
antimicrobial agents during its lifetime.

What a good idea! It’s good, but not exactly new. Sweden banned agricultural 
antibiotics <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/234985.stm> in 1986, and 
Denmark has cut down drastically in the last 20 years.

Does that mean that I can eat Danish bacon without worrying about getting MRSA?
 Probably, although don’t forget the World Health Organisation’sclaim last year 
that bacon gives you cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/26/bacon-ham-sausages-processed-meats-cancer-risk-smoking-says-who>
.

Actually, I’ve lost my appetite. I’m worried that this has been too preachy. 
Has it been too preachy?

A bit. Sorry. Eat what you like, I say. We’ve all got to die of something, 
right?

Do say: “Finally, meat you can eat with a clear conscience.”

Don’t say: “So long as you’re cool with the mass murder of millions of 
animals, obviously.”
 