
Anti-Muslim sentiment is “strong” and “probably quite widespread” among 
Australian defence force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-military> members and 
was higher among those who had undergone cultural sensitivity training, 
according to research commissioned by the army.

Soldiers from four special operations units based at Holsworthy army base were 
asked whether they believed “the Muslim religion promotes violence and 
terrorism”.

Of the 182 people who took part, an estimated 80% agreed with the sentiment, 
according to lead researcher Charles Miller from the Australian National 
University.

Malcolm Turnbull calls for unity not 'machismo' in face of terrorism threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/24/malcolm-turnbull-calls-for-unity-over-machismo-in-face-of-terrorism-threat>
The survey was conducted as a “list experiment” to grant anonymity to the 
participants and reduce concerns that agreeing with the statement might invite 
repercussions.

“This study has found strong evidence that many members of the ADF’s elite 
units simply do not buy the official line presented by Western leaders from 
George W Bush on that ‘Islam is a religion of peace’,” Miller concluded.

“Anti-Muslim sentiment is strong at least among some of the elements of the 
ADF at the forefront of deployments to Afghanistan and Iraq.”

Miller estimated that the proportion of soldiers who had undergone cultural 
sensitivity training and agreed thatIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> promoted violence was about 91%.

“The corresponding figure for those who have not had cultural sensitivity 
training is a mere 17%,” he wrote in a paper published in theautumn edition of 
the Australian Army Journal 
<http://www.army.gov.au/~/media/Army/Our%20future/Publications/AAJ/Current%20Edition/AAJVol131MillerADF%20views%20on%20Islam.pdf>
 (pdf).

But he cautioned against declaring the one-day cultural sensitivity training a 
failure, noting that only soldiers who were deployed to the battlefield 
underwent the course. “It could simply be that this [positive] effect is being 
comprehensively drowned out either by the effects of overseas deployment or by 
whichever factors caused individuals to join units which would be deployed 
overseas in the first place,” Miller said.


Special operations units at Holsworthy had “borne a heavy share of the 
fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan”, he noted.

He suggested “a higher ‘dose’ of the training” could improve perceptions of 
Islam among soldiers, but said further research was needed to make any 
conclusions about the effectiveness of the sensitivity course.

The ADF is engaged in currently engaged in official efforts to increase 
minority and female numbers among enlisted people.

Navy's Islamic Twitter account shut down after anti-Islam group complains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/05/navys-islamic-twitter-account-shut-down-after-anti-islam-group-complains>
The chief of army, Lieutenant General Angus Campbell, wrote an introduction to 
the paper noting it would “challenge your opinion of the way in which our army 
conducts and manages cultural sensitivity training. And challenge is a good 
thing.”

“We do not all have to agree. Both the evaluation board of the Australian Army 
Journal, which reviews these articles, and my staff, have a number of opposing 
views on this article’s content and its reflection on the lived experience of 
army values,” he wrote.

“That said, discussion on sensitive matters, supported by sound research and 
rigorous analysis, helps position army to understand difficult problems and 
deal with them appropriately.”
 