
The opening title arrives as a provocation, a mission statement. "Lars von 
Trier," it reads. "Antichrist." At theCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, where the film was 
unveiled in May, the audience responded with indulgent laughter. Over the years 
the international press has grown accustomed to the antics of the puckish Dane. 
This, after all, is the man who once dumped his festival prize in a dustbin, 
who dragged Nicole Kidman through the wringer in Dogville and provoked hoots of 
outrage when he won the Palme d'Or for his death row musical, Dancer In The 
Dark. And yet nothing – but nothing – could prepare us for the film that 
followed.

Antichrist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/antichrist> opens, 
simultaneously, with a blaze of unsimulated sex and the death (simulated, one 
hopes) of a child, who topples from an upstairs window and cannons into the 
snow below. Bedevilled by guilt, his unnamed parents – He (Willem Dafoe) and 
She (Charlotte Gainsbourg) – retreat to a cabin in the woods called Eden. 
There, matters go from bad to worse. Oppressive Defoe winds up hobbled and 
impotent, while Gainsbourg runs clean off the rails and starts hacking at her 
own genitals with a pair of scissors. Sitting in the dark of the Cannes Palais, 
the audience yelped and howled and covered their eyes. Legend has it that at 
least four viewers fainted dead away in their seats.

If Von Trier had come to cause a stir, he succeeded with bells on. Antichrist 
provided the one bona-fide scandal of this year's festival. While Gainsbourg 
eventually went on to win the best actress award, the director was barracked at 
the official press conference and the reviews, by and large, were incandescent. 
Antichrist was accused of rampant misogyny; of being "an abomination"; "easily 
one of the biggest debacles in Cannes film history". Variety labelled it "a big 
fat art-film fart". For the critics at Time magazine, the film "presented the 
spectacle of a director going mad".

As it happens, there may be some truth to this last accusation. According to 
Von Trier, he wrote Antichrist on his sickbed while battling an epic bout of 
depression and conceived the tale as a form of catharsis. Small wonder, then, 
that the finished product is so torrid and unrefined, frequently preposterous 
and on the brink of outright meltdown. One might even argue that these very 
qualities are what make it so electrifying.

Is Antichrist a misogynistic movie? That, inevitably, is in the eye of the 
beholder. Von Trier constructs the drama as a fun-house of terrors; a warren of 
dark nooks and crannies, spring-loaded with trap doors and rearing phantoms. 
Here is a film that explicitly confronts the director's intertwined fears of 
primal nature and female sexuality. But does a fear of femaleness automatically 
equate to hatred? I'm not convinced that it does. Yes, the "She" character is 
anguished and irrational; a danger to herself and those around her. And yet for 
all that, she proves more vital, more powerful, and oddly more charismatic than 
"He", the arrogant, doomed advocate of order and reason. In one audacious 
scene, Von Trier has Dafoe blunder through the bracken where he encounters a 
talking fox who informs him that "chaos reigns". Reason, the director implies, 
is a paltry defence against elemental forces. Chaos reigns.

Von Trier is now back in Denmark, battling his demons in private. When I spoke 
to him last week, he claimed to have no immediate plans to make another film. 
Instead, he aims to lead the life of a convalescent, pottering gently around 
his garden. "It's like an English country garden," he explained. "It has little 
hedges around the lettuce and the onions and the cabbage. It has a greenhouse." 
Undeniably, there is something endearing about the image of cinema's ageing 
enfant-terrible trimming his hedgerows and tending his veg. It's just that, 
after sitting through Antichrist, I now have an altogether different image of 
Von Trier's garden. It is a place of slithering serpents and Arthur Rackham 
trees. Behind the greenhouse lies a dark, dank hollow, and on the lawn sits a 
garrulous fox.

Joanna Bourke Professor of History, Birkbeck College

Lars von Trier's new film opens with heart-breaking lyrics of loss and longing 
from Handel's Rinaldo opera. The graceful yet ecstatic beauty of death – 
literal and symbolic ("la petite mort") – sets the tone. Black and white 
scenes, in which the camera moves with a dreamlike slowness, are followed by 
dazzlingly dyed scenes of claustrophobic carnage. The effect is breathtaking 
and compulsive, like a drug; I would have watched the film a second time if it 
had been possible.

The theme of the film is an ancient one: what is to become of humanity once it 
discovers it has been expelled from Eden and that Satan is in us? Despite the 
erotic beginning, Von Trier has little interest in desire; his focus is on 
Sadeian extreme pain and enjoyment, the abject emptying of self and other 
(including the audience, who are made complicit in the sexual violence infusing 
the film).

Antichrist circles relentlessly around acts of transgression. The violence is 
defiantly excessive and beautiful. It is gendered, but more misanthropic than 
misogynistic. The man's violence is the heartlessness of rationality. 
Patronisingly, he sneers at the woman's research project on gynocide. He is a 
rationalist cognitive therapist, who bullies her into exposing her inner demons.

In contrast, the woman embraces the mysterious, uncanny energies of the 
unconscious and unknowable elemental forces. Her violence against the man and 
her own body is unbounded. The scenes of her crushing his penis and then 
snipping off her clitoris and labia are graphic. But it is not designer 
violence, intended to appall and titillate in the same breath. Neither does it 
inspire compassion. Von Trier simply presents cruelty as "there", serving no 
liberating function for the audience. Pain – its infliction and its suffering – 
is integral to life.

Von Trier has admitted that, of all his films, Antichrist "comes closest to a 
scream". It exposes us to an untamed erotic and aggressive aesthetic without 
redemption. It jolts us out of a passive voyeurism and, in despair, leaves us 
(in the words of Handel) crying over cruel fate.

Gillian Wearing Artist

This is the only film I have seen that clearly seems directed by someone with 
mental health issues. And I don't say that in a negative way: I think it is 
genius. I know people who would hate me if I recommended them to see this – the 
violence is horrible and at times the film becomes almost ridiculous, such as 
in the scene with the talking fox. But this is a visceral film. I rarely come 
out of films feeling that I have experienced anything of life, but Antichrist 
shows you how depression, dislocation and desperation feel. It is almost like a 
suicidal film – grief that can only be articulated through violence (female) or 
cold sterility (male). I sometimes wonder if Von Trier's films have led to his 
nervous breakdown – the fact that he allows himself time and time again to go 
to the very dark side of human emotions to try to show us the tormented mind, 
and in this case getting the actors to enact his own demons.

I have read a few reviews where people were balking at Von Trier having a 
breakdown, implying that perhaps it was a gimmick. But I don't think this film 
could possibly have been made without that experience. This is film as art. 
It's not trying to be reasonable, and I find it quite close to painting in the 
way it plays with the abstract, the real and the unreal.

Julie Bindel Journalist and activist

Watching this film was like having bad sex with someone you loathe – a hideous 
combination of sheer boredom and disgust. I hated it, and I hate the director 
for making it. So, Von Trier was depressed a while back, had nightmares and 
decided to write the script of this atrocity as a form of therapy. Couldn't he 
have kept it to himself?

No doubt this monstrous creation will be inflicted on film studies students in 
years to come. Their tutors will ask them what it "means", prompting some to 
look at signifiers and symbolism of female sexuality as punishment, and of the 
torture-porn genre as a site of male resistance to female emancipation.

It is as bad as (if not worse than) the old "video nasty" films of the 80s, 
such as I Spit On Your Grave or Dressed To Kill, against which I campaigned as 
a young feminist. I love gangster movies, serial killer novels and such like. 
But for me they have to contribute to our understanding of why such cruelty and 
brutality is inflicted by some people on others, rather than for the purposes 
of gruesome entertainment. If I am to watch a woman's clitoris being hacked 
off, I want it to contribute to my understanding of female genital mutilation, 
not just allow me to see the inside of a woman's vagina.

If there is any justice in the world, this film would sink into oblivion. 
Aside from the risible script and potty plot, we have rubbish acting. Having 
previously loved Willem Dafoe and Charlotte Gainsbourg, I will now cross the 
street to avoid watching anything with them in. Apparently, both read the 
script and couldn't wait to be in it. That makes them almost as bad as Von 
Trier.

If you see this film you will be putting your money into something which 
deserves to bomb – and give a grain of validity to the sickest general release 
in the history of cinema.

Linda Ruth Williams Professor of Film, Southampton University

I approached Antichrist with some trepidation. Lars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> first got my sexual-political 
back up with Breaking The Waves, a pernicious paean to female self-abnegation, 
which sees raped and murdered Emily Watson getting celestial postmortem 
applause as heavenly bells peal in the clouds above. This was a horror film in 
the true sense, I thought. Now I am not so sure. Von Trier's tongue is often so 
firmly poked into his cheek, who knows where he's coming from, or going to?

Antichrist is obsessed with bodies. Clearly, for all its in-your-face 
qualities, no one should approach it expecting a pornographic romp. There is a 
money-shot, but it's bloody rather than ecstatic. Heavily referencing horror 
cinema, it's marketed as the arthouse answer to The Blair Witch Project, 10 
years on. Teen audiences marinaded in the conventions of "spam in a cabin" 
movies – monsters in the woods, out there where no one can here you scream – 
will feel at home with the creepy noises, buried bodies and innovative uses for 
a woodsman's toolbox here. Yet Antichrist hardly offers the "dare you to watch 
it" thrills of popcorn horror.

For me, what is most shocking, and most interesting, is its frenzied 
meditation on sexual hysteria. Film academics have turned to horror cinema over 
the last 15 years because it reveals cultural sores, symptoms of our guiltiest 
pleasures and incomplete repressions. At best, horror shows that in our 
sex-saturated culture, the body, surrealism and the unconscious can still hold 
imaginative power. Yet the most familiar sub-genre right now is the production 
line of so-called "torture-porn" meat-fest movies. In the wash of multiple Saw 
and Hostel films, it's hard to see the ideas-rich Antichrist as a serious 
danger to our moral wellbeing.

Last week, the Brazilian film Embodiment Of Evil opened in the UK, including 
scenes of somebody eating their own buttocks and a rat running up another 
character's vagina. To my knowledge, no one has condemned this as the most 
obscene film ever made (in contrast with the Sun's outrage over Antichrist). 
With films like that as a backdrop, I don't find Antichrist's intellectualised 
antics too worrying. If only tabloids campaigned against real clitorectomies, 
done on real baby girls, rather than fabricated ones done in fiction movies.

Of course, Von Trier probably doesn't "mean" any of it. For all the ludicrous 
excesses of this story, it could all be seen as an extended grief nightmare. If 
Antichrist has a sexual political agenda, it's probably just to stir things up. 
Von Trier throws us ideas, and we fight like dogs over them.

Samantha Morton Actor

Watching film is always a very personal experience for me; I understand the 
dangers mentally, emotionally and physically. The euphoria when the team 
achieves the "scene" in question, when the light is perfect, the words happen 
at the right time, the sound is like crystal, and everybody is happy to move on 
. . . It is hard to describe what happens when you're alone, the scene just 
performed and your skin and nerves are tingling as if you're cold turkeying 
from a drug. For this reason, I congratulate from the bottom of my heart 
Charlotte Gainsbourg's performance. The grief portrayed was of profound 
honesty. She had, when needed, a vulnerability that was heartbreaking, and 
throughout her demise into madness she maintained integrity. Willem Dafoe 
amazed me with his tragic stillness and inner pain. The constant, intense 
battling of intelligent minds, mixed with the most horrific of circumstances, 
proved fascinating.

A director (if they're worth their salt) will, and does, feel the pain of 
every moment of every character, be it behind closed doors or on set. A 
director pains over every shot, every inch of film, every breath of sound. 
Trying to communicate birth, fear, loss, death, religion, pain, love, desire, 
hate – the list goes on – is all-encompassing to the point of insanity. 
Deciding to make the film (or the film guiding you to make it) is an act of 
bravery and vulnerability, and sometimes of loneliness. The writer/director 
speaks through every character, so this film must have been incredibly painful 
to make.

The cinematography here is breathtaking, pushing the boundaries between 
emotion and technology, like the ancient vines that are photographed. Film is 
so important to me and for that reason I am glad I saw Antichrist. However, 
like I do with my life – and especially my mind – I take care. A bit like 
visiting a loved one who's going through some terrible, dark pain in the face 
of which we seem powerless, it can be emotionally crippling to watch. So for 
that reason, I say: take care viewing this. But if you can take the journey, 
take it.

Jane and Louise Wilson Artists

This wasn't really like cinema; it was more of an event. Watching it felt a 
bit like being in a trance. At one point, Von Trier shows the vein on the neck 
of Charlotte Gainsbourg and an extreme close up of the back of her head. The 
narrator talks about the dryness of the mouth, palpitations, sweats and pangs. 
Afterwards, you feel some of those things, including (for us) loss of appetite.

But parts of Antichrist are too absurd to be believed. You're not sure whether 
it's parodic or serious, especially when the fox speaks. The film was most 
powerful midway through, when the scene switched to the log cabin. Acorns 
bounce off the ceiling. Lichen grows over Defoe's hand. Nature encroaches on 
the two of them. It's as if they're inhabiting a state of despair – and so are 
you, the viewer.

This film would work beautifully as an installation in terms of the 
camerawork. There is a scene in the shower where you can see Gainsbourg's face, 
but you also see water droplets falling really slowly in front of her: it looks 
like a frozen moment. There is a very strange sense of depth. It was 
reminiscent of Bill Viola's video installations. The effect is achieved by 
filming at high speed, shooting hundreds of frames as opposed to several. When 
the footage is played back at normal speed, you see all these individual frames 
of the one moment. There are some amazing shots: the deer attempting to give 
birth, for instance, and the scene where hands come out of the trees. But then 
another shot shows bodies in the undergrowth, barely hidden, and that, in its 
obviousness, pulls you away from the story.

Unfortunately, this film leaves you quite unfulfilled. It's pretty damning 
about the whole of human nature. And, of course, the woman gets it in the end. 
Of all the to-dos you could have, there's a demonised mother, a witch who seems 
to prioritise her own sexual fulfilment over the safety of her child. All of 
which made us curious about why Von Trier dedicates the film at its close to 
Tarkovsky. Tarkovsky's demons were very different. The Russian authorities 
tried to censor his films. He spent his final years in exile from the home and 
family he loved. There is a density to what he does that transcends genre.
 