
Google's latest doodle celebrates the 161st birthday of Antoni Gaudí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi>, the Catalan architect 
whose iconic buildings have left an indelible mark on Barcelona.

Gaudí, who met his untimely death under the wheels of a city tram in 1926, 
took with him to the grave his vision for his masterpiece, the Sagrada Familia 
church.

Work continues on the vast Roman basilica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/apr/24/gaudi-sagrada-familia-rowan-moore>
 and visitors flock to Barcelona every year to see it and his other works, 
including Park Guell, a steep garden complex with architectural elements and 
Casa Batllo, a mansion on the city's Passeig de Gracia.

Research suggested in 2011 that Gaudí used the garden of a psychiatric 
hospital as a testing ground for his revolutionary designs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/12/gaudi-psychiatric-hospital-test-designs>
, with the patients serving as his artisans. The grounds of the hospital at 
Sant Boi, south of Barcelona, are littered with Gaudí-esque constructions, the 
most outstanding of which is a bench similar to those in Park Guell, finished 
with broken tiles in a style known as trencadis that was pioneered by Gaudí.

The relative crudeness of the work had previously suggested that the works 
were copies, but researchpublished in the magazine Sapiens 
<http://www.sapiens.cat/ca/galeria-imatges.php?IDG=21> showed that they pre-date
Gaudí's signature buildings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/oct/10/architecture2> and were 
in fact prototypes for features in Park Guell, the Sagrada Familia and the 
nearby Colonia Guell, all of which Gaudí was working on at the time.

While Gaudí was part of the art nouveau movement, he was also a revolutionary 
structural engineer. He made an upside-down model of the Sagrada Familia to 
test his structural theory, which he then tested in practice when he built 
Colonia Guell.

Known as "God's architect", Gaudí's deep Catholic faith has left admirers 
lobbying the Vatican to have him beatified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/07/antoni-gaudi-sagrada-familia-miracle>
.
 