
I'm not sure where to start when looking at Philip's legacy as it is 
overwhelming in its scope and depth. But that immediately tells you a lot about 
his choices. He was the best character actor I can think of, and if you look at 
just the smaller roles he occupied, then those performances alone set him apart 
from his contemporaries. His strength was a total immersion in the role and a 
lack of vanity. At the same time, he hated what he loved, that was his curse –
he would tear himself to pieces over his performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/feb/02/philip-seymour-hoffman-death-interview>
.

It was my girlfriend Nimi who, upon reading the script of A Most Wanted Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/18/sundance-film-festival-review-most-wanted-man>
, immediately suggested I approachPhilip Seymour Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/philipseymourhoffman>; in retrospect, there 
was only one choice. It was obvious that he would be the person to bringthis 
John le Carré character to life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/27/fiction>. I always imagined this 
man to have a strong physicality as well as intelligence and a certain kind of 
leadership. When Phil and I watched the film together in its early stages, 
I could not believe that the guy sitting next to me was the same person as the 
one on screen. The belief in the reality of his character was total. Despite 
any issues he was dealing with outside of the film, domestic or otherwise, the 
performance never suffered.

Our first meeting was on a still shoot I did with him for Vogue in New York in 
2011. While they were mending his trousers in an adjacent hotel room, we used 
the downtime to discuss the film and his role. He was sitting in his underwear, 
of course, but he never let his focus shift to the absurdity of the situation. 
He was serious about the work.

Initially there was some unease between us on the set of A Most Wanted Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-most-wanted-man>, which I attribute to my 
inexperience as a director and in not verbalising my needs from actors in a way 
they are used to. But, gradually, Phil and I got to a place where the movie 
started to flow naturally and he didn't need much direction any more; he 
totally became the character of Günther Bachmann. He even signed off as Günther 
on an email to me when he got back home, after the film finished.

His character had a team of young detectives, Nina Hoss and Daniel Brühl among 
them, and on and off set he would be very much like their mentor. He would be 
protective of them and available as an actor with advice or encouragement. On 
the other hand, he would not hang out with actors who played roles that he, as 
a character in the film, had no time for. At night, we exchanged emails over 
scenes to come and to work out where we were going with it. He had a incredible 
take on his character and the film as a whole and it was fantastic to share 
this with him. We bonded over many things in the end, music being one of them. 
I made him a tape of songs I wanted to use in the film which he loved very 
much, particularly theTom Waits track 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/oct/01/popandrock.shopping9> Hoist That 
Rag, as he too had been listening to it recently.

Phil and I had dinner with our partners Mimi and Nimi in the late summer and 
he was a wonderful spirit and company to be with. He was a giant of a man in 
every way imaginable and his demise is not only a tremendous loss to the world 
at large and to lovers of great art, but very much on a human level. He was 
200% human, with all the struggles and flaws that come with this – and that is 
where that great art came from, I like to think.

It is unlikely I can do him justice with my writing but I like to think I did 
him justice in the film we made, where he is outstanding, and deserving of all 
our attention. I know he was extremely proud of it and we were talking about 
working together again when we met two weeks ago. As he put it: "I hope we get 
to do this again on another film. We know more now and I feel we'd fight well 
together and be unshakeable, and that's exciting."

Alas, it will never be and that makes the end of our film even harder to watch.

• The fee for this article has been donated to the Guardian and Observer's 
Future Africa appeal
 