
The television chef Antony Worrall Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonyworrallthompson> has apologised 
to his family and friends after being arrested for shoplifting from a Tesco 
supermarket, saying he would seek treatment.

The 60-year-old presenter and restaurateur, best known for BBC's Ready Steady 
Cook and Saturday Kitchen programmes, received a police caution for stealing 
from the Tesco in Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire.

Staff at the store reportedly spotted Worrall Thompson failing to scan some 
goods while using self-service checkouts at the shop on five occasions in just 
over two weeks from late December.According to the Sun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/4046788/Chef-Antony-Worrall-Thompson-shoplifts-at-Tesco.html>
, after using a store CCTV camera to watch Worrall Thompson use one of the 
tills last Friday staff challenged him as he left the store and called the 
police.

Police said the items involved were of low value. They reportedly included 
wine and cheese.

Worrall Thompson, from High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire, said in a statement 
that he deeply regretted his actions. He said: "I am of course devastated for 
my family and friends, whom I've let down, and will seek the treatment that is 
clearly needed.

"I am not the first, and I certainly won't be the last person to do something 
without rhyme or reason – what went through my head, only time will tell.

"Of course, I must also apologise sincerely to Tesco, with whom [I've] had a 
long and genuine working relationship, and to all the staff at the Henley 
branch, many of whom I've got to know over the years. I am so sorry for all my 
recent stupid and irresponsible actions. Hopefully in the future I can make 
amends."

A Thames Valley police spokesman said: "Thames Valley Police arrested a 
60-year-old man from High Wycombe following a report of shoplifting offences in 
Tesco, Reading Road, Henley-on-Thames. The man has been issued with a formal 
caution for these offences."

A Tesco spokesman said: "It's a matter for police."

Worrall Thompson's first restaurant was the Ménage à Trois in Knightsbridge, 
central London, in 1981. He opened a series of subsequent outlets as well as 
moving into television and producing an eponymous range of cooking equipment.

In 2009 he put his chain of six restaurants, pubs and cafes into administration
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/feb/09/worrall-thompson-restaurants-close>
, blaming his bank for being too cautious with credit.

He used his own funds to keep open two restaurants <http://awtrestaurants.com/>
, in Kew and Windsor, and has since bought back and reopened the Greyhound, a 
gastropub in Oxfordshire, and the Windsor Larder, a delicatessen and cafe.
 