
Control director Anton Corbijn is to delve into pop culture history 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/anton-corbijn-direct-james-dean-559143> 
once again for a film about the real-life friendship between James Dean and 
Life magazine photographer Dennis Stock.

The biopic, titled Life, will follow the recent trend for movies that touch on 
a vital period in their subject's life, eschewing the once-popular "cradle to 
grave" format. Dean's 1955 breakthrough, the melodrama East of Eden, had not 
yet been released when Stock received an assignment from the Magnum agency to 
photograph the young actor. The pair ended up becoming friends during a journey 
from New York to LA, and on to Indiana, with the photographer capturing iconic 
images of the nascent star.

East of Eden, based on John Steinbeck's novel, was one of only three films in 
which Dean took the lead and the only one of those to be released in his 
lifetime. He also starred in Giant (1956) and the iconic Rebel Without a Cause 
(also 1955). The actor died in a near head-on car crash in September 1955 while 
travelling at a reported 85mph in his new Porsche 550 Spyder.

Life, which is based on a screenplay by Luke Davies and whose budget is 
reported to be between $10m and $15m, is expected to shoot in early 2014. So 
far there are no casting details available.

The best-known biopic of Dean is perhaps the superior 2001 telepic James Dean, 
which starred a highly praised James Franco in the title role and gave the 
actor an early career boost. Corbijn is best known for his critically acclaimed 
2007 film about the last years of Joy Division singer Ian Curtis,Control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/118797/control>. The photographer and 
music video director has since directed George Clooney thrillerThe American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/25/the-american-review>. His 
terrorist thriller Most Wanted Man, starring Philip Seymour Hoffman and Rachel 
McAdams, is due in cinemas later this year.
 