
HIS STORY Anton Corbijn, 59, director and photographer 

Andy and I met in New York in 1980. I was shooting the Gang of Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gangoffour> on assignment for the NME. The 
magazine was on strike at the time, although they were still commissioning, so 
the story was never printed. I liked Andy. I thought he seemed very English – 
his accent and his manners – but also he was well read and opinionated. I was 
impressed by what he did on stage, too – he had this wholeWilko Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/wilko-johnson> guitar thing going on. The 
Gang of Four were strong live and visually interesting. We had a great time – I 
was only 24 and it was all very new to me. Later that year I was back in New 
York and I went to surprise Andy on his birthday. I have a picture of him in 
bed hungover with his legs sticking out and a grin on his face.

We’ve been friends for almost 35 years now. One of Andy’s girlfriends spoke 
Dutch, which helped me a lot with my English. Once they had an argument and she 
came to stay with me, and as a thank you she got her friend to cook a meal for 
me. The friend became my girlfriend for many years.

We worked together in the 1980s and then again when the Gang of Four had their 
big renaissance around 2004. Now when we see each other it’s just social. We 
both travel a lot and are both workaholics. It’s the Calvinist in me – I’m such 
a control freak that I even directed a film calledControl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/control>. So sometimes we will go a while 
without seeing each other. But when we meet I know that after five minutes we 
will have picked up again where we left off. Andy has this big love of music 
and food and film and art and he doesn’t mind going against the grain. It’s 
never dull.

HIS STORY Andy Gill, 59, musician

Anton is one of the most identifiable and copied photographers out there. It’s 
extraordinary the way he reduces the image to something simple, like using a 
very narrow depth of field to pick out someone’s eyes while everything else is 
out of focus. His photographs are appealing and extraordinary. But to do all 
that and then go, “Right, I’m going to become a filmmaker”…

It was an incredible transition. I’m only slightly jealous of his success.

He had to put a lot of his money into making Control, but then everyone saw it 
was this amazing film and after that it became a bit easier for him. I was in 
Leeds at the timeControl was set and we used to go to Manchester a lot. It was 
a complete shithole, but Anton made it look lovely. Then he didThe American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/123622/american> with George Clooney in 
Tuscany – how could that not be beautiful? He also has an eye for a 
good-looking woman, in real life as well as on screen.

How we hang out has varied over the years. Sometimes he’ll just come round to 
the flat for a quiet cup of tea or we’ll go out for a meal. But at other times 
it can be pretty wild, like the housewarming Anton thew for his place in The 
Hague. He got Peter Greenaway’s art director to do the decorations. Waitresses 
had dresses with drinks stacked on them, and waiters served soup from kettles 
on their heads. U2 were there, and Lars from Metallica. Michael Stipe sent a 
message by video. It was insane. Anton is driven, but he also has a left-field 
sense of humour that’s very appealing to me.

Gang of Four play at the Oslo Club, London on 28 February. 

What Happens Next, by Gang of Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gangoffour> and Alison Mosshart, is out on 2 
March (Membran)

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 