
Something must be coming – some big anniversary, where people do a lot of 
cooking and like to give each other kitchen gadgets? Am I right? Because all the
tired old celeb chefs are pushing out their cookware 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2009/oct/13/gadgets-chefs-product-endorsements>
 at the moment.Gordon Ramsay has just launched 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/foodanddrinknews/6281106/Gordon-Ramsay-launches-cookware-in-Argos.html>
 a "ground-breaking" new stainless steel range of milk frother, sandwich 
toaster, soup / smoothie maker etc, all available from Argos.

Not to be outdone Antony Worrall Thompson has, according to his PR people, 
invented a new breadmaker that can actually be set on a timer so the loaf is 
ready when you wake up in the morning? Isn't that brilliant? What a boon!
"Use your loaf and wake up to fresh bread with Antony Worrall Thompson's 
ingenious breadmaker!" commands Brazen PR's press release. "Few things can 
raise a smile on bitter mornings, but waking up to the smell and taste of 
fresh, warm bread is guaranteed to cheer up even the grumpiest of people, which 
is whyAntony Worrall Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonyworrallthompson> has designed a 
breadmaker that allows you to bake fresh bread at home, overnight."

When I asked Brazen if they knew that most electronic breadmakers had offered 
the timer facility for a decade or so, account executive Nikki Girvan said she 
wasn't sure about that. "We're just highlighting Antony's personal additions to 
his Breville Breadmaker. The 10 pre-set functions and their timings etc have 
all been designed using Antony's expertise."

I offered to "review" one if they'd send one to me. I hereby pledge to give it 
to my niece for Christmas (rather than put it on eBay).

Next from Wozza's expertise, the ingenious cork-screw with a lever handle; the 
plastic tray in which water can be frozen to make little blocks of ice, and 
even – though this is space-age stuff – a "non-stick" saucepan to which even 
porridge and scrambled eggs will not stick. Whatever next?
 