
An amateur historian has found the press pass issued to the French writer and 
aviatorAntoine de Saint-Exupéry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antoine-de-saint-exupery> when he covered 
Spain’s 1936-39 civil war for several French newspapers.

The pass was lost because it was not stored with those given to other 
reporters such as the German photojournalist Gerda Taro, the partner of the war 
photographer Robert Capa, said Maria Jose Turrion, the assistant head of 
Spain’s Salamanca-based civil war archives.

Antoine de Saint-Exupéry's Little Prince illustration up for auction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/26/antoine-de-saint-exuperys-little-prince-illustration-up-for-auction>
Dated 16 April 1937 the media accreditation for the author of The Little 
Prince was issued by the bureau in charge of propaganda for the losing 
republican side in Spain’s civil war. All journalists who worked in republican 
territory were required to register with the department.

Saint-Exupéry was aged 36 at the time and he listed himself in the pass he 
filled out as being an aviator and “clerk” in what appears to be a mistaken 
translation into Spanish ofecrivain, the French world for writer.

Policarpo Sánchez, a 52-year-old lawyer and amateur historian, found the press 
pass among other documents on 30 June in a small village in the central 
province of Toledo while researching civil war cinema.

“It has extraordinary value. His press pass provides us with precious 
information regarding his stay in Madrid,” Sánchez said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fantoine-de-saint-exuperys-little-prince-author-spanish-civil-war-press-pass%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc616ccb9ea2b1c1b28e3875b7a989e44fc50353f%2F23_14_2461_1477%2F2461.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antoine%20de%20Saint-Exup%C3%A9ry's%20Spanish%20civil%20war%20press%20pass%20found&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fantoine-de-saint-exuperys-little-prince-author-spanish-civil-war-press-pass%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antoine%20de%20Saint-Exup%C3%A9ry%27s%20Spanish%20civil%20war%20press%20pass%20found&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fantoine-de-saint-exuperys-little-prince-author-spanish-civil-war-press-pass%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc616ccb9ea2b1c1b28e3875b7a989e44fc50353f%2F23_14_2461_1477%2F2461.jpg>
 The press pass used by the French writer and aviator Antoine de Saint-Exupéry 
during the Spanish civil war. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Saint-Exupéry had listed his address in the Spanish capital as the Hotel 
Florida, where many writers who came to Spain to cover the war such as Ernest 
Hemingway and Martha Gellhorn stayed.

The conflict pitted soldiers loyal to an elected Socialist-led government 
known as republicans against rebel nationalist troops under Gen Francisco 
Franco in his military uprising that ultimately toppled the government.

It was one of the first conflicts to be extensively covered by press around 
the world, especially by intellectuals who sympathised with the republican side.

Saint-Exupéry, a pioneering pilot of his era, covered the war in 1936 from 
Barcelona in north-eastern Spain for the French newspaper L’Intransigeant and 
then in 1937 for Paris-Soir.

He disappeared while flying over the Mediterranean in 1944, shortly after the 
publication of the fairy tale-like novella The Little Prince. His body was 
never found.
 