
An original watercolour illustration of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry’s child hero 
The Little Prince, which shows the much-loved character standing in desert sand 
dunes with his scarf blowing in the wind, is due to be exhibited for the first 
time.

Saint-Exupéry wrote and illustrated the story of The Little Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/18/best-le-petit-prince-little-quotes>
, in which a pilot crashes in the desert where he meets the titular alien who 
tells him about life on his home planet, in 1942, while he and his wife 
Consuelo were living in Long Island. It was published in April 1943, and Mary 
Poppins author PL Travers predicted in the New York Herald Tribune that it 
would “shine upon children with a sideways gleam” and “strike them in some 
place that is not the mind”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fantoine-de-saint-exuperys-little-prince-illustration-up-for-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc108f493adebe27c3fd44d1dae85f159043f412%2F0_15_1492_1865%2F1492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antoine%20de%20Saint-Exup%C3%A9ry's%20Little%20Prince%20illustration%20up%20for%20auction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fantoine-de-saint-exuperys-little-prince-illustration-up-for-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antoine%20de%20Saint-Exup%C3%A9ry%27s%20Little%20Prince%20illustration%20up%20for%20auction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F26%2Fantoine-de-saint-exuperys-little-prince-illustration-up-for-auction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc108f493adebe27c3fd44d1dae85f159043f412%2F0_15_1492_1865%2F1492.jpg>
 An undated photo of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Saint-Exupéry died in action in 1944, and The Little Prince went on to become 
one of the most read books in the world, translated into 270 languages, with 
145m copies sold. Saint-Exupéry’s manuscript and sketches were acquired by the 
Pierpont Morgan library in New York, while his wife Consuelo took the original 
watercolours back to France with her.

The signed original watercolour image, which comes from the Consuelo 
Saint-Exupéry family, is from page 87 of the book’s original edition, 
corresponding to the text where the narrator says of the Little Prince: “This 
night I didn’t see him get under way. He had slipped away silently. When I 
succeeded in joining him he was walking at a rapid pace. He only said to me : 
-Ah, you’re there. And he took me by the hand. But he was still tormented: -You 
shouldn’t have come. You’ll have sorrow. I’ll seem to have died and it won’t be 
true.”

It will be exhibited in New York by French auction house Artcurial from 3 to 9 
May. “This watercolour shows an iconic image of the young hero. He escapes into 
the night without a sound and walks alone in the dunes with his scarf blowing 
in the wind. He will soon disappear and the atmosphere is tense,” said 
Guillaume Romaneix, who runs the book and manuscript department at Artcurial. 
It will then be auctioned by Artcurial on 31 May in Paris, with a guide price 
of €50-60,000 (£38-46,000).
 