
The Little Prince travelled from his home asteroid through the universe to end 
up in the African desert. Now the greatest creation ofAntoine de Saint-Exupéry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/antoine-de-saint-exupery> has taken a step 
into cyber-space, as Google marks the 110th anniversary of the French author 
with a doodle on its home page.

Born in Lyon on 29 June 1900, Saint-Exupéry was an aviator who flew the mail 
over North Africa and the Andes. He won awards for several of his novels, but 
is best-known today for the allegorical children's book The Little Prince 
<http://www.angelfire.com/hi/littleprince/frames.html>, the story of a pilot 
who crashes in the desert and meets the Little Prince. The fairytale has its 
roots in the author's own experiences: in 1935 he had an accident in the desert 
of North Africa, walking for days before he was rescued.

The prince tells the pilot about life on his tiny home planet, the asteroid 
B-612, which has three volcanoes and a rose, which he loves. He decides to 
leave and adventures through the universe, visiting six other asteroids before 
travelling to Earth, which is "not just an ordinary planet! One can count there 
111 kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the negro kings among them), 7,000 
geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men 
– that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grownups."

The book is an allegory about the innocence of childhood. It sees the prince 
tame a fox who tells him that "it is only with one's heart that one can see 
clearly. What is essential is invisible to the eye", and ends as the prince is 
bitten by a snake in order to return to his planet and care for his rose.

First published in 1943, the year before the author died in action, The Little 
Prince has been translated into over 100 languages and has sold millions of 
copies around the world. Perhaps in honour of what would have been 
Saint-Exupéry's 110th birthday, today it was hovering at the top of Amazon's 
children's classics bestseller list 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/bestsellers/books/291745>.

Google has previously honoured HG Wells with a crop-circle doodle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2009/sep/21/google-hgwells-doodle-mystery>
, marking the 143rd birthday of the father of science fiction.
 