
Suggestions by president-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> that the United States may 
review or cut its F-35 joint strike fighter procurement have caused experts to 
warn it could cause cost blowouts in Australia’s plans to buy the jet.

But the defence industry minister, Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne>, has said that 
Australia’s commitment to buy the fighter jet stands despite Trump’s criticism 
of its cost.

On Monday, Trump scolded military jet manufacturer Lockheed Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/lockheed-martin-share-prices-donald-trump-tweet>
 for the F-35’s “out of control” costs and said “billions of dollars can and 
will be saved on military (and other) purchases after January 20th”.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The F-35 program and cost is out of control. Billions of dollars can and will 
be saved on military (and other) purchases after January 20th.
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808301935728230404> December 12, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808301935728230404> 
The United States air force plans to buy 1,763 F-35 jets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/03/f-35-ready-for-service-says-us-air-force-as-australia-and-britain-await-delivery>
; the $379bn program to develop and builder the fighter is the Pentagon’s 
largest weapon’s project.

Trump's tweet about Lockheed-Martin cuts $4bn in value as share prices fall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/lockheed-martin-share-prices-donald-trump-tweet>
In 2014 Australia committed to buy an additional 58 joint strike fighters  
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-04-23/australia-to-buy-58-more-joint-strike-fighters/5405236>
at a cost of more than $12bn, taking our total commitment to 72 jets. The jets 
willbe delivered from 2018 to 2023 
<http://www.abc.net.au/cm/lb/7219028/data/defence-response-data.pdf> at a cost 
per fighter expected to come down to US$90m.

Speaking from London, Pyne said the government was “very confident” the joint 
strike fighter is the right jet for Australia, the US and the “rest of the 
world”.

“Whether it has been efficiently managed from the United States’ point of view 
in terms of their cost and delays and so on is really a matter for them and for 
president-elect Trump’s opinion,” he said.

Pyne said it was “perfectly fine” for Trump to have the opinion the F35’s 
costs were out of control but Australia was very committed to the project as a 
partner nation and as the Asia-Pacific hub for the jet.

“It is a long way down the track and obviously a great deal of money has been 
invested in it.”


The US Studies Centre research director, James Brown, told Sky News that 
Trump’s tweet was “very contradictory” with promises to restore defence 
spending before the election.

Brown said it was “overly optimistic” for Pyne to suggest Australia’s 
procurement of F-35s was not affected by Trump’s commentary.

“The joint strike fighter, without the US, does not exist: the US is buying 
the greatest number ... if Donald Trump were to cancel that project after 
January 20 that would leave Australia pretty exposed.”

Brown said if the US downsized its order, that would increase the cost per jet 
for Australia. He said Australia’s defence strategy had been built around the 
F-35 and it would be “quite a disruption” to move away from it to buy other 
models, such as the Super Hornet.

The Australian Strategic Policy Institute director of defence and strategy, 
Andrew Davies, told Guardian Australia that Trump’s comments may amount to 
“sabre-rattling” to drive a harder bargain with Lockheed Martin and other big 
defence contractors.

“They couldn’t afford to cut the entire program – the US air force don’t have 
an alternative in production,” he said.

But he warned if the US cut its order in years Australia is still buying the 
jet then economies of scale will be reduced and Australia will pay more.

Davies has suggested 
<https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/2017-usaf-budget-f-35a-price-and-production-schedule-update/>
 the US air force’s decision in 2016 to delay acquisition of 45 jets over five 
years could result in Australia paying between US$150m and 200m for the 30 
aircraft it will buy in 2018–21.

F-35 ready for service, says US air force, as Australia and Britain await 
delivery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/03/f-35-ready-for-service-says-us-air-force-as-australia-and-britain-await-delivery>
Davies added that Australia benefited from being a partner country because its 
component makers can bid for work contributing to the jet. That is currently 
worth about $400m to Australian industry, but could rise to billions of dollars 
if there were an increase in orders for the F-35.

The joint strike fighter project, launched in 2001, has been dogged by huge 
cost overruns and technical problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/03/f-35-ready-for-service-says-us-air-force-as-australia-and-britain-await-delivery>
 that blew out its budget by nearly 70%.

Britain slashed its orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/12/defence-aircraft-jet-fighters-budget>
 and the decision of the Howard government in 2002 to buy the jet fighter has 
beenheavily criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/22/australias-f-35-jet-acquisition-has-hallmarks-of-ponzi-scheme-inquiry-told>
 as hasty and ill-judged as cost increases, delays and doubts about its 
capability have mounted.

Problems with the fighter jet have included issues with the radar software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/08/radar-glitch-requires-f-35-fighter-jet-pilots-to-turn-it-off-and-on-again>
 and increased risk of neck injury to lower-weight pilots when they ejected 
from the aircraft. The planes cannot be equipped with a operational gun 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/12/31/new-u-s-stealth-jet-can-t-fire-its-gun-until-2019.html>
 until at least 2019 because software is not available to support it.

Davies said that Trump’s criticism of the F-35 “would’ve been very fair about 
five years ago” but the program was in better shape today.

He cited increased production of the jets, prices stabilising and coming down 
<https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/2017-usaf-budget-f-35a-price-and-production-schedule-update/>
, and his assessment that its software problems were “not completely solved but 
under control”.
 