
“Horny” and “smug”, said Richard James when asked by Rolling Stone how he felt 
about Syro, his first newAphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin> album in 13 years. He laughed as 
he said it but if anyone is entitled to feel a little bit pleased with 
themselves, it’s him. After so long away, Aphex still has an allure like no 
other. At 43, he remains a reluctant figurehead who has nevertheless preserved 
his mystique in an era of limitless data by doing precisely nothing; letting 
the digital realm embellish what he once called the “lush disinformation” about 
him: those 90s Aphex myths perpetuated, often by James himself, before the 
internet took hold and the tales could be instantly verified. Did he really 
drive a tank, live in a bank vault and make music in his sleep?

The truth hardly matters when the myth is so engaging. A techno Time Lord who 
regenerates with each new release – always the same, always different – it 
helps that his music is impervious to fashion. Straddling everything from 
Stockhausen to Pain Jerk, disco to jungle, Aphex fills in the gaps between 
genres and constructs entirely new ones. Hence the hoo-ha surrounding Syro. For 
the devoted, this is a rare chance to devour an hour of box-fresh blockbuster 
braindance that might somehow bring them closer to their master. Everyone else 
should sit back and enjoy the frenzy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis&media=>
Björk

“Richard is an innovator. He showed the way and had to then take on the 
extraordinary pressures of scrillions of copycats. It probably gets tricksy to 
tell your own voice apart from your disciples’ – which one is the original? And 
he has the true prangsterism of an original, too: when someone assimilates him, 
he simply disappears and starts from scratch elsewhere. They can hang on to the 
artifice. It wasn’t about that in the first place anyway. I cannot remember 
when I first heard his music – it must have been in 92. But I do remember that 
he came and supported me on tour, probably around 94, in the USA – he shared 
our tour bus and he DJed with sandpaper! It really cracked me up. Richard has 
always been incredibly supportive of me and has emailed me a couple of times 
and told me about equipment that he knew I would get into. For example, he told 
me about the Korg 4-track dictaphone that helped me a lot to make Medúlla. He 
has a very generous and humble side.”

Ian Rankin


“I use Ambient Works as background music when I’m writing, which would 
probably appal Richard James, to think he’s being used as wallpaper music, but 
it puts me in a great zone. It shuts out the world. Selected Ambient Works 
means that I can focus. It means my brain can dance. But having gotten used to 
that very ambient sound, the videos came as a complete shock, especially Come 
To Daddy. I’m a big fan of Clive Barker, and it had that kind of urban horror; 
it was absolutely chilling. The meeting of a great visual artist,Chris 
Cunningham <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chris-cunningham>, with decent 
music. The way he puts his face on to these horrific children who are running 
around this great postmodernist estate causing havoc. And in Windowlicker, when 
he grafts it on to glamour models; it’s funny and very disturbing at the same 
time. Which is quite in keeping with the music. He’s definitely part of a great 
lineage of British artists. He’s got wide appeal: for young people that still 
listen to dance music, but also for music fans my age, who want something 
cerebral that you can sit down and listen to. Also, you don’t know what you’re 
going to get. His new album could aspire to Brian Eno or it could be quite 
heavy dancefloor music. He’s someone who, from a very early age, knew what he 
wanted to do and found ways to do it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7MBaEEODzU0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7MBaEEODzU0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7MBaEEODzU0&media=>




Stuart Braithwaite, Mogwai

“Aphex Twin has been a constant in my life as a music fan. I remember hearing 
Digeridoo as a teenager at an Orb gig and thinking: “This is absolutely one of 
the most intense things.” I’ve always got his records, I’ve seen him play a lot 
of times and enjoyed all the amusing things he’s done over the years. I thought 
he might have given up on the concept of releasing records as Aphex Twin. 
People concentrate on the innovations, but the actual musicality of them is 
above what most musicians ever produce. Selected Ambient Works II and a lot of 
the piano music on Drukqs is timeless. Then he’ll bring out something like Come 
To Daddy and you can imagine him pissing himself laughing.”

Chris Cunningham

“I heard Selected Ambient Works volume one first and didn’t like it at the 
time, but then I heard Surfing On Sine Waves and became obsessed. I started 
going to the record exchange in Camden two or three times a week to look for 
the Rephlex white labels or test pressings that would end up there. I actually 
got one of the original Caustic Window vinyl LPs from there. Richard tried to 
steal it back from me when he came round my house! He was so baffled that I had 
a copy. There’s a lot that makes his music extraordinary: personality, sense of 
humour, technical mastery, scope, depth… Plus he’s not lazy; he’s made so many 
tracks. His music is a perfect mix of mystery and adrenaline. It’s influenced 
my film-making more than any film-maker, for sure. I remember he played me a 
track in his studio once that blew me away and then gave me a Zip drive with it 
on. When I got home it was blank and I still haven’t gotten a straight answer 
from him it if it was a trick or not.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh-9UvrLyj3k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh-9UvrLyj3k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh-9UvrLyj3k&media=>
Daniel Avery


“I was utterly transfixed by the videos for Windowlicker and Come To Daddy as 
a teenager. It was a view into another place that I didn’t quite understand but 
was desperate to know more about. Aphex is a continual reminder that the most 
interesting musicians are the ones who create their own world and don’t 
particularly care about existing outside of it. In today’s pop culture, where 
extroversion and gushing collaborations are seen as the most desirable 
attributes for success, Aphex remains the ultimate anti-careerist. Everything 
he creates has a beautiful cohesion to it: whether it’s serene ambient 
electronica, laser-guided acid, or disconcerting, dystopian glitch, the work 
clearly comes from a singular mind but one that is not affected by outside 
trends. Aphex is one of those figures who has always done things exactly on his 
own terms and I see many new artists with the same mindset. The next few years 
could be very exciting.”

Syro by Aphex Twin is out on Warp on Monday
 