
For fans of Aphex Twin, the outside world stopped on Monday when a mysterious 
Soundcloud userstarted uploading tracks purporting to be early unreleased Aphex 
Twin demos <https://soundcloud.com/user48736353001>. Four days in and the 
giving continues – at current count more than 100 tracks have now been added. 
Who knows how many it will be by the time you’re reading this – or whether they 
will still even be there.

While this is symptomatic of a new move to openness by the Cornish producer – 
as symbolised bythis truly remarkable interview from late last year 
<http://0101001101010010.co.uk/?page_id=42>, in which he shared intimate 
details of his recording process– it is also the latest example of a new 
willingness on the part of Aphex Twin to embrace digital media in very 
unexpected ways.


Over the last year the world has been introduced to Aphex Twin material – new 
and old – through a variety of intriguing digital channels. First there was the 
almost accidental Kickstarter campaign that brought the “lost” Caustic Window 
LP to the wider world – and ended fittingly enough with the inventor of 
Minecraft bagging the original pressing 
<http://www.factmag.com/2014/06/24/aphex-twins-caustic-window-test-pressing-bought-by-minecraft-creator-notch/>
. The strength of good feeling generated by this grassroots digital initiative 
seems to have genuinely moved Aphex Twin – “the whole thing is just really 
touching”he told Pitchfork back in August 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/56459-aphex-twin-speaks-on-his-new-album-being-sampled-by-kanye-more/>
 – and has perhaps influenced his future activities.


A few months later came the equally unexpected news of a new Aphex Twin album 
– announced with a linkonly accessible via darknet site Tor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/21/tor-aphex-twin-taylor-swift>
 – causing an unexpected spike in traffic for the service which makes it 
possible for users to surf the internet anonymously.


This latest dump of early demos on Soundcloud is perhaps the least 
sophisticated of recent moves – but the mystery surrounding what’s happening 
and why, the constantly changing user profiles Richard D James uses, and the 
seemingly random drip-feeding of tracks is classic Aphex Twin. This is him at 
his best, playing with the medium and his audience just as he used to do with 
more primitive models of branding, marketing, myth-building and distribution. 
He’s not suggesting that he has the answers that will lead to a new business 
model. He is simply playing, in much the same way that label mates Boards of 
Canada did when they launched their 2013 albumTomorrow’s Harvest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/06/boards-canada-tomorrows-harvest-review>
 with a bizarre online and offline global treasure hunt.


There was a sense for a while that the internet had to be used to solve all 
the problems that it had caused. Hence we hadThom Yorke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/07/spotify-thom-yorke-dying-corpse>
 andDavid Byrne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/11/david-byrne-internet-content-world>
 railing against the evils of streaming – and Yorke’s grand but flawed attempts 
to create a new way of selling music – either through a “pay what you like” 
scheme or viaa legalised BitTorrent model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/26/thom-yorke-tomorrows-modern-boxes-bittorrent>
.


Aphex Twin isn’t trying to solve these problems. Rather he’s giving his 
audience a new way to engage – and in the process he’s highlighting the need 
for a new playfulness and spirit of adventure in the music industry’s 
relationship with the internet. Why not explore the creative possibilities 
offered by the internet? Why not use it as a medium to shock, delight and 
surprise? Yes there are real problems created by the new digital paradigms – as 
highlighted byOne Little Indian’s problems when Bjork’s new album was leaked 
<http://www.factmag.com/2015/01/22/bjorks-record-label-detail-nightmare-album-leak/>
 – but there are also opportunities. Think of Caribou’s recent “reward” to fans 
of a 1,000-track YouTube playlist 
<http://noisey.vice.com/en_uk/blog/caribou-shares-1000-track-playlist-with-fans>
, or FaltyDL’s curious decision topromote his new album through porn site 
Pornhub 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/pornhub-launches-record-label-20140925>.


Is this a sign that the music industry is beginning to stop worrying and love 
the net again? There’s still a long way to go of course, but Aphex Twin’s 
playful experiments – as always – are worth watching.


Stuart Aitken is a strategist at global marketing and technology agency 
DigitasLBi

 