
After years of Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> events 
starring the same four-person executive team, of Craig Federighi, Eddy Cue, 
Phil Schiller and Tim Cook, the absence of any female representation on stage 
had started to be a running joke – albeit not a funny one.

Even after the hiring of Burberry’s Angela Ahrendts to head up the company’s 
retail operation in 2014, the biggest company in the world still managed to run 
overwhelmingly male-dominated keynotes. At the company’s WWDC event in June 
2014, and at the launch of the iPhones 6 and Apple Watch, no women were on 
stage at all.

Even March’s Apple Watch event featured just one woman, supermodel Christy 
Turlington Burns, who came on stage to discuss running a marathon with the new 
device. Critics were quick to draw a link between the failure of representation 
at the highest levels, and other oversights in the company, such as the lack of 
period tracking in Apple Health.

But there are signs that the company is responding to criticism. The latest 
version of Apple Health, released as part of iOS 9 on 16 September, does indeed 
track reproductive health, Cook announced in June 2015. And at that same event, 
two female Apple employees (Jennifer Bailey and Susan Prescott, the heads of 
Apple Pay and Apple News) took the stage.

Wednesday’s iPhones 6S launch event saw the company move a step further, 
putting three women on stage: Jen Folse, a senior design producer at the 
company who introduced the new Apple TV; and two guests, Michelle Peluso, who 
introduced her company Gilt’s Apple TV app, and Irene Walsh, head of design at 
3D4Medical, who demoed an iPad Pro edition of its medical app.

Of course, against the 24 men who also took to the stage, it shows that Apple 
has a way to go to achieve a semblance of parity. But the company is apparently 
taking to heart the statement Cook made in Junewhen he said 
<http://mashable.com/2015/06/08/tim-cook-apple-diversity-women-future/#ZDss24O0oSka>
 that the lack of diversity in tech was “our fault”.

“‘Our’ meaning the whole tech community,” he added. “I think in general we 
haven’t done enough to reach out and show young women that it’s cool to do it 
and how much fun it can be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fapple-iphone-event-record-number-women-why-photoshop-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441891107198%2Ffc6a839f-da14-4b8e-8a36-2bb20671c3b5-2060x1099.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple's%20iPhone%20event%20had%20record%20number%20of%20women%20on%20stage%2C%20but%20why%20did%20it%20Photoshop%20one%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fapple-iphone-event-record-number-women-why-photoshop-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%27s%20iPhone%20event%20had%20record%20number%20of%20women%20on%20stage%2C%20but%20why%20did%20it%20Photoshop%20one%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fapple-iphone-event-record-number-women-why-photoshop-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441891107198%2Ffc6a839f-da14-4b8e-8a36-2bb20671c3b5-2060x1099.jpeg>
 Eric Snowden, Director of Design for Adobe/Behance, fixes a model’s smile. 
Photograph: Beck Diefenbach/Reuters 
But apparently Adobe <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> didn’t get 
the memo.

Invited on stage to demonstrate the company’s new suite of iPad design 
software, Adobe’s Eric Snowden rattled through a number of cool tricks, from 
automatically turning scribbles with the $99 Apple Pencil into coherent layout, 
to handling any of the company’s 1,000+ truetype fonts.

But then came the tone-deaf decision to demonstrate a new app for retouching 
images, called Photoshop Fix, by “fixing” a model’s smile. “I wish she had a 
little bit more of a smile. I think it would warm up the design quite a bit. 
Luckily we have an app for that,” Snowden said, before tweaking a slider in the 
app to alter her appearance.
Monica Dinosaurescu (@notwaldorf) 
The Apple keynote or: if you can’t get a woman to talk on stage, you can at 
least photoshop one live 😘
 <https://twitter.com/notwaldorf/status/641668635967164416> September 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/notwaldorf/status/641668635967164416> kitchen witch 
(@burjz) 
lmao a sweaty nerd just made a woman smile more using photoshop or whatever at 
this apple event
 <https://twitter.com/burjz/status/641668424570028032> September 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/burjz/status/641668424570028032> Biz Carson (@bizcarson) 
So, the only woman on stage at the Apple Event so far has been a man showing 
how to Photoshop a woman's smile. Mmmmkkkkk.
 <https://twitter.com/bizcarson/status/641668016732815360> September 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/bizcarson/status/641668016732815360> 
From the company whose flagship product’s name is synonymous with unrealistic 
images of female bodies, the sight of a man doing the technological equivalent 
of shouting “give us a smile, love” is perhaps not surprising, but it is 
unhelpful.

So, while it is good to see more women on stage at a major tech launch, just 
12.5% is little to shout about – and, as the Photoshop incident illustrates, 
the industry still has a very long way to go.



 