
Apple, Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft>, Google, 
Samsung, Twitter, Facebook and 56 other technology companies have joined 
together to reject calls for weakening encryption saying it would be “exploited 
by the bad guys”.


After Apple’s chief executive Tim Cook’s claims that “any backdoor is a 
backdoor for everyone”, the Information Technology Industry Council, which 
represents 62 of the largest technology companies worldwide,said 
<https://www.itic.org/news-events/news-releases/tech-responds-to-calls-to-weaken-encryption>
: “Encryption is a security tool we rely on everyday to stop criminals from 
draining our bank accounts, to shield our cars and airplanes from being taken 
over by malicious hacks, and to otherwise preserve our security and safety.”

The debate over encryption, which has become the bedrock of the internet used 
by almost every transmission that needs to be secure and increasingly those 
that don’t, has erupted after the terrorist attacks on Paris.

The Information Technology Industry Council’s chief executive, Dean Garfield, 
said: “Weakening security with the aim of advancing security simply does not 
make sense.”

Tech industry groups urge US to avoid policies that would weaken encryption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/09/tech-industry-groups-obama-policies-encryption>
End-to-end encrypted communications mean that only the sender and receiver can 
view the contents of the message, which governments say has put intelligence 
services at a disadvantage.

Governments, including the UK’s, have said that backdoors – holes in the 
security software powering various forms of encryption – should be created 
through which security services could view communications.

Garfield said: “Weakening encryption or creating backdoors to encrypted 
devices and data for use by the good guys would actually create vulnerabilities 
to be exploited by the bad guys, which would almost certainly cause serious 
physical and financial harm across our society and our economy.”

Security experts have previously described David Cameron as “living in cloud 
cuckoo land” over his suggestions that encrypted messaging apps should be 
banned.

Should technology companies refuse to include means through which governments 
and security agencies can break encryption, banning would only impact the 
lawful as it will be very hard to stop terrorists or other groups from using 
software that uses encryption.

 * The Guardian view on encryption: the problem is obvious but the answer is 
still elusive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/22/the-guardian-view-on-encryption-the-problem-is-obvious-but-the-answer-is-still-elusive>
 