
With the launch of the new Apple TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-tv>, Apple has positioned its 
set-top box as the heir to the Nintendo Wii, bringing accessible casual gaming 
into the living room with the device’s app store and motion-sensitive remote 
control.

The company’s all-singing, all-dancing press conferences regularly involve a 
quick play-through of a video game, but usually under the guise of a graphics 
demonstration. Hence the introduction of Vainglory,the mobile-first multiplayer 
online battle arena (MOBA) that debuted alongside the iPhone 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/09/vainglory-moba-ios-super-evil-megacorp>
, which was explicitly characterised as an example of what the company’s new 
Metal API could do for game developers; andInfinity Blade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/dec/19/infinity-blade-iphone-app-review>
, announced as “Project Sword” by Epic Games alongside the introduction of Game 
Centre, again with the emphasis on its graphical fidelity. “Everything you see 
is in realtime”, Epic’s Mike Capps emphasised.

This time, the demonstration of Warhammer 40,000: Freeblade, a third-person 
shooter for the iPhone, followed a similar pattern: its compatibility with the 
new devices’ “3D touch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/09/apple-iphone-6s-6s-plus-event-processors-cameras-3d-touch>
” was trailed heavily. But the two games we got to see running on an Apple TV 
were somewhat different.Crossy Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/04/crossy-road-mobile-game-10m-freemium>
, an already hugely popular iPhone game, served notice to existing iOS 
developers that porting games over to the living room was expected, while the 
debut of Beat Sports, a new game by Rock Band developer Harmonix, emphasised 
that Apple wanted to work with the sort of developer who normally steers clear 
of the ecosystem entirely (although Harmonix has released one iOS game 
previously, a port of Rock Band for the iPhone, which was co-developed with EA 
Montreal).

To be sure, both demos did touch on aspects of the device that Apple was keen 
to show off, with Crossy Road’s tight integration with theiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> version and Beat Sports’ use of 
the motion-sensitive remote. But the subtext was clear: Apple thinks it can 
take on Nintendo for third place in the console market.

The problem is, even while it’s parading game developers on stage, it’s still 
not clear ifApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> actually wants 
to take on the console market. The inconsistency within the company when it 
comes to games is painful to see, and shows no sign of abating any time soon.

The problem is that games are treated as just another type of app by the 
company – albeit a very profitable type. The games store, for instance, is 
organised in exactly the same way as the rest of the app store, with prominence 
given to a few select apps and then three charts of top-selling paid games, 
most-downloaded free games, and “top grossing games”.

Like all charts, those tend to be vaguely self-reinforcing – and their 
relation to the actual highest-quality games is loose at best – but “top 
grossing” takes it a stage further, encouraging the sort of cash-grabbing that 
makes Clash of Clans, Game of War and Candy Crush Saga a perpetual top three.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fapple-tv-games-console-can-it-be-trusted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655bd9f23038658ee50a2afaad2fc4c7bf2e4b31%2F0_216_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20wants%20the%20Apple%20TV%20to%20be%20a%20games%20console.%20But%20can%20it%20be%20trusted%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fapple-tv-games-console-can-it-be-trusted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20wants%20the%20Apple%20TV%20to%20be%20a%20games%20console.%20But%20can%20it%20be%20trusted%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fapple-tv-games-console-can-it-be-trusted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655bd9f23038658ee50a2afaad2fc4c7bf2e4b31%2F0_216_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Candy Crush Saga: forever at the summit of the ‘top-grossing’ chart. 
Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
Similarly, in the newly-released guidelines for Apple TV apps 
<https://developer.apple.com/library/prerelease/tvos/documentation/General/Conceptual/AppleTV_PG/>
, the company reveals that “the maximum size of an Apple TV app is limited to 
200MB”, with no persistent local storage. In other words, apps must be lean, 
and they must download everything they show from the cloud. That’s smart for a 
media player in a world with widespread broadband penetration, as it removes 
the risk of one app filling up the storage with downloaded movie files, leaving 
all the others unable to work. Streaming is the new downloading, that much is 
clear.

But 200 megabytes is a paltry amount for a game. The top-tier consoles right 
now ship their games on Blu-ray discs, which store at least 25GB and can rise 
to 128GB per disc (twice the total storage of the highest-capacity Apple TV); 
but even last generation’s Nintendo Wii, which is perhaps a better comparator, 
used DVDs that hold 5GB. On my iPhone right now, I have five games installed 
that are over the 200MB limit.

Some of those games might be able to stream content, hewing to the developer 
guidelines by the letter by downloading levels as you play. But unless Apple 
seriously intends to reintroduce the interminable loading screens of 
pre-hard-drive console gaming, it seems clear that they simply view games as an 
acceptable casualty of their drive for sleek TV apps.

Perhaps the most damaging example of Apple’s failure to give games the support 
they needis at the very top of the company’s app store review guidelines 
<https://developer.apple.com/app-store/review/guidelines/>: “If you want to 
criticise a religion, write a book. If you want to describe sex, write a book 
or a song, or create a medical App. It can get complicated, but we have decided 
to not allow certain kinds of content in the App Store.”

The iPhone is the largest games store on the planet, and it’s managed by a 
company whose attitude to the medium is “go write a book”. That hasn’t stopped 
magnificent art being made for Apple’s platforms, but it has stopped some, such 
as Sweatshop HD, whichwas pulled from the app store in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/22/sweatshop-game-apple-app-store?CMP=twt_guhttp://>
. Of course, that game didn’t criticise a religion or describe sex, but it did 
satirise exploitative employment practices in manufacturing. Can’t think why 
Apple would have an issue with that.

Despite my concerns, there is the chance that the Apple TV could be good for 
gaming. Unlike PC games, consoles have always been fairly locked down by the 
platform manufacturers. In a way, its “no sex, no drugs, only rock and roll” 
attitude is merely replicating the same approach that Nintendo has emphasised 
for years in its efforts to keep its games consoles family friendly. The 
company has onlyallowed six 18-rated games on its platforms in its history, and 
maintains a strict ban on any game given the US “Adults Only” rating, alongside 
Sony and Microsoft.

And unlike the old consoles, there’s no need to ask permission before making a 
game for the Apple TV, and the company is still much less controlling over what 
makes it on the App Store than any of the legacy publishers.

But its success as a games console would be handing yet more control of the 
medium to a company which fundamentally looks down on games and gaming. And 
that should concern anyone who likes to play.
 