
There has, arguably, never been a better time to be a music fan, with more 
ways to discover, listen to and share music than ever before, even if disputes 
about how much the artists make from these services continue to rumble.

The big streaming services like Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify>, Apple Music and Deezer may be 
familiar, but a host of other apps lie beyond those, from daily suggestions of 
new tunes to games that create levels based on your songs – via automated DJs, 
mobile gig tickets and “lip-dub” videos.

1 | Vevo (Android/iOS)


If you’re looking for music videos, Vevo <http://www.vevo.com> should be your 
first port of call: it has a wide selection, along with exclusive live 
performances and interviews. The more you use it, the better its 
recommendations get.

2 | Dice (Android/iOS)

Dice 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/dice-gig-club-tickets-no-booking/id898358948?mt=8>
 is a mobile ticketing app: you buy tickets for concerts within it, and then 
show your phone to enter on the night. The big draw: no booking fees, and also 
the promise of smart recommendations for new bands you might love.




Spotify UK revenues surge to almost £190m as mobile subscriptions take off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/spotify-uk-revenues-surge-to-almost-190m-as-mobile-subscriptions-take-off>
3 | Pacemaker (iOS)

Pacemaker 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pacemaker-create-share-mixtapes/id593873080?mt=8>
 started as an inventive app to DJ with your Spotify collection. It’s becoming 
something more interesting though: an artificial-intelligence DJ that does the 
mixing (and even chooses the songs, if you want) for you.

4 | BBC Music (Android/iOS)

The BBC has so much music across its networks, it’s easy to miss things you’d 
like.This app 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/articles/e6758066-4fd0-4f9f-af31-a915438af60d> aims 
to avoid that, pulling together live sessions and playlists from presenters and 
shows, tying in with Spotify, Deezer and YouTube as well.

5 | WhoSampled (Android/iOS)

If you want to dig deeper into the music you love, WhoSampled 
<http://www.whosampled.com/apps/> will soak up hours of your time. It scans 
your iTunes or Spotify library and lets you go back in time via the samples in 
your songs – as well as remixes and cover versions.

6 | Genius (Android/iOS)

The perfect companion for WhoSampled: this app <http://genius.com/static/app> 
provides annotated lyrics for more than 1.7m songs. So, not just the words, but 
fellow fans’ explanations of what they mean and key people and places 
referenced within them.

7 | Musical.ly (Android/iOS)

In 2016, Musical.ly <http://musical.ly> has become a bona-fide app craze, with 
more than 120 million users. Teenagers in particular have adopted it to create 
short “lip-dub” videos, where they dance and mime to their favourite songs.

8 | Combo.fm (iOS)

If you like a bit more human in your music recommendations, Combo.fm 
<http://combo.fm> is excellent. Its team suggests a few songs every day, with 
text explaining why it’s been chosen, and the ability to save the ones you like 
to a Spotify playlist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmusic-apps-tried-and-tested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff369dd55506c42d88188a53a709ec979176a44b0%2F0_0_6864_6924%2F6864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apps%20to%20keep%20you%20in%20tune%20with%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmusic-apps-tried-and-tested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apps%20to%20keep%20you%20in%20tune%20with%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmusic-apps-tried-and-tested%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff369dd55506c42d88188a53a709ec979176a44b0%2F0_0_6864_6924%2F6864.jpg>
 The Beatles with producer George Martin at Abbey Road Studios, London, 1967. 
Photograph: Copyright Apple Corps 
9 | Inside Abbey Road (Android/iOS)

You’ll need a Google Cardboard 
<https://store.google.com/product/google_cardboard?utm_source=en_GB-ha-emea-sem&utm_medium=text&utm_term=GoogleCardboard-exact&utm_content=bkws&utm_campaign=googlecardboard&gclid=CKLLz5KQyc8CFYYy0woduowFEQ>
 virtual reality headset to make the most ofthis app 
<https://insideabbeyroad.withgoogle.com/en>, which gives you a 360-degree 
guided tour of London’s famous recording studio, including sitting in on a 
session with the London Symphony Orchestra.

10 | Vibble (iOS)

This is another DJ-ing app <https://www.vibble.co> that promises to do the 
hard work for you: you create a playlist and then mix smoothly between songs by 
swiping your finger across the screen. It can use songs from your iTunes 
collection as well as SoundCloud.

11 | White Label – Hip-Hop (Android / iOS)

If you’re looking for a concentrated burst of new hip-hop tracks, White Label 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.hydricmedia.whitelabel&hl=en>
 is a great place to start. It mines SoundCloud for the freshest tunes, and 
serves them up as a playable chart. The same developer’sWonder app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/wonder-discover-new-indie/id1097691911?mt=8> 
focuses on indie.

12 | Riff Racer (iOS)

This futuristic racing game 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/riff-racer-race-your-music/id950299949?mt=8> 
has a clever twist: it creates its tracks based on songs in your collection, or 
(if you’re a subscriber) Apple Music playlists. This is more than a gimmick: 
you race in time to the music, to gripping effect.

13 | Mimi Music (Android/iOS)

This new app <https://mimi.io> is aimed at anybody who has hearing problems – 
including loss of frequencies if you’ve been to one too many gigs without 
earplugs. It measures your “earprint” and then tunes music specifically for the 
way you hear.

14 | Loopimal (iOS)

In theory, this app 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/loopimal-by-yatatoy/id964743113?mt=8> is for 
children: a creative way to make music with colourful creatures who dance and 
play loops of audio. It works beautifully but is such fun that parents will 
find it hard to resist playing when the kids are in bed.

15 | Shazam (Android/iOS/Windows)

This app <http://www.shazam.com> has been downloaded more than a billion times 
so far, with its core use being to identify a song playing in the real world – 
whether on a TV soundtrack or in a club. Its newer features include 
recommendations and the ability to follow artists to see what they’re Shazaming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmusic-apps-tried-and-tested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e00d01f5d98b152bc6b22116edc009505aab6f9%2F0_0_1079_855%2F1079.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apps%20to%20keep%20you%20in%20tune%20with%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmusic-apps-tried-and-tested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apps%20to%20keep%20you%20in%20tune%20with%20the%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmusic-apps-tried-and-tested%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e00d01f5d98b152bc6b22116edc009505aab6f9%2F0_0_1079_855%2F1079.jpg>
 Bruce Springsteen in concert last month. Photograph: Elizabeth Robertson/AP 
16 | Songkick Concerts (Android/iOS)

This app <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.songkick&hl=en_GB> 
is free but it could hit your wallet in the long run – in the best way. 
Songkick scans your digital-music service of choice to find out who you like, 
and then pings you whenever they announce a gig nearby, so that you can buy 
tickets.

17 | Mixcloud (Android/iOS)

The big music-streaming services focus on tracks, albums and playlists but 
Mixcloud <https://www.mixcloud.com> is all about radio-like “shows” and mixes 
from DJs and podcasters. It’s great for whiling away an hour or two at a time 
with the tastemaker of your choice.

18 | Lost Music (iOS)

Like Combo.fm, Lost Music 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/lost-music-playlist-everything/id956112633?mt=8>
 wants to recommend new music to you, and it works with a selection of 
influential music blogs and brands to do it. There are plenty of new tracks 
every day, with Spotify and Apple Music subscribers able to listen in full.

19 | RA Guide (iOS)

If you’re into dance music, you need RA Guide 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/ra-guide-djs-clubs-tickets/id981952703?mt=8> 
on your homescreen. Like its parent website, it’s a comprehensive guide to club 
nights and DJ sets near you, including tracking your favourite artists. You can 
buy tickets too.

20 | Lumines Puzzle & Music (Android/iOS)

Originally a Sony PSP game in 2005, Lumines 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mobcast.lwt.global&hl=en_GB> 
has returned as an addictive musical-puzzle game for smartphones and tablets. 
You have to match coloured blocks to make them disappear, playing to the beat 
of a range of earworm-worthy dance tracks.
 