
A few days after reading April De Angelis’s latest play, After Electra, I 
stumbled acrossan interview with the great Patti Smith 
<https://medium.com/cuepoint/patti-smiths-eternal-flame-fcadf12a8417>. She 
talks about her return to writing and recording albums in the mid-90s and being 
told she “didn’t do anything in the 80s” when she had been busy raising her 
family. Her outrage at the idea “that if you’re a mother, you’re not doing 
anything” is palpable. Then, just before meeting De Angelis, the tabloids are 
full of a story about a mother wholeft her children alone at home while she 
went on holiday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2953703/Mother-left-two-children-aged-10-13-home-THREE-WEEKS-went-holiday-abroad.html>
.

The two stories say a lot about our conflicted attitudes towards motherhood, 
and these themes are threaded through After Electra, directed bySamuel West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/10/sam-west-family-values>, 
which opens this week at the Drum in Plymouth before transferring to the 
Tricycle in London.

Motherhood is, as Smith suggests, an undervalued occupation, seldom given the 
status of “real” paid work. But woe betide the mother, creative or otherwise, 
who fails to subsume her own needs, desires or career to those of her children. 
Is there a more demonised figure than the mother who goes “against nature” and 
abandons her children, and in so doing finds herself subject to the clamour to 
be punished?

“You are often disempowered as a mother, and denied [the opportunity to be] 
self-defining,” says De Angelis. “The stories of mothers are stories that 
largely remain unwritten. A lot of women’s lives and experiences are 
overlooked, not thought of as interesting. The heroic struggle of bringing up 
children and all the emotional caretaking that entails; these things are seldom 
recognised and written about in theatre and culture.”

De Angelis’s hit play Jumpy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/29/jumpy-review> transferred from 
the Royal Court to the West End, where it became a magnet for theatregoing mums 
and their teenage daughters. After Electra puts that relationship centre-stage. 
In 84-year-old Virgie, De Angelis has created a woman who is both an artist, 
with a focus outside of men and her children, and a mother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fapril-de-angelis-after-electra-motherhood-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426074523050%2F323d6259-485e-4be7-9e03-36142e979d56-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=April%20De%20Angelis%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20a%20feminist%20in%20the%20real%20world%20is%20tough%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fapril-de-angelis-after-electra-motherhood-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=April%20De%20Angelis%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20a%20feminist%20in%20the%20real%20world%20is%20tough%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fapril-de-angelis-after-electra-motherhood-older-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426074523050%2F323d6259-485e-4be7-9e03-36142e979d56-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Veronica Roberts as Haydn and Marty Cruickshank as Virgie in After Electra. 
Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
“Virgie hasn’t had the life that many men do that allows them to explore their 
artistic genius. It’s about the tug that all women experience between children 
and work and how you manage that. Virgie is just an extreme example of that. I 
think we are still a long way off from answering the question, How to be a 
mother? – and how also to be yourself.”

After Electra takes place on Virgie’s 84th birthday when family and friends 
join her in order to hear an announcement. She is very much taking control of 
her own life.

“There is such contempt for older women,” says De Angelis. “Even on stage, 
older women are so often portrayed as foolish, silly … not as powerful figures. 
I didn’t want to write a romance, that ‘cougar’ image has been done. But I did 
want to create a transgressive character, an artist and a mother, who is a 
powerful older woman and wants control over her life and her body. Virgie keeps 
on saying, ‘But it’s my body’. But are women really allowed to be in control of 
our own bodies, and really inhabit them? We are so used to being policed in so 
many ways.”

Since she began writing in the 1980s after a stint as an actor with feminist 
theatre companies, includingMonstrous Regiment 
<http://www.unfinishedhistories.com/history/companies/monstrous-regiment/> and 
ReSisters, De Angelis has been rewriting, in surprising and often transgressive 
ways, the traditional narratives that relegate women to a peripheral status. 
She has always done so with a wickedly funny dollop of wit. Long before 50 
Shades of Grey came along, De Angelis was asking whether feminism and 
sadomasochism made good bedfellows inThe Positive Hour 
<http://www.outofjoint.co.uk/production/positivehr>.

In an early play, Breathless, the image of the helpless Victorian heroine and 
Frankenstein myth was transformed. Her modern classic, Playhouse Creatures, 
vividly sings with life as it explores the experiences of women on Restoration 
stages, and inThe Life and Times of Fanny Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/15/the-life-and-times-of-fanny-hill-bristol-old-vic-review>
, recently given a superb revival at Bristol Old Vic, John Cleland’s 
18th-century pornographic novel is rewritten by women.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fapril-de-angelis-after-electra-motherhood-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426074623273%2F7cf6546e-0982-4c5f-b8f7-159916ab804e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=April%20De%20Angelis%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20a%20feminist%20in%20the%20real%20world%20is%20tough%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fapril-de-angelis-after-electra-motherhood-older-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=April%20De%20Angelis%3A%20%E2%80%98Being%20a%20feminist%20in%20the%20real%20world%20is%20tough%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fapril-de-angelis-after-electra-motherhood-older-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F11%2F1426074623273%2F7cf6546e-0982-4c5f-b8f7-159916ab804e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 April De Angelis at the After Electra rehearsals. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
For over 30 years, fuelled by feminism and her own experiences, De Angelis has 
reclaimed the stage as a place where female experience can be explored and 
celebrated. Although she admits that it’s sometimes been easier to be a 
feminist in her writing than it is in everyday life.

“Being a feminist in the real world is tough. That’s definitely what Jumpy was 
about. There are the ideals, and then there’s the practice of it. My own 
experience as a daughter and a mother with a daughter has always fed directly 
into what I write. I remember when my daughter was young, I felt really 
disempowered, and wondered where all my bravado as a feminist had gone.”

De Angelis’s daughter is now grown up, but some of those feelings find their 
way into After Electra, which hijacks the Greek myth ofElectra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/01/electra-theatre-review-old-vic-kristin-scott-thomas>
, who takes her revenge on her mother, Clytemnestra, for killing her father, 
and tries to re-imagine it through the relationship of the elderly Virgie and 
her middle-aged daughter, Haydn. It’s a very funny play, full of her trademark 
deflating one-liners and some surprises as it takes a familiar story and 
subverts it.

“I wanted to try and rewrite it and reconfigure the relationship between 
mother and daughter so they are not always set against each other, which is how 
Freud sees it. He says that the girl is always disappointed in the mother, and 
always in competition with the mother for the father. But I’m interested in 
seeing if there is a value, a different kind of value that she can find in the 
mother. I didn’t want to copy the Electra story, but the echoes are there. The 
‘after’ in the title is important to me, because it’s as if I’m trying to chase 
her and pin her down. It’s about looking at an old story and maybe reassessing 
it, and trying to find another way of looking at it, and a potential for 
change. To see if there are other ways of reframing the story so we see it 
differently, with new eyes.”

• Until 28 March. Box office: 01752 267222. Venue: Drum, Plymouth 
<http://www.theatreroyal.com/whats-on/2015/after-electra/>. From 7 April to 2 
May. Box office: 020 7328 1000. Venue:Tricycle London 
<http://www.tricycle.co.uk/current-programme-pages/theatre/theatre-programme-main/after-electra/>
 