
Film-maker Anton Corbijn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anton-corbijn> 
has revealed that Arcade Fire will release their new single, Reflektor, on 9 
September. Corbjin lifted the veil on the band's mysterious "9/9/9" event, 
explaining that it will mark the international debut of a new music video.

"I'm working on a really great song at the moment: Arcade Fire's new single," 
Corbijn recently told the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/09/04/exclusive-arcade-fire-to-debut-new-music-video-for-reflektor-on-monday.html>
. "The song is called Reflektor, and you'll be able to see it Monday ... I 
can't say much more than that, because it's all a surprise. You'll have to 
watch the TV Monday evening!"

For weeks, Arcade Fire's fans have been anticipating Monday, 9 September. That 
date – 9pm on 9/9 – was part of the grand reveal following the group's 
underground marketing campaign. Promotions for Reflektorincluded street art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2013/aug/06/arcade-fire-reflector-new-album-title>
, a secretInstagram account <http://instagram.com/reflektor#> and, most 
recently, somecryptic teaser videos 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=4i2wp3GkNrg>. Until 
Corbijn's statement, no one knew whether this date would mark the launch of 
single, a video, a surprise gig or something else.

In fact, Monday's plans are still not entirely clear. Although Reflektor is 
thought to be the lead single from Arcade Fire's fourth album, it may also be 
the anchor for a new EP. The owner of the Twitter account @ArcadeFireTube, a 
fan who has become privy to some of the band's plans, claims that the Montreal 
group will be unveiling a12in Reflektor EP on Monday 
<https://twitter.com/ArcadeFiretube/status/375660727278632960#>. The record 
will be seeded to "approved" record shops worldwide, including Glasgow'sLove 
Music <http://www.lovemusicglasgow.com/> and Manchester's Piccadilly Records 
<http://www.piccadillyrecords.com/shop/index.php>.

Based on an earlier announcement, Arcade Fire's album proper won't be out 
until 29 October. The album was recorded in New York and Montreal with help 
from LCD Soundsystem's James Murphy.

Arcade Fire's previous LP, 2010's The Suburbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/dec/16/albums-2010-arcade-fire-suburbs>
, topped the UK albums chart and won a Brit award for best international album.
 