
Arcade Fire <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> have announced 
their new album almost every possible way at once. On Monday, after weeks of 
teasing, the band released a new single, an interactive music video, an 
old-fashioned music video and, to cap it off, played a surprise gig at a salsa 
club in Montreal.

Wait though, there's more. New Zealand's iTunes store appears to have leaked 
the cover art 
<http://www.onenewspage.us/n/Entertainment/74w12kzgi/Arcade-Fire-Album-Cover-Revealed.htm>
 for the group's forthcoming album, Reflektor, which is due out on 29 October. 
There's a world tour coming up. Oh, and the indie rockers have confirmed that 
it is indeed David Bowie singing backup on their new song.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7E0fVfectDo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7E0fVfectDo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7E0fVfectDo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=7E0fVfectDo>

"Thought you would bring me to the resurrector," Bowie intones on the nervy, 
disco-dappled title track Reflektor, which was produced byLCD Soundsystem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lcd-soundsystem>'s James Murphy.

As ever, frontman Win Butler and Régine Chassagne sing in French and English. 
However,violinist Sarah Neufeld <http://sarahneufeldmusic.com/>, a veteran 
member of the group, is nowhere to be seen in the videos and photos 
accompanying the buildup to the band's fourth album. Neufeld recently released 
an excellent solo record, and co-owns a large yoga studio in New York.

Arcade Fire have released a dramatic black-and-white music video, directed by 
Anton Corbijn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/06/arcade-fire-new-single-reflektor>
, although the clip was overshadowed by a more ambitious interactive film, 
conceived byVincent Morisset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/aug/04/arcade-fire-synchronised-artwork-suburbs>
. Shot in Haiti and Montreal,Just a Reflektor <https://www.justareflektor.com> 
follows the story "of a young woman who travels between her world and our own". 
Viewers can only interact with the film in Google Chrome. Like the band's 
previous interactive short film, 2010'sThe Wilderness Downtown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/aug/31/arcade-fire-future-music-videos>
, it's a tour de force of digital art.

As for the LP, the cover art – featuring a photograph of Rodin's sculpture 
Orpheus and Eurydice <https://itunes.apple.com/nz/album/reflektor/id696702725> 
– has popped up in the New Zealand iTunes store, along with an unofficial track 
listing suggesting it will be a 13-song, two-disc recording.

Completing a breathless flurry of activity, Arcade Fire took to the stage at 
Montreal's Salsathèque for thesecond surprise gig in a week 
<http://www.setlist.fm/setlist/arcade-fire/2013/salsatheque-montreal-qc-canada-33c65829.html>
. Posters around the city invited revellers to attend in formal or fancy dress, 
promising tickets for just $9. It was reported that a mere 100 lucky audience 
members took in the show.
 