
Archant <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant> has reported its first 
revenue and profit growth in eight years, bucking the tough market that has 
hammered rival newspaper groups.


Archant, publisher of a stable of regional newspapers including the UK’s 
largest in Norwich-based Eastern Daily Press, said there has been modest 
revenue growth in the first half of the year – thought to be the first in about 
eight years.

The group, which issued shareholders with a snapshot of its performance to 
date on Friday, said it is also on track to increase full-year profits for the 
first time in around eight years.

This compares favourably with rivals Johnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/11/johnston-press-claims-trading-up-despite-slump-in-ad-revenue>
 andTrinity Mirror, which recently reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/03/trinity-mirror-profits-print-ad-and-phone-hacking-costs>
 sliding profits and 4.6% and 8.7% first-half declines in total revenues 
respectively.

Archant said it has managed to limit the first-half overall advertising 
decline at its newspapers to just 1%, this compares with 13.7% at Trinity 
Mirror and 5.1% at Johnston Press.

Simon Bax, Archant chairman, acknowledged the strong performance but warned 
that the market remains tough.

“Our half-year financial performance gives us every reason to be positive for 
the second half of the year,” he wrote in a letter to shareholders. “However, 
the general environment for local media companies remains challenging, as is 
evidenced by recent announcements from some other companies in the sector. This 
emphasises the need for us to continue to focus on improving and strengthening 
our business.”

Bax said the large-scale changes introduced by chief executive Jeff Henry, the 
former senior ITV executivehired last August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/21/archant--jeff-henry-chief-executive>
, have started to pay off.

Since Henry joined, he has streamlined the functioning of the publisher’s 33 
operating units, part of a wider strategy called One Archant, and introduced 
initiatives such as an investigations unit and significantly boosting 
parliamentary coverage.

“We have invested back into content,” said Henry. “Investing across our titles 
is definitely paying dividends. The core of the business is performing well, 
there are fewer barriers to change, and clarity in reporting lines means that 
there is less duplication.”

The company said it increased digital revenues in the first half, but “at 
lower levels than we would wish”.

Henry has also sold off three magazines, invested in Norfolk rural broadband 
service WiSpire and cut costs at its local TV service, Mustard.

Henry said Mustard, which aired two of Norwich City’s pre-season friendlies, 
was still not yet profitable but it was now “moving in the right direction”.

The drop in the health of the newspaper market has renewed speculation of 
consolidation among the regional groups.

Henry distanced Archant from being a major player in any potential rounds of 
consolidation, warning that stripping costs was no substitute for growth.

“As far as we are concerned I don’t believe we need to consolidate to make a 
stronger Archant,” he said. “At Archant it isn’t simply about taking cost out 
of business, it is about growth. It may only be small but it is nevertheless 
revenue growth. I can see how huge amounts of costs can be taken out by 
industry consolidation, but fundamentally you still need growth”.
 