
Impressions of Jacqui Lambie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jacqui-lambie> by two artists have 
been submitted to the prestigious Archibald prize competition, each portraying 
different shades of the independent senator.

Depicting Lambie draped in an Australian flag, painter Phillip McKay of 
Tasmania <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania> said his final 
piece is a little different to what the senator, whom McKay has known for four 
years, had in mind.

“When we did the sitting she ran out and she got a toy machine gun from 
K-Mart,” McKay said of Lambie’s original brief, which included a ball gown and 
pistol. So I’ve got quite a few photographs with her posing like that but it 
didn’t sort of work. As sensational as that would be, my mother always said, 
‘no guns, Phillip’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Farchibald-prize-entries-depict-different-shades-of-jacqui-lambie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac2a17e34cdcc31db1592d129273747a75d8660c%2F0_0_3617_4423%2F3617.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Archibald%20prize%20entries%20depict%20different%20shades%20of%20Jacqui%20Lambie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Farchibald-prize-entries-depict-different-shades-of-jacqui-lambie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Archibald%20prize%20entries%20depict%20different%20shades%20of%20Jacqui%20Lambie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Farchibald-prize-entries-depict-different-shades-of-jacqui-lambie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac2a17e34cdcc31db1592d129273747a75d8660c%2F0_0_3617_4423%2F3617.jpg>
 Tasmanian artist Phillip McKay’s portrait of Lambie, titled I, Jacqui. 
Photograph: AAP 
McKay said his competition entry aims to show Lambie’s nationalistic and 
patriotic nature.


Tania McMurtry of Sydney also submitted a painting of Lambie, seeking a more 
personal depiction of the subject in her work, after meeting the senator 
shortly after Christmas.

“She was soft and pretty and gentle,” McMurtry said. “She doesn’t come across 
like that in the media.”

McMurtry’s painting shows the ex-soldier in a khaki skirt with her face 
sketched in black and white, and minimal coloured shading.

“She’s a very strong woman in a very hard place and no matter what you think 
of some of the other things that she can say, I just admire her guts,” McMurtry 
said.


Lambie, who said it had been a joy to work with both artists, offered the 
gun-and-gown pose suggestion as a tongue-in-cheek way to portray women in the 
defence force.


“It was around the time the media was poking fun at me and calling me Lambo,” 
she said. “However, amongst the chuckles and exaggeration, there was a serious 
message I was thinking of.”

These two portraits of Lambie will join more than 800 other portraits, which 
have been entered into the Archibald prize this year.

An exhibition of the finalists will open at the Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery of NSW on 18 July.

The prize was won last year by Fiona Lowry for her portrait of architect 
Penelope Seidler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/18/archibald-prize-won-by-fiona-lowry-for-portrait-of-architect-penelope-seidler>
.
 