
An independent online news outlet in Exeter has gone into partnership with the 
regional newspaper and magazine publisher,Archant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>.

The Exeter Daily <http://www.theexeterdaily.co.uk/>, a start-up founded by 
former Northcliffe newspaper editor Marc Astley, has agreed a deal that links 
his site to two Archant publications:Exeter Life 
<http://edition.pagesuite-professional.co.uk/launch.aspx?referral=mypagesuite&refresh=cJ037rS1wA18&PBID=bf045ecc-1394-4d27-8790-60027fa1be39&skip>
 and a new magazine entitled Business and Professional Life. The website also 
offers a new channel called The Business Daily.

In effect, the Exeter Daily will act as a digital platform for the two 
magazines. At present, Exeter Life is a monthly and the business mag is a 
quarterly that is hoped to become a bi-monthly.

It is a significant move by Archant, which has parked its tanks on a lawn 
previously “owned” in newspaper terms byLocal World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/local-world> through its Exeter Express & 
Echo, which used to be edited by Astley.

Evidently, Archant began monitoring the Exeter Daily early last year after 
talks with Astley. He launched the site in October 2012 with the backing of a 
consortium of business people who continue to support the project.

He and Archant signed a 12-month deal in February 2015 and, aside from 
publishing in digital and print, are hoping to stage events while exploring 
other revenue streams.

Astley said: “We are really excited about this collaboration. We both bring 
something completely different to the party and because we are not wedded to a 
daily or weekly print product we are able to take a very different approach to 
publishing content.


“This isn’t a case of us simply replicating an old model. Innovation is at the 
heart of what we do”.

Indeed, it is. The Exeter Daily/The Business Daily have just one full-time 
employee working on both platforms. Almost 40% of the content comes from users 
thanks, said Astley, “to the site’s unique citizen journalism model and UGC 
functionality”.

Astley left the Echo in November 2011, three months after it switched from a 
daily to weekly publication. In November 2012, Northcliffe sold all its papers 
to Local World, which is chaired byDavid Montgomery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-montgomery>.

In October 2014, Astley launched a sister platform, The Plymouth Daily 
<http://www.theplymouthdaily.co.uk/>. 
 