
At the opening night of the Archibald prize in July, one painting commanded 
more double takes than the rest:Nick Stathopoulos’ portrait of Sudanese refugee 
and lawyer, Deng Adut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/15/archibald-prize-2016-review-typically-debatable-portrait-beats-some-very-worthy-work>
 – so real to life it could have been a photo.

On Wednesday Stathopoulos was awarded the public-voted people’s choice award 
for the hyperreal piece, which took him four months to complete – more time 
than he has ever taken on a single painting.

The portrait, titled Deng, is Stathopoulos’ first public choice winner and his 
fifth entry to be selected as an Archibald finalist. A “clear winner” among the 
pool, it comes with a $3,500 cash prize.

Archibald finalists 2016: from artists to activists to celebrity chefs – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/07/archibald-finalists-2016-from-artists-to-activists-to-celebrity-chefs-in-pictures>
The win is something of a vindication for Stathopoulos. In 2014, the artist was
 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/art-and-design/ugly-portrait-wins-salon-des-refuses-after-archibald-snub-20140911-10fer3.html>
 “astonished and disappointed” when his portrait of the author Robert Hoge, 
titled Ugly, did not make the finals of the Archibald or the Doug Moran prizes; 
it went on to win the people’s choice at Salon des Refuses, which features work 
that did not make the Archibald’s finalists exhibition.

“I tend to think it’s all a bit of a crap shoot,” he said at the time.

In a statement to the press on Wednesday, Stathopoulos said he has spent his 
whole life developing his style and process, which he described as 
“time-consuming, laborious and painstaking”. He commended the public for their 
selection of his work.

“I don’t think we give the general public enough credit when it comes to 
matters of art. In my experience they are very clued in. And when it comes to 
the Archibald prize people’s choice award, they seem to get it right every 
year,” he said. “The critics may balk, but the public always manages to pick my 
favourite paintings. So I’m delighted they chose my portrait of Deng Adut. It’s 
a great affirmation.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Farchibalds-nick-stathopoulos-hyper-real-portrait-of-deng-adut-wins-peoples-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F259eea51d72a824a2d5d3affc3411c03c2c24301%2F0_0_2947_2965%2F2947.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Archibalds%3A%20Nick%20Stathopoulos'%20hyperreal%20portrait%20of%20Deng%20Adut%20wins%20people's%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Farchibalds-nick-stathopoulos-hyper-real-portrait-of-deng-adut-wins-peoples-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Archibalds%3A%20Nick%20Stathopoulos%27%20hyperreal%20portrait%20of%20Deng%20Adut%20wins%20people%27s%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Farchibalds-nick-stathopoulos-hyper-real-portrait-of-deng-adut-wins-peoples-choice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F259eea51d72a824a2d5d3affc3411c03c2c24301%2F0_0_2947_2965%2F2947.jpg>
 Archibald prize finalist Nick Stathopoulos’s portrait of Deng Adut, titled 
Deng Photograph: Mim Stirling/AGNSW 
The Art Gallery of New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> director, Michael 
Brand, said: “This vote of appreciation by visitors to the Archibald recognises 
both the meticulous skill of artist Nick Stathopoulos and the wonderful 
contribution Deng Adut has made – and is making – to Australian life.”

Archibald prize 2016 review – a typically debatable portrait beats some very 
worthy work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/15/archibald-prize-2016-review-typically-debatable-portrait-beats-some-very-worthy-work>
Deng Adut was a child soldier in Sudan before fleeing the country, arriving in 
Australia in 1998 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/21/cherish-australias-freedom-from-fear-says-refugee-lawyer-deng-thiak-adut>
, putting himself through law school and becoming a refugee advocate, lawyer 
and community leader. Stathopoulos first came across his name through a 
marketing campaign for Western Sydney University, where Adut studied.

“It must be some sort of magic, but Nick really captured what’s underneath my 
skin in his painting,” said Adut on Wednesday. “It can be hard for me to look 
at – not least because my nose looks so big!”

The Archibald exhibition, which was won by Louise Herman for her portrait of 
Barry Humphries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/15/louise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait>
, is at theArt Gallery of New South Wales until 9 October. 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/archibald-wynne-sulman-prizes-2016/>
 