
Local newspaper publisher Archant <https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant> 
is to pay its first dividend since 2012 after recording a 20% increase in 
profits to £9.6m in 2015.

The Norwich-based publisher, which runs 130 titles including the Eastern Daily 
Press and the Ham & High newspapers as well as glossy magazines, said the 
increase in profits over 2015 had been achieved without cutting staff, despite 
a 1.9% fall in revenue.

The company said the 2015 performance and outlook for 2016 meant it was 
proposing a dividend of 5p per share.

It said circulation at half its magazine titles had increased, while 
circulation revenue at its newspapers was broadly flat as price increases 
offset falling sales. The company said it had moved to reduce its pension risk 
and was taking a “proactive” approach tosettling an outstanding tax bill  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/mar/24/archant-faces-another-hmrc-investigation-over-its-tax-affairs>
with HMRC.

Chief executive Jeff Henry, who was appointed in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/21/archant--jeff-henry-chief-executive>
, said the improved performance was due to focussing on Archant’s core business 
in print. The company recorded revenues of £114.6m, down 1.9% on the year, but 
it was Archant’s best relative performance since 2007, despite difficult 
industry conditions.

Henry said: “2015 was about very careful husbandry of our existing customers, 
of our existing businesses, not sacrificing it at the altar of digital. In 2016 
we are going to make much more progress in digital than in 2015.”


He added that Archant was meeting its 2016 revenue targets so far this year, 
and was ahead of profit targets. He said he was not concerned about 
consolidation in the regional media or competition for national advertising as 
it only accounted for 8% of revenue.

He said: “Archant is focussing on what we can do within improving the lives 
and businesses of the communities we serve. Our main strategy is not about 
making ourselves having a general UK appeal, it’s about having massive appeal 
and relevance in our local community.”
 