
The Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> icebreaker 
confiscated by Russia after activists tried to board a Gazprom oil rig has been 
released. But it could take two months before the Arctic Sunrise leaves 
Murmansk harbour, according to the campaigning group.


The ship was boarded by the Russian coast guard <http:> and towed 500 miles 
from the Pechora Sea to the northern Russian port of Murmansk in September 
2013. Thirty activists, including six Britons, were arrested and accused of 
hooliganism and piracy.


Although the 30 activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2013/oct/14/greenpeace> 
wereall released from prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/28/arctic-30-final-greenpeace-activist-bailed>
 after three months of international protests, the ship remained in port 
pending a decision by the Russian investigative committee (IC).


According to Greenpeace International lawyers, the committee unexpectedly 
“annulled the arrest” of the ship on Friday and informed the Amsterdam-based 
group that the ship could leave.


However, Greenpeace International said it was unlikely that the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> Sunrise would be seaworthy for at 
least a month and possibly more.

“Our main priority now is to get the ship checked by independent surveyors to 
assess the level of damage since it was seized by Russian agents on 19 
September. We will also be asking the Russian authorities to continue guarding 
the vessel until our crew arrives to take custody of it,” said Daniel Simons, 
Greenpeace International legal counsel.


Essential navigation gear is also known to have been removed from the ship and 
is being held separately by the Russian authorities. “It will take at least a 
month to prepare the ship,” said Maria Favorskaya, a Greenpeace spokeswoman in 
Moscow.


“Millions of people spoke out against the illegal imprisonment of the Arctic 
30, and today the final member of the group is free to come home. Our ship was 
confiscated during an entirely peaceful protest against Arctic drilling in 
international waters. There was absolutely no justification either for boarding 
the ship or keeping it for eight months.


“This whole affair was a brazen attempt to intimidate those who believe that 
drilling for oil in the melting Arctic is reckless and unsafe. After months 
without proper maintenance our ship will need careful repairs, but like our 
campaign to protect the Arctic she will emerge better, fitter and stronger from 
this.”

 