
The Russian authorities have told a group of Greenpeace activists and 
freelance journalists arrested after a protest against oil drilling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/19/greenpeace-protesters-arrested-arctic>
 in the Arctic that they cannot leave the country. 

The environmental group said the decision was in defiance of a ruling of an 
international court, and repeated its demand that the 28 activists and two 
journalists, including six Britons, should be allowed home. 

The so-called Arctic 30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2013/oct/14/greenpeace> 
were arrested in September after the Russian authorities boarded their vessel 
during their protest. 

They have all been granted bail by courts in St Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/28/arctic-30-final-greenpeace-activist-bailed>
 but have remained in Russia while efforts are made to give them permission to 
leave. 

Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> revealed on 
Friday that Russia's Investigative Committee has written to one of the 30 – 
Anne Mie Jensen from Denmark – indicating that they are not free to leave the 
country. 

Lawyers for Greenpeace said they expect all of the non-Russian defendants will 
be treated in the same way by the authorities, meaning they would now be forced 
to stay in St Petersburg for Christmas and possibly well beyond. 

Lawyers have also been seeking an assurance that the investigative committee 
would give at least one month's notice when it wanted to interview the 30; 
otherwise they could break their bail conditions if they returned home. 

In its letter to Anne Mie, the committee said it would not provide the 
requested notice. 

Peter Willcox, the American-born captain of the Greenpeace vessel, the Arctic 
Sunrise, said: "I am ready to go home to my family. We were seized in 
international waters and brought toRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> against our will, then charged with 
a crime we didn't commit and kept in jail for two months. 

"A respected international court says we should be allowed to go home, so do 
numerous presidents and prime ministers, but we can't get visas to leave the 
country, and, even if we could, there's no guarantee the investigative 
committee won't schedule an interview for the day I get home, forcing me to 
break my bail conditions. 

This is either a mistake and we're caught in a vicious bureaucratic circle, or 
it's a deliberate snub against international law. Either way this is a farce." 

A ruling in November by the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, 
made up of 21 eminent judges, ordered Russia to allow the Arctic 30 to leave 
the country immediately and to release the Arctic Sunrise, as soon as a bond of 
3.6 million euros (£3 million) in the form of a bank guarantee was paid. 

The bond was posted by the Government of the Netherlands, where the Arctic 
Sunrise is registered, on 29 November, so Greenpeace said Russia was now in 
defiance of that order. 

Greenpeace International legal counsel Daniel Simons said: "The Russian 
Federation is now in clear breach of a binding order of an international 
tribunal. As president Vladimir Putin stated in his famous open letter to the 
American people on Syria, 'The law is still the law, and we must follow it 
whether we like it or not.' 

"In his state of the nation speech in Moscow yesterday, he added 'We try not 
to lecture anyone but promote international law'. It's time for the authorities 
to act in that spirit and allow the Arctic 30 to go home to their families 
immediately." 

Greenpeace added that an amnesty decree likely to be voted on by the Duma - 
the Russian parliament - this month could still see legal proceedings against 
the Arctic 30 dropped. 

A draft of the decree submitted by President Putin does not include the Arctic 
30, but the group said a small amendment by the Duma would see them covered by 
the amnesty. 
 