
The Australian Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> 
activist held in a Russian prison for two months is due to land in his home 
state of Tasmania on Thursday night.

Colin Russell was one of the so-called Arctic 30, who were arrested in 
September by armed Russian coastguards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/03/greenpeace-activists-charged-piracy-russia>
 as they tried to board the Prirazlomnaya offshore oil rig in the Pechora Sea 
from the ship Arctic Sunrise. He had faced charges of piracy and hooliganism.

Russell was freed on 29 November on bail of about $61,000 paid for by 
Greenpeace, and then granted amnesty in December. He was due to return to his 
Tasmanian home with his wife and daughter late on Thursday.

He planned to hold a brief press conference at Hobart airport and asked for 
privacy after his arrival.

His return home has been welcomed by the Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson.

“The Greens want to extend our thanks to Colin for his admirable work 
protecting the Arctic’s pristine environment from oil drilling,” he said.

“This has been an incredibly difficult time for the members of the Arctic 30 
and their families, as they faced disproportionate and ludicrous charges in
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and were detained in harsh 
conditions for months.

“The Greens called many times for the Abbott government to step in and 
intervene on Colin’s behalf, in line with the actions of other governments.”

Russell was the last of the activists to be granted bail in Russia and had 
previouslywritten about the conditions in the jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/07/arctic-30-colin-russell-expresses-confusion>
 to his wife, Christine.

"I got some sudokus and I have done them, then because I am old and forgetful 
I can then copy the numbers into a hand-drawn grid and do them over again – 
still manage to stuff it up," he wrote.

Russell was initially detained in Murmansk before making the day-long train 
trip to Saint Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/11/arctic-30-greenpeace-moved-saint-petersburg>
 as he was transferred to another jail.

"I read your messages all the time honey and they do wrap my heart with warmth 
and hope," he wrote.

"I love you honey as always and it won't be long and I will be beside you 
again together and one.

"I have got myself into a bit of a routine now and it's sure strange how the 
time seems to move on."
 