
Greenpeace activist Colin Russell hopes he'll be back in Tasmania before the 
end of the year after Russiagranted amnesty to the so-called Arctic 30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/18/jailed-pussy-riot-russian-amnesty>
, who had been facing hooliganism charges.

Russell, 59, was defiant after being told he wouldn't face trial, insisting he 
hadn't done anything illegal.

"It's more relief than joy," the full-time Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> employee said from Saint 
Petersburg.

"I didn't do anything wrong. I was illegally brought here and illegally 
detained.

"I think the hierarchy, the people in Moscow, have said they want this to end, 
so it could very well be next week that we are on our way."

Russell was among 28 activists and two journalists detained in September after 
Greenpeace scaled a state-owned oil platform to protest Russian energy 
exploration in theArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic>.

The 30 – including Briton Alexandra Harris, who lives in Sydney, and New 
Zealander Jon Beauchamp, from Adelaide – were charged with piracy before that 
was downgraded to hooliganism.

Harris, 27, said it was strange to be forgiven "for a crime we didn't commit". 
"But I am relieved and looking forward to moving on with my life," she said.

Russia's lower house on Wednesday approved a Kremlin-backed amnesty bill that 
ends their prosecution and will also set free two jailed members of the punk 
bandPussy Riot <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pussy-riot>.

The bill, which commemorates 20 years since Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> ratified its constitution, applies 
to people charged or convicted of hooliganism or mass riot offences.

The amnesty doesn't require approval by the upper chamber of parliament and 
will be effective when published, which is likely to be on Thursday.

Russell was the radio operator on board the Greenpeace vessel Arctic Sunrise. 
He spent more than two months in jail before being released on bail in late 
November.

The Tasmanian expects to be able to leave Saint Petersburg, where he is 
celebrating with his wife Christine and daughter Madeleine, once the criminal 
investigation is formally wound up and immigration provides a visa.

But the fate of the Dutch-registered Arctic Sunrise, impounded in Murmansk, is 
less certain. The international maritime court in November ordered Russia to 
release the Greenpeace ship and its crew in exchange for a $5.3m bond.

Russell now wants Moscow to act. He argues Australia complied with a similar 
international tribunal for the law of sea order after escorting a Russian 
vessel to Perth.

"Russia accepted that ruling back in 2002 and here we are today and they don't 
even want to acknowledge that tribunal exists."

Despite his hardships, Russell says he'll be back on duty for Greenpeace after 
taking some time off.

Any oil spill was bad, but if one occurred under ice it would be disastrous, 
he said. "We did go to the Arctic for a reason ... and I truly believe we are 
doing the right thing," he said.

"It will only take one disaster to ruin everything. I don't see how they could 
contain it. How could they clean it up?"
 