
For centuries, the Christian church wrote the script for how westerners deal 
with death. There was the deathbed confession, the last rites, the pallbearers, 
theobligatory altar call 
<http://freethoughtblogs.com/almostdiamonds/2011/11/22/preacher-at-the-funeral/>
, the burial ceremony, the stone, the angels-and-harps imagery. Yet that 
archaic and stereotypical vision of death, like a mossy and weather-worn 
statue, is crumbling – and in its place, something new and better has a chance 
to grow.


Traditional funerals and burials are declining in popularity (to the point 
wherechurches are bemoaning the trend 
<http://americamagazine.org/content/all-things/why-are-catholic-funerals-decline>
), in favor of alternatives likegreen burial 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=17232879> and cremation. 
Personalizedhumanist funerals 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/keeping-faith-the-changing-face-of-religion-in-canada-1.3071353>
 andsecular celebrants 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/on-faith/godless-funerals-thrive-in-post-catholic-ireland/2013/05/21/d6822930-c24c-11e2-9642-a56177f1cdf7_story.html>
 are becoming more common, echoing a trend that’s also occurring with weddings.

As younger generations turn away from religion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/26/millennials-godless-politics-religous-conservatives>
, the US is slowly but surely becoming more secular. As mortician and “good 
death” advocate Caitlin Doughty writes in her book, Smoke Gets In Your Eyes & 
Other Lessons from the Crematory, America is seeing a sea-change in traditions 
and rituals surrounding mortality.

Doughty and others see this shift not as something to be lamented, but to be 
embraced. Instead of following a script that’s been written for us, we can 
create our own customs and choose for ourselves how we want to be remembered. 
We can design funerals that emphasize the good we did, the moments that made 
our lives meaningful and the lessons we’d like to pass on.


Rather than the same handful of biblical passages, we can have readings from 
any book, poem or song in the whole broad tapestry of human culture. Rather 
than mourning, gloom and sermons on sin, we can have ceremonies that are joyful 
celebrations of the deceased person’s life.

But the rise of humanism isn’t just influencing what funerals look like; it’s 
changing how we die. For ages, when the church’s word was law, suicide was 
deemed a mortal sin. Even today, studies find that more fervent religious 
devotion correlates tomore desire 
<http://scienceblogs.com/insolence/2009/03/19/religion-and-end-of-life-care/> 
for aggressive and medically futile end-of-life intervention, not less.


The most famous case in recent years was Brittany Maynard 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2014/11/brittany-maynard-and-the-right-to-die/>
, a 29-year-old woman with terminal brain cancer who ended her life in 2014 
under Oregon’s death-with-dignity law. Maynard’s story put a sympathetic public 
face on the right-to-die movement, which proved decisive when California 
Governor Jerry Brown, a former Jesuit seminarian,signed a similar bill 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/political/la-me-pc-gov-brown-end-of-life-bill-20151005-story.html>
 the next year despite heavy pressure from religious groups. He, too, cited the 
value of autonomy and freedom from suffering:

“In the end, I was left to reflect on what I would want in the face of my own 
death,” Brown wrote in a signing message. “I do not know what I would do if I 
were dying in prolonged and excruciating pain” he added.


In California and elsewhere, the staunchest adversaries of the right to die 
are churches and religious believers who assert that the time, place and manner 
of each person’s death is chosen by God, and that we have no right to change 
that regardless of the human cost.


And yet, almost without notice, that’s become a minority position. Gallup polls
 <http://www.gallup.com/poll/162815/support-euthanasia-hinges-described.aspx> 
now find that as many as 70% of Americans now support a right to aid in dying. 
This position entails that, when people are suffering without hope of recovery, 
they should be allowed to end their lives painlessly, with medical help, at a 
time of their choosing.

This, too, is a deeply humanist conception of death. It springs from the idea 
that needless suffering is the greatest evil there is and that autonomy is the 
supreme value. If we’re the ultimate owners of our own lives, then we have the 
right to lay them down when we judge they’ve become unbearable.

Even as religious trappings linger in our rituals and attitudes around death, 
society is coming to adopt the humanist viewpoint on mortality, neither fearing 
nor denying it, but gracefully accepting it as an inevitable part of the human 
experience. The sooner we bury our religious past, the better.

 