
Damon Albarn’s appearance at Roskilde music festival on 4 July ended with an 
intervention, when theBlur frontman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/21/blur-review-brilliance-hits-home-loud-and-clear>
 refused to leave the stage during a five-hour set.

Closing the annual event in Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/musicblog/2013/jul/12/roskilde-festival-foodies-foodjam>
, Albarn and his Africa Express collective – which includes Yeah Yeah Yeahs’ 
Nick Zinner, Seye Adelekan and Songhoy Blues - embarked on an epic performance 
that lasted until 4am. The set included covers of Randy Newman and 
reinterpretations of Gorillaz tunes, and special guests such as Graham Coxon 
and Laura Mvula also stepped in during the five-hour extravaganza.
graham coxon (@grahamcoxon) 
Went with a Guitar came back with a maraca! #africaexpress 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/africaexpress?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/grahamcoxon/status/617672983851741184> July 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/grahamcoxon/status/617672983851741184> 
The festival has previously encountered serious problems with regards to 
audience control: most notably an incident in 2000, when nine people died and 
26 were injured during Pearl Jam’s performance.

Ian Birrell, co-founder of Africa Express, told the Guardian that the show 
only ran over the 4am curfew by five minutes before Dave Prentice, the veteran
Africa Express <https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> stage manager 
usually known as “Big Dave”, carried him off stage.

“The crowd were in a very ebullient mood despite it being 4am. They were 
chanting for more and more, quite noisily,” said Birrell.

“Damon was clearly enjoying himself and wanted to carry on, as did all the 
musicians.”

Once the show was over, Albarn and the rest of the collective continued to 
make music backstage, as did the crowd, who “carried on outside the tent for 
almost an hour”, said Birrell. “They were drumming against the poles of the 
tent and chanting.”

Watch the footage below:

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fdamon-albarn-carried-off-stage-roskilde-denmark-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436175813321%2FKP_343892_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Damon%20Albarn%20carried%20off%20stage%20during%20Roskilde%20performance%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fdamon-albarn-carried-off-stage-roskilde-denmark-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Damon%20Albarn%20carried%20off%20stage%20during%20Roskilde%20performance%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Fdamon-albarn-carried-off-stage-roskilde-denmark-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436175813321%2FKP_343892_crop_640x360.jpg>
As ever, Albarn is in the midst of many musical projects: as well as his 
ongoing work with Africa Express, his band Blur are playing a number of dates 
across the globe this summer followingthe release of album The Magic Whip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/21/blur-review-brilliance-hits-home-loud-and-clear>
, whilewonder.land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/05/wonderland-review-occasionally-dazzling-often-garbled>
, his modern reworking of Alice in Wonderland, is currently on at Manchester 
international festival.

 