
Two trailers were released this week, one for Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/07/first-trailer-shows-ant-man-has-a-big-hill-to-climb>
 and one forAccidental Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/06/alive-again-david-o-russells-abandoned-film-nailed-re-emerges-as-accidental-love>
. They both, it must be said, contain slightly suspect notions of what the 
movie-going public wants to see; Paul Rudd riding a bug around like a rodeo 
cowboy and Jessica Biel playing a serious brain injury for knockabout good-time 
funsies.

But the Ant-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man> and Accidental Love 
trailers both had one more thing in common: neither were for films credited to 
their original directors.

Ant-Man – which only wrapped principal photography a month ago – will be the 
work ofPeyton Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/09/michael-douglas-ant-man-edgar-wright>
, of Bring It On and Yes Man fame. The director of Accidental Love, meanwhile, 
is listed as“Stephen Greene” 
<http://filmschoolrejects.com/news/nailed-now-accidental-love.php>. Given that 
IMDb only contains two credited Stephen Greenes – one a production assistant on 
a recent short and the other the producer of a 2005 documentary entitled Boost 
Mobile RockCorps Concert – it seems fair to assume that Accidental Love is the 
work of a man hiding behind a pseudonymous shame-shield.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel's%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel%27s%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
It shouldn’t have been this way. For years, the most thrilling thing about 
Ant-Man was the involvement of Edgar Wright; a singularly talented and dynamic 
writer-director, beloved by comic book fans, with a proven track record of 
magicking impossible production values out of barely there budgets on films 
such as Shaun of the Dead or Hot Fuzz. Back in 2006, when Marvel announced its 
first slate of independently produced feature films, it wasWright’s involvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/28/edgar-wright-to-direct-grasshopper-jungle-ant-man>
 that generated the most heat. Reaction to a brief snippet of his test footage 
in 2012 waseuphoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/16/simon-pegg-ant-man-edgar-wright>. 
It was all incredibly exciting, at least until Wright left Ant-Man last year 
amid reports that he couldn’t make his vision dovetail with the wider Marvel 
plan. Now it’s hard to feel anything about the film except exhaustion.

Similarly, Accidental Love shouldn’t even be called Accidental Love. It should 
be calledNailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2012/nov/25/capitol-films-movies-youll-never-see>
, and it should have been released half a decade ago, and David O Russell’s 
name should have been on the trailer. But he abandoned the troubled production 
– blighted as it was by lawsuits, cast walkouts and a general failure to pay 
anybody on time – in 2010 after its fourth shutdown, leaving the film’s 
financiers to Sellotape together their own movie from the uncompleted footage. 
No wonder Russell won’t have his name anywhere near it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D097mfp8HgAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D097mfp8HgAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D097mfp8HgAo&media=>
Sure, it’s possible to glean some positives here. Wright’s Ant-Man script has 
now been partly rewritten by Paul Rudd, which will hopefully push him into 
producing more of his own material; and Russell’s nightmarish experience with 
Nailed seems to have informed his decision to create more intimate work such as
The Fighter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fighter> and Silver Linings 
Playbook <https://www.theguardian.com/film/silver-linings-playbook>, which 
helped to cement his reputation as one of Hollywood’s most prestigious artists.

And, true, sometimes films can be vastly improved by a last-minute switch at 
the top of the tree. Pixar, in particular, has been incredibly cavalier about 
the treatment of its directors in the past – swapping out Jan Pinkava for Brad 
Bird whenRatatouille <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ratatouille> ran into 
problems, and Brenda Chapman for Mark Andrews whenBrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brave> did the same – while the fact that 
Spartacus <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0054331/reference> was directed by 
Stanley Kubrick immediately makes it more intriguing than if it had been 
directed by Anthony Mann, the man he replaced.

But mid-production changes usually result in a finished piece that ends up 
either being unwatchably bland, because the new director has been too timid to 
put their fingerprint on what’s already there; or unwatchably muddled, because 
they’ve been far too enthusiastic about doing it.

Fortunately, Wright left Ant-Man too soon – and Russell left Nailed too late – 
to create a mess as pronounced as 1980’sSuperman II 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superman_II>, which still stands as an all-time 
gold-standard example of the perils of replacing a director midway through 
filming. Richard Donner’s original footage doesn’t just clash thematically with 
the bizarrely madcap slapstick scenes shot by his replacement Richard Lester, 
but the continuity is just as screwed; surely a drinking game exists where 
people get progressively more wasted whenever Margot Kidder’s haircut changes 
mid-scene.

Plus, thankfully, nobody had thought to make an official teaser trailer for 
either of these films before they ran into trouble. The same couldn’t be said 
for Alien 3, which heralded its arrival long before its release (and long 
before a script was finalised) with atrailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bk_x9W1xKng> that boomed: “In 1979, we 
discovered in space nobody can hear you scream. In 1992, we’ll discover that on 
Earth everyone can hear you scream.” Several drafts – and directors – later and 
the Earth-invasion premise was long gone, banished in favour of one where the 
aliens land on Planet Bald Tedium instead. By the time it was released, the 
only people harder to find than those who enjoyed the film were those willing 
to take any credit for it.

Nevertheless, these are the films that Ant-Man and Accidental Love should 
start counting as their peers, alongside others that couldn’t quite make it to 
the end with their original vision intact for other reasons. Clint Eastwood 
hijacked The Outlaw Josey Wales from original director Philip Kaufman. 
Trainwrecks such as The Birds 2, The OJ Simpson Story and Kiefer Sutherland’s 
Woman Wanted all ended up being credited to “Alan Smithee 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Smithee>” – the notorious pseudonym used by 
Hollywood directors who wanted their names removed from credits. The Day The 
Clown Cried, hidden from view by its mortified creator Jerry Lewis. 
Started-but-never-finished would-be masterpieces such as Terry Gilliam’s The 
Man Who Killed Don Quixote, Orson Welles’ The Other Side of the Wind or Tim 
Burton’s Superman.Whatever Lynne Ramsey had planned for Jane Got a Gun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/12/lynne-ramsay-jane-got-a-gun-lawsuit-settle>
 – another film that’s finally seeing the light of day this year after an onset 
change of director.
 David O Russell … quit Photograph: Ian West/PA 
It’s not a bad bunch to be lumped in with, really. With the possible exception 
of Ant-Man, which you suspect is going to be steamrollered into anonymity by 
Marvel’s overwhelming desire to create a vast and painfully homogenised 
cinematic universe, these films have long since mutated into something else. 
They’re lessons. Lessons of what can happen if you overreach. Lessons of what 
can happen if you can’t get along with people. Lessons of what can happen if 
you don’t stick up for your principles, or if you do stick up for your 
principles but all your principles are stupid and you’re an idiot with no 
talent or social skills.

Chances are that Nailed – if it had been seen through to completion – would 
have immediately disappeared from view. It was the followup to the hugely 
unsuccessful I Heart Huckabees, for example, and it hardly seems feasible that
David O Russell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-o-russell> would have 
clawed back his reputation with a chuckle-fest about a mentally injured 
nymphomaniac. But Accidental Love? That’s going to last for ever.

There’s no question that Nailed would have been a better film than Accidental 
Love. But Accidental Love is notorious now. It’ll be the answer to a pub quiz 
question. It’ll end up in lists of films that couldn’t make it past the 
finishing line. It’ll be pored over for generations, whispered about by 
dedicated film fans and curious bystanders alike, who’ll pull it apart and 
squint at it in an attempt to make sense of Russell’s original vision. Because 
that’s what these films are. They’re more than just films. They’re a peek 
behind the curtain; a chance for us to guess at the majesty of what could have 
been. And that’s always better than the reality, isn’t it?
 