
I often feel I am under pressure to represent the “craft community”, to be the 
poster-boy for the handmade. I am a great lover of craft skill but I am not 
going to fetishise technique over artistry.


Craft and art are different things – I define craft as something that can be 
taught, while art requires inspiration. Many artists are extremely poor 
craftsmen while many great craftspeople are rubbish artists. I see many 
beautifully made things that I find pig ugly.

What I will stand up for is the relevance of craft in the information age. 
Some people think that craft is a nostalgic activity, like knitting with your 
grandma or throwing medieval peasant pottery But I say craft is necessary and 
thriving more than ever in the age of the internet, Photoshop and rapid 
prototyping. There are many examples of this in theUniversity of the Arts London
 <http://www.arts.ac.uk/> collections.

One of my pleasures, now that I have had a bit of success and got a bit more 
money, is commissioning and working with great craftsmen and craftswomen. I 
like nothing more than designing a dress, some shoes or a motorcycle, 
collaborating with highly skilled individuals or teams to bring my ideas to 
life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fare-computers-killing-off-craft-not-a-chance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F086a8ed3b7eed2638e7baa6ef33b2991f9fe89fa%2F630_311_4404_6834%2F4404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20computers%20killing%20off%20craft%3F%20Not%20a%20chance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fare-computers-killing-off-craft-not-a-chance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20computers%20killing%20off%20craft%3F%20Not%20a%20chance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fare-computers-killing-off-craft-not-a-chance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F086a8ed3b7eed2638e7baa6ef33b2991f9fe89fa%2F630_311_4404_6834%2F4404.jpg>
 Grayson Perry’s The Rosetta Vase. Photograph: Grayson Perry/MCA 
I employ craftspeople to assist me in casting my sculptures, printing my 
etchings and digitising my tapestries. I would not describe any of these 
individuals as overly nostalgic or anachronistic in the digital age. In fact, 
every one of them uses – to a greater or lesser degree – the wonderful 
technology now so woven into our lives.

My shoemaker very much depends on her website as a shop window. Her footwear 
is for a niche market and she needs to be found by far-flung international 
clientele. A rock star in Los Angeles can order a pair of lace thigh-boots with 
seven-inch heels and my shoemaker can create them in an inexpensive studio in 
north London.

In the same way, I can email drawings of a motorcycle detail I’ve designed to 
a custom bike builder on the south coast. He can transfer them into a programme 
and the parts are milled in a process that would be hugely time-consuming, 
expensive and perhaps impossible if attempted by hand.

A friend alters photographs in Photoshop for me to convert into ceramic 
transfers that I can then fire onto a vase. These will be printed on a 
specially built inkjet printer which uses ceramic enamels, making it possible 
to create full-colour transfers more cheaply than with the old litho or 
silk-screen method.

Digital technology offers the craftsman and the artist creative opportunities 
that were previously too expensive for an individual, too time-consuming or 
just plain impossible. This technology is coming down in price all the time – 
it won’t be long before 3D printers are as common as kilns. To become skilful 
with these newer technologies is to be just as much of a craftsman as a 
traditional weaver or potter.

Don't stifle creativity with more cuts to arts education, say experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/may/08/dont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts>
To get great results the user has to be just as sympathetic to the material 
effects of a particular digital technique. Tests have to be done and responded 
to in just the same way I do with glazes in the kiln. The results of digital 
production often have a lifeless feeling – that is because the machine will do 
exactly what is asked of it and no more. There are fewer “gifts of the fire” 
than in pottery.

As technology develops, craftspeople will become better at predicting and 
nuancing their instructions to machines and digital manufacturing will become 
more refined. I am looking forward to an amazing era of craft and art using 
computers in various ways and in combination with the old techniques we know 
and love.

This is an edited version of an essay appearing in a new University of the 
Arts London publication entitled Reflections on Archives, Museum and Special 
Collections, launching atIm/Material: Encounters in the Creative Archive 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/chelsea/research/events/immaterial/?_ga=1.231460760.684185003.1456827105>
.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 