
Aretha Franklin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin> has 
announced details of her new covers album, revealing its lead single: a version 
of Adele’s Rolling in the Deep.


As track two on Aretha Franklin Sings the Great Diva Classics, Rolling in the 
Deep has apparently cementedAdele <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> as 
a “diva” on the scale of Barbra Steisand, Etta James, Sinéad O’Connor and 
Franklin herself. The British singer’s 2010 hit appears alongside songs 
including At Last, I Will Survive, Nothing Compares 2 U and Alicia Keys’s No 
One. All have been reinterpreted by the 72-year-old soul legend, who turns 
several tracks into medleys: Chaka Khan’s I’m Every Woman merges with Respect, 
and Rolling in the Deep gradually fades into Ain’t No Mountain High Enough.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNWeGngQqOI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNWeGngQqOI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoNWeGngQqOI&media=>
The Great Diva Classics marks an upgrade on Franklin’s preceding record, 
2011’s Aretha: A Woman Falling Out of Love, which was a commercial flop. This 
time, Franklin is working hand in hand with Clive Davis. The long-time 
associates have not collaborated since 1998’s A Rose is Still a Rose, her most 
successful album of the 1990s. They produced the Divas record together, with 
additional work from names like Babyface and André 3000. “You won’t be 
disappointed,” she toldBillboard in June 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6133927/aretha-franklin-covers-album-andre-3000-adele-rolling-in-the-deep>
. “We’re going to give you exactly what you’re expecting and what you’re not 
expecting.” Although Franklin hoped to team up with producer Danger Mouse, the 
scheduling“didn’t work out” 
<http://www.jsonline.com/entertainment/musicandnightlife/aretha-franklin-covering-adele-on-next-album-b99319995z1-269699581.html>
.


Aretha Franklin Sings the Great Diva Classics is out on 21 October.

Aretha Franklin Sings the Great Diva Classics track list:

1. At Last (Etta James)

2. Rolling in the Deep (Adele)

3. Midnight Train to Georgia (Gladys Knight and the Pips)

4. I Will Survive (Gloria Gaynor)

5. People (Barbra Streisand)

6. No One (Alicia Keys)

7. I’m Every Woman (Chaka Khan) / Respect

8. Teach Me Tonight (Dinah Washington)

9. You Keep Me Hangin’ On (The Supremes)

10. Nothing Compares 2 U (Sinéad O’Connor)
 