
Soul legend Aretha Franklin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin>
, the daughter of a preacher, will sing for Pope Francis during his highly 
anticipated visit to the United States this month, it was announced Monday.

Franklin, originally a gospel singer but best known for her feminist-tinged 
version of Respect, will perform for the reform-minded pope in Philadelphia at 
the 26 September Festival of Families, organizers said.

The 73-year-old Franklin, whose father was a Baptist minister, recorded her 
first album, 1956’s Songs of Faith, at his Detroit church when she was 14.

The 18-time Grammy winner said in a statement that it was “indeed a blessing” 
to sing forPope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis>.

The Festival of Families, sponsored by the Roman Catholic Church and put on 
every three years, also announced that actorMark Wahlberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-wahlberg> would serve as the host of the 
event.

Wahlberg, a devout Catholic, embraced the church after deciding to turn his 
life around duringa short jail term for racially motivated attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/05/mark-wahlberg-seeks-pardon-assault-conviction-prison>
 as a teenager in Boston.

“As a Catholic, I credit much of my success to my faith,” the 
rapper-turned-actor best known for the 1997 film Boogie Nights and for his 
Oscar-nominated performance in 2006’s The Departed said in a statement.

Americans are ready to hear Pope Francis – but will they listen?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/14/pope-francis-america-visit-cuba-climate-change-immigration>
“It is an honor to be part of welcoming Pope Francis to Philadelphia and I am 
humbled to join this celebration.”

US pop-rock band the Fray, Christian pop singer Marie Miller and comedian Jim 
Gaffigan were also unveiled Monday as Festival of Families performers.

Colombian rocker Juanes, the Philadelphia Orchestra and Italian tenor Andrea 
Bocelli, who frequently performs at the Vatican, will also be on stage, as was 
previously announced in June.

Next week’s visit will be the first by Pope Francis to the United States – as 
pontiff or earlier. The trip will also feature a meeting with President Obama 
and an address to Congress in Washington as well as events in New York, 
including at the United Nations.
 