
Someone has been busy with a black marker pen on the pavement outside a 
designery hotel in Soho, London. "Follow me, Ari," they've written in elaborate 
letters, encircling the words with a heart.Ariana Grande 
<http://www.arianagrande.com/>, though, is inside, and can't see it; nor can 
she hear the occasional whoops of the 100 or so tweenagers who have planted 
themselves outside. She hasn't come out all day, says 16-year-old Jessica, who 
has spent six hours waiting to meet the 20-year-old American singer. But she 
and her two friends are prepared to stick it out. "She's different, she's sweet 
with her fans," she explains. "She's not like Miley Cyrus – you can tell she 
goes through what every other teenager goes through."

Well, yes and no. Grande is very much "not like" Cyrus; rather, she's a role 
model in the 1950s sense, a safe pair of hands who is unlikely to give parents 
the heebie-jeebies. (There is also her Mariah Careyish, multi-octave range, 
which distinguishes her from the Mileys and Selenas in terms of raw ability.) 
But going through what every other teenager does? If Jessica were upstairs, in 
the rooms occupied by Grande and her entourage, she might change her mind.

Grande has been sent to London to promote her first album, Yours Truly 
<http://www.metacritic.com/music/yours-truly/ariana-grande>, which in September 
entered the American chart at No 1 – only the 15th time a debut by a female 
artist has done so (Beyoncé andLauryn Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lauryn-hill> also managed it). Today she is 
accompanied by her PA, a makeup artist, a choreographer, a publicist and a 
woman from Nickelodeon UK, the children's network that broadcasts the tween 
sitcomSam & Cat <http://www.nick.co.uk/blog/samandcat/samandcat-sneakpeek-ep3>, 
in which Grande plays a ditzy babysitter. Like Cyrus, she got her start in 
kids' TV – Nickelodeon first cast her in a series called Victorious in 2010, 
and she proved so popular that Sam & Cat was created around her – but she's 
still doing it. "There does need to be a transition," she acknowledges.

Her UK launch is being tracked by the tabloids and fashion mags, and, perhaps 
surprisingly, the urban press. The latter are interested because the album 
features guest appearances byrappers Big Sean 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fhcpubAVdmc> and Mac Miller 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_sV0S8qWSy0>, though their contributions are 
relatively tame, in keeping with the album's tone. On the hit single The Way, 
Miller daringly refers to Grande as "a freak", which she now laughs off: "It's 
a generic love song, don't read anything into it."

She has got a total of 12 hours of promotion today, but that's nothing. "When 
I was making the album, I would start [filming] Sam & Cat at 6.30 in the 
morning and finish at 8.30[pm], then go to the studio till midnight and get 
home at 1am." Then she'd do it all again the next day. Punishing as it sounds, 
that is the lot of a successful teen idol – and that doesn't even take into 
account the time given over to communicating with fans.

She has got nearly 11 million Twitter followers – "Arianators", naturally – 
and they get their money's worth. Grande is a prolific tweeter and 
Instagrammer, and has periodic"follow sprees" 
<https://twitter.com/ArianaGrande/status/344840294967173120>, following any 
Arianator who asks. Her Twitter biography says: "My fans are family," and she 
treats them as such, broadcasting gossip and personal milestones, such as her 
newly hatchedrelationship with Nathan Sykes of The Wanted 
<http://metro.co.uk/2013/11/05/the-wanteds-nathan-sykes-the-first-thing-i-said-after-my-throat-op-was-hello-and-i-sounded-like-barry-white-4172907/>
. He is here with her today; she's sitting on his lap when I arrive, though she 
immediately rises and transfers herself to a sofa. As she arranges herself – 
she's a tiny, doll-like woman with big, worried brown eyes – he watches 
disconsolately. So what's it like, I ask him, to be part of a pop couple? He 
smiles uncomfortably. "It's not my interview."
 Photograph: Dave Hogan/Getty Images 
The two met when he was headhunted by her manager, Scooter Braun, who decided 
they would mesh well on the album duetAlmost is Never Enough 
<http://www.muzu.tv/ariana-grande/almost-is-never-enough-music-video/2005023/>. 
The brains behind Justin Bieber's career, Braun is clearly a skilled alchemist. 
In Grande's case, he was working with impressive raw material, but deserves 
credit for the way it has been moulded. To steer her away from Miley/Selena 
clonehood,Kenny "Babyface" Edmonds <http://www.babyfacemusic.com/> was 
recruited to co-produce Yours Truly – accounting for the deliberately retro R&B 
feel that makes the most of her baby-diva vocals – and she appears approachable 
rather than sexy.

There has been one not-suitable-for-work misstep: before the album came out, a 
"teaser" shot was released, showing her kneeling in a bed of roses in a basque 
and stockings. Fan reaction was so negative that the picture was withdrawn, and 
doesn't appear anywhere in the album artwork. "It was never the cover art," she 
maintains. "It was a more mature shot, but I'm not comfortable enough to be 
forwardly sexual." Isaac the choreographer interjects: "It was girly and 
feminine, and we're proud of it."

For Grande – and she sounds so adamant that it rings true – it really is all 
about the music … and the romance. "My favourite era was the 50s and 60s – the 
Chiffons, the Shangri-Las. My grandparents played it and I fell in love with 
it, because it was more about romance and love, and less about getting drunk 
and going home with someone you don't know." And, she adds, even more 
unexpectedly, her medium-term goal is to install her own studio in her 
California house, so she can emulate her favourite musician, the bittersweet 
British songwriter Imogen Heap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/14/imogen-heap-cd-review>.

Really? Imogen Heap?

"I'd love to be like her," she says vehemently. Take that, Miley!
 