
In three southern states on Monday, civil rights hero Martin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr and civil war 
Confederate commander General Robert E Lee will share a common holiday. In 
Arkansas, however, they will do so for perhaps the final time.

Stone Mountain monument at center of racial tension over Confederate tributes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/28/stone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension>
Asa Hutchinson, the state’s Republican governor, is pushing to separate the 
joint celebration after critics said it is an insult to the man who fought to 
end racial segregation to share a day with a man who fought to preserve slavery.

“They need to be distinguished and separate,” Hutchinson told a news 
conference this month about the holidays.

Arkansas, Mississippi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> and 
Alabama have for years observed a joint holiday for King and Lee, whose 
birthdays are four days apart.

In the 1940s, Arkansas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> set up a 
day in mid-January to honor Lee; it created a holiday for King in 1983. Two 
years after that it combined the two for a joint day, marked on the third 
Monday in January.

In January 2015, Arkansas lawmakers defeated a bill that would have reserved 
the January date for King and established a memorial day, although not a 
holiday, for Lee in November.

Racial sensitivity has been heightened across the southern US following the 
murders of nine black worshippers at a Charleston, South Carolina church last 
June, by a suspected gunman who sympathized with white supremacist views and 
adorned his social media posts with Confederate regalia.

The shooting caused many southern states to re-examine public symbols of the 
Confederacy. The Confederate battle flag wassubsequently removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
 from some official locations;statues of Confederate heroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/28/stone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension>
 like Lee, Jefferson Davis and Stonewall Jackson have also come under scrutiny.

Arkansas state representative Fred Love, a Democrat who led the unsuccessful 
campaign in 2015 to separate the joint holiday, said passing the new measure 
would be a winner in terms of race relations.

“It would show how far we’ve come,” he said.

South Carolina's Confederate flag comes down as history of hate meets modernity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
For many in Arkansas, Lee remains a revered figure who fought with dignity for 
the south in the civil war, between 1861 and 1865.

Representative Jeff Wardlaw, a Democrat who voted against Love’s bill, said 
his conservative constituents were concerned Lee would be officially 
disregarded.

“I’m the kind of guy who does what his constituents tell him they want, and 
last year they indicated they didn’t want a change,” Wardlaw said.

Hutchinson wants lawmakers to pass legislation that gives King a day of his 
own when they meet for a regular session in the Republican-dominated statehouse

“It’s important that that day be distinguished and separate and focused on the 
civil rights struggle and what he personally did in that effort,” Hutchinson 
said.
 