
Like millions of Armenians, Movses Haneshyan will mark the centenary of the 
1915 genocide today. He will visit the village cemetery near Vagharshapat, 
where he will say a prayer for all of those killed in the tragedy – and for his 
wife who died earlier this month.

But unlike others attending solemn ceremonies around the world, the 
105-year-old has first-hand memories of the events 100 years ago in which he 
lost his mother and most of his family.

Haneshyan was a five-year-old boy when soldiers entered his village as part of 
a campaign to eradicate Armenians from Anatolia in present-day easternTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>. He still has vivid memories of that 
day.

“Soldiers came and gathered us in the village, pushing their rifles against 
us,” he said. “My mother was visiting a neighbouring town - we never found out 
what happened to her.”

 ‘You cannot deny what happened’. Photograph: Zia Weise 
“I was with my father, holding his hand. Half the road was covered with dead 
people.”


Up to a million and a half Armenians died during the mass deportations into 
the Syrian desert. Haneshyan and his father, Ibrahim, might have shared that 
fate had their march not passed through the town of a wealthy Arab man his 
father had once worked for.


“He saw us and he bribed the soldiers to free my father and me. He put us on 
his horse and took us to his house, a big house with a garden full of animals,” 
Haneshyan said.

The pair hid in the house for three years, terrified of being discovered. His 
father worked as a servant for the family while Haneshyan spent his time 
playing with the rabbits and chickens. Only when France occupied Hatay in 1918 
were they able to return to their village.

After the province was returned to Turkish rule in 1938, Haneshyan moved to 
Lebanon, thenArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>, where he 
worked as a grape farmer and factory worker in a village close to the historic 
capital of Vagharshapat.

With six children, 20 grandchildren, and more great-grandchildren than he can 
remember, he lives surrounded by family. But the death of his wife Iskuhi, at 
the age of 99, has left a massive hole.

“We spent 80 years together. She always looked after me. After her death, 
there is nothing left here for me,” he said, nodding at a portrait of his wife 
opposite his bed. “Now I will wait for recognition and then I will die.”

A small country but a big nation: how genocide shaped the Armenia of today
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/22/turkish-silence-fans-century-of-armenian-grief-over-genocide>
By “recognition”, Haneshyan is referring to the ongoing controversy over 
Turkey’s failure to acknowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/21/turkey-100-years-genocide-denial-armenia>
 the Ottoman-orchestrated massacres and deportations of Armenians as genocide. 
The ongoing debate has threatened to overshadow the commemorations, but for 
Haneshyan, demanding recognition is what the centenary is all about.

“Turkey has to recognise it so it never happens again. If they do not 
recognise the genocide, they leave open the door for another one,” he said.

“If you had seen it with your own eyes, if you had heard the noises on the way 
toDeir Ezzor  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deir_ez-Zor_Camps>[the site of 
concentration camps in Syria], you would know it’s all very simple: thousands 
were killed. You cannot deny that.”

Haneshyan’s bedroom is decorated with a large poster of his village Kebussieh 
near Musa Dagh, where he lived before being deported in the summer of 1915. 
Despite his age he still tends to his garden, trying to grow a tree from seeds 
he brought from his childhood home. Even now, though, he says he is afraid to 
return to the village.

“I should be happy to see my place of birth again. Just for one day. But how? 
If I go back, they will kill me,” he said.

 