
Ridicule his abilities as you wish but Arnold Schwarzenegger’s films have made 
over $4bn worldwide over a 30 year period, making him one of the most 
successful actors of all time.

And while this might have less to do with his impeccably emotive line delivery 
and more to do with his hulking physical presence, he’s sustained a 
surprisingly varied career nonetheless. This week he returns to play his most 
iconic role inTerminator Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terminator-genesis> and, since it’s not going 
down as one of his greatest films, here’s what we’d pick instead.

Pumping Iron
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdVCfDioTcY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdVCfDioTcY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdVCfDioTcY&media=>
Perhaps the only actor to have ever broken out in a documentary, Arnie’s 
appearance in this bodybuilding doc has brought him both rewards and 
embarrassment. The 30-year-old goes into great, great detail about his routine, 
showing off his physique at any given moment. In this haunting clip, we hear 
him compare weight training to ejaculating.

Total Recall
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-rziE39JWfs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-rziE39JWfs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-rziE39JWfs&media=>
Long before Colin Farrell and director Len Wiseman brought roughly nothing to 
the table in the 2012 remake, Paul Verhoeven and Arnie added surprising smarts 
to this 1990 sci-fi thriller. A thin layer of satire added to a pacey action 
plot made it one of Arnie’s most purely enjoyable films.

Terminator 2: Judgment Day 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmEjjjkTTc4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmEjjjkTTc4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmEjjjkTTc4&media=>
The first Terminator is a brilliantly spare thriller, as ruthlessly efficient 
as Arnie’s deadly android, but James Cameron’s 1991 sequel transformed a 
B-movie into a blockbuster. Utilising CGI in a way that no one had before, the 
effects still hold up to this day and the undervalued storytelling makes it a 
model on how to keep a broad audience on the edge of their seats.

Last Action Hero
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM80ZKIjSp3g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM80ZKIjSp3g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM80ZKIjSp3g&media=>
Unfairly overlooked, this 1993 meta-action film provided Arnie with a chance 
to poke fun at his persona, quite literally, as the actor played himself. 
Released a week after Jurassic Park, it was always somewhat doomed, with a 
complicated premise that was a little too knowing and also a little too nuts to 
work on the masses.

True Lies
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fxgf1m8_hey-because-it-s-you-true-lies-1994_shortfilms&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fxgf1m8_hey-because-it-s-you-true-lies-1994_shortfilms>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dailymotion.com%2Fvideo%2Fxgf1m8_hey-because-it-s-you-true-lies-1994_shortfilms&media=>
Arnie’s attempts at comedy were mixed and, given the failure of Last Action 
Hero, it’d be understandable if he stayed away from the genre completely. But 
reuniting with James Cameron for this 1994 attempt was a stroke of genius. 
Making sure the action quota was kept in check while also ensuring a steady 
stream of laughs, the balance was perfectly managed and proved, yet again, that 
Arnie works best when paired with Cameron.
 