
Arnold Schwarzenegger has given the sequels to his 1987 blockbuster Predator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/04/my-favourite-film-predator>
 a skinning, saying the follow-up films – neither of which starred him – were 
not “satisfactory to the audience”.

When asked in a Q and A hosted by Reddit 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/arnold-schwarzenegger-slams-predator-sequels-807294>
 whether he would consider appearing in an upcoming franchise reboot helmed by 
Iron Man 3 director Shane Black, Schwarzenegger revealed that he has “not been 
asked”, but that Black’s talents as a “great” writer and director would ensure 
that “it would become a great movie”, even without his involvement. He went on 
to describe the first Predator as his “absolute favourite” of the series, and 
criticised the latter films implying that the the studios rushed them in order 
to make a quick buck.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DciuvNsG10_E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DciuvNsG10_E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DciuvNsG10_E&media=>
“The sad story is that sometimes studios do a great job with creating sequels, 
and sometimes they really screw it up bad, and it all has to do with greed,” he 
said. “They sometimes want to do it really cheap and make as much money as 
possible, so they don’t hire the right cast or the right director.”

Schwarzenegger presumably does not feel the same way about the latest 
instalment of the Terminator franchise. InTerminator Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terminator-genesis> he again returns to his 
best-known role as the titular cyborg, although that film has been received 
largely negatively by critics.

Terminator Genisys review: Arnie's back, but the lustre isn't
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/terminator-genisys-review-arnold-schwarzenegger>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D62E4FJTwSuc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D62E4FJTwSuc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D62E4FJTwSuc&media=>
 Watch the Terminator Genysis trailer 
 He has never shown the same devotion for the Predator 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y1txEAywdiw> franchise since starring in the 
original back in 1987, and turned down the offer to appear in 1990’s Predator 2 
due to a salary dispute. The series has continued in his absence, spawning 
Predators in 2010, Alien vs. Predator in 2004 and Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem 
in 2007.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-slams-screwed-up-predator-sequels-online-forum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436445516912%2Fd8bd165e-5d7a-444e-bc3c-da3bed957ca0-2060x1358.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%3A%20they%20'screwed%20up'%20Predator%20franchise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-slams-screwed-up-predator-sequels-online-forum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%3A%20they%20%27screwed%20up%27%20Predator%20franchise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Farnold-schwarzenegger-slams-screwed-up-predator-sequels-online-forum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436445516912%2Fd8bd165e-5d7a-444e-bc3c-da3bed957ca0-2060x1358.jpeg>
 Adrien Brody and Alice Braga in 2010’s Predators. Photograph: 20th Century 
Fox/Everett/Rex  