
Green campaigners should stop talking about the risks from climate change in 
2050 and talk about “right now”, the former governor of California,Arnold 
Schwarzenegger <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arnold-schwarzenegger>, has 
said.


“It drives me crazy when people talk about 30 years from now, rising sea 
levels and so on,” he told the Guardian in an interview atthe Paris COP21 
climate conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/the-paris-climate-summit-at-a-glance>
. “What about right now? Thousands of people are dying from pollution. People 
are living with cancer [because of air pollution].”

He said campaigners should focus on the immediate effects of polluting the 
environment, because that resonates with the public in a way that distant 
visions of future harms do not. Most people find it hard to imagine the world 
in 2050 or 2100, the dates that are beingdiscussed at the Paris conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
 for a “long-term goal” on climate action, he said.

“There are people stuck in cancer wards now, tubes sticking out of them - 7 
million people die a year because of pollution,” he said. “We should be talking 
about that.”

“Stuff that happens in the future does not mean anything to people,” he said.

He cited an advertising campaign in California that showed small children 
sucking air through an inhaler, because of the damage done to their respiratory 
systems by breathing polluted air. “People saw this commercial, what we are 
doing to our kids, and thought ‘we have to protect our environment’.”

Polls found that the ads were effective in persuading people of the need for 
new regulations, he said. “All of a sudden, the poll numbers changed.”

“My job is to get the message out there,” he added. “If you do not have people 
behind you, you can’t do anything [on legislation]. Global warming is an 
extremely important issue, the most important issue. You have to communicate it 
properly. You have to communicate to people that this is right now.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Feveryone-responsible-climate-change-fight-arnold-schwarzenegger-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F8%2F1449580581312%2FKP_699683_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%3A%20Everyone%20responsible%20in%20climate%20change%20fight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Feveryone-responsible-climate-change-fight-arnold-schwarzenegger-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Schwarzenegger%3A%20Everyone%20responsible%20in%20climate%20change%20fight%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Feveryone-responsible-climate-change-fight-arnold-schwarzenegger-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F8%2F1449580581312%2FKP_699683_crop_640x360.jpg>
Arnold Schwarzenegger: Everyone responsible in climate change fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/08/everyone-responsible-climate-change-fight-arnold-schwarzenegger-video>
At the Paris climate change conference, entering its second and final week, 
governments are hoping to forge a new global agreement on limiting emissions 
that would kick in from 2020, when current commitments run out. Anew draft text 
<http://unfccc.int/files/bodies/awg/application/pdf/_adp_compilation_4dec15@1000.pdf>
 of an agreement was published on Saturday, and is now under scrutiny by the 
195 governments gathered in France.

Schwarzenegger, a Republican, and internationally known as a star in films 
such as Terminator, was a strong proponent of action on air pollution, and 
greenhouse gas emissions, while in office. His successor, the DemocratJerry 
Brown <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerry_Brown>, joined him in Paris in 
calling for action on emissions. “The Paris conference is the biggest leap 
forward in dealing with climate change. France has been instrumental  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/19/france-launches-global-drive-for-climate-deal>
in advancing this agenda,” he told the Guardian.

Schwarzenegger said such joint efforts from both sides of the US political 
divide were essential to making progress on environmental problems. “I never 
paid much attention to [political] parties,” he said. “This is a people’s 
issue, not a party issue.”

He said that “sub-national” authorities, such as state governors and 
assemblies in the US, and regional and city governments, could play an 
important role in bringing down greenhouse gas emissions, by taking their own 
initiatives independently of national governments.

“It is good that this is now being recognised,” he said. “It’s about 
[emphasising] efficiency, and alternatives [to fossil fuels].”

California under successive administrations has brought forward a series of 
measures on air pollution and greenhouse gases, including a pioneering regional 
cap-and-trade system for carbon. Republicans in the Senaterecently opposed 
<http://www.climatechangenews.com/2015/11/18/republicans-bid-to-kill-obama-climate-rule-before-un-summit/>
 Barack Obama’s“historic” Clean Power Plan to cut nationwide emissions from 
power plants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/obamas-clean-power-plan-hailed-as-strongest-ever-climate-action-by-a-us-president>
, andRepublican states have filed lawsuits against the regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/23/obama-carbon-coal-power-plant-epa-lawsuit-republicans>
.

In Paris, a group of Republican politicians from the US has been seeking 
meetings with the chief officials of leading developed and developing nations. 
They broadly oppose an international deal on climate change, while the Obama 
administration has pushed strongly for an ambitious deal in Paris.

A group of 10 Democratic senators also attended the talks at the weekend, 
pledging tohelp President Obama attain his environmental goals. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/05/paris-climate-change-talks-democratic-senators-obama-cop-21>
 