
Noah Cannon: 'The new season is blisteringly funny'
 Lucille Bluth from Arrested Development Photograph: Sam Urdank for Netflix 
In the weeks leading up to the release, I found myself preparing for the 
worst. Don't get me wrong, I had, and always will have, faith in Mitchell 
Hurwitz –Running Wilde aside <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1615926/>– but I 
worried that the new episodes would be so burdened with fan service andcallbacks
 <http://apps.npr.org/arrested-development/> to the original series that they 
would at best serve as stale reminders of what used to be a great show.

However, as I discovered after eight hours of power-streaming on Sunday 
morning, my fears were mostly not realised. Sure, season four has its flaws, 
some of them gaping. The ambitiousVantage Point 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0443274/>, with scenes re-lived over and over with 
different characters proves tiring, particularly with characters like Michael 
and George Sr, whose storylines so often depend on interaction with other more 
dynamic Bluths. And there's a sometimes grating reliance on running gags and 
guest stars from seasons past.I love Liza as much as the next American 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aR-bzPHsSj0>, but I'm not sure how successfully 
Lucille 2 can anchor a plot. The edge has dulled a bit, with the searing satire 
of the Bush administration from the original series being replaced by a flimsy, 
not quite as timely, plot about immigration.

But amid these nitpicks, season four proves blisteringly funny. The cast is as 
sharp as ever, retaining all the chemistry of the original seasons. When the 
taut jigsaw-puzzle narrative works it's exhilarating. Is it as groundbreaking 
this time around? Probably not, but AD remains as intricate, witty, and 
rewarding after seven long years. The writers include plenty of nods to earlier 
seasons, but also a slew of new gags and motifs that I can't wait to become 
part of the vocabulary of AD fans everywhere.

At its root, season four represents for me a small, glorious triumph for a 
community of fans who grabbed on to a show and didn't let go. That I run a 
fairly successful blog in which I superimpose AD quotes on Downton Abbey 
screencaps speaks to how far-stretching and ridiculous this fandom is. In a lot 
of ways, the communal experience of loving a show can be as rewarding as the 
show itself. It's wonderful and surreal to have even more AD to love together, 
flaws and all. I may never seeSimon and Garfunkel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dTCNwgzM2rQ> the same again.

Noah Cannon is a student who runs the blog Arrested Downton 
<http://arresteddownton.tumblr.com>

Julia Cruz: 'The years of turmoil had finally broken the Bluth men'
 Buster Bluth drawing by Julia Cruz. For panel only. Photograph: Julia Cruz 
for the Guardian 
It was midnight. Seven years of anticipation had led to this moment, the 
release ofArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> season four. I 
watched the first couple episodes excited but apprehensive.

To be honest, it was weird. Michael cried while talking to George Michael – 
something he had never done until the last episode of the series. After all,
he's a robot <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-2b_8qnNbCQ>. George Sr no longer 
possessed his signature bear-like qualities. Oscar, however, had gained a 
new-found confidence. Perhaps the years of turmoil had finally broken the Bluth 
men. Perhaps their essence had simply been forgotten. Either way, something 
wasn't right.

The issue may have been beyond the creator's control. The new Arrested cast 
wasn't missing a single original member, right down to the Veals and the
waitress at Swappigans <http://arresteddevelopment.wikia.com/wiki/Loretta>. Add 
the countless cameo roles by well-known stars like Kristen Wiig (who was almost 
too perfect as a young Lucille) and it's no wonder conflicting schedules left 
each character virtually alone.

The thing is, in the first three seasons, no matter how many adventures the 
Bluths went on (trips to Reno, threats to move to Phoenix), they always came 
back. We always found them together at the model home or the penthouse. 
Remember the time everyone was laughing and riding and cornholing except 
Buster? I thought that was the point: that Michael could never really leave. 
Luckily, in the few scenes where the family are all in one room, they almost 
seem like themselves. Michael regains his blasé attitude and false sense of 
superiority. Gob is satisfyingly lazy and oblivious.

So it did get better. Some of the Bluth chemistry came back, and there were 
enough references from the Arrested Development we already know and love to 
keep me laughing. Will Arnett was in rare Gob form in his episode, which was 
probably my favorite. The egg jokes were plain Ann perfection. Even the "
Showstealer Pro Trial Version 
<http://techcrunch.com/2013/05/26/show-stealer-pro-trial-version-os-x-keygen-haxxxxx/>
" watermark and Lucille's inmate number 07734 (hello 
<http://25.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_kr5qs8xCNs1qzvevko1_400.jpg>) held true to 
classic subtle AD style.

Despite my apprehension, the incongruities in character traits may be an 
elaborate plan of Mitch Hurwitz's to come full circle in the future theoretical 
movie (heyyy possible movie). After all, we still don't know what happened to 
Lucille 2, do we?

Until then, I'm looking forward to re-watching these 15 episodes. Arrested 
Development is best enjoyed the second, third, or 18th time, depending on how 
many forget-me-nows you have.

Julia Cruz is curator of Great Over Good <http://greatovergood.com/> which 
held theI Just Blue Myself Arrested Development art show 
<http://greatovergood.com/i-just-blue-myself/> on May 25. She drew the above 
picture of Buster

Josh Morrissey <http://www.twitter.com/joshmorrissey>: 'If you aren't 
impressed, watch it again'
 GOB Bluth close up Photograph: 20th CENTURY FOX./ 20th CENTURY FOX. 
I woke up early. I dived in immediately and watched seven straight episodes. 
The first two seemed a bit clunky, but that was overshadowed by the pure joy of 
seeing these characters reanimated after a seven year hibernation. Once I got 
past Portia De Rossi's new face, the Lindsay-Fünke centered episode three had 
me laughing, and reminded me why this was my favorite show. The David Cross 
innuendo-filled performance in episode five was sharp as ever, and the 
Gob-featuring seventh episode was my favorite of the group.

Instead of binge-watching the rest of the series, I decided to rewatch the 
first seven with a group of friends later in the day. As was true with the 
first three seasons, the second watch was better. The awkwardness I had felt 
during episodes one's Michael-and-George-Michael tension was now more funny 
than uncomfortable. The layers started to reveal themselves and the 
self-referencing jokes came to light.

Of the many guest stars, Maria Bamford as Tobias's partner in crime Debrie was 
my favorite. I've been a fan of her stand-up comedy for a long time and she 
couldn't have fitted in better within the twisted confines of that world. My 
favorite short cameo was the scene where Conan O'Brien plays a chauvinistic 
version of himself, and the moment I laughed hardest was at the 
Entourage-referencing LA club named Jeremy Piven frequented by Gob's crew.

I tried to imagine what it would be like if these episodes had been released 
one at a time, instead of the entire season being made available at once. I 
think we would have been a bit concerned after the first two, but overall would 
have appreciated the following episodes more than we do now. There would be 
more rewatching, recaps, gif making, and discussion before we saw the next 
episode. I've decided to take my time going through the rest of the season to 
appreciate it more. if you aren't impressed by season four yet, do what I told 
my friends in college to do after season one – watch it again.

Josh Morrissey <http://www.twitter.com/joshmorrissey> is the creator of Fuck 
Yeah Arrested Development <http://fuckyeaharresteddevelopment.tumblr.com/>

Sandy Vasquez: 'The dedication of the fans finally paid off'
 Lindsay Funke from Arrested Development close up Photograph: 20th CENTURY FOX.
 Unlike most fans, I decided not to stay up to watch the premiere at the exact 
time it was released and opted against binging the entire season. No, I had 
waited way too long for this moment and felt that if I watched the whole thing 
at once with a lack of sleep I would not enjoy it. I needed to savor every 
episode, so my plan was to watch one or two episodes every Sunday night.

So at 9pm on Sunday, I turned on my TV and logged into Netflix. I felt 
butterflies in my stomach when I saw the title for the show had a small banner 
that said "New Episodes" under it. It was all magical. I even asked my brother 
to pinch me to see that it was really happening and then I pressed play.

Unfortunately, as the first episode progressed the feeling of excitement I had 
when I first started watching slowly wore off. The show just didn't feel the 
same, and it wasn't what I had expected. Maybe it was the fact that there was 
not that much interaction between the family members, which was what made me 
fall in love with the show in the first place – the family's reactions to each 
other (i.e.,Michael's face when he hears about Ann's famous mayon-egg 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tO1k2Y3o-iM>). You can't really blame them for 
that though, since Mitchell Hurwitz had mentioned it was difficult to get most 
of the cast in the same scene.

There were some moments where I laughed, there's no doubt, like when Michael 
was trying to kick the tumbleweed that had entered his house. Or when he 
arrives in the Phoenix airport and you see a mural in the background with a 
bunch of references to previous seasons. But this first episode was simply 
missing a spark and some of the cleverness of previous episodes. Somehow it 
felt like the callbacks and jokes were forced.

Does this mean I'm completely giving up on this season and that it's not as 
great as the first three seasons? No. After all, I can't really judge the 
greatness of a season based on only one episode. Besides, what I'm hearing from 
most people is that the first two episodes are kind of weak but the rest are so 
much better. I'm definitely looking forward to seeing the rest of season four 
and then re-watching over and over again to catch new jokes and easter eggs 
every different time. Even if the rest of the season is not as great as I'm 
hoping to be, I'm just happy the dedication of the fans finally paid off and we 
were able to get Arrested Development back.

Sandy Vasquez runs The Bluth Company Tumblr 
<http://thebluthcompany.tumblr.com/>
 