
To Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> it is 
the set-backs that remain with him, gnawing away, impossible to scratch. “It is 
the problem of my life, basically,” the Arsenal manager says. “I’m competitive 
and every disappointment stays with me forever. It is a scar in your heart and 
reduces your life expectancy.”

When Wenger considers his record against Sam Allardyce, who visits the 
Emirates Stadium with his newCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> team on New Year’s Day, it 
ought to be with his glass half-full. In 15 years or so he has faced Allardyce 
31 times in all competitions, winning 18 and losing only five. But it is the 
ones that have got away that Wenger recalls with the greatest clarity. His 
curse is that victory over an Allardyce team, be it Bolton Wanderers or 
Newcastle United, Blackburn Rovers, West Ham United or Sunderland, loses much 
of its cachet because it has tended to be expected.

Bolton Wanderers 2 - 2 Arsenal
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/apr/28/match.sport7> 
The dropped points hit home with force and none have done so more than those 
fromthe 2-2 draw at Allardyce’s Bolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/apr/28/match.sport7> in the fourth 
last game of the 2002-03 Premier League season. It was the day when Wenger’s 
team surrendered a 2-0 lead late on and, with it, control of their destiny at 
the top of the table. Manchester United found themselves two points clear and 
they did not look back, winning their remaining fixtures to take the title.

On that day at the Reebok Stadium Wenger was close to meltdown on the 
touchline. He ripped off his tie early in the second half and whirled his arms 
with increasing ferocity as the game wore on. The commentators at the time said 
it was Wenger as had not been seen – the cool, scholarly exterior stripped back.

Allardyce loved it and, even though plenty of matches have since been played, 
the images have endured. This is how Wenger’s relationship with Allardyce has 
come to be considered – the Frenchman as the sophisticate but vulnerable to 
being knocked from his perch by Allardyce, the great friend of Sir Alex 
Ferguson and, for so long, a member of the cartel of British managers in the 
north-west of England.

“Of course, I remember the 2-2 at Bolton,” Wenger says. “Football is like real 
life but in a more condensed way, more intense. At some moments it catches you 
suddenly and it can be very cruel. In competition it is like that.”

Wenger’s relationship with Allardyce has improved over the years. “Slowly, 
slowly,” Wenger says, with a smile. Back in the Bolton days Allardyce scored a 
number of successes over him, most notably during a five-match purple patch in 
the league from 2004-06, when he won three and drew two. Allardyce frequently 
out-tactic-ed Wenger, to borrow one of his famous phrases.

The pickings for him have been slimmer in more recent times. Since Allardyce’s 
Blackburnbeat Arsenal at Ewood Park in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/03/blackburn-rovers-arsenal-premier-league>
 he has lost in all bar one of his 10 meetings with Wenger’s team. The 
exception wasthe 0-0 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/sunderland-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 that he earned with Sunderland at the Stadium of Light last April.

And yet Wenger will be wary of the Allardyce Factor on Sunday, not least 
because his old rival knows how to organise a team; how to make them tough to 
break down. “The level of confidence or urgency always goes a bit up when a new 
manager comes in,” Wenger adds. “That makes the game more difficult.”

Allardyce’s Palace will present a familiar challenge at the Emirates – a 
compact unit that will seek to profit on the counter-attack or set pieces and 
for whom a point would be a terrific result. Wenger has lamented the lack of 
“classic” games in this season’s division; the dearth of “spectacularity” 
despite the presence of so many elite managers.

And he puts it down to the fear that every club below the top six feels to 
varying degrees about relegation. Going down is unthinkable for financial 
reasons and so the caution has come to be pronounced. “Everybody is under 
pressure, first, not to lose,” Wenger says.

Tony Pulis’s West Bromwich Albion were the last team to come to the Emirates 
and theyfrustrated Arsenal on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/arsenal-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
 until Olivier Giroud scored the only goal of the game in the 86th minute. “I 
don’t blame West Brom [for their approach],” Wenger says. “You can understand 
them. They want their 40 points. And, after they get them, you will see a 
different West Brom.

“At the start of the season you have the six or seven teams that will fight at 
the top and the other teams say: ‘Let’s make sure we are not in the seven that 
will fight not to go down and get 40 points as quickly as possible.’ The 
problem today is that for these teams to play in the Premier League, they need 
to pay the wages of the Premier League. And if you go down with the wages of 
the Premier League, it is a massive problem.”

Wenger is not surprised to see Allardyce back in the Premier League, after his 
ill-fated stint with England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-leaves-england-manager-role-fa>
. He talked in general terms about why chairmen at struggling clubs would 
always favour experienced managers who gave “certain guarantees to stay in the 
league”. Allardyce is one of those managers.

Wenger’s preoccupation is simply to get the better of him and continue the 
response to the back-to-back defeatsat Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-goodison-home-crowd>
 andManchester City before Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. “We responded well against West Brom and we now have to show who we are – 
which is the team that went 19 games unbeaten [after the first match of the 
season]. We have to show we can bounce back. That will make our season or not.”
 