
Alisher Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov>, 
Arsenal’s second largest shareholder after Stan Kroenke, has accused Arsène 
Wenger of failing to learn from his mistakes and claims the club must 
strengthen every area of the team to compete with Europe’s elite.

The Russian billionaire stressed his desire to see Wenger reintroduce success 
at Arsenal but expressed his concerns that the Frenchman’s “principles” could 
be holding the side back followinganother defeat at the hands of Manchester 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/23/arsenal-dominant-dazed-wayne-rooney-exposes-lack-ruthlessness-manchester-united>
 that continued a miserable recent record against the Premier League’s 
strongest sides.

Speaking to CNBC, Usmanov said <http://www.cnbc.com/id/102211548>: “He is one 
of the greatest coaches, not just of European, but of world football. But we 
have a Russian proverb which goes: “Even an old lady can have a roof falling on 
her.

“Everybody makes mistakes. He can make mistakes and I know as you age it is 
more difficult, more challenging to accept one’s mistakes. Does [Wenger] have 
money or not? There is officially money in the club.

“Arsenal is a dream that sometimes becomes a mirage and sometimes a pain as 
every dream. [The] potential of the team is there but there is no critical 
evaluation of mistakes and they need to need to acknowledge them. Because no 
genius can retain the same level of genius if they do not acknowledge mistakes. 
It’s only when you admit your mistakes that you can get rid of them.

“My opinion – and I tell it openly – we need to strengthen every position to 
play on the level of such teams in [the] UK as Chelsea and Manchester City, in 
Europe like Real Madrid, Barcelona, Paris Saint-Germain and other clubs.”

The 2-1 defeat to United left Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> in eighth place in the Premier 
League with four wins from 12 matches – their worst start to a season since the 
1982-83 – and prompted Wenger to label his side “defensively naive”.
 