
Arsène Wenger will not take criticism from the major shareholder Alisher 
Usmanov <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alisher-usmanov> personally but 
has told everyone involved with Arsenal they must get behind his team.

The Uzbek oil magnate, whose Red & White Holdings Group has just over a 30% 
stake in Arsenal’s parent company –gave an interview to American broadcaster 
CNBC in which he questioned the direction of the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/24/alisher-usmanov-arsene-wenger-mistakes-arsenal>
.

He suggested Wenger’s mistakes were never properly evaluated, which was 
standing in the way of them challenging Europe’s other leading sides.

Wenger has enough experience not to take anything to heart, with the 2-1 
Premier League home defeat to Manchester United on Saturday having attracted 
plenty of negative headlines.

The Arsenal manager believes such public statements and suggestions of crisis 
talks with the board do little to benefit the team, who hostBorussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> on Wednesday looking to 
secure a place in the last 16 of the Champions League once again.

“When you are such a long time in football as I am, you don’t understand any 
more what crisis means. I must get to the dictionary and look at it well 
again,” said Wenger, who confirmed the midfielder Jack Wilshere will see a 
specialist to assess the seriousness of ankle ligament damage suffered in the 
defeat to United.

“During the 18 years I have been here I have shown that I can take criticism. 
Everybody has the right to have an opinion, having said that, we have values at 
this club,” he added.

“The first one is when we go through a difficult patch, we show solidarity. 
That is a very important one. The second one is that, when you have something 
to say to each other, we say it face to face. We don’t need to go to the 
newspapers.

“I don’t take [Usmanov’s comments]personally at all. It is an opinion I 
respect, but when you are from this club, you are from this club. You are in or 
out, you cannot be both.

“I am long enough in the game to know that when you play well, but lose the 
game, you get flooded with critics, however, if you play a very bad game, but 
you win it, everyone says how great you are.

“It is our job to take a distance with that and see what was right and what 
was wrong. The rest is part of the game.”

Wenger insists Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have 
what it takes to finish the season strongly again, having seen their title 
challenge fade with Chelsea 15 points clear of them already.

He said: “What is important is how close we are together inside the club and 
how much we can respond to people who question our quality. I personally feel 
there is a very strong bond inside the team and the club, and that this team 
will have a very strong season.

“I believe in what I do and I especially believe in my players, and in their 
quality and spirit. I question myself every day and I hope you do that as well.”

Aaron Ramsey said the squad are united in their desire to turn the campaign 
around. The midfielder said: “We believe in ourselves, we have a great team 
spirit and we are not too concerned with what is being said about us. We know 
all about what we are capable of doing. It is just some fine tuning.”

Wenger expects Wilshere to be “out for a while” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/25/jack-wilshere-arsenal-injury-arsene-wenger-dortmund>
, having been forced off against United when a sliding tackle from Paddy McNair 
turned his ankle.

“He has a big ankle sprain and I don’t want to talk about it because I’m not a 
specialist medically,” Wenger said. “The first news is they have told us that 
he will be out for the next few games. To find out for how long, we will need 
to see a specialist.”

Arsenal, though, will be able to call on the defender Laurent Koscielny, who 
has resumed full training after an achilles problem.

Olivier Giroud is ineligible after being omitted from Arsenal’s Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> squad. He was 
originally expected to miss all of the group matches because of a broken leg.
 