
There was genuine surprise in Martin Tyler’s voice when he commentated on the 
moment that cemented Arsenal’s most recent signature win away from home in the 
Premier League. When Olivier Giroud glanced in Santi Cazorla’s arcing free-kick 
to confirma 2-0 lead at the Etihad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, Tyler captured the sentiment that millions of TV viewers were sharing. “Well, 
well, well!” he intoned. This was not the Arsenal everybody was used to 
watching implode when confronted by big away challenges, the Arsenal that had 
been walloped on their travels to elite opponents during the previous year. 
Suddenly, they seemed to have found the method and mettle to rise to the 
grandstand occasion.

All this happened in January 2015. Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> remembers the impact it 
had on his team’s sense of themselves and their capabilities. “It was big for 
the confidence of the team because we were struggling a bit away from home in 
big games,” he says. “To win this game was very important for the belief of the 
players.”

If it felt like a turning point, subsequent events suggest that it was only a 
half turn. Since that Cazorla-inspired win, Arsenal have a decent record on the 
road in the Premier League and they have cut out the ferocious pastings. But 
here is the snag. They have not managed to summon another Premier League 
victory at the home of a major contender. It has been a story of a handful of 
draws and the odd narrow defeat. If you are tempted toinclude a handsome 
scoreline at the King Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/26/leicester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 in the early throes of last season, that occurred long before Leicester were 
anywhere close to even daring to dream of titles.

Pep Guardiola learns to accept fans only sing when you’re winning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/pep-guardiola-adapt-style-english-game-manchester-city-arsenal>
A standout away triumph or two is a hallmark of a potential champion. A 
signature win, a statement win, some might grab the flavour of it better by 
calling it an eff-off win. Wenger is conscious of Arsenal’s need for the kind 
of result that sends out a blaze of intent. “Man City will tell you the same,” 
he says. “It’s a big game. There will be fierce intensity because both teams 
are in a position where they will want to respond. We must focus on what we 
want to do and have clarity in our heads on how we want to do it. After that we 
have a good chance.”

So much of that chance appears to be linked with Alexis Sánchez. Arsenal’s 
leading light came back from his last international with Chile supposedly 
nursing a fragile hamstring but he has played an inspirational part, barely 
taking a moment’s rest, during a spell of seven games in 21 days. His influence 
cannot be overstated, either in raw statistics (he has scored or assisted 27 
times in his past 27 Premier League games) or in his souped-up demeanour.

“He is a leader in his way on the pitch. Because he is not scared of anybody. 
That’s a kind of leadership,” says Wenger. That lack of fear stands out in key 
games.

In many ways Wenger has never managed anyone quite like him. “He is comparable 
to Suárez a bit in style, but from players I had, no [comparison]. Thierry 
Henry was a real athlete, naturally you saw this guy was a strong man. Sánchez 
surprises you a little bit because of his size – you do not expect such a 
dynamic, strong winning attitude. It’s his game.”

Wenger’s crotchety mood in the buildup to Sunday’s game was partly down to the 
tension growing over the past few days, with questions about the club’s 
ambitions over the contract renegotiations of Sánchez and Mesut Özil striking a 
nerve. It also hinted at how much Arsenal were frustrated bytheir setback at 
Goodison Park on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
.

Williams atones for error as Everton come from behind to sink Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
Wenger believes the nature of the reaction could be season-defining: “We had 
the big setback at the start of the season. We dealt with it and have to deal 
again with the disappointment on Tuesday night and bounce back straight away. 
That will decide our season.”

Despite City’s dip since their impeccable start to the campaign, Wenger is 
hardly expecting a breeze. Pep Guardiola’s introduction of his philosophy might 
be a source for debate in Premier League circles, but Wenger has first-hand 
experience of how his counterpart can produce teams built on an overwhelming 
blend of ingenuity and intensity. He regards Barcelona’s Guardiola vintage as 
the best team he has faced.

“I played a semi-final against Arrigo Sacchi’s Milan with Monaco in the 
Champions League. They were good as well. But withArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> we faced maybe Barcelona at its 
peak – at the time when Xavi was still young enough, Iniesta was coming up, 
Dani Alves was young. Messi was 20, 21, 22. They were all coming up with a huge 
hunger and desire. It was natural for them. Let’s not forget they had some team 
there. They had Eto’o and Henry and Ibrahimovic and Messi. Imagine what that 
was.”

Why Héctor Bellerín said no to Pep Guardiola and Manchester City | David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/hector-bellerin-pep-guardiola-manchester-city>
Recreating that blueprint in Manchester, imposing that capacity to put 
opponents under crushing, creative pressure, remains a work in progress, but 
Wenger is unmoved by the notion that Guardiola is somehow put out by the 
Premier League’s own brand of relentlessness.

His focus on engineering a signature win, something capable of redefining his 
team’s belief for the weeks ahead, dominates his thinking.
 