
Arsène Wenger claimed Arsenal were the victim of two offside goals in their 
2-1 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 at Manchester City and he directed his anger at the match official Martin 
Atkinson, stating “referees are protected like lions in the zoo”.

The manager also rounded on the Premier League for its scheduling and on his 
goalkeeper, Petr Cech, for taking a short free-kick instead of putting the ball 
directly in the box in added time. UltimatelyArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> dropped to fourth place, nine 
points behind the leaders Chelsea.

Raheem Sterling completes Manchester City turnaround against Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
Wenger’s side took the early lead through Theo Walcott before Leroy Sané 
levelled at the start of the second half and Raheem Sterling scored a 
71st-minute winner. Sané did appear marginally offside for his goal while David 
Silva was the player Wenger believed was in a similar position for City’s 
second.

Wenger said: “We conceded two offside goals, which is very difficult to accept 
in a game of that stature. I feel enough is enough for us because we got some 
bad decisions for the whole season and today I looked at the goals – both are 
offside. The second one is five yards offside. But what can I do? The referees 
are protected in what is like the lions in the zoo so we have to live with 
that. I want them to be very well protected, I want them to be safe.”

Asked to clarify the remark, Wenger said: “It is too long a subject, I do not 
want to make referees the subject of the press conference. It is right they are 
safe and protected but if they make right decisions, even better.”

The manager indicated he was unhappy at Arsenal having had to travel to 
Merseyside last Tuesday to face Everton afterbeating Stoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/arsenal-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 the previous Saturday.Arsenal lost 2-1 at Goodison Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-goodison-home-crowd>
 and Wenger questioned why some sides not involved in European competition the 
previous week played on Wednesday. He believed this caused a tiredness that 
allowed Manchester City’s second-half comeback. “I felt we were in control and 
it didn’t look like we could lose the game and every time we stopped them from 
creating chances,” he said.

“We were caught cold in the second half and we dropped physically and when we 
won the ball it didn’t come out as clean as in the first.

“We’ve played four games away from home out of the last five [and] we had one 
day less recovery at Everton after everyone else. I feel there were plenty of 
teams who don’t play in Europe, big teams who could have played on Tuesday and 
we could have played on Wednesday.”

While this is likely to refer to Chelsea and Liverpool, each of those sides 
had the same amount of rest, three days, as their weekend matches were on the 
Sunday.

In added time Cech took a short free‑kick when a team-mate might have punted 
the ball into City’s area. Atkinson blew the final whistle and this caused 
Wenger further annoyance. Of Cech’s decision, the manager said: “I was upset 
because I don’t see with 20 seconds to go why you play a short free-kick when 
you could play the ball in the box. The referee took advantage but he would 
have allowed the ball played in the box.”

To make matters worse, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain sustained a muscular problem 
and Wenger was left hoping his team can now bounce back against West Bromwich 
Albion. “We have to come back next week and win our game [at home]. We had a 
horrible week and what is worse, out of two good performances we get zero 
points and out of two leading positions, we lose two games. For a while we have 
not kept a clean sheet. If you want to play at the top, you have to keep a 
clean sheet.”

City’s win lifts them to second place. “Seven points [behind Chelsea] is a 
huge distance,”Pep Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola>, the manager, said. “Today 
is a good day. We are second in the Premier League.”

Pablo Zabaleta sustained a knee ligament problem that caused his removal at 
half-time and he will see a specialist on Monday.

Guardiola again left John Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/manchester-city-manager-john-stones-pep-guardiola>
 out of the starting XI, as he did for the 2-0 win against Watford on 
Wednesday. “I just apologise to John because he doesn’t deserve to be out,” 
Guardiola said. “I love him a lot but I just tried to do the same back four we 
played against Watford.”
 