
A major new Andy Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> 
exhibition, a retrospective of Robert Mapplethorpe’s photography and work by 
modernist artists Georgia O’Keeffe, Margaret Preston and Grace Cossington Smith 
are among the highlights of the Art Gallery of New South Wales’ 2017 program, 
which was announced on Tuesday.

At the launch event, Wayne Tunicliffe – the gallery’s head curator of 
Australian art – spoke on an issue that has been plaguing public galleries in 
Australia: thegender diversity among collections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/15/gender-and-the-ngv-more-white-male-artists-than-you-can-shake-a-stick-at>
. “If women hold up half the sky, it’s a miracle it’s not fallen on our heads 
in the state and national galleries,” he said. “We are working very hard to 
address that situation.”

New survey paints grim picture of gender balance in Australian visual arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/australian-visual-arts-survey-finds-gender-imbalance-at-most-levels>
Among the Australian collection of AGNSW, Tunicliffe said that 56% of works 
made in the past 10 years came from women artists. He highlighted some involved 
in the 2017 program, including BC (formerly Brown Council), Pat Brassington and 
Mikala Dwyer.

Following on from the record-breaking success of the Andy Warhol | Ai Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/02/andy-warhol-and-ai-weiwei-come-together-in-melbourne-with-cats>
 show at the National Gallery of Victoria this year, Adman: Warhol Before Pop 
has been billed as one of the most comprehensive exhibitions assembled of the 
artist’s early work. Opening in February during the Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, 
Adman will showcase Warhol’s output as a commercial illustrator in the 1950s, 
when he was commissioned by brands such as Tiffany’s, magazines including Vogue 
and Harper’s, leading Fifth Avenue department stores and the major art 
directors of Madison Avenue.


More than 200 objects will be on display from the art and archival collections 
of the Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh, including rare drawings and 
photographs, vintage ads, recreated department store windows and artist books, 
which dip into the pre-Mad Men, pre-pop era of commercial art and reveal 
Warhol’s development as a queer artist, and his early influences of Matisse, 
Cocteau and Picasso.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fart-gallery-of-nsw-warhol-mapplethorpe-and-australian-women-in-2017-program%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f1960440a8c2f231a639e63d9e29f4d790e2925%2F0_0_3432_2546%2F3432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20Gallery%20of%20NSW%3A%20Warhol%2C%20Mapplethorpe%20and%20Australian%20women%20focus%20of%202017%20program&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fart-gallery-of-nsw-warhol-mapplethorpe-and-australian-women-in-2017-program%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20Gallery%20of%20NSW%3A%20Warhol%2C%20Mapplethorpe%20and%20Australian%20women%20focus%20of%202017%20program&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fart-gallery-of-nsw-warhol-mapplethorpe-and-australian-women-in-2017-program%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f1960440a8c2f231a639e63d9e29f4d790e2925%2F0_0_3432_2546%2F3432.jpg>
 Landscape at Pentecost (1929) by the Australian artist Grace Cossington Smith. 
Photograph: Saul Steed/Art Gallery of South Australia 
Making Modernism, which opened at the Heide Museum of Modern Art 
<https://www.heide.com.au/exhibitions/okeeffe-preston-cossington-smith-making-modernism>
 in Victoria last week, celebrates the contribution to international modernism 
made by three women: two of Australia’s most celebrated 20th century artists, 
Preston and Cossington Smith, alongside their American peer O’Keeffe. After 
travelling to the Queensland Art Gallery, it will arrive at AGNSW in July.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fart-gallery-of-nsw-warhol-mapplethorpe-and-australian-women-in-2017-program%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbd983585d81a84cc7ab0d2649799fd8f1c88b0c%2F0_0_2703_3232%2F2703.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20Gallery%20of%20NSW%3A%20Warhol%2C%20Mapplethorpe%20and%20Australian%20women%20focus%20of%202017%20program&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fart-gallery-of-nsw-warhol-mapplethorpe-and-australian-women-in-2017-program%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20Gallery%20of%20NSW%3A%20Warhol%2C%20Mapplethorpe%20and%20Australian%20women%20focus%20of%202017%20program&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fart-gallery-of-nsw-warhol-mapplethorpe-and-australian-women-in-2017-program%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbd983585d81a84cc7ab0d2649799fd8f1c88b0c%2F0_0_2703_3232%2F2703.jpg>
 Johannes Vermeer’s Women in Blue Reading a Letter (1663), one of only 36 
paintings by the Dutch Baroque artist. Photograph: Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam 
The program launch also highlighted previous announcements for 2017, including 
The National,the inaugural biennale of new Australian art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/art-institutions-unite-for-new-biennial-survey-of-contemporary-australian-art>
, which will presented over six years at AGNSW, Carriageworks and the Museum of 
Contemporary Art; and Rembrandt and Dutch Golden Age: Masterpieces from the 
Rijksmuseum, which will showcase the flourishing arts culture of 17th-century 
Holland, including six paintings and a dozen etchings from Rembrandt and 
Johannes Vermeer’s portrait Woman in Blue Reading a Letter.

Comprised of contemporary works that “question, contest, and provoke 
discussion about rights to land in Australia”, Our Lands will open in January: 
a pointed and political counterpoint tothe Sentient Lands exhibition 
<https://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/sentient-lands/>, which is 
currently on show in the Yiribana Gallery. In June, the first major exhibition 
of Filipino art in Australia, Passion and Procession: Art of the Philippines, 
will open at AGNSW, as part of theBayanihan Philippines Art Project 
<https://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/calendar/bayanihan/>, celebrating 70 years 
of diplomatic relationships between Australia and the Philippines.

Also opening in June, the AGNSW’s historic Grand Courts will be reinvented as 
an authentic Victorian display space, to showcase more than 80 19th-century 
watercolours from the gallery’s collection that are rarely displayed due to 
conservation difficulties.

Other exhibitions include John Olsen’s The You Beaut Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/19/john-olsen-the-you-beaut-country-review-ngvretrospective-australian-artist>
, which closes at the National Gallery of Victoria in February and opens at 
AGNSW in March; and Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Medium, a major exhibition 
of the photographer’s still lifes, portraits, erotic imagery and rare colour 
photographs,which opened in Los Angeles in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/16/robert-mapplethorpe-the-perfect-medium-photography-los-angeles>
 and arrives in Sydney in October 2017.
 