
The first rule of Art Club? Don’t talk about how you run Art Club – that is, 
don’t talk about your risks, your losses and definitely don’t discuss your 
eccentric shortcuts or the expenditures that ultimately win you a customer 
base. You probably want to avoid even calling them “customers”, even though 
that’s precisely what your fans are at the point of sale. Even though they may 
– if you’ve developed a friendly relationship with them – take pride in their 
role as buyers of your art.

The mostly-unspoken rule that artists aren’t supposed to talk about their 
businesses reveals plenty about how we tend to think of “art” and “business” as 
mutually exclusive – and have double (or even triple) standards about what 
artists are and are not allowed to say about their money and still be 
considered artists.

Megastars can flaunt their tour revenue and album sales when they reach the 
millions, but you won’t see Lady Gaga, former London School of Economics 
student Mick Jagger, Pink Floyd or the management behind any of these artists 
chatting openly about the more painful moments behind their massive paydays: 
the tours that lost money hand over fist, the brilliant yet pricey packaging 
ideas that flopped at the register, or the humiliating back-door giveaways with 
local radio stations in which these Stadium Acts have paid to “paper the house” 
(read: giveaway tonnes of tickets because there are still 6,000 nosebleed seats 
empty the day of the show). You won’t see these artists blogging aboutthe 
private corporate gigs they take for $10 million a pop 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2007/jan/11/entertainment/et-private11> so they 
can afford to bring the high-tech, holographic stage rig they desire on their 
next tour.

You won’t see that because most artists do not want to take the beating in the 
press or the blogosphere. Scrutinizing the decisions of our artists has become 
at bestan interesting daily discussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/18/taylor-swift-spotify-billy-bragg-google-youtube>
 and - at worst - a cruel sport.

There is, though, a growing clan of transparent musicians trying to yank back 
the mystique-curtain on what it takes to make a living as an artist, fromback 
<http://www.negativland.com/news/?page_id=17> in the day 
<http://www.salon.com/2000/06/14/love_7/> and more recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/24/zoe-keating-itunes-spotify-youtube-payouts>
 – sharing their private spreadsheets so that we aren’t all starting from 
scratch or working from hearsay. Musicians already spend our days juggling 
music-making with the minutiae of tour-booking, dusting off our codpieces and 
our back catalogues, and trying to explain our lives, souls and financial 
decisions to our contemporaries and – more importantly – to our fans, who trust 
and support usbecause of the transparency for which we will be criticized. 
Transparency – much like full-disclosure honesty in any loving human 
relationship – is beautiful, but it’s expensive.

Jack Conte, one-half of the indie duo Pomplamoose, is confronting this paradox 
the hard way in the wake of his recent post on Medium 
<https://medium.com/@jackconte/pomplamoose-2014-tour-profits-67435851ba37> in 
which he lays bare the nuts, bolts, nets and grosses of his group’s 24-show 
American tour. Pomplamoose decided to pull out most of the stops and hire a 
full crew (sound, lights, tour manager, merch person), spare few expenses 
(buying new lights and road cases for their gear), and they freely admitted to 
considering the undertaking an investment in their future as a touring band. 
They lost about $12,000 after grossing a total of $136,000. I looked at that 
and barely blinked.

Metaphorically, the band didn’t even fly first class, but that didn’t stop 
armchair critics 
<http://gawker.com/indie-musicians-viral-tour-diary-was-a-marketing-stunt-1665409710>
 from complaining that Pomplamoose didn’t deserve to get on the plane to begin 
with, those plane-taking wankers. And there are those angry at Pomplamoose’s 
abilty to absorb a loss-leading tour because they’re making enough sustainable 
income through their pledge-per-song system onPatreon <http://patreon.com/> (a 
platform Conte started 2 years ago, because no online system existed for 
YouTube-star bands to convert millions of views into actual revenue).But he 
could afford to the lose the money!some musicians complained 
<http://thebillfold.com/2014/12/on-creative-businesses-that-sometimes-lose-money-or-the-pomplamoose-thing/>
.This isn’t a fair representation of middle class touring at all!, others wrote 
<http://lefsetz.com/wordpress/index.php/archives/2014/11/26/pomplamoose-blog/>. 
The indie bands who’d toured in vans, slept on floors, and had nothing but 
chips and salsa on their riderssaid <http://pitchfork.com/thepitch/574-op-ed/> 
things likeThese guys spent their money like idiots!


The critics are partially correct: Conte’s accounting is not how they’ve 
toured, or might tour if given the same budget. But it is how Pomplamoose chose 
to tour: at a loss, and as an investment. If there was any naiveté in Jack’s 
post, it wasn’t in how the band spent their money but rather in his assumption 
that a compassionate universe was ready to accept his transparency as an 
important contribution to the music information economy instead ofa mercenary 
gimmick promoting his own cause 
<http://www.aux.tv/2014/12/sob-story-from-band-that-lost-11000-was-actually-a-marketing-stunt/>
.

But losing money on a mid-level tour is more common than anyone apparently 
thinks – it’s just that there are few artists masochistic enough to put the 
information transparently into the public domain.

When The Dresden Dolls were invited to open up for Nine Inch Nails’ summer 
tour in 2005, we were ecstatic. We were offered $500 per show to perform about 
six shows a week. We had to hire a tour bus and driver (no amount of 
sleeping-in-the-van or cheap flights could match the speed of the NIN caravan), 
and we had to hire our own sound guy. I have not, until now, written about the 
huge loss we took on that tour, nor would I ever criticize Trent Reznor for not 
offering us a “living wage”. He made the offer; we didn’t have to take it. To 
this day, I still meet people who discovered my music because of that tour: 
they became fans, they supported my Kickstarter, they come to my shows, they 
bought my book. We figured we’d make it back when we went back on our own tour 
as headliners. And …we did.

Risk-based investing exists everywhere but the arts (and, one could argue, in 
the non-profit world 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/dan_pallotta_the_way_we_think_about_charity_is_dead_wrong?language=en>
), where it is considered absolutely déclassé. In the tech industry – and the 
restaurant industry, or any industry, really – it is considered necessary to 
spend, experiment, fail, struggle, borrow capital and ultimately find a healthy 
balance between expenditure and income. Wired’s Erika Hall recently evenwrote 
of the tech world 
<http://www.wired.com/2013/09/why-do-research-when-you-can-fail-fast-pivot-and-act-out-other-popular-startup-cliches/>
 that “Somewhere along the way, it got to be uncool to reduce one’s risk of 
failure.”

Perhaps the stickiest problem when comparing art and business is that the 
definition of “success” becomes muddied when you opt for a career in music. On 
the one hand, you’re told you haven’t “made it” until you’re a megastar – 
making a living at your art isn’t enough – and, on the other hand, musicians 
aren’t supposed to be concerned with profits if they’re “real” artists –Didn’t 
you get into this job just for the love of it?

I launched my now-infamous Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/amandapalmer/amanda-palmer-the-new-record-art-book-and-tour>
 for my own album, tour and art book in 2012 and, while it grossed over $1.2m, 
it netted – when all was said and done – close to zero. I actuallychose to run 
the Kickstarter as a loss leader: I wanted to impress my fans, and the critics 
of crowdfunding who I knew were going to judge and criticize me - and the 
project - no matter what. I deliberately used high-end, expensive packages when 
manufacturing the CD-books, the vinyl, the hand-painted record players and 
art-books I’d convinced 25,000 people to pre-purchase. I even wound up
chronicling my projected budget <http://amandapalmer.net/blog/20120522/>. Why? 
Because there was a bizarre impression that I’d somehow been handed a 
million-dollar check and was going to spend my year languishing in a swimming 
pool filled with hundred dollar bills. But I hadn’t: like a shoe store, or a 
restaurant, I was running a business with the obligatory expenses, like a full 
staff on payroll, a shop to rent, and a million dollars worth of pre-ordered 
shoes to design, inspect, manufacture and mail out to my customers.

Meanwhile, even as I was only breaking even on the Kickstarter with an 
optimistic vision of future earnings (which did eventually manifest as a larger 
fanbase, more profitable tours, and a book advance), I got widelyraked over the 
coals 
<http://gawker.com/5944050/amanda-palmers-million-dollar-music-project-and-kickstarters-accountability-problem>
 in the media for not paying fans who’d volunteered to come to my show and play 
with me and the band for two or three songs in exchange for tickets, backstage 
beers and hugs. This wasn’t my salaried band or crew we’re talking about – 
these were local sax and violin players showing up for an impromptu jam session 
that lasted one evening. I’d been doing these sorts of trades for years and 
they’d worked out just fine for everyone, until people got the sense that I was 
a millionaire (or, at least the wife of one) running a rock’n’roll sweat shop.

The irony? Some of the exact same journalists and bloggers are now lambasting 
Jack Conte for paying the professional musicians he hired to toured with 
Pomplamoose (which is usually a two-person band that use loops to fill out 
their sound). Will Stevenson, a band manager himself,asked in the Alternative 
Press 
<http://www.altpress.com/features/entry/how_not_to_spend_150000_on_a_28_day_touran_op_ed_by_the_artery_foundations>
: “But why would the rest of you and your band need salaries? If you aren’t 
making the money, why would you pay it out to people?”

The backlash (Amanda, pay your volunteers! Jack, don’t pay your band!) is 
laughable, but it speaks volumes about the double standards with which the 
world tackles the music industry: you’re damned if you play by the rules, and 
you’re damned if you find a creative way to thwart them. We – Taylor Swift, 
Trent Reznor, Zoe Keating, Pomplamoose, U2, Radiohead, me – are all just trying 
to find a way to create and monetize our creations at the same time.

And if there are going to be a million new paths to sustainability for a 
million different artists, we’d best stop bickering amongst ourselves about the 
validity of each and every path these artists are stumbling down – or at least 
step out of the way if we can’t lend a hand.

• This article was amended on 14 December 2014 to clarify that Mick Jagger 
attended, but did not graduate from, the London School Of Economics.
 