
Art Basel, which closed on Sunday, effectively rounds off the art market’s 
annual program of fairs, sales and exhibitions. Coming after auctions inNew York
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> that clocked sales totals less 
than half of those a year earlier, art dealers have been cheered by apparently 
buoyant sales at the fair.

Dealers ticked off the highlights: a Sigmar Polke for €6.5m (£5.1m) at David 
Zwirner and Paul McCarthy’s Tomato Head (Green) (1994) sold by Hauser & Wirth 
for $4.75m (£3.3m) and a Mike Kelley Reconstructed History for $1.5m. The 
availability of such works suggested that dealers are getting more of the best 
work coming up for sale now that the auction houses have stepped back from 
offering seller’s guarantees.

But whether these headline sales, like the auctions, are a gloss that 
disguises other weaknesses, is not yet clear. The art market has been going 
through a testing period, not least its sensitivity to fluctuations in the 
global economy and the uncertain political outlook.

But the one story that might have been expected to affect art market 
confidence – the civil suit against the directors of the Knoedler & Company 
gallery in New York earlier this year, appears to have had scarcely had any 
impact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffale-art-market-authentication%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1648b8b141372c429b1f81185ec07915cdf2cfe1%2F0_5_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20market%20shrugs%20off%20forgery%20case%20but%20finders%20of%20fakes%20still%20flourish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffale-art-market-authentication%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20market%20shrugs%20off%20forgery%20case%20but%20finders%20of%20fakes%20still%20flourish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffale-art-market-authentication%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1648b8b141372c429b1f81185ec07915cdf2cfe1%2F0_5_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A visitor looks at the artwork Tomato Head (Green) (1994) by US artist Paul 
McCarthy on display at Art Basel, in Basel, Switzerland. Photograph: Georgios 
Kefalas/EPA 
Back in February, jurors heard how the gallery – one of the most prestigious – 
had passed off literally dozens of fakes said to be by abstract expressionist 
masters including Mark Rothko andJackson Pollock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jackson-pollock> to unwitting 
collectors. The case was settled before Knoedler’s directors, Anne Kennedy and 
Michael Hammer, were called to testify but not before the court heard how 
collectors Domenico and Eleanore De Sole had been swindled.

In total, the gallery sold upwards of 70 fakes to collectors who were readily 
– and understandably – willing to trust the provenance of the works offered by 
the gallery. “A case like this tends to wake people up,” Jason Hernandez, the 
lead prosecutor in the criminal investigation, toldArtnet 
<http://www.artnews.com/2011/04/01/the-trouble-with-warhol/>. “It touched such 
a well-known gallery in addition to how much money was involved.”

But the case also hinted at another issue: just how few artists’ estates now 
have functioning authentication boards. In 2011, following a lawsuit brought by 
the British collector Joe Simon-Whelan against theAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol> Art Authentication Board 
over its refusal to authenticate a self-portrait of the artist that 
Simon-Whelan had purchased for less than $200,000 in 1989, the Warhol 
Foundation closed down the service.

'Fake Rothko' trial reduces tragic art to farce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/feb/02/fake-rothko-trial-reduces-tragic-art-to-farce>
But that was not the Warhol Foundation’s only problem with provenance. Dozens 
of Brillo boxes it had authenticated over the years had to be “reclassified” as 
posthumous works.

Other authentication boards soon closed up: Keith Haring, Roy Lichtenstein, 
Jean-Michel Basquiat <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/basquiat>. The 
cost of defending cases (the Simon-Whelan case had cost the Warhol estate $7m) 
and the threat of further lawsuits over issues of liability had made such 
services too risky to maintain, each said.

One of those to benefit is Richard Polsky, an art dealer, author and Warhol 
expert who is now running an authentication service,Richard Polsky Art 
Authentication <http://richardpolskyart.com/>. He told the Guardian recently 
that the Knoedler fraud trial “had no effect because it was an isolated 
incident in terms of the scale of what happened. There were so many red flags. 
It was unbelieveable. That’s why it had no effect. It gave dealers something to 
talk about, and it was a lot of fun, but I don’t know anyone who thought it 
made any sense on any level.”

“That’s not to say that things don’t happen on a daily basis that aren’t 
always kosher, but that was one of the most unusual cases I or anyone has seen.”

It was unusual, he says, because the intent to pass the fakes off was so 
clearly fraudulent. Sixty percent of the art that Polsky is asked to 
authenticate is fake. But they are fakes without fraudulent intent. “There’s a 
huge difference between fraud with the intent to make money and, ‘Oh, I love 
Basquiat. I’m going to make my own’, and somehow that reaches the market.”

The motivation for faking art is sometimes hard to figure out, Polsky says. 

“Someone called me from North Carolina saying they’d found a carving of a cat 
with Warhol written on the bottom of it. Then they said they found a Picasso in 
the same market. I laughed, of course, but the point is, what was the intent? 
Maybe the guy that made the cat was doing it for fun, got bored, and put it in 
a market.”

Part of the reason that the Warhol Foundation was so detested by collectors 
was that it didn’t just refuse to authenticate certain works, it refused to 
authenticate, then stamped “denied” on the back, and refused to offer any 
explanation for their decision.

“The Warhol people had you sign a disclaimer stating that if they found the 
work to be inauthentic they were allowed to stamp the work on the back. 
Obviously, if they did that you’d be bummed out. But if you asked them why, 
they wouldn’t give you a reason. They’d say something like, ‘We don’t want to 
aid counterfeiters.’ So now you’d not only be bummed out but mad!”

His policy, he says, is complete transparency. The service costs $2,500 for a 
painting, $1,500 for a drawing and $1,000 for a print. “You get a letter 
explaining why, or why not, I think it’s authentic or inauthentic.” There’s a 
legal disclaimer, of course, but at least – unlike a multimillion-dollar art 
estate, he’s not worth suing.

For the most part, the business of authentication is determining what makes 
sense. Warhol, clearly, directed his studio to make works for him and he was, 
to some degree, almost cavalier over what he chose to sign. Provenance, as the 
plaintiffs in the Knoedler scandal found out to their cost and embarrassment, 
is key.

“If someone comes to me saying they inherited a Warhol from their mother who’d 
bought it from a gallery in Cleveland in the 60s it’s fairly easy to determine 
that there were no galleries in Cleveland in the 60s that showed Warhol. But 
it’s a great feeling when something checks out.”

But that’s not to say that frauds are not taking place daily. A scandal over 
faked 18th-century French furniture, with two specialists under investigation 
for the alleged making and sale of counterfeit chairs for as much as $1m each, 
some of which were bought by Versailles, is currently making headlines in 
France.

Polsky says that though this art market has been in a boom far longer than 
anyone anticipated, that does not necessarily translate into a greater 
opportunity for fakery. In part, that’s because the manufacturing involved in 
many artists’ work is simply too difficult, and too expensive, to duplicate. 
“You can’t fake a Jeff Koons – it would cost too much to manufacture.” The 
temptation to fake may be greater, but the more valuable art becomes, the more 
scrupulous – usually – people become about buying it, he says. “As the saying 
goes, if it’s too good to be true it probably is. If you’ve got a Damien Hirst 
butterfly painting show me something. A letter from White Cube or Gagosian. Or 
where did the butterflies come from?”

In those types of cases, authentication is relatively straightforward. But 
things can always get complicated. Polsky recalls a case in which Keith 
Haring’s estate refused to approve graffiti the artist had made in the New York 
subway. The work was real but the estate claimed the artist had not intended 
the work to reach the market.

“So it’s all about intent. Did Haring intend these things to be works of art? 
The answer is yes, he did. Whether he intended them to enter the market is not 
my concern. My concern is: are these real, did Haring intend for them to be 
real?”

The opposite is true in the case of Willem de Kooning’s toilet seat. The 
artist was living in the Hamptons when he took some paints to the outhouse and 
painted the toilet seat. Years later, someone tried to sell it. “I would turn 
that down,” says Polsky. “Did De Kooning paint it? Yes. Did he intend it to be 
a work of art? No. That’s how the authentication works – what was the artist’s 
intent?”
 