
Want to stage a realistic re-enactment of a violent 1980s industrial dispute? 
Or perhaps line the interior of an apartment with copper sulphate crystals?

These are the kind of unlikely proposals that the arts commissioning body 
Artangel <http://www.artangel.org.uk/> has realised. Now it is asking artists, 
composers, filmmakers and choreographers to propose fresh ideas for up to five 
fantastical projects,on which it will lavish £1m between them 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/open> .

According to Jeremy Deller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/feb/20/jeremy-deller-joy-in-people>
, who won the 2004 Turner prize for his Artangel project restaging the miners' 
strike confrontation known as the Battle of Orgreave, the ideas submitted 
should "make Artangel sweat a bit. People should suggest something that no one 
else would touch". When he applied to Artangel with his proposal, which 
involved a cast of hundreds: "I didn't think it was really possible to do it. I 
was pretty taken aback when they said they would take it on."

Roger Hiorns was the artist who created Seizure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/sep/04/art>, a London flat that 
was coated in Yves-Klein-blue copper sulphate crystals (right). It earned him a 
place on the 2009 Turner prize shortlist and this May the piece will be 
installed permanently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jul/06/roger-hiorns-seizure-demolition-yorkshire>
 at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park. He said: "With the level of insanity of the 
project it was interesting to have that level of commitment."

Proposals for Artangel <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel> 
Open are invited by 29 April from artists working in all media: from composers 
and theatre-makers to choreographers, visual artists and filmmakers. 
Shortlisted artists will have the opportunity to develop their ideas with 
mentors, who include filmmakers Andrea Arnold and Penny Woolcock and artists 
Rachel Whiteread and Tacita Dean.

There will also be 12 "open platforms" in late January and February for 
artists in cities around the UK, where interested artists will be able to meet 
Artangel co-directors James Lingwood and Michael Morris.

Lingwood said: "We hope to find younger artists who will put forward amazing 
proposals. We feel that we want to get ideas that are forming in the darkness 
into our field of vision."

Deller's advice? "Be clear and concise about your idea – don't give two sides 
on the theory behind it. Artangel wants its own capabilities to be stretched. 
Give them something entirely new."
 