
You forget how big Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> is. Looking up in the 
Turbine Hall yesterday I was suddenly overcome by its scale, its excess. Not 
many works of art can stand out against such vastness.

Well, the museum has laid its hands on just such a work. Anselm Kiefer's 2006 
installationPalm Sunday 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/ViewWork?workid=98196&roomid=5640> is part of a 
superb collection of contemporary art acquired for the nation from dealer 
Anthony d'Offay, and is now going on show here as a series of"Artist Rooms" 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/pressoffice/pressreleases/2009/17730.htm>. 

But before I praise it, let's take a look at Tate Modern's new sequence of 
free collection displays calledEnergy and Process 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/CollectionDisplays?venueid=2>, of which it is a 
part. The previous exhibits in these rooms on Level 5 revolved around 1960s 
minimalism. Now the Donald Judds are out of there and the central hall is 
occupied by post-minimalist and anti-form artists of the late 60s and early 
70s. There are compelling works such as a molten heap bythe sculptor Lynda 
Benglis <http://www.brooklynmuseum.org/eascfa/feminist art 
base/archive/images/576.1721.jpg>, which looks like runny ice cream but is in 
fact lead, epitomising the moment when the grids and boxes of minimal art made 
way for sloppiness and unpredictability.

This was also when Europeans made a comeback in modern art. From the 1940s to 
60s the avant garde was dominated by the US. Yet, as these displays 
demonstrate, the rise of Arte Povera in the 60s put Europe on the map again. 
It's funny: the Americans at the heart of this show – Benglis et al – are icons 
of the art history books, darlings oftheory 
<http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?ttype=2&tid=4043> – but the 
Europeans knock them sideways. Most people will walk away thinking not about 
Benglis but aboutGiuseppe Penone 
<http:////213.121.208.204/servlet/ViewWork?cgroupid=999999961&workid=17394&searchid=9154&tabview=image>
 and the other Arte Povera sculptors in these rooms. Above all, they'll think 
aboutJannis Kounellis 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/collections/artist-rooms/jannis-kounellis.shtm>. There 
is a wondrous room dedicated to him, an enchanting gallery where dry-stone 
walling, sacks of grain and rice, and a painting that includes part of the 
score of St John Passion by JS Bach bring a sense of real life, organic and 
ancient, into the museum. Like the Kiefer installation, this is another of the 
Artist Rooms acquired from the collection of Anthony d'Offay.

The attraction of the Arte Povera artists lies in their passion for the 
natural and the archaic. Penone's trees contrast with American works that reek 
of the big city. Suddenly, the antiquity of Europe hits you, as artists from 
the old continent reach back to peasant worlds. Kounellis places oxidised, 
ancient-looking bells on an old table. He takes stones of the sort that might 
be found in a farmhouse wall in Greece and uses them to block a gallery doorway.

But nowhere is art's return to history and landscape more spectacular than in 
the work ofAnselm Kiefer <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anselm_Kiefer>. There 
are many good artists in the Arte Povera displays, but Kiefer looks like the 
greatest, if also the darkest. His Palm Sunday is staggering. The size of this 
graphic work is in keeping with his colossal paintings, but the matted, tragic 
textures, the desert poetics of the palm pictures, have nothing authoritarian 
about them. Palm Sunday is a surreal transfiguration of natural history. It 
makes you wonder what Tate Modern might look like as a science museum. It's 
simply a great work and Kiefer is the peer ofCy Twombly 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cy_Twombly>. 

See this. And see the best collection display ever staged by Tate Modern.
 