
A small and poignant bronze sculpture of a young man called Craig – who became 
homeless after serving in Afghanistan – will greet visitors to a new exhibition 
to raise awareness and money for the charityCrisis <http://www.crisis.org.uk/>.

The work by Gillian Wearing goes on display at Somerset House 
<http://www.somersethouse.org.uk/visual-arts/crisis> in London on 14 March 
along with new pieces by artists includingAntony Gormley 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/jan/31/antony-gormley-dont-criminalise-squatting>
, Tracey Emin, Sir Anthony Caro and Jonathan Yeo. All the works will be sold on 
3 May, with the money going to the charity for single homeless people, Crisis.

Wearing said she was inspired by the real story of Craig O'Keefe who became 
homeless after returning from duty in Afghanistan. Eventually, with the help of 
Veteran's Aid, he managed to get work and a flat and is now a volunteer tutor 
for Crisis.

"Crisis were great because they really wanted artists to get involved directly 
with their charity," said Wearing. She was part of a workshop meeting people 
who work for and used its services. "It wasn't a passive involvement which I 
really thought was important."

Emin offered four works: two self-portraits and two neon signs saying Trust Me 
and Trust Yourself. She said they were words we often say to others and to 
ourselves. "Sometimes such statements need to be reaffirmed. The use of neon 
makes it all the more positive."

The two self-portraits, Deep Blue III and Deep Blue V, are part of a series 
Emin created for her forthcoming show at Turner Contemporary in Margate, in 
which she explores the idea "of the body becoming older, self-loathing and the 
notion of self-preservation".

Emin said she did not do anything different because the show was for Crisis. 
"I'm quite impressed at what a big show it is and how serious it is and not 
just a charity event."

Gormley has made a cast iron sculpture of a person we assume to be homeless. 
"The most challenging social sculpture of our times is made by the quiet 
performances of the homeless within the shelter provided by the doorways of the 
shops of our inner cities."

He said he was trying to evoke a fallen body which is, nevertheless, not at 
rest. "This exhibition allows one to think about those bodies that have no 
place. I believe that sculpture can powerfully evoke the nameless, the 
voiceless and the placeless."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRWf25wZGLVo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRWf25wZGLVo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRWf25wZGLVo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The Crisis Commission show raises money and awareness at a crucial time, says 
the charity. After years of declining trends, 2010 represented a turning point 
when all forms of homelessness began to rise. In 2010/11, 3,975 people slept 
rough in London, an 8% rise on the previous year.

The show runs until 22 April and will also feature work by homeless and 
vulnerable people who have been helped by Crisis.

The charity's chief executive Leslie Morphy said: "We are thrilled that so 
many leading contemporary artists are participating in the Crisis Commission. 
This prestigious event will raise much needed funds for our work and bring a 
new focus to the worrying current rise in homelessness in society."

Other works in the show include Yinka Shonibare's Homeless Man, 2012, which 
shows a vibrantly dressed Victorian man weighed down by 11 suitcases. The 
artist said: "The idea of the work is to suggest that any privileged person can 
become vulnerable at any time due to circumstances outside of their own 
personal control, such as illness, death of a relative, war or unfortunate 
economic circumstances."

The artist Bob and Roberta Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bob-and-roberta-smith> (also known as 
Patrick Brill) has made a piece called Kite because of its association with 
isolation and the elements. "My kite has 'help' written on it. It is a cry for 
help by the person flying it."

Brill said he was aware of homelessness rising and taught in an art school 
where some of his students are homeless. "Homelessness is about isolation. 
Homes are not just roofs and walls – they are networks – about nurture and 
care."

The show has been curated by Laurence Sillars, chief curator at the Baltic in 
Gateshead <http://www.balticmill.com/> and the cost of creating the works has 
been met by GlaxoSmithKline. All of them will be auctioned at Christie's on 3 
May.
 