
Arundhati Roy does what any good polemicist should do. She annoys people and 
forces them to take sides;she highlights an issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/26/arundhati-roy-kashmir-india> and 
gets people talking. Too bad that what she gets them talking about has nothing 
to do with the topic at hand. Inevitably, the debates she stirs tend not to 
centre around dams, or Maoists, or Kashmir, or even freedom of speech, but 
around Arundhati Roy.

Speaking at a conference on Sunday, Roy said, "Kashmir has never been an 
integral part of India. It is a historical fact. 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/article847323.ece>" The rightwing 
opposition BJP party, already in a mood over a similar conference last 
Thursday, decided enough was enough – this was their issue of the week, never 
mind thatshe has expressed similar sentiments before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/aug/22/kashmir.india>.

The government of India, with its usual lack of backbone, explored the 
possibility of arresting Roy for the laughably archaic crime of sedition. On 
Monday, theHindustan Times 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/Geelani-Arundhati-may-be-booked-under-sedition-charge/Article1-617748.aspx>
 reported she "may be booked for sedition". On Tuesday,the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/26/arundhati-roy-kashmir-india> 
decided she "faces arrest over Kashmir remark". By Wednesday, theLos Angeles 
Times 
<http://latimesblogs.latimes.com/jacketcopy/2010/10/arundhati-roys-dangerous-kashmiri-cause.html>
 was convinced that "the Indian government took steps to authorise the arrest". 
Come Thursday, andeditorials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/oct/28/arundhati-roy-india-kashmir-bjp>
 andblogs 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/mehdi-hasan/2010/10/india-kashmir-justice-roy-live>
 appeared praising Roy. Somewhere amid the ruckus, Kashmir was forgotten.

There are many things that are wrong with India. Its foreign policy is 
wishy-washy <http://www.atimes.com/atimes/South_Asia/LG02Df01.html>, its manner 
of handling internal security threats is dubious, the way India's powerless are 
treated by the state is despicable, and Kashmir – that great mix of the three – 
is an all-round disaster. All of these are worthy of essays, of debate, of 
balanced analysis and – as important – of partisan rants. There are plenty of 
rabid righties that need to be balanced by rabid lefties.

In an India obsessed with shiny new shopping malls and expressways and the 
launch of the latest international luxury brand, in rapidly morphing cities 
where slum-dwellers are shunted out to the suburbs and even the raincoats on a 
policeman's back are sponsored, there is a desperate need for polemicists to 
remind the smug middle class about the 800 million-odd who don't get to partake 
in what the tourism department calls Incredible India. Palagummi Sainath, the 
author ofEverybody Loves a Good Drought 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Everybody-Loves-Good-Drought-Districts/dp/074726032X>, 
did it with elegance. Arundhati Roy does it with infinite righteousness.

Roy wrote a paean earlier this year to the cause of the Maoists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2010/mar/27/arundhati-roy-maoists-india>
 – a group dedicated to the violent overthrow of the state and responsible for 
beheading policemen, murdering civilians andkilling dozens of soldiers 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/8604256.stm> – while skewering the 
state for waging war on the poor. In her most recent essay before the Kashmir 
kerfuffle, Roy told readers of one of India's best-selling news weeklies that 
the government is a farce, the media is a shambles, the military is not to be 
trusted, the mainstream communist parties are a joke, and India's democracy is 
only nominal.

Who would want to live in Arundhati Roy's India? Who would even want to read 
about Arundhati Roy's India? The government of India has many faults, but even 
Roy has to admit that living in this country isn't entirely intolerable. 
Confronted with the relentlessly bleak picture she paints, one in which the 
only good guys are murderers and mercenaries, who can blame middleIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> for retreating into their iPods and 
tabloid newspapers?

Roy has important things to say, but her tone and bluster ensure the only 
people listening are those who already agree with her. She is preaching to the 
converted. To the left-leaning publications of the west, she is an articulate, 
intelligent voice explaining the problems with 21st-century India. For the 
university lefties in India, she confirms their worst fears of a nation falling 
apart. But to any intelligent readers who may be sitting on the fence or for 
anyone from middle-class India taking their first tentative steps towards 
greater political involvement, her polemic serves to terrify and alienate.

As Salil Tripathi writes over at the Index on Censorship 
<http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2010/10/india-arundhati-roy-kashmir-pakistan-sedition/>
 blog, "Initially her dissent was seen as admirable, then as a novelty, and now 
her view is largely marginalised." This week's shenanigans prove that debate 
about Arundhati Roy is, as ever, thriving. But her writing is rapidly becoming 
irrelevant in Indian public discourse.
 