
The news that the prize-winning Indian author Arundhati Roy may be arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/26/arundhati-roy-kashmir-india> for 
her remarks aboutKashmir <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kashmir> is not 
surprising. It is a sign of growing Indian intolerance towards the issue. 
During the current phase of the Kashmiri intifada, the only Indian response to 
Kashmiri demands for justice and self-determination has been the use of 
overwhelming military force. More than 112 civilians – mostly youths – have 
been killed and several thousand injured, mainly by the Indian military and 
paramilitary.

In the absence of strong international criticism, the Indian state has been 
emboldened to crush any dissent or demands of justice ferociously. Intimidating 
Kashmiri civil society has always been part of the standard Indian response, 
but it has grown exponentially over the last few months. In early July, the 
police arrestedMian Qayoom 
<http://www.kashmirprocess.org/reports/20100715_StateOfException.html>, 
president of the Kashmir Bar Association (the main lawyers' body), for 
protesting against human rights violations. He was arrested under the draconian 
Public Safety Act, which authorises incarceration for up to two years if the 
authorities feel that the detainee may disturb peace and order or threaten the 
security of the state.

Several other human rights activists, such as Ghulam Nabi Shaheen and 
political workers remain behind bars, along with hundreds of Kashmiri youths 
who have been detained for offences such as throwing stones at gun-toting 
Indian armed forces.

Frustrated by having to treat the mounting casualties amid curfew restrictions 
and with dwindling medical supplies, a group of doctors at the government 
medical college in Srinagar staged a peaceful sit-in – only to beaccused by the 
police 
<http://www.sananews.net/english/2010/07/28/cases-against-doctors-in-held-valley-lodged/>
 of various "offences" including rioting and "disobedience to order duly 
promulgated by public servant". The police also accused them of inciting people 
and using "anti-national slogans". The largest local newspaper, Greater Kashmir,
lamented 
<http://greaterkashmir.com/news/2010/Jul/28/barking-the-wrong-tree-13.asp> that 
creating an atmosphere of intimidation in this way "speaks of the mindset that 
always contributed to the worsening of the situation". It continued: "Rather 
than establishing a connect with its people and knowing from them what has gone 
wrong and how can it be corrected, government, by initiating such actions 
against people, is only pushing the situation towards worse."

From the very beginning of the current unrest, the government adopted the 
policy of restricting journalists reporting on demonstrations and brutal 
government responses. The Indian army and paramilitary forces beat several 
journalists, refused to respect their curfew passes and even forced closure of 
leading newspapers as their offices remained locked and the journalists were 
denied access. In one such incident in July this year, 12 photojournalists 
working for local, national and international publicationssuffered serious 
injuries 
<http://www.nationalturk.com/en/12-photojournalists-injured-in-indian-kashmir-23673763>
 from security forces trying to stop them recording the demonstrations. One of 
the BBC's Urdu service journalists, Riaz Masroor, wasstopped and beaten 
<http://www.ifex.org/india/kashmir/2010/07/13/masroor_assaulted/> by police as 
he went to collect his curfew pass on 9 July. According the BBC, hesuffered a 
fractured arm <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10570903>.

In September, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) renewed its call 
<http://cpj.org/2010/09/india-restricts-reporters-in-jammu-kashmir.php> to 
allow Kashmiri journalists to cover the unrest. This is how Anuradha Bhasin, 
the executive editor of the Kashmir Times, described the situation to me in an 
email in September: "The level of intimidation is so high that many reporters 
have been forcibly doing table [desk-based] stories, mainly operating from the 
homes. And as an editor, sometimes, even I find that a safer arrangement, given 
the vulnerability of the reporters in simply stepping out of their homes".

The current phase of intifada has deeply exposed Indian vulnerability in 
Kashmir. In absence of any Pakistani support to the new generation of 
Kashmiris, Indian claims to blame Pakistan, Islamic terrorism andLashkar-e-Taiba
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lashkar-e-Taiba> have lost credibility even 
among its own population.

This has provoked several newspaper reports and opinion articles 
<http://www.hindu.com/op/2010/10/10/stories/2010101050011600.htm> by Indian 
journalists and commentators that not only question India's brutal tactics but 
also have shown sympathy to Kashmiri demands. It has created what Roy rightly 
describes as "panic about many voices", and the threat of charging her with 
sedition, she says, "is meant to frighten the civil rights groups and young 
journalists into keeping quiet".

As the "ISI or Laskhar-e-Taiba" theory of the protests becomes increasingly 
untenable, Kashmiri demands are finding greater resonance within Indian civil 
society. The threat to Roy may be a crude attempt to prevent such criticism 
from gathering momentum at a time when Barack Obama is planning a visit to 
India next month. India is determined to keep Kashmir out of the picture and, 
to achieve this, intimidation and terror against Kashmiris has alreadyentered 
another phase 
<http://www.greaterkashmir.com/news/2010/Oct/27/day-138-clashes-in-north-south-42.asp>
.
 