
Like India and Walt Whitman, Arundhati Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> contains multitudes. She is, 
however, far from large. Small, delicately boned, a beguiling mixture of 
piercing dark eyes and bright easy smile, she is a warm presence. She turns 53 
tomorrow and the grey tint to her curls lends depth to a still strikingly 
youthful face. Looking at her, it’s not hard to detect the author of the richly 
empatheticThe God of Small Things 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/god-of-small-things.html>, her debut, 
Booker-prize winning novel about family life in Kerala, that John Updike 
described as a “massive interlocking structure of fine, intensely felt details”.

That was 17 years ago and photos from that period show a captivating figure, 
at once shy and fiercely proud, wary and utterly self-possessed. The book was a 
huge international hit and the publishing world readied itself to cash in on a 
phenomenal new talent, galvanised by the fact that so photogenic an author 
would be a dream to market.

But the follow-up novel didn’t arrive. Instead Roy directed her considerable 
energies towards political activism, most especially inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> where, despite her success, she has 
remained. It was a path that has led her to express solidarity with groups – 
such as Kashmiri separatists and Maoist guerrillas – that are seen by many 
Indians, with some reason, as terrorists. As a result Roy has become a 
controversial figure, an outspoken heroine in certain radical quarters, but 
loathed by large sections of Indian society, not least Hindu nationalists.

She has also become a prolific essayist and polemicist. She currently has two 
extended, book-length essays out. One, entitledThe Doctor and the Saint, is an 
examination of caste, a subject she explored inThe God of Small Things, and it 
forms the long introduction to a new edition of BR Ambedkar’s classic workThe 
Annihilation of Caste. Roy’s essay traces the difficult relationship between 
Ambedkar and Mahatma Gandhi. She portrays the neglected Ambedkar – born an 
“untouchable” – as the true hero of India’s poor, while Gandhi is 
controversially depicted as a self-dramatising defender of the status quo.

The other essay is called Capitalism: A Ghost Story 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Capitalism-Arundhati-Roy/dp/1608463850>. It’s written 
in a very different style fromThe Doctor and the Saint, which, for all its 
contentious opinions, is a carefully constructed argument. By contrastCapitalism
 reads like an extended rant, strident, intemperate, conspiratorial, and 
relentlessly one-eyed in its outlook. The shrill prose is hard to reconcile 
with the softly spoken middle-aged woman sitting opposite me in the Soho 
offices of her publishers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416597480908%2Fa33b55af-80df-4eee-8d2c-d90a14b246c2-1399x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416597480908%2Fa33b55af-80df-4eee-8d2c-d90a14b246c2-1399x2040.jpeg>
 New Delhi, March 2006: Roy attends a protest at the government’s lack of 
support for hundreds of women whose farmer husbands committed suicide because 
of failed crops. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Her basic argument is that the reforms that liberated India’s economy in the 
early 1990s and thrust it into the global marketplace may have created a 
vibrant new middle class, but have been devastating for the country’s poor. She 
writes of the “800 million who have been impoverished and dispossessed to make 
way for us [the 300 million members of the middle class]”.

The poor in India are of course not a recent creation. It’s been said that 
India’s historic problem was the redistribution of poverty, whereas now the 
issue is the redistribution of wealth. As Roy makes clear, there are vast and 
intolerable inequalities in today’s India. But the implication of her words is 
that to make 300 million Indians richer, 800 million Indians have become poorer 
in real, rather than relative, terms. As she doesn’t supply any supporting 
evidence for this claim in the book, I ask her if that’s what she means.

“What happens,” she says, “is that statistically people keep playing games 
with the poverty line. It’s not that people get richer or poorer but they keep 
moving the line up and down redefining what poorer means.”

She then goes on to say that you only have to visit the suffering villages of 
India to see the terrible plight of the poor, in particular the mass suicides 
of farmers whose land has been destroyed by mineral exploitation and 
industrialisation. This may be true, but has the rapid growth in India’s middle 
class caused the poor to become poorer?

She continues talking about access to water, the drying up of land etc, until 
I push her once again on what seems to me a crucial matter of fact. “Well, I 
think so,” she says finally. “For example, just things like food grain intake 
has actually reduced.”

‘I’ve never understood the logic that if you’re privileged you argue for 
privilege’

This is true, though there are various arguments put forward to explain the 
drop, including the increase in the consumption of other foods. But there is 
also compelling evidence to suggest that, while India has become a much 
wealthier country over the last couple of decades, a hefty percentage of its 
population continues to experience low employment, malnutrition and other major 
social deprivations. It’s just that Roy never really gets to grip with the 
evidence.

She prefers a scattergun approach in which she attacks everything from 
philanthropy and the “hegemony of the United States” to NGOs funded by 
Coca-Cola. You could easily get the idea, for example, that arms dealing was a 
function of capitalism – yet there is no mention of Russia (the biggest arms 
exporter) or China (the third biggest). Similarly she quotes Pablo Neruda’s 
poem attacking the Standard Oil Company but makes no mention that he was an 
unabashed cheerleader for Stalinism when he wrote it. When I ask her about the 
omission she says she’s written about Stalinism in another essay and doesn’t 
want to keep repeating herself.

It’s the sort of screed that will bring head-nodding agreement from her core 
anti-capitalist audience, but it will do little, or at least not enough, to 
persuade those who genuinely want to know whether or not the new India, for all 
its many flaws, is an improvement on the old.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416513405178%2F96e74ea5-a6bc-42c0-9591-87c64a73caf7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416513405178%2F96e74ea5-a6bc-42c0-9591-87c64a73caf7-1020x612.jpeg>
 Roy is kissed by supporters in 2002 after being released from Tihar Jail in 
New Delhi. She had been jailed during a campaign against a new dam. Photograph: 
MANISH SWARUP/AP 
She’s used to this sort of criticism, and her answer is that it’s not a 
subject that she can be dispassionate about. Dry, academic analysis doesn’t 
alter the conditions of the poor, so someone needs to raise the temperature, 
invoke some much-needed shame and outrage.

But her detractors argue that Roy’s posturings do nothing to help the poor 
either. Her fellow novelist and essayist Aatish Taseer wrote in 2011 in the 
online cultural magazine the Nervous Breakdown: “I don’t think she’s a friend 
of the poor at all. She would like to doom them to a permanent state of 
picturesque poverty… The people who get her into the streets [ie in protest] 
are the new middle classes. This class, still among the most fragile in India, 
people who have newly emerged from the most dire conditions, are despicable to 
her. She mocks their clothes; their trouble with English; she hates their 
ambitions.”

Indeed Roy writes of the “aggressive, acquisitive ambition” of the middle 
class inCapitalism. Is Taseer on to something?

“Well look,” she replies, unflustered, “obviously mine is a very definite 
point of view and there are many people who disagree with me vehemently. The 
only thing I will say is that I’m not a lone operator. Most of what I’ve 
written is to do with being in solidarity with many resistance movements. I’m 
not at the front of it. I’m not preaching to the poor what they should be 
thinking. I’m learning from their arguments.”

Naturally Roy’s wealth exposes her to accusations of hypocrisy. She lives 
alone in the exclusive Jor Bagh district of New Delhi in a large apartment. 
Aren’t the acquisitively ambitious simply seeking to gain the material comforts 
she has in abundance?

“I don’t come from a privileged background, I just happened to write a book 
that sold a lot. My mother was literally dying. She had nothing. She left her 
drunk husband. She started a school. I left home at 16, I lived on the streets. 
I had nothing. Then I wrote a book. I lived for a long time, yes, with a man 
who had privileged parents but then that had nothing to do with me.”

This seems like a slightly romantic summary of her early life. She was born 
SuzannaArundhati Roy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> in 
north-east India to a Syrian Christian, Mary, who is still alive. Her father, a 
Bengali Hindu, was an alcoholic who managed a tea plantation. The marriage 
ended when Roy was two years old. Her mother took her and her older brother to 
Tamil Nadu and then to Kerala, where her mother, who suffered from asthma, set 
up an independent school.

'The thing is no one is pure. I'm certainly not a saint who wears a loincloth, 
eats goat’s cheese and doesn’t have sex'

Roy was sent to boarding school where she gained a reputation as an 
indefatigable debater. From there she went to secretarial college, which she 
quit at 16, moving to Delhi to study at the architectural school. She lived 
with her boyfriend at the time in a slum, then after a spell in Goa, worked for 
the National Institute of Urban Affairs, where she met her husband, Pradip 
Krishen, a widowed former history professor and Oxford graduate from a wealthy 
background.

The couple made several documentaries and films together, in the first of 
which Roy played the female lead. But eventually she became dispirited with the 
elitist film world and spent more time writing, leading eventually to the 
publication ofThe God of Small Things in 1997. It was a literary sensation that 
went on to sell more than 6m copies worldwide.

In a vital sense, as Roy says, her background and material circumstances, 
whatever they are, should not be the means to assess her ideas. “I’ve never 
understood the logic that if you’re privileged you should take the point of 
view of the privileged and argue for more privilege.”

Yet in Capitalism she writes of being compromised by connections with the 
corrupting worlds of corporations: “But which of us sinners was going to cast 
off the first stone? Not me, who lives off royalties from corporate publishing 
houses.”

What does that mean? She breaks out into a big smile. “Yeah, I’ve also thought 
about that. I was just thinking, living off royalties from corporate publishing 
houses? In fact those corporate publishing houses are making money off me, and 
giving me 5%!”

She laughs at herself and says that perhaps she got that wrong. “The thing is 
no one is pure. I am certainly not a pure saint who lives in a loincloth and 
eats goat’s cheese and doesn’t have sex and says ‘I’m poor’”, she says in an 
obvious dig at Gandhi. “It’s crap.”

Moreover, she is no armchair revolutionary, cooped up in the safe confines of 
her apartment. She does go to dangerous places and she does make powerful 
enemies: Hindu nationalists, dam builders, mineral extractors, large 
corporations and the Indian military. And despite a great many threats, she is 
not easily intimidated.

But danger runs both ways. The picture Roy paints of India is of a vast 
military occupation, a colonial suppression enacted by the Indian state on its 
own people. She speaks of hundreds of thousands of troops stationed in 
secessionist Kashmir and the vicious paramilitary operations in central India 
against the Maoist or “Naxalite” guerrillas.

In Walking with the Comrades, her book about joining up with the Maoists, she 
wrote about a Congress politician called Mahendra Karma, whom she said was 
responsible for orchestrating a campaign of murder, rapes and displacement in 
the Bastar region. In May 2013 Maoist guerrillas killed Karma, stabbing him 78 
times, and 24 other people, including 11 other Congress members, in a truly 
gruesome attack on a convoy. When asked to comment immediately after the 
assault, Roy refused to speak.

Incidents such as these have prompted the charge that she is a dilettante, a 
literary tourist who can beat a retreat whenever it suits her. If that’s true 
then it’s also a fact that India’s democracy is riven by nepotism and 
corruption and violence and it suits many who are getting rich to look the 
other way. The statements Roy makes are often provocative, naive and arguably 
counterproductive, but the presiding nationalistic silence is perhaps more 
worthy of condemnation.

And the issue on which India has learned to be most tight-lipped is that of 
caste. It’s a subject on which Roy has always been refreshingly vocal, quick to 
remind those who might wish to forget of the immovable social structure that 
underpins Indian society. InThe Doctor and the Saint she returns to the theme 
but this time she sets it against two different visions of reform: Gandhi’s and 
Ambedkar’s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416513498495%2Ff1d94292-43dc-4fda-b140-d2231634f71d-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416513498495%2Ff1d94292-43dc-4fda-b140-d2231634f71d-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Roy portrays Gandhi as ‘a backward-looking egomaniac’. Photograph: REX 
Gandhi wanted to abolish the designation of “Untouchables”, the lowest caste 
that is today referred to as Dalit. But Ambedkar wanted to get rid of the caste 
system in its entirety. Although she had always been suspicious of the Gandhi 
cult, she was largely ignorant of the dispute between Ambedkar and Gandhi 
before a publisher asked her to write an introduction toThe Annihilation of 
Caste.

“I thought I’d just write three pages of politeness and give it to him,” she 
says. “Then I started to read and I was shocked by what I was reading and it 
turned into a huge thing.”

Gandhi emerges as a backward-looking egomaniac who had to be dragged into 
modernity by the more ambitious and radical Ambedkar. The respected historian 
Ramachandra Guha, who is in the middle of a two-part biography of Gandhi, has 
taken Roy to task for “selectively quoting Gandhi out of context [so] that she 
can paint him as a slow-moving reactionary”.

Guha, whose earlier work looked at forestry in northern India, has clashed 
with Roy before over her environmental advocacy, which he described as 
“self-indulgent” and “self-contradictory”. “Ms Roy’s tendency to exaggerate and 
simplify, her Manichean view of the world, and her shrill, hectoring tone, have 
given a bad name to environmental analysis,” he wrote back in 2000.

She dismissed his criticism back then as “smug”. She says that she’s quoted 
Gandhi from 1893 to 1948, “across his adult life. Of course every quote has to 
be selective. I can’t quote the whole nine volumes.” She says that “it’s 
dishonest to suggest that Gandhi was an incrementalist or a man of his times”. 
And in any case, she adds, Guha is a Brahmin, the caste that is at the top of 
the social hierarchy – if you like, the ruling class.

It has been argued by some that it’s unfettered capitalism that has done most 
to undermine caste in India, but Roy notes that only a tiny percentage of 
marriages are cross-caste. She writes that the only way caste can be 
annihilated is if “those who call themselves revolutionary develop a radical 
critique of Brahminism”. I quote her a statement from a well-known Indian 
writer and ask her to guess who it is. The author speaks of his Brahmin 
identity as being crucial in giving him a sense of “dignity” and through it the 
ambition not to settle for “some badly paid government job”.

She puts her hands over her face and says “Pankaj?”

Pankaj Mishra, who is now based in London, has built a formidable reputation 
as radical critic of imperialism, ever vigilant to the incidence of western 
racism both on a geopolitical and personal level. He was also the first 
publisher to championThe God of Small Things, when he worked for HarperCollins 
in India, and thus a longstanding friend of Roy’s. Is he on the revolutionary 
side of the argument?

“On this one, I don’t think so,” she says. “There are a lot of critiques about 
many Brahmins who at some point do want to mention that they are Brahmins. The 
issue is a very vexed one. Look at all the major politburo members, including 
the Maoists, they are usually Brahmins.”

You sense that one of the reasons Arundhati was drawn to reappraise Gandhi is 
the consensus he enjoys as an embodiment of decency and tolerance. She has 
recently caused a stir for downplaying another widely admired figure,Malala 
Yousafzai <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malala-yousafzai>. After she gave 
a TV interview in which she suggested Malala was a pawn in game of global 
politics, the Pakistan writer Pervez Hoodbhoy wrote an article asking why it 
was that Malala bothered many on the left, citing Roy as an example.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416513605838%2Ff8789af9-9a88-4c88-8b32-6ed0b955c442-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arundhati%20Roy%3A%20goddess%20of%20big%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F23%2Farundhati-roy-interview-goddess-of-big-ideas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416513605838%2Ff8789af9-9a88-4c88-8b32-6ed0b955c442-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Even Malala Yousafzai, the Nobel peace prize winner, has been the subject of 
criticism from Roy. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
“I have no doubt she did something wonderful,” she says. “But that was not the 
point I was trying to make.” She says she wanted to draw attention to the fact 
that Dalit women are similarly mistreated in India but are never heard about. 
But that doesn’t make Malala a puppet. She stood up against male oppression. 
Isn’t that an unambiguously good thing?

“I don’t think you can isolate Malala and say ‘Oh this is wonderful.’” Why 
not? “I don’t think this world of prizes and awards is an innocent world. It is 
loaded and it’s precious to suggest it’s not.” She thinks Malala’s Nobel peace 
prize was an extension of the politically corrupt process that awarded one to 
Obama, whom she characterises as a warmonger, adding, “I’m not trying to take 
anything away from Malala.”

But of course she is.

I admire her willingness to confront sacred cows, but can’t help thinking that 
she sees dark conspiracies where sometimes nobler intentions lie. And in her 
rush to embrace the oppressed, she can blur the lines between victim and 
perpetrator.

Enough of the politics. What about fiction? There have been rumours going back 
to 2007 that she is writing a novel.

“I have been working on it for quite a few years,” she acknowledges. “If those 
characters are still hanging around in my house, swinging their legs and 
smoking their cigarette butts, they’re not going to go away, so there must be 
something there.”

Yet she says she put the novel aside to write The Doctor and the Saint. 
Writing non-fiction is for her a tense and urgent business. She has to get it 
out. “It’s like the body doesn’t have room for its organs,” she says, and 
reading her non-fiction one can see what she means.

She is a different person altogether when writing fiction, which she says 
she’s able to relax into. “I don’t mean because it’s easy to write but I trust 
its rhythms and I don’t have to get it out there. There’s no urgency. It’s like 
cooking, it takes its time. I rather like the idea of just living inside it and 
not coming out of it.”

That’s an idea that will torment all those millions who have been waiting so 
many years for her second novel. It may also trouble those critics of her 
polemical work who hope that she’ll return to fiction at the earliest 
opportunity. But if there is one thing that is certain about the multifaceted 
Roy, she will continue to do what she wants to do when she wants to do it.

Capitalism: A Ghost Story is published by Verso (£9.99). To buy it for £7.99 
click here <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/capitalism.html> The Annihilation 
of Caste is published by Verso (£16.99).To buy it for £13.59 click here 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/annihilation-of-caste.html> 



 