
Novelist Arundhati Roy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> has 
become the latest literary figure to return a top Indian national award in 
protest against the growing violence and “horrific murders” by rightwing groups 
in India.

Roy and two dozen Bollywood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bollywood> 
figures have added their voices to those of artists, scientists and historians 
in expressing alarm at a series of violent incidents and attacks on 
intellectuals, following the landslide election victory of the Hindu 
nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) in India last year.

The writer, famous for her Booker prize-winning novel, The God of Small Things,
said 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/why-i-am-returning-my-award/> 
she was returning her 1989 National Award for Best Screenplay in protest 
against the growing culture of fear and censorship fostered by the government, 
who encouraged the “lynching, shooting, burning and mass murder of fellow human 
beings”.

In a sharply worded editorial in the Indian Express 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/why-i-am-returning-my-award/>
, Roy wrote that millions of people from minorities – including Muslims, 
Christians and members of low-caste or tribal communities – were “being forced 
to live in terror, unsure of when and from where the assault will come”.

Over the past two months, more than 40 novelists, essayists, playwrights and 
poets have now given back awards from the country’s most prestigious literary 
institution, the Sahitya Akademi. In particular, they have criticised the 
institution for not condemning the killings of secular activists.

The two incidents that have most angered India’s intellectuals and creatives 
were the murder of Malleshappa Kalburgi, an award-winning scholar whose 
frequent criticism of what he saw as superstition and false beliefs had angered 
Hindu extremists, andthe lynching of a Muslim labourer in September, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/03/inside-bishari-indian-village-where-mob-killed-man-for-eating-beef>
 who was believed to have eaten beef. Among India’s majority Hindu population, 
cows are considered to be sacred.

The film-maker Sanjay Kak, who was among 24 industry figures and film-makers 
returning National Film Awards in Mumbai on Thursday, said those protesting had 
“deployed their visibility – and credibility – to articulate the growing 
anxiety of a vast number of Indians, those who may remain less visible but are 
no less perturbed at what is going on around them”.

Bollywood star Shah Rukh Khan has also spoken out against “extreme 
intolerance” inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.

Why the 'Modi Toadies' are after Salman Rushdie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/shortcuts/2015/oct/14/narendra-modi-toadies-salman-rushdie-india>
Roy said she was “so ashamed of what is going on in this country”, and was 
pleased to return her 1989 screenplay award and “be a part of the political 
movement”.


“I believe what artists and intellectuals are doing right now is 
unprecedented, and does not have a historical parallel. It is politics by other 
means,” said Roy, who in recent years has become a civil rights activist.

Many of those protesting have also criticised the prime minister, Narendra Modi
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi>, and the BJP for not 
speaking out against religious attacks, saying their silence has encouraged 
Hindu hardliners to justify the attacks and assert Hindu superiority.

Salman Rushdie was also among the authors who recently weighed into the 
debate, telling a local television network: “What has crept into Indian life 
now is a degree of thuggish violence which is new. And it seems to be given 
permission by the silence of official bodies, the silence of the Sahitya 
Akademi … by the silence of the prime minister’s office.”

Communal violence and prejudice are nothing new for India. Hindu-Muslim 
violence claimed an estimated 1 million lives in the runup to partition in 
1947. Since then, deadly riots and clashes have erupted at intervals, mostly 
between Hindus and Muslims, with upsurges of sectarian tension in recent years 
often coinciding with elections.

Some people voiced concern over Modi’s meteoric rise and landslide election 
victory last year, warning that his support was grounded in the BJP’s Hindu 
majority and noting that he had risen to prominence through the militant Hindu 
organisation Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, which translates as the National 
Volunteers Association.

Modi insisted during his election campaign that he would be prime minister for 
all of India and guaranteed protection for minorities. He has said little on 
the subject since taking office.

His administration has dismissed the growing protest as a political ploy to 
tear down the governing party.

“The entire purpose of these protests is to derail the development agenda of 
the Narendra Modi government,” the urban development minister, Venkaiah Naidu, 
said on Thursday. “The country is being subjected to damage and unnecessarily 
wrong information is being given about political intolerance.”

On Thursday, a separate group of writers, academics and artists came out in 
support of that stance and accused their protesting colleagues of political 
vengeance after Modi’s BJP election victory last year.

“A section of the nation’s intelligentsia has expressed outrage at a perceived 
mounting intolerance in society,” said a statement signed by 36 Modi 
supporters, including the head of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations. 
“Failure in the elections is now sought to be avenged by other means.”
 