
This has been one of the most vivid autumns I can remember. Days of clear 
skies and bright sunlight have been plenty this year, and apart from some fog 
there have yet to be many washouts or frosts. This warm, sunny, weather has 
been wonderful in the trees, and the furnace colours of oak, birch and beech, 
the buttery sycamores and field maples, lemony ash and golden syrup limes, have 
been spectacular. But surely this happens every year, more or less?

Every year the deciduous trees change colour 
<http://usna.usda.gov/PhotoGallery/FallFoliage/ScienceFallColor.html> before 
falling. Every year before winter there is a burst of transition that looks 
beautiful, and our feelings for it have something to do with an increase in 
wild food mammals need to bulk up for the winter. The absence of chlorophyll to 
mask leaf pigments before the tree jettisons them hardly captures the 
significance of autumn colour or that sense of wonder in seeing the woods shine 
brightly like a bedtime story before the long sleep.

Autumn landscapes – expert tips on taking great photographs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/17/-sp-autumn-expert-tips-travel-photographs>
What more can be said of autumn, even one as spectacular as this, that has not 
been worn out by repetition? In truth, every autumn is unique.Each autumn tells 
its own story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gallery/2009/oct/13/autumn-leaves-colours-countryside>
, even though we say the same things every time; the narrative is inadequate. 
What does it smell, taste and feel like; what is the significance of autumn 
colour in the dark?

As I wander the lanes of Wenlock, as the poet Adrian Henri 
<http://www.adrianhenri.com/biography-page.html> did in his Song For AE 
Housman, to “dream about the night, / where every leaf is shrivelled and every 
berry bright”, I listen for owls and smell the wet leaves that awaken some 
wordless feeling like a very misty memory. The clocks have gone back, dusk 
edges further into day and the old rebellions return.

Smell it in the rot: an autumn of trees sparks a spring of fungi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/28/toadstools-cats-eye-woods-country-diary>
 turning fallen leaves and tree stumps into earth; an animate flowering of 
fleshy moons in the woods releasing a smoke of spores. This is a scent every 
bit as evocative as cordite and bonfires, every bit as subversive as gunpowder, 
treason and plot.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 