
Inspired by the example set by the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, support for free trade and movement is 
growing in Africa.

Rwanda and Benin 
<http://www.africanews.com/2016/08/30/visa-free-entry-for-africans-benin-follows-rwanda-s-lead/>
 have announced plans to allow visa-free entry, while Zimbabwe has lifted visa 
restrictions for citizens travellingfrom within the South Africa Development 
Community <http://allafrica.com/stories/201603070815.html>, which includes 15 
countries in the region.

In July, the African Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> 
also announced it had finally agreed on an all-Africa passport to finally do 
away with visa restrictions. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, the chair of the AU 
commission, declared it was a “step towards … a strong, prosperous and 
integrated Africa, driven by its own citizens and capable of taking its 
rightful place on the world stage.”

Aisha Abdullahi, commissioner for political affairs at the AU, has since said 
the organisation has recruited consultants who are formulating plans for an 
African single market, which they hope to implement by 2017.

But while diplomats were promised access to the passports by 2018, it quickly 
became clear that the continent’s 1.1 billion people would have to wait longer, 
as the project is reliant on national governments passing individual 
legislation.

And as in Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, which after 
40 years as a beacon of free trade and movement is showing signs of an 
existential crisis, migration is proving a contentious issue.

The pan-africanist movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/15/revolutionary-spirit-pan-african-congress>
, a cornerstone of the AU, has long called for closer unity on a continent 
scarred by the arbitrary map-drawing of colonial times, but leaders are worried 
by what they’ve seen in Europe. Abdullahi said the challenges exposed in the 
European project have been a warning sign.

“Free movement has many economic and social benefits, but we know that there 
are concerns,” Abdullahi said. “This is why we are not doing it in a loose 
fashion, or like European free movement.”
Mac-Jordan (@MacJordaN) 
Check out the African Union Diplomatic Passport launched in Kigali yesterday. 
What do you think of this?#AUPassport 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AUPassport?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/PdySClZGup 
<https://t.co/PdySClZGup>
 <https://twitter.com/MacJordaN/status/754838219586285568> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MacJordaN/status/754838219586285568> 
Takyiwaa Manuk, a director at the Economic Commission for Africa, said the 
political and social challenges African countries face are more extreme than 
those in Europe. He stressed that while international media has focused on mass 
migration fromAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> to Europe, 80% 
of Africans who migrate do so within the continent, with less than 20% 
travelling to Europe.

This has brought serious problems, most recently with a spate of xenophobic 
attacks in South Africa, which has the second biggest migrant population on the 
continent after Ivory Coast. About 300 businesses run by migrants were 
destroyed, and workers from countries such as Zimbabwe and Mozambique were 
attacked.

Real unity?

So amid optimistic talk of a “United States of Africa”, critics have been 
quick to point out that the union has been catastrophically weak in dealing 
with continental crises and supporting populations under attack.

Though it has deployed peacekeeping forces to Somalia and Darfur, and has 
recently agreedto send troops to South Sudan 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/07/19/486592426/african-union-approves-plan-to-put-peacekeeping-force-in-south-sudan>
, it has been accused of largely ignoring the brutaljihadi occupation in 
northern Mali 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-mali-rebels-africa-idUKBRE90Q06Z20130127>, 
the deadly Ebola outbreak <http://newafricanmagazine.com/ebola-au-done-enough/> 
in west Africa, and failing to hold “presidents for life” to account.

This ambiguous approach to democratic principles has led to a situation in 
which Chad’s president, Idriss Déby, who recently extended his 26-year rule 
amid accusations of vote rigging, intimidation and holding “the whole country 
hostage”, is nowmediating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/chads-president-set-to-mediate-in-disputed-gabon-election>
 inan election crisis in Gabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/gabon-election-results-disputed-incumbent-ali-bongo-victor-jean-ping>
.

Dapo Oyewole, director of the Policy Development Network, said the AU needs to 
change its image if it is to truly bring about continental unity.

 “The African Union needs to become much more active and meaningfully relevant 
in the day-to-day life of average Africans,” he said. “It has to become an 
accessible and responsive platform for actualising collective aspirations and 
not just like a club of African leaders.”


But the new project shows promise says Imad Mesdoua, an Algerian political 
analyst based in London. “The new inter-African passport is proof that member 
states are genuine about making integration a reality,” he said, but added 
“more needs to be done and at a much faster pace.”
 