
What is remarkable about Wednesday’s Parliament House protest against 
detention of asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/pro-refugee-protesters-disrupt-parliament-and-shut-down-question-time>
 is that there has not been a lot more of it. In the history of protest it was 
a minor event, minimally disruptive and not especially creative.

The media attention it grabbed was due less to its intrinsic reportability 
than to press gallery boredom and the fact it happened under their noses while 
the cameras were rolling. When the law-and-order brigade demanded that the book 
be thrown at the protesters it was dutifully following its part of the script.

Protests have been inseparable from Australia’s social and political history – 
from the Eureka Stockade and the conscription rallies of 1916 to Captain de 
Groot’s dramatic unofficial opening of the Sydney Harbour Bridge in 1932.

Refugee protesters abseil down Parliament House and dye fountain red
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/refugee-protesters-abseil-down-parliament-house-and-dye-fountain-red>
Yet when we think about the story of protest in Australia, we usually think 
first of the 1960s and 1970s, for it was then that powerful waves of dissent 
broke over the nation. The protest movements transformed our society in ways 
unimaginable then and often forgotten by young people now.

The dissenters met fierce resistance from a mostly stolid, conservative nation 
still in the shadow of the patrician post-war prime minister, Robert Menzies. 
But Australians who entered the 1960s feeling comfortable and relaxed soon felt 
an earthquake beneath their feet.

Progress does not just happen. It occurs because a few individuals began to 
demand change. They have to be determined, obstinate and willing to suffer, 
because those opposed to change are more powerful and typically react with 
ridicule, anger and, at times, violence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fasylum-seeker-protests-hit-parliament-house-for-second-day-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asylum%20seeker%20protests%20hit%20Parliament%20House%20for%20second%20day%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fasylum-seeker-protests-hit-parliament-house-for-second-day-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asylum%20seeker%20protests%20hit%20Parliament%20House%20for%20second%20day%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fasylum-seeker-protests-hit-parliament-house-for-second-day-video&media=>
Asylum seeker protests hit Parliament House on Thursday for a second day in a 
row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/dec/01/asylum-seeker-protests-hit-parliament-house-for-second-day-video>
It’s faded now, but in the 1960s and 1970s one of the most powerful 
institutions resisting social change was the RSL. Every social movement had to 
take on the returned soldiers’ organisation.

In the 1960s the Walgett RSL Club enforced a colour bar  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/20/freedom-ride-walgett-remembers-when-charles-perkins-came-to-town>
that extended to Aboriginal diggers. The sleepy club provoked a storm 
controversy when in 1965 the Freedom Riders arrived and picketed it with signs 
reading “Good enough for Tobruk. Why not Walgett RSL?”

Then as now, the RSL was the keeper of the Anzac tradition, but the armed 
forces’ values of regimentation, discipline and conformity represented 
everything the counterculture rejected and which young people were yearning to 
escape.

Freedom Ride returns to Walgett, the town where the RSL banned black diggers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/20/freedom-ride-walgett-remembers-when-charles-perkins-came-to-town>
The military’s entanglement in the Vietnam war and the horrors committed 
against the Vietnamese people tarnished the armed forces for decades, something 
conveniently forgotten in the recent rehabilitation of Vietnam vets and the 
mawkish sentimentality that now smothersAnzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day>.

Anzac was also the symbol of Australian masculinity, and so incomprehension 
mixed with outrage when a vanguard of young feminists arrived at the 1977 Anzac 
Day parade in Sydney waving placards denouncing rape as a weapon of war.

After all, as one placard read, US soldiers admitted to mass rape in Vietnam, 
and some of those marching down George Street had fought with them.

Gay Liberation too had to confront the RSL. In 1982 the League’s pugnacious 
Victorian president Bruce Ruxton stood in the path of members of the Gay 
Ex-servicemen’s Association to prevent them from laying a wreath at the Shrine 
of Remembrance.

“I don’t remember a single poofter from world war two,” he growled.

The RSL was not the only bastion of the old world’s homophobia, racism and 
male privilege. The police forces were just as guilty. When the politicians 
wanted to teach protesters a lesson they only had to let the police off the 
leash.

Back then “police brutality” and “Queensland” were almost synonymous. But not 
only there. The Vietnam Moratorium march in Sydney in September 1970 ended in 
disarray as police bashed protesters indiscriminately.

Malcolm Turnbull smiles on as his Validation Day turns into a hot mess | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/malcolm-turnbull-smiles-on-as-his-validation-day-turns-into-a-hot-mess>
And much of the battle for gay rights was a battle against the police, most 
notoriously in the premeditated violence by police at the first Gay Mardi Gras 
in 1978. This year theNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> police force and 
the parliament apologised.

Looking back now, the protest movements take on a romantic aura; but, at the 
time, protesting often had the emotional ugliness of a schoolyard fight. The 
Age cartoonist Michael Leunig, among the earliest to take to the streets 
against the war in Vietnam, remembered it like this:

It was a very sinister and disillusioning time. Something really dirty 
happened back then, and I have never forgotten it. … I saw how paranoid, 
conservative and insensitive this culture really was.

In those days, transgression was a potent political tool – gay men challenged 
the law with a public “kiss-in”, feminists chained themselves to the foot rail 
of a men-only bar, and Aboriginal militants pitched a tent embassy on the lawns 
of Parliament House, daring politicians to take it down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fas-this-weeks-glue-in-in-parliament-shows-the-story-of-protest-has-no-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5935888402b696533494ca9db00864844354e6f%2F0_0_2598_3425%2F2598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20'glue%20in'%20in%20parliament%20shows%2C%20the%20story%20of%20protest%20has%20no%20end%20%7C%20Clive%20Hamilton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fas-this-weeks-glue-in-in-parliament-shows-the-story-of-protest-has-no-end%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20this%20week%E2%80%99s%20%27glue%20in%27%20in%20parliament%20shows%2C%20the%20story%20of%20protest%20has%20no%20end%20%7C%20Clive%20Hamilton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fas-this-weeks-glue-in-in-parliament-shows-the-story-of-protest-has-no-end%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5935888402b696533494ca9db00864844354e6f%2F0_0_2598_3425%2F2598.jpg>
As this week’s “glue-in” attests, the story of protest has no end. There was a 
sense that the protesters had reached the point of desperation, so frustrated 
had they become with the policy of bi-partisan cruelty.

No one expects the parliamentary disruption to change anything, and yet many 
protest movements are marked by long phases of apparent futility, until history 
shifts and makes it all worthwhile.

* Clive Hamilton is the author of What Do We Want? The story of protest in 
Australia, published by the National Library of Australia.
 