
The advertising watchdog has ruled that a controversial atheist ad campaign, 
which sparked the ire of Christian groups for proclaiming "There is probably no 
God", did not break its code.

Religious groups including Christian Voice complained to the Advertising 
Standards Authority arguing that theAtheist Bus Campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jan/09/atheist-bus-campaign-asa>, which 
ran on buses with the strapline "There is probably no God. Now stop worrying 
and enjoy your life", broke the advertising code on the grounds of 
substantiation and truthfulness.

The ASA, which said that some of the complaints were that the ad was offensive 
and denigratory to people of faith, faced the prospect of having to decide if 
God existed in order to rule on Christian Voice's complaint.

However, the watchdog said today that the British Humanist Association's 
campaign did not breach the advertising code or mislead consumers and that it 
therefore would not launch an investigation.

"The ASA council concluded that the ad was an expression of the advertiser's 
opinion and that the claims in it were not capable of objective 
substantiation," said the ASA. "Although the ASA acknowledges that the content 
of the ad would be at odds with the beliefs of many, it concluded that it was 
unlikely to mislead or to cause serious or widespread offence."

Writer Ariane Sherine first suggested the idea in a Guardian Comment is Free 
blog last June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising>, 
saying an atheist bus campaign would provide a reassuring counter-message to 
religious slogans threatening non-Christians with hell and damnation.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 