
The departure of Andy Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
 from the top job at Asda means that each of the big four supermarket chains 
have changed their chief executive in the past two years.

Since July 2014, Justin King has retired from Sainsbury’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/09/justin-king-leaves-sainsburys>
, Philip Clarke has beenpushed out of Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/21/tesco-ousts-philip-clarke-after-profit-warning>
 and Dalton Philips has beensacked from Morrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/13/morrisons-chief-dalton-philips-quits-supermarket>
.

That is a clear sign of the tumultuous change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/apr/02/aldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets>
 in Britain’s grocery industry. The discounters Aldi and Lidl have taken market 
share at one end of the grocery market, with Waitrose and Marks & Spencer 
grabbing spending at the other. At the same time, online shopping and 
convenience stores are eating into the sales of out-of-town supermarkets.

It is only a coincidence that Asda announced the change days after Amazon 
revealed that it islaunching its grocery service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/11/amazon-fresh-launches-in-uk-can-it-deliver>
, Amazon Fresh, in London. Amazon’s announcement also showed how quickly the 
grocery market is changing.

Asda, in particular, cannot afford to stand still. It has suffered a decline 
in like-for-like sales, which measures sales in stores open more than a year, 
for seven quarters in a row. This drop has not been small. In the last three 
months of 2015, Asda sales fell by 5.8% year on year, theworst performance in 
its history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/sainsburys-lidl-and-aldi-gain-while-rivals-struggle>
. In the first three months of this year, Asda’s performance improved, but not 
by much, to asales decline of 5.7% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
.

Judging Asda’s performance is difficult because it is part of Walmart, the 
biggest retailer in the world, rather than a separate listed entity such as 
Tesco or Sainsbury’s. For example, it is never clear when Walmart is pushingAsda
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> to deliver sales growth or 
profits. While sales have been falling over the past two years, profits have 
held relatively firm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fasda-boss-departure-reveals-sweeping-change-among-supermarkets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F100c388b12860e1373e4338b2c416684f921546c%2F0_491_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asda%20boss%20departure%20reveals%20sweeping%20change%20among%20supermarkets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fasda-boss-departure-reveals-sweeping-change-among-supermarkets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asda%20boss%20departure%20reveals%20sweeping%20change%20among%20supermarkets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fasda-boss-departure-reveals-sweeping-change-among-supermarkets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F100c388b12860e1373e4338b2c416684f921546c%2F0_491_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 Andy Clarke, the outgoing chief executive of Asda, will be replaced after 
failing to engineer a sales recovery. Photograph: David Parry/PA 
Walmart, though, has clearly decided that Asda needs to stop losing market 
share. There had beenrumours that Clarke could depart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/18/andy-clarke-asda-determined-not-shelve-five-year-plan>
 Asda for a year. These increased when the companypoached Roger Burnley from 
Sainsbury’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/asda-poaches-top-sainsburys-director>
 to become chief operating officer. In fact, the only surprise about the news 
of Clarke’s exit is that it is not Burnley replacing him but Sean Clarke, a 
former Asda employee who has beenrunning Walmart’s Chinese business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
.

The challenge facing Sean Clarke is to stop Asda getting lost in the middle of 
the grocery market between the discounters and the rest of the big four. Asda 
had built a niche with customers as being cheaper than the Sainsbury’s, 
Morrisons and Tesco, while having better quality food than the discounters. 
This niche meant that between 2010 and 2014, the first four years of Andy 
Clarke’s tenure, it performed robustly.

However, Tesco and Morrisons have pushed down their prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/31/tesco-rescue-has-dave-lewiss-first-year-been-a-success>
 significantly under Dave Lewis and David Potts, their current chief 
executives. At the same time, Aldi and Lidl havecontinued to expand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/17/soaring-sales-at-aldi-and-lidl-drive-market-share-to-10-percent>
. Suddenly, Asda’s niche has disappeared. Sean Clarke’s job will be to lead a 
fightback.
 