
Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> has said it will not be 
increasing its investment in a price cuts regime despite a further 7.5% slump 
in sales in the spring.

On Thursday, the Walmart-owned chain revealed the drop in sales at established 
stores for the three months to 30 June – a major worsening of performance after 
a5.7% fall in the previous three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/19/asda-sales-fall-for-seventh-quarter-in-a-row>
 and its eighth quarter of decline. One retail analyst described the grocer’s 
performance as “fairly calamitous”.

Walmart’s chief financial officer, Brett Biggs, admitted Asda had failed to 
win back customers from rivals. “In the UK, fierce competition and food 
deflation continue to challenge the market, significantly impacting traffic,” 
he said.

But despite suggestions that Asda would try to win back shoppers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/supermarket-shares-fall-asda-price-cut-warning>
 from the likes of Aldi and Lidl with aggressive price cuts, Biggs said the 
company remained “committed to the previously announced five-year £1.5bn price 
investment”.

“Our strategy remains focused on improving retail basics, simplifying and 
strengthening the offer through improved availability and assortment 
discipline, reducing costs through our cost analytics programme and driving 
sales through strategic price investments,” he said.

UK supermarket sales suffer worst fall for at least two years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/uk-supermarket-sales-fall-poor-july-weather>
Neil Saunders, chief executive of industry analyst Conlumino, said: “In our 
view this is a fairly calamitous outcome and one that certainly reflects the 
challenges of the UK market, but also underlines the inadequacy of Asda’s 
response to it.”

He said Walmart <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> needed to 
invest more in price cuts as its traditional low price image had been blunted 
by heavy competition from Aldi and Lidl.

“Walmart, as the biggest retailer in the world, has the firepower and 
expertise to fight back, but up until now it has been a sleeping giant. These 
figures will act as a wake up call and that position will, in our view, now 
change,” he said.

But Clive Black, a food retail analyst at broker Shore Capital, said Asda’s 
problems were not just about price and it was no surprise that the company was 
not planning to hit the “nuclear button” on a price war.

“Asda has got a stronger price perception and relation than a lot of its 
competitors and it is still underperforming. They have to look at a whole lot 
more. Their stores are boring and functional and they have lost the art of 
selling. Product quality is poor and reflects elements of their supply chain 
and low staff morale.”

Asda has been losing market share for the past two years as Aldi and Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/17/soaring-sales-at-aldi-and-lidl-drive-market-share-to-10-percent>
 expanded rapidly, while bigger rival Tesco has improved its prices and 
service. Price deflation and the rise of online shopping, combined with the use 
of small local grocery stores, have driven sales declines at all the major 
traditional supermarket chains.

But Asda, which does not operate a chain of small local stores and has based 
its marketing around price, is faring far worse than its major rivals.

The group ousted Andy Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
 from his role as chief executive in June and replaced him with Sean Clarke, a 
former Asda employee who most recently ran Walmart’s Chinese business.

Sean Clarke said: “Although Asda is in midst of a very challenging period 
there is no doubt in my mind that the culture that has always been at the heart 
of our success is still there. We’ve also started one of the biggest journeys 
of reinvention in our history to further build on our strong offer and I feel 
positive about the future.”

Asda recruited Roger Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/asda-poaches-top-sainsburys-director>
, Sainsbury’s operations head, last October and some analysts expected him to 
replace Clarke once his year-long notice period from Sainsbury’s was over. 
Burnley will become deputy chief executive when he arrives in October.

Walmart’s chief executive, Doug McMillon, said: “While our turnaround will 
take time, I’m confident in the new leadership team there and want to assure 
you we’re addressing this with urgency.”


In the US, Walmart revealed a better than expected 1.4% rise in sales at 
established stores, excluding fuel, while total sales for the group rose 0.1% 
to $119.4bn in the three months to 31 July.

The company lifted its profit expectations for the year as it revealed a 1.6% 
rise in operating profit to $6.2bn. Asda said its US operation had performed 
well because it had improved its stores, online operation andits prices.
 