
Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> has replaced its chief 
executive in an attempt to reverse a long run of falling sales at the 
supermarket amid intense competition between food retailers.

Walmart <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart>, Asda’s US owner, said 
Andy Clarke will be replaced by Sean Clarke, a former Asda employee who most 
recently ran Walmart’s Chinese business.

Andy Clarke has worked for Asda for more than 20 years and has run the 
business since 2010. He will work at Asda until the end of July and act as an 
adviser to Britain’s third-biggest supermarket until the end of the year.

Asda has been the main casualty of the supermarket price war as customers 
defect to rivals such as the German discounters Aldi and Lidl. Walmart said 
last month that price cuts hadfailed to stop sales falling for the seventh 
quarterly period in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/19/asda-sales-fall-for-seventh-quarter-in-a-row>
 as shoppers opted to shop in rivals’ smaller shops instead of Asda’s large 
stores.

Andy Clarke launched a plan called “project renewal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/19/asda-reviews-five-year-plan-after-sales-hit-lowest-ebb>
” to revive the business in October, including cutting prices, refurbishing big 
stores, scrapping products and shelving expansion plans. Asdaannounced 750 job 
cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/asda-to-cut-up-to-750-jobs>in 
stores and its head office in March and said it would close staff canteens to 
cut costs.

Asda also opted out of the pre-Christmas Black Friday discount bonanza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/asda-to-step-away-from-black-friday-deals>
 to protect profit margins andhired the TV chef James Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/14/asda-supermarket-sales-slump-james-martin-ads>
 to appear in advertisements.

Pressure grew on Clarke as trading failed to show a turnaround from a 
worst-ever quarterly sales fall, recorded during the period over Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/asda-quarterly-loss-christmas>
. Thecompetition watchdog also criticised Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/27/asda-pricing-tactics-singled-out-by-watchdog-which>
 in April for offering deals that could mislead shoppers.

Asda recruited Roger Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/asda-poaches-top-sainsburys-director>
, Sainsbury’s operations head, last October and some analysts expected the 
former Asda man to replace Clarke once his year-long notice period from 
Sainsbury’s was over. Burnley will become deputy chief executive of Asda when 
he arrives in October.

Walmart said: “Andy Clarke has decided the timing is right to step aside from 
his role with the company. Sean’s leadership will allow Asda to build upon the 
momentum of project renewal and reposition the business in a very competitive 
market place.”


Sean Clarke started his retail career at Asda in 1996 and worked for Walmart 
in Japan and Canada before running the Chinese operation of America’s biggest 
retailer. He will take over at Asda on 11 July.


He said: “Rejoining Asda at such a critical point in the development of the UK 
retail market is both a challenge and a privilege. After spending the last 15 
years in Walmart’s global retail markets, I’m looking forward to returning to 
the business that got me hooked on grocery retail.”
 