
Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> has reported another quarter 
of poor trading as like-for-like sales slumped 5.7% in the first three months 
of 2016.

The supermarket chain’s American parent company, Walmart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart>, admitted that price cuts had 
failed to stop customers defecting to rivals such as the discounters Aldi and 
Lidl.

Asda adds Yorkshire grit to low prices, but renewal won’t be a piece of cake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/14/asda-supermarket-sales-slump-james-martin-ads>
“The UK continues to struggle, due primarily to fierce competition,” said 
Walmart’s chief financial officer, Brett Biggs. “Improvements in price and 
product availability throughout the quarter were not enough to overcome traffic 
and food volume declines in our large format stores.”

Asda’s performance was a slight improvement on the 5.8% decline in underlying 
sales suffered in the final quarter of 2015, which wasits worst-ever quarterly 
sales fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/asda-quarterly-loss-christmas>
. Asda has now reported seven consecutive quarters of declining sales.

Asda is battling the rise of the discounters and stronger performances from 
its major rivals Tesco, Sainsbury’s and Morrisons. While profits at all four 
supermarket chains have come under pressure, Asda had opted to defend its 
bottom line rather than its market share.

But with the retailer’s market share down from 17.3% two years ago to 16% 
today, according to Kantar Worldpanel, Asda chief executive Andy Clarke has 
been forced into action.

In a presentation to investors, Biggs revealed that the number of shoppers 
visiting Asda had declined 5% during the 13 weeks to 30 March. The average 
amount shoppers spent – another measure of performance – was also down 0.7%. 
The combination meant that it was a less profitable quarter than the same 
period a year ago.

“Asda has lost its low-price crown to players like Aldi and Lidl and, despite 
its best efforts to regain ground, has found one of its key points of 
differentiation undermined,” said Conlumino analyst Neil Saunders. “It has been 
hard for Asda to mitigate and offset its losses to the discounters with gains 
from other players.”

To win back shoppers Clarke has embarked on “project renewal” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/14/asda-supermarket-sales-slump-james-martin-ads>
 – an overhaul of the business designed to “simplify and strengthen the 
customer offer, reduce costs and drive sales”. This year 750 jobs have gone in 
its stores and head office as it looks to streamline operations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fasda-sales-fall-for-seventh-quarter-in-a-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f7cdc1ac2965b6d47404f93f16b87bf5fb1fab5%2F1677_282_2577_3221%2F2577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asda%20sales%20fall%20for%20seventh%20quarter%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fasda-sales-fall-for-seventh-quarter-in-a-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asda%20sales%20fall%20for%20seventh%20quarter%20in%20a%20row&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fasda-sales-fall-for-seventh-quarter-in-a-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f7cdc1ac2965b6d47404f93f16b87bf5fb1fab5%2F1677_282_2577_3221%2F2577.jpg>
 Andy Clarke. 
The under-pressure Clarke, who broke with the usual tradition of holding a 
press briefing to discuss performance, is focusing the retailer’s financial 
power on making its big stores more appealing to shoppers. To that end it has 
put the brakes on new business channels such as opening click and collect 
points in petrol and railway stations and targeting small store openings in 
London.

Instead Asda will refurbish 95 of its biggest stores, some of whose floor 
space is being handed over to retailers such as the French sportswear company 
Decathlon, this year. Changes are also taking place behind the scenes with the 
closure of staff canteens and the removal of services such as photo-processing 
and pizza-making to cut costs. Savings that had already been made were being 
invested back in the business, said Biggs.

The supermarket is pulling up to a fifth of its products from the shelves as 
part of a review of its 40,000 lines. Tesco carried out a similar exercise last 
year in the face of customer defections to the low-cost, low-choice Aldi and 
Lidl, which typically stock fewer than 2,000 products. Clarke has also promised 
a fresh wave of price cuts as it tries to narrow the gap with the German 
discounters.

“If Asda was a ship it is one that is limping back to port having been 
torpedoed by smaller and more agile competition,” said Phil Dorrell, a 
consultant at Retail Remedy. “Trying to maintain its position on price alone is 
simply not working, which it should have realised several quarters ago.”

The sales torpor at Asda has led to questions about Clarke’s future. After six 
years in the job he is the longest serving chief executive of the big four 
grocers, with last year’s hiring of Sainsbury’s retail and operations director, 
Roger Burnley, who arrives in the autumn, pointing to a changing of the guard.



 