
Tonight the Gene Genie is back to fire up the Quattro, punch out the villains 
and generally lord it up over his 1980s manor for one last time in the third 
and final series ofAshes To Ashes <http://www.bbc.co.uk/ashestoashes/>. DI Alex 
gets a new haircut (and an on-trend T-shirt dress), Ray's been stepping up in 
Gene's absence and Shaz and Chris have called things off. Will this be end of 
the best office romance on British TV sinceTim and Dawn 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_CrYUlZIG8s>?.

The big news in CID is the arrival of discipline and complaints officer, DCI 
Jim Keats – played by Daniel Mays, last seen fending off Duncan from Blue in 
the C4 comedyPlus One 
<http://www.youtube.com/show?p=jNt2wjtOUYM&pl=162C5CC22479DE6E>. Keats is 
investigating why Gene shot Alex at the end of the last series (er, to give us 
a decent cliffhanger? Case closed!). But it also looks like he's interested in 
what happened toSam Tyler <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sam_Tyler> in his life 
after Mars - and has a hunch that Gene might know more than he's previously let 
on.

What are your predictions for this series? Last time around Alex seemed to 
keep forgetting that she was supposed to be getting back to the noughties (and 
her daughter!). But who can blame her?Gene's a lot of fun to hang out with 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o1nSV8UzC7M>, there's a never-ending stream of 
plonk at Luigi's and she has a pretty good track record of cracking the cases 
with her new-fangled 21st century detective techniques. If she gets home will 
she even like it? And if everythingis happening in her mind, where does that 
leave Gene and the gang? Does the mythology of the show stand up for you? Or is 
the "it's all in Alex/Sam's mind" conceit just a good excuse to play with the 
idea of a contemporary cop mucking about in the 1970s and 1980s without having 
to get bogged down in time-travel paradoxes? Do you want Alex and Gene to get 
together? (Philip Glenister has hinted that a romanceis probably not on the 
cards 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/15/gene-hunt-last-stand-ashes>
). And are you ready to let Genego? Let us know below

Meanwhile, for those looking for a quick pre-Ashes hit, here are a few of Gene 
Hunt's best lines from tonight's episode. Don't ready any further – obviously – 
if they will make you rant about spoilers.

"They said I tried to kill you, Bolls, but I know you wouldn't let me down, 
we're a team: Bodie and Doyle. I'm the one in the SAS, you can be the one with 
the girl's hair. Now get your knickers on, we're leaving."

Drake: "Where did you go?"

Hunt: "Abroad. The Isle Of Wight. But that was shit, so I tried the Costa 
Brava."

"Ray – if you come in here again dressed like a maths teacher, I will paint 
your balls the colour of hazelnuts and inform a bag of squirrels that winter's 
coming."
 