
BBC1's time travel cop drama Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> bowed out with 5.4 
million viewers last night, March 27.

The drama, starring Keeley Hawes and Philip Glenister, won its time slot but 
was down 1.6 million on its opener and down by the same amount on the finale of 
Life on Mars last year, which also featured Glenister's detective Gene Hunt.

BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> has already ordered a second 
series of Ashes to Ashes, which is due to air next year.

The drama pulled in an average audience share of 23% in the 9pm hour, 
according to unofficial overnight figures.

Ashes to Ashes beat the final episode of ITV1's drama Trial and Retribution, 
which attracted 4.3 million viewers and an 18% share in the same slot.

Channel 4's Cutting Edge documentary Sleeping with My Sister pulled in 1.9 
million viewers and an 8% share in the 9pm hour, plus an extra 207,000 on 
Channel 4 +1, while Channel Five's US drama House picked up 1.8 million and 8%.

BBC2's comedy double bill saw That Mitchell and Webb Look score 1.6 million 
and a 7% share at 9pm, with a repeat of The Catherine Tate Show attracting 1.4 
million and 6% at 9.30pm.

ITV1 had the better of BBC1 in the battle of the 8pm cop shows, turning the 
tables on last week's result, with The Bill arresting 5.4 million and a 23% 
share, compared with 4.1 million and 18% for Holby Blue.

BBC2's Ten Things You Didn't Know About Avalanches drew 2.2 million viewers 
and a 10% share in the 8pm hour, while Channel 4's A Cook's Tour of Spain 
picked up 1.6 million and 7%, with an extra 69,000 tuning in on Channel 4 +1.

Five's I Own Britain's Best Home attracted 1.4 million viewers and a 6% share 
in the 8pm hour.

ITV2's new US drama Gossip Girl picked up 293,000 viewers and a multichannel 
share of 1.9% in the 10pm hour despite an inheritance of 974,000 and a 4.7% 
share from new series Katie and Peter: The Next Chapter in the 9pm hour.

Later on ITV2, new series of US shows Entourage and The Office: An American 
Workplace both launched after midnight.

The start of the fourth series of Entourage was relegated to a midnight slot 
and subsequently only pulled in 30,000 viewers and a 0.6% multichannel share, 
while the first instalment of the new run of The Office, written by Ricky 
Gervais and Stephen Merchant, attracted 21,000 and 0.6% between 12.30am and 1am.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 