
Melbourne operates on two settings – grunge or luxe, milk-crate stools or 
marble (with occasionally the two combined). Thanks to a secondary grid of 
alleys -"laneways" to the locals  
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/Opinion/Melbournes-love-affair-with-lanes/2004/12/31/1104344983928.html>
- and arcades behind its grand central streets, Melbourne's underground buzz 
extends from the grand Gold Rush-built heart of the city to inner 
neighbourhoods that sometimes feel like pre-Giuliani New York's East Village.

Kick start your day 

Melbourne runs on coffee so set yourself up for the day with breakfast and a 
short black at Pope Joan. With restaurant-quality food at cafe prices, this 
recent arrival inhabits an old milk bar in Brunswick East where gentrifying 
Fitzroy and Carlton North meet the bungalow burbs. The 96 tram runs past the 
door. Inside, it's eclectic with homestead touches (see online magazine
Broadsheet Melbourne 
<http://www.broadsheet.com.au/melbourne/food-and-drink/article/pope-joan-opens> 
for pictures). In the backyard is a yummy mummy haven and small veggie patch to 
add to dishes like poached egg, smoked fish rosti and herb salad. Next up for 
the owners, the Bishop of Ostia bar, planned for next door.

• 77-79 Nicholson Street, Brunswick East, popejoan.com.au 
<http://www.popejoan.com.au>, +61 (0)3 9388 8858

Lose yourself in a laneway 
 Sista Bella bar 
The more hidden the location, the greater the cred when it comes to 
Melbourne's laneway denizens. Many of these alley cafes, bars and galleries 
don't have a sign and the tiny streets they sit on sometimes don't bother 
either. From the dozens, there's low-fi bar Sista Bella, (22 Drewery Place, at 
the end of Sniders Lane,sisterbellas.com.au <http://sisterbellas.com.au/>) 
Japanese mimimalism and sushi downstairs at Izakaya Den (basement, 114 Russell 
St,izakayaden.com.au <http://www.izakayaden.com.au/>), Van Haus 
<http://tummyrumbles.com/2008/09/von-haus.html> (like a 19th-century worker's 
parlour at 1a Crossley Street) or the bar Section 8, housed in a shipping 
container (27-29 Tattersalls Lane,section8.com.au <http://www.section8.com.au/>
). Just remember, the more dumpsters to negotiate, the better it is.

Two wheels good

Call a certain number, and Matt Hurst from the Humble Vintage Bike Hire Co 
will deliver a classic racer or city bike to your door on which you can explore 
this most cycle-friendly of Australian cities. Follow Matt's "hidden heritage" 
guide, or head east past the MCG cricket ground along the River Yarra, lock up 
and visitHerring Island's sculptures 
<http://home.vicnet.net.au/~herring/arts.htm> (weekends only). Follow 
tributaries for tea atFairfield Boathouse <http://fairfieldboathouse.com/> or a 
drink at Handsome Steve's House of Refreshment in the Abbotsford Covent 
artists' complex <http://www.abbotsfordconvent.com.au/community-tenants/artists>
 (1 St Heliers St).

• Humble Vintage Bike Hire Co, + 432 032 450, thehumblevintage.com 
<http://www.thehumblevintage.com>. Hire from A$30 per day (inc helmet, lock, 
lights).

Gentrification
 Steven Blick Barbers. Photograph: Melbourne Broadsheet 
Young-fogies are drawn like iron filings to Captains of Industry, a 
"gentleman's outfitter and cafe", which is "not so much a shop as a modern-day 
men's club", according to The Age newspaper. A laneway staircase lined with 
brown paper tailoring patterns leads up to a first floor workshop cafe on 
Somerset Place with studios down one side. Thom Grogan cuts slim-fit suits 
while Steven Blick (ex Shoreditch) snips and wet-shaves from vintage barbers' 
chairs and James Roberts makes kangaroo leather boots. Opposite the Captains at 
No19, behind a roller shutter garage door, isLittle Mule 
<http://www.thelittlemule.com/> for coffee and hand-built bicycles.

• Level 1, 2 Somerset Place, captainsofindustry.com.au 
<http://www.captainsofindustry.com.au>

Art of the city

Graffiti is God in Melbourne with half the outside of half the city's 
buildings covered in the stuff and the other half dedicated to artist-run 
gallery spaces celebrating it. Many of these are hard to find, like the 
respectedBlindside Gallery <http://www.blindside.org.au/> on 7th Floor of the 
Nicholson Building (37 Swanston St).Thousand Pound Bend 
<http://www.thousandpoundbend.com.au> (through the roller door at 361 Little 
Londsale St) is a multipurpose performance/art/cafe warehouse space with Noises 
in the Attic cinema upstairs for screening shorts. The organisers have a finger 
in all things Generation Y arty.Fortyfivedownstairs 
<http://www.fortyfivedownstairs.com> gallery has a lively basement theatre (45 
Flinders Lane).

Musical beats
 Photograph: BBC/Corbis 
Australia's most famous composer Percy Grainger was an eccentric sort, a 
musical innovator who invented "elastic scoring' and "free music". He left 
money to honour himself after his death with a small museum that has just 
reopened after long repairs. Among the relics on display are his collection of 
whips - he was a sado-masochistic with a particular penchant for 
self-flagellation - including one made from a conductor's baton. He also made 
some lovely arrangements of folk songs along the way - his piano solo of 
Country Gardens was an enormous hit.

• The Grainger Museum, Royal Parade, University of Melbourne, 
grainger.unimelb.edu.au <http://www.grainger.unimelb.edu.au>

Vinyl action

Vinyl is big in Melbourne, so before you go, download Diggin Melbourne  
<http://www.digginmelbourne.wordpress.com>, a free map to 31 stores (soon to be 
more) selling vinyl. Down in St Kilda – a faded beachside suburb moving rapidly 
upmarket - is Pure Pop Records. Vinyl and CDs and coffee (plus beer and pizza) 
are upfront while in the back yard is a miniature live music venue for mainly 
local gigs and a ramshackle bar open to the stars (or wannabees).

• Pure Pop Records, 221 Barkly Street, St Kilda, +61 (0)3 9525 5066, 
purepop.com.au <http://www.purepop.com.au>

Eats

No frontage is necessary for some of the best of Melbourne dining options. 
Movida <http://www.movida.com.au> does exceptional tapas out of 1 Hosier Lane 
whileMamasita <http://www.mamasita.com.au/>, offering gourmet Mexican, is 
hidden up a staircase at the top of 11 Collins Street. For newcomerSt Peter's 
<http://stpetersrestaurantandbar.com/> (6 Melbourne Lane), where superb 
rod-and-line caught fish is served from a sexy mid-century modern interior, 
look out for the fish in a top hat at the start of the lane. It's a sign.

Seven floors high club
 Photograph: Alamy 
Melbournites like to get high, and the city has a clutch of rooftop bars and 
two hotels with rooftop pools - the very Lost In Translation 27th floor spa at 
theCrowne Metropol  <http://www.CrownMetropol.com.au>skyscraper, and the 
boutiqueAdelphi <http://www.adelphi.com.au>, where you can peer at the laneway 
below from the pool's jettying glass bottom. Alternatively, catch a 
cult-classic movie against a background of towers at theRooftop Cinema 
<http://www.rooftopcinema.com.au> and bar on the 7th floor (take the lift to 
the 6th and walk) of the Curtin House - which also houses the music venue/bar
The Toff in Town <http://www.thetoffintown.com>, just above the tram bells 
ringing along the city's main drag.

• Curtin House, 252 Swanston Street

Gallery

A "lamington drive" is a fundraiser based around Australian coconut cakes but 
this eponymous gallery "made out of cardboard for nice people" is dedicated to 
edgy illustrators and graphics. It forms part ofThe Compound Interest  
<http://www.thecompoundinterest.com>warehouse space in Collingwood, north of 
Johnson (15-25 Keele St). It's also home to theModern Motorcycle Company 
<http://www.modernmotorcyclecompany.com/> for stunningly updated 70s Japanese 
motorbikes (spares displayed like museum exhibits); and there's an old-school 
printer and a box room selling cult local jeans brandNote To Self 
<http://www.notetoself.com.au/>. By February, yet another hidden cinema plus 
architecture gallery and bar will be added.

• Qantas: (qantas.com) <http://www.qantas.com> flies London Heathrow to 
Melbourne from £736pp. Valid for departures between 16 April-20 June 2011. 
Offer ends 31 January 2011.
Further information from Toursim Australia, australia.com 
<http://www.australia.com>, visitmelbourne.com <http://www.visitmelbourne.com>
 