
So farewell DCI Gene Hunt: former Sheriff of Manchester, snakeskin-booted Gene 
Genie, hard-drinking police dinosaur, the Guv. Cut from the same cloth asThe 
Sweeney's Jack Regan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sweeney#Jack_Regan> with 
an equally strong sense of justice, Philip Glenister's Manc Lion will tonight 
roar one last time.

Over the past five years I've been a regular visitor to the sets of both Life 
On Mars and Ashes To Ashes, gazing at the pints and pickled eggs in CID local 
The Railway Arms and the Chianti bottles in Luigi's. It's fair to say I'm a 
fan. And like so many others, ever so slightly obsessed with the Mars and Ashes 
universe.

TV writers don't always get to tell their full story – just ask the team 
behind Heroes orFlashForward 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/may/14/flashforward-axed>
. But happily for co-creatorsMatthew Graham and Ashley Pharoah 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/writersroom/insight/monastic_interview.shtml>, Ashes 
comes to a close at the end of what they always described as their "three-year 
plan", drawn up after John Simm decided he didn't want to play Sam Tyler in a 
third series of Life On Mars.

So how to finish Gene Hunt's story? Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> introduced DI Alex 
Drake (Keeley Hawes) and WPC Shaz Granger (Montserrat Lombard) while 
re-establishing Hunt and his team down south in 1981. As Ashes has progressed, 
the tone of the show has grown darker – culminating in the arrival of Gene's 
nemesis DCI Jim Keats, who has a crucial part to play in the finale. It's also 
given us the best series of the three (Glenister's actor wife Beth Goddard even 
turned up in a guest role to ask: "Is there a Mrs Hunt? Poor, poor woman.") 
Those who criticise the authenticity of Gene's world miss the point. Initially, 
Ashes appeared to be Alex's version of the 1980s: DI Drake believed she was in 
a modern-day coma and this was all in her head. Now she takes the Guv's 
universe much more seriously and is finally about to discover what it all means.

What it does mean, of course, has been the subject of intense speculation by 
fans. Will Alex get home to Molly? Who is the ghost PC? What happened to Sam? 
Who is buried in the shallow grave? What do those stars mean? Is Jim Keats to 
be trusted? Who is Gene Hunt? And what does his world represent? Are any of the 
theories correct? Please share your views below.

Without introducing any spoilers, I can say this: tonight's final episode does 
answer most of those questions without spelling out every last detail – and the 
clues have been there for the audience to spot. Writers and cast acknowledge it 
will divide opinion but hope the majority of viewers will approve. It's bound 
to be an emotional experience for fans who have invested five years of their TV 
lives in Gene and his world. But the time is right for him to go. Having seen 
his final scenes, I'm happy. Hope you're happy too.

• The final episode of Ashes To Ashes is on BBC1 at 9pm – join us on the TV 
site after the show to discuss the ending and for an exclusive interview with 
the man who wrote Gene's final scenes, Matthew Graham
 