
From the first episode of Life on Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/apr/10/lifeonmarsthebestbits>
, it was immediately obvious that John Simm's man-out-of-time, Sam Tyler, 
wasn't the true star. How could he be, with Philip Glenister's Gene Hunt 
rampaging around like Jack Regan's evil northern cousin?

We immediately loved Hunt because, in the words of Tyler (for once getting a 
decent punchline instead of trying to stop a punch-up), he was an "overweight, 
over-the-hill, nicotine-stained, borderline alcoholic homophobe, with a 
superiority complex and an unhealthy obsession with male bonding". Thrillingly, 
after years of oh-so-flawed and sensitive TV coppers, the Gene Genie was an 
unreconstructed thug only marginally less frightening than the villains he 
chased.

In Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/apr/21/ashes-to-ashes>, 
Hunt's character inevitably evolved. From being a copper who steals scenes, 
he's now become a character on whom storylines are built, a leader with the 
weight of the world on his shoulders. The Met is corrupt and only Hunt can stop 
the rot. As bothLife on Mars <http://www.bbc.co.uk/lifeonmars/> and Ashes to 
Ashes <http://www.bbc.co.uk/ashestoashes/> developed, he has become more 
vulnerable; a somewhat sensitive man – if you can get past the 
keep-your-distance sarcasm and snarling. You can't help thinking that 
something's been lost along the way.

You could, of course, argue that Hunt adrift in the 1980s is a brilliant, if 
convoluted, metaphor for the UK under Thatcherism – but that's probably 
over-complicating matters, and best left to those with cultural studies PhDs to 
complete.

What seems to have happened is that Hunt's character has moved in two mutually 
exclusive directions. A cartoon Hunt would have become increasingly boring, so 
he's been given more emotional depth. But because we love his kinetic energy 
and ability to say things we're not allowed to, the violence and the quips have 
become more extravagant. Not even a Savile Row tailored camel coat could take 
the strain.

I think Hunt is a genius creation, albeit one who dangerously panders to our 
secret suspicion that violence can solve problems – but I hope the next season 
ofAshes to Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> is 
the last. Otherwise, I fear that his character trajectory will end with Hunt 
exhausted and hopelessly conflicted.

Ashes to Ashes will return next year 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/ukpress/article/ALeqM5hk_CAlFTOgZev8hd97UxnxWgZWMQ>
, but let's not burden the good detective with another Tyler or Drake – let's 
send Hunt and his team through time and space instead:

• Hang On to Yourself
Hastings, 1066: "Stop whining, you've got another eye, haven't you? I've seen 
worse at a Manchester derby. It stops here; no garlic-chomping froggie 
pretender is taking over my country. Raymondo, to the shield wall!"

• Rebel Rebel
East Anglia, 1642: "Now, I'm not what you'd call a political man, but there's 
right and there's wrong, and King Charlie has crossed the line. Me and 
Cromwell, that one with the warts, are going to do something about it. Are you 
with us?"

• Suffragette City
The Crimea, 1855. "Yes, she's a bird, but Florence here is in charge. When she 
says jump, you jump. And if anyone else tries to nick her lamp to light the way 
to the pub, they'll have to answer personally to the Gene Genie."

• Station to Station
A small branch line, 1963: "Right then lads, it's clear this Dr Beeching is a 
right bastard and it's up to us to stop him. Betjeman here can tell you more. 
Don't worry about the versifying, he can't help himself."

• Let's Dance
The Power Station Studio, New York, 1982: "Oi, Bowlegs! Twenty years in the 
artistic wilderness beckons if you carry on down this blatantly commercial 
road. Get Tony Visconti back in now and make a proper album, comprende?"

• Starman
The Moon, 2053: "What do you mean, you can't drink or smoke up here? Bloody 
hell, somebody tell Chris that we're mining Helium-3 cos it's a non-radioactive 
isotope used in nuclear fusion, not the stuff that makes your voice go 
high-pitched."

• "Heroes"
A pseudo-medieval realm, date unknown: "So let's get this straight, because 
this lad here, raised on a farm despite allegedly having royal blood, has a 
grand destiny and a special sword, you expect the Met's finest to accompany him 
on an epic quest?"
 