
Dennis Lillee hasn't always been known for his hospitality. For years, he 
ruined the visits of Englishmen venturing to Australia with his ferocious fast 
bowling. By the time he retired from Test cricket, in 1984, he had taken more 
Test wickets - and more Ashes wickets - than anyone in history.

Now, however, he has mellowed. "We love the Poms," he says with a smile. 
"Sure, there's fierce rivalry at the cricket, but the Brits are embraced with 
open arms."

Here are his tips to enjoy his hometown in between sessions.

The city
 Dennis Lillee in his cricketing heyday. Photograph: Adrian Murrell/Getty 
Perth has boomed in the last 10 years. I remember looking out across it a 
little while ago and counting 36 cranes on construction sites. They're building 
new offices and hotels all the time and the mining sector - which is 
particularly strong in Western Australia - has ensured that we haven't 
experienced the recession that has affected other parts of the world. There was 
a time when Perth was seen as the poor relation of Melbourne, but not any more. 
There are fantastic hotels and restaurants now and it's become a vibrant, 
multi-cultural, modern city. But it's still the most isolated city on the 
planet. There is a rugged beauty about Western Australia and I love the fact 
that you can drive for hours and hours and not see another person. It's the 
largest state in the country - taking up nearly a third of Australia - and 
though around 2.2 million people live here, about 85% of them live within a 
couple of hours of Perth. I hardly leave WA now. Why would I? We have an 
amazing climate, amazing countryside and incredible recreational opportunities. 
I even holiday here.

The WACA
 Photograph: Philip Brown/Corbis 
I have to recommend the WACA (waca.com.au 
<http://www.waca.com.au/waca/museum.asp>), don't I? I'm President there now. 
Even if there isn't a game on, you can take a guided tour and visit the museum. 
It's a relatively intimate stadium; more like an English ground than some of 
the Australian ones. The tickets for this Ashes Test sold out in about 48 hours 
and there's certain to be a great atmosphere. We're redeveloping the ground 
straight after the Ashes. The competition for hosting international games just 
grows greater, so we're going to improve the facilities and make sure we retain 
cricket here.

Pubs

The Elephant and Wheelbarrow 
<http://northbridge.elephantandwheelbarrow.com.au/> is a good bet for a night 
out. It stays open late and offers beers on tap. It's located in Northbridge, a 
district where you'll find many of the bars and clubs. If supporters want to go 
for a drink right after play - and I expect they will - they just head up the 
hill and visitFenians <http://www.novotelperthlangley.com.au/fenians/index.html>
, an Irish pub, or The Grosvenor Hotel (thegrosvenorperth.com.au 
<http://www.thegrosvenorperth.com.au/>). Elsewhere, in South Perth, The Windsor 
(windsorhotel.com.au <http://www.windsorhotel.com.au>) - one of the oldest pubs 
in Australia - is well worth a visit as is The Vic (the-vic.com.au 
<http://www.the-vic.com.au>) in Subiaco and The Subiaco Hotel (
subiacohotel.com.au <http://www.subiacohotel.com.au/>).

Coffee

There's been an explosion of great coffee shops in the last 10 years. There's 
a strip of really good ones alongside Victoria Park. Epic (epicespresso.com.au 
<http://www.epicespresso.com.au>), on Hay Street, in West Perth, is very good. 
Zekka 
<http://www.urbanspoon.com/r/338/1370877/restaurant/Perth-City/Zekka-Perth> is 
exceptional, too. It's located on King Street in Perth's West End, where many 
of the boutique shops are. Zekka offers a wide variety of teas, too.

Eating out
 Fremantle for fresh fish. Photograph: Doug Pearson/JAI/Corbis 
A few years ago, finding a great restaurant in Perth was pretty hard work. But 
not any more. You're spoiled for choice now. It may not be quite as good as 
Melbourne in that respect, but it's much improved. One that I like very much is 
In Contro (incontro.com.au <http://www.incontro.com.au>). It's in South Perth 
and has superb views across the Swan River and the city. The chef - Peter 
Manifis - is developing a reputation as one of the best young chefs in the city 
and specialises in fresh, local produce. There's a huge Asian influence in 
Perth and that's reflected in the cuisine. Ten Ten Kitchen (tentenkitchen.com 
<http://www.tentenkitchen.com/>), a Chinese restaurant in East Victoria Park, 
is very good value, whileMunch Delight 
<http://www.urbanspoon.com/r/338/1529868/restaurant/South-Perth/Munch-Delight-Millstream-Shopping-Centre-Perth>
, on Mends Street in South Perth, offers good Thai food. Frasers (
frasersrestaurant.com.au <http://www.frasersrestaurant.com.au>) has wonderful 
views of the city skyline and the Swan River and is open for breakfast, lunch 
or dinner. The best sea food you'll ever taste can be found in Fremantle and it 
doesn't get any better than Kailis' (kailis.com <http://www.kailis.com>). I 
always have fish and chips, but their prawns and scallops are to die for. The 
fish is all brought in as fresh as can be from Fremantle harbour.

The outdoors

Perth has an outdoor lifestyle. I'm sure it's part of the reason I became a 
successful sportsman. Like most Australian kids, I was outside all the time as 
I grew up. If I wasn't playing cricket, I was playing football or riding around 
on my bike. Perth made me. The Swan River is at the centre of everything. I'd 
strongly recommend people go sailing (funcats.com.au <http://www.funcats.com.au>
), on river cruises or yachting (sopyc.com.au <http://www.sopyc.com.au>) if 
they get the chance. Charter fishing is also wonderful. For golfers, I'd 
recommend The Vines (vines.com.au <http://www.vines.com.au>), which is a 
championship golf course in the Swan Valley.

The beach
 Cottesloe Beach. Photograph: Alamy 
Cottesloe is a great family beach. It's just off Marine Parade, so there are 
loads of pubs and cafes overlooking the water and it's the perfect place to 
enjoy Perth's sunset.Scarborough is more open and expansive. It's great for 
surfing and has lovely, white sand. You can go anywhere in the world, but you 
won't find better. They have a big screen up for one day of the Test, too, so 
you can go to the beach and not miss any of the cricket. Should people worry 
about sharks? We've had a few attacks recently. But bearing in mind how much 
coast we have and how many people swim, there really aren't many. You're much 
more likely to be knocked down by a car.Mandurah is worth a visit if you get 
the chance, too. It's about 40 minutes from Perth on the train and was the 
holiday destination of choice in the 1940s and 50s. It has been modernised a 
lot in recent years and has some excellent bars and restaurants, but the 
original accommodation survives and makes it a charming place.

BBQ

If you go to South Perth and walk around the Swan River, you'll probably find 
a coin-operated BBQ every 500m or so. Every Saturday and Sunday, you'll see 
hundreds of people using them and enjoying their food by the water. Matilda 
Bay, opposite the university, is another good spot for a barbie.

Further afield
 Diving at Ningaloo. Photograph: Jeffrey L Rotman/Corbis 
Ningaloo Reef is amazing. In fact, I'd go as far as to say it's the most 
stunning thing I've ever seen. It's a couple of hours north of Perth, but well 
worth the flight. You can go snorkelling over the reef and see an amazing 
variety of fish. The colours are outstanding. I know David Gower was heading 
there between the Adelaide and Perth Tests. Sal Salis (salsalis.com.au 
<http://www.salsalis.com.au>) is the place to stay. It's eco-friendly and you 
stay in tents right on the beach.Rottnest <http://www.rottnestisland.com> is 
superb, too. It's a car-free island, a 30-minute ferry ride from Fremantle. 
Again, it's great for snorkelling and is very popular with anglers. Huge 
schools of samson (sambo as the locals call them) make the island one of the 
best metro fishing spots in Australia. Fishing gear can be hired or bought at 
Rottnest Adventure Centre, the General Store in Thomson Bay, and the Geordie 
Bay Store. My favourite holiday destination is Kimberley. It's in the northern 
part of the state and I like to drive for half a day and not see another 
person. It's a harsh, rugged place with very few settlements. It's about three 
times the size of England, but only 40,000 people live there. It's amazingly 
beautiful. The eco-resort at Broome (ecobeach.com.au 
<http://www.ecobeach.com.au>) is also outstanding. You can watch turtles and 
whales and, like Ningaloo Reef, you can sleep right on the beach and watch the 
sun come up.

Wine

Western Australia only produces about 8% of the wine made in Australia, but 
the quality is exceptionally high. There are easily accessible wineries about 
30 minutes from Perth in the Swan Valley, or you could make a day of it and go 
to Margaret River.outandabouttours.com.au <http://www.outandabouttours.com.au>.

• Qantas: (qantas.com <http://www.qantas.com>) flies from London Heathrow to 
Perth via Singapore from £805, including all taxes and surcharges. Valid for 
departure 16 April - 20 June 2011
 