
Rapidly shedding its sunshine and superficiality "Brisvegas" image, the 
Queensland capital is more than just the Gabba. But you have to get out from 
the shade of its cookie cutter Central Business District towers and into its 
inner neighbourhoods, such as leafy Paddington or post-industrial Fortitude 
Valley – "the Valley" – to really savour its laid- back local vibe.

Pearls and jam

Just one street back from the Gabba (short for its Woolloongabba locale) and 
presenting its backside to the ground is a pocket of Logan Street saved from 
the ravages of highway engineers and industrial development. Nestling among its 
antique shops and a violin-maker is Pearl Cafe, for breakfast, lunch or dinner 
– a recent venture by the former manager of the locally beloved West End 
restaurant The Gun Shop (53 Mollison St, West End,thegunshopcafe.com 
<http://www.thegunshopcafe.com/>). The mood is brasserie with dim lights and 
mirrored niches in its bare brick walls. The food is lustrous.

• 28 Logan Rd, Woolloongabba, +61 73392 3300. 7am-4pm Tuesday-Saturday

Walk on the not so wild side
 Old Stilt Houses. Photograph: Oliver Strewe/Corbis 
Bunker Coffee <http://bnecoffee.wordpress.com/2010/08/27/bunker-coffee-milton/>
 is a new hole-in-the-wall pitstop housed in an old air-raid shelter in Milton. 
Camouflaged by creepers and patronised by hipsters on fixies, it's a stylish, 
utilitarian place to refuel before heading up through Rosalie in search of the 
historic wooden Queenslander houses of the colonial city. Perched on stilts to 
allow the breezes to pass under, they teeter across the hills and dales of the 
area like salt cellars on a shaken tablecloth. Head up Ellena Street, past 
cutesy shops on La Trobe Terrace, and end up at hippy-shack cafeCabinessence 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Cabinessence/81316848970>, set in an old 
pharmacy building, for views back down to the CBD skyscrapers.

• Bunker Coffee, 21 Railway Terrace. Mon-Fri, 6.30am-2.00pm. Cabinessence, 117 
Enoggera Terrace, Paddington

For more coffee shops in Brisbane, see ourbrisbane.com 
<http://www.ourbrisbane.com/food-and-drink/brisbanes-best-coffees>

The force is with you

A licensed refuge for video game geeks, Mana Bar's patrons include the local 
Star Wars storm trooper legion and they don't need a theme night to dress up. 
The Valley shopfront has wall mounted screens for multi-player computer game 
combat and a serious bar at the back manned by a pierced chap in demi-gladiator 
threads. A cabinet holds a rotating display of donated gaming figurines. Games 
are both the latest or heritage button pushers such as Tetris. Being 
"Australia's first video game bar", it attracts nerds in the know from across 
the country. Quiet during university holidays when the Warcraft folk have gone 
home to mum.

• 426 Brunswick St, manabar.com.au <http://www.manabar.com.au>. Mon-Fri 
5pm-midnight; Sat-Sun 3pm-midnight

Barefoot in the park

It doesn't get much more suburban Australia than a BBQ and a beer at the local 
bowls club. Merthyr Bowls Club, near the ferry port in now fashionable New 
Farm, caught on to a winner when they introduced barefoot bowls to their greens 
more than a decade ago (a cross-dressing bowling day kicked the idea off, but 
it's no place for stilettos). No specialist kit required now, so you can just 
rock up and pay your $6 (more with meal deals) but it's best to book ahead. The 
clubhouse is a stylistic hybrid of Australian post-war good life and 
contemporary, with a faded portrait of HRH gazing down on plates laden with 
Tassie oysters and a deck overlooking the Brisbane River.

• 52 Oxlade Drive, New Farm, merthyrbowlsclub.com.au 
<http://www.merthyrbowlsclub.com.au>

Winn Winn situation

A stubby emulation of Melbourne's laneway culture 
<http://www.onlymelbourne.com.au/melbourne_details.php?id=9408> (enclaves of 
one-off boutiques, unique galleries, tiny cafes and hidden bars), Winn Lane is 
a short, gritty alley off Winn Street in the Valley, home to Little Jane Street 
(littlejanest.com.au <http://www.littlejanest.com.au/>) - a pocket-sized 
stationery store with Australian-made paper products. On one corner of Winn 
Lane is Flamingo (flamingocafe.com.au <http://www.flamingocafe.com.au/>), an 
open-air kitsch cafe where staff sport tattoos and floral pinnies and stools 
are 70s plastic corn on the cobs and burgers. On the other corner is Outpost
(the-outpost-store.blogspot.com <http://the-outpost-store.blogspot.com/>) the 
younger, street-wise cousin of local clothing institution Blonde Venus (
blondevenus.com.au <http://www.blondevenus.com.au>).

• Winn Street, Fortitude Valley

Finders keepers

The Queensland government has been investing heavily in its creative 
industries and the results are beginning to show. Artisan (381 Brunswick St,
artisan.org.au <http://www.artisan.org.au/>) is a design gallery and store 
that's also the starting point for one of two Audio Design Museum walking tours 
- downloadable MP3s that guide you to design stores, makers' studios and 
contemporary architecture in the Fortitude Valley area. There's also a South 
Bank and West End audio tour available.

• audiodesignmuseum.com <http://www.audiodesignmuseum.com>

Escape the heat
 South Bank artificial beach. Photograph: Steve Parish/Corbis 
For those without the time for a day trip to the island beaches in Moreton 
Bay, you can take a swim in the centre at the artificialStreets Beach 
<http://www.visitsouthbank.com.au/streets-beach> on the Brisbane River at South 
Bank – complete with palms, sand and lifeguard (skinny dipping after his 
midnight departure – don't tell) – or at the 25m lido locals use in Ithica 
Park. But for a true Brisbane experience, there's the 1886 Spring Hills Baths – 
ancient history for a city founded in 1824. Painted wooden cubicles line the 
25-yard pool partly open to the sky. Remembered by many as a venue for school 
swimming carnivals, it is like swimming into a sepia photo of the past.

• Spring Hill Baths, 14 Torrington Street, Spring Hill, 
brisbane.qld.gov.au/facilities-recreation 
<http://www.brisbane.qld.gov.au/facilities-recreation/whats-on/venues/index.htm?q_venue_id=464>

More tea, vicar? 

Brisbanites are rightly proud of their glossy new Gallery of Modern Art 
<http://qag.qld.gov.au/> (GOMA) on South Bank but the remodelled Queensland 
State Library just behind is a more intricate offering of unexpected spaces 
stuck together like a Chinese puzzle. Head upstairs to level two and try the 
door to the Queensland Terrace, a slightly surreal civic reception room open to 
the sometimes monsoonal elements at one end but lined, with deliberate 
defiance, with shelf upon shelf of delicate tea cups and saucers. Tours 
available. Out the back is a fire pit where story sessions from local 
indigenous elders are in the planning.

• Queensland State Library, Cultural Centre, Stanley Place, South Bank, 
slq.qld.gov.au <http://www.slq.qld.gov.au>

Fallow that for fashion

Black, white and grey are the founding principles of fashion store Fallow, 
which is hidden one floor up in an office building shared with Amnesty. Push 
the antler handle on the black wooden door to enter its windowless 
goth-goes-Gucci interior. It's all so surprising - not sunny, casual, Brisbane 
at all but instead an astutely put together collection of dark-hued Australian 
labels with silver, brass and leather costume jewellery by local and 
international makers.

• 1/ 354 Brunswick street, fallow.com.au <http://www.fallow.com.au>

Lime and ginger

Apart from Sunday arvo, the in-crowd has moved on from the rooftop terrace of 
the boutique Limes Hotel, with its pierced metal façade sandwiched between two 
wooden houses. The sybaritic day-beds have also gone but the views and the 
cinema (really a large flat screen) remain for film nights. The real find, 
though, is that if you become over-refreshed on Limes cocktails after midnight 
on Saturday, the hotel offers a bargain $99 deal to its bar flies if they still 
have a room free. It's a gamble – a vacancy or the night bus.

• 142 Constance Street, Fortitude Valley, limeshotel.com.au 
<http://www.limeshotel.com.au>

• Qantas (qantas.com.au/uk <http://www.qantas.com.au/uk>) flies London 
Heathrow to Brisbane via Singapore from £892 including all taxes and 
surcharges. Valid for departure 16 April - 20 June 2011.
Further information fom Tourism Australia, australia.com 
<http://www.australia.com>
 