

Annoying: Keeley Hawes as DCI Alex Drake in Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> (BBC)

There's something about Ashes to Ashes 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/tv/2008/02/can_a_70s_copper_make_the_80s.html> I 
find dispiriting, and I'm not talking about Keeley Hawes turning up for work at 
Met HQdressed 
<http://img.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2007/12_01/ashestoashesBBC_468x310.jpg> like 
a member of Human League. Although that too.

In last night's episode, DCI Alex Drake (Hawes) fairly cheerfully submitted to 
an induction into her new workplace that involved allowing her male colleagues 
to gather round and rubber stamp her backside.

It was all right to take part, she reasoned, because her life in 1981 is only 
a creation of her subconscious. By the same token, she could've stuffed the ink 
pad up DS Ray Carling's rear without fear of professional repercussions.

"I've done it too," chirped a female subordinate. Sexual harassment - remember 
when it was a bit of fun?

Things have moved on since Life on Mars 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/tv/2007/03/life_on_mars_how_will_it_end.html>, 
and I'm not talking about the show's fictional timeline. John Simm's character 
Sam Tyler was appalled when he encountered unreconstructed attitudes and 
methods of policing, 70s style.

His racist, sexist, brawling boss DCI Gene Hunt (Philip Glenister) was made 
safe for modern enjoyment by Sam standing in as a liberal conscience. When the 
male coppers were patronising towards WPC Annie Cartwright ("go and detect me 
some Garibaldis love") Sam stuck up for her, and not just because she had 
potential love interest written all over her flammable fabrics.

The message was always that the nostalgia trip was entertaining so as long as 
you had a return ticket. Then somewhat confusingly, Life on Mars concluded with 
Sam committing suicide in the grey and grim present to return to a colourful 
imaginary past full of birds, boozing and larger-than-life characters.

And now the Gene Genie's the star of his own spin off 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/tv/2008/02/last_nights_tv_ashes_to_ashes.html>, 
he and his team are fully fledged rogueish heroes, minus a credible critic. By 
giving them only the annoying, ineffectual and frequently inappropriately clad 
Drake as foil, it increasingly seems like a way to wallow in a Richard 
Littlejohn-style world view with impunity.

In the trailer for next week's episode, DC Chris Skelton appears amused and 
amazed that a prostitute is claiming she has been raped, with an earnest Drake 
explaining that no, really, it's still possible that a crime has been 
committed. It also looks like "Bolly knickers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/pressoffice/pressreleases/stories/2008/01_january/28/ashes_hawes.shtml>
" is going to fall for Hunt's raw machismo.

Of course, you could argue that Ashes to Ashes is just getting going, and 
forthcoming plotlines like this will be used as an intelligent meditation on 
the differences between then and now, to point up how far we've come. (Or 
haven't.)

If so, I hope the storytelling is sharper than the wardrobe department's 
research.
 