
So that's it then, Ashes to Ashes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/may/20/ashes-to-ashes>to ashes. 
The end ofGene Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2010/mar/16/ashes-to-ashes>, 
the bullying, racist, misogynist, everything else-ist DCI the nation strangely 
fell in love with, who spoke some of the most laboured lines in British 
television history. Hunt, of course, is also the TV character our prime 
minister said he was flattered to be compared with. "Don't let him take Britain 
back to the 1980s," saidLabour's poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/02/david-cameron-gene-hunt-labour-poster>
. Like a poorly tuned Audi Quattro, the campaign backfired, and here we are.

It seems that Hunt's been dead all along, I think. To be honest I'm not 
totally sure what's going on. (My name is Sam Wollaston, I had an accident, and 
I woke up in 2010, strange things are happening on the television, it's quite 
hard to follow.) But I think Hunt died trying to be a hero and that's him, with 
his face blown off, in the shallow grave with the scarecrow outside the spooky 
house in Lancashire.

It turns out that the world of Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> and Life on Mars 
before that is a sort of purgatory for troubled cops. Troubled dead cops, 
because Hunt's colleagues Shaz, Ray and Chris are also deceased, hence all the 
voices and the stars (should we have guessed?). At least Shaz made it to the 
90s and Oasis and New Labour before being screwdrivered by a petty car thief. 
Got it? No, I'm not sure I have either. Did the people behind A2A know all this 
when they started, or are they just tying together all the loose ends together 
now, in a big old knot?

Alex Drake – the police psychologist mentioned at the finale of Life on Mars 
who was dumped in 1981 at the start of Ashes for Ashes – is dead too, has been 
all along as well. She never came out of her coma and died at 9.06. No mummy 
for her daughter Molly then, poor girl. They – the dead – can go to heaven now.

Heaven is the pub, the old one from Life on Mars, the Railway Arms, where CID 
went for a bit of R&R after beating the crap out of people all day. Nelson the 
barman is back, on the door, playing Saint Peter, because Luigi's gone back to 
Italy.

What about Hunt's nemesis DCI Jim Keats then? Well, he's the devil. He runs a 
troubled cop hell, an alternative to Hunt's troubled cop purgatory. I'm pretty 
sure it's hell because you go down to get there. Wham's Club Tropicana, playing 
for ever, could be a problem, but it doesn't look so bad to me, with cocktails 
and skimpily clad blonde police ladies. Ah, that'll be temptation then.

Sam Tyler? He's still dead I think, probably always will be. His soul must be 
in pub heaven with the others, having a pint of Nelson's finest. The Quattro's 
dead too, murdered by a Dutch diamond thief, a dyke-digging tossport – Gene's 
words, not mine. Is that how Dave Cameron will refer to Jan Peter Balkenende, 
the Dutch PM? Let's hope so.

Hold up though, who's this at the end? A new arrival in Gene Hunt's purgatory? 
Does that keep the door open, just a crack, for maybe more to come? Oh Lordy 
no, surely not, they said this really was the end. I don't think I want to 
look, in case it's me ...
 