
Ashley Young is ready to play centre-forward for Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> should Louis van Gaal 
ask him to, the winger having played there previously for Aston Villa and with 
the manager’s options in the position limited.

Wayne Rooney is unavailable for Tuesday’s Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group match at PSV 
Eindhoven due to a hamstring injury. The manager has allowed Javier Hernández, 
Robin van Persie, and Radamel Falcao to leave in the summer window, and Adnan 
Januzaj to go on loan.

Wayne Rooney out of Manchester United’s match at PSV Eindhoven
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/14/wayne-rooney-injury-psv-eindhoven-champions-league>
This means the Dutchman may again start Marouane Fellaini as the main striker, 
ashe did in Saturday’s 3-1 win over Liverpool  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
at Old Trafford. Van Gaal could also field Memphis Depay as the No9.

“If the manager wants me to play there then yes, of course I would,” Young 
said. “I can play in lots of positions and I have done that under the manager, 
whether it is up front or in midfield. Hopefully I can play there [through the 
middle] but it’s up to the manager.”

Although Van Gaal has never spoken publicly of Young as a central striker the 
64-year-old is aware he can operate there. “He has said it to me before, but it 
is down to him,” said Young. “He has that headache of picking the team, so 
rather him than me.”

Last season Young forced his way back into the side and became a first choice. 
This term he has started only once, the 1-0 win over Tottenham on the opening 
day. “It has [been a while] and every player in the squad wants to be in the 
starting XI and I am not different. I want to play as much as I can, but when I 
am called from the bench as I was against Liverpool, I just want to show the 
manager that I am ready and willing to give 100%,” the 30-year-old said.

“I have always said that it is good to have competition for places and we have 
that in abundance in the squad.”

Young is carrying an ankle problem but it is manageable. “It’s OK. It’s 
strapped at the moment, but it shouldn’t be a problem for Tuesday,” he said.
 