
Ashley Young has still not signed a new deal at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and admits that his 
future depends on the decision of Louis van Gaal.

Young re-established himself last season under the Dutch manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/24/ashley-young-manchester-united-challenge>
, his fine form moving Wayne Rooney to vote for him as his player of the year 
at United’s end-of-season awards. Yet despite the 30-year-old’s contract 
expiring next summer, Young has yet to have any advanced talks regarding 
extending his stay at a club he joined in 2011.

Sergio Busquets hints Pedro may leave Barcelona for Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/manchester-united-pedro-barcelona-game-time-sergio-busquets>
Young, who is on United’s tour of America, is keen to remain. “I’m at one of 
the biggest clubs in the world so I want to stay here as long as possible,” he 
said. “That’s exactly what I want to do. I think a lot of people thought I had 
it done [a new deal] but I haven’t. It’s in the club’s hands now so I will have 
to see how it goes.”

Young is relaxed about the situation. “Of course. I want to go out and play 
and at the moment I am on tour so I am trying to enjoy myself,” said Young, 
though he said there was a long way to go. “I hope we can sort things out. 
There have been preliminary talks so I am just looking to go out on the pitch 
and leave my agent to take care of that.”

Pressed if the contract would be finalised soon, Young said: “You will have to 
ask the club that.”

After last year’s impressive form Young wants to look forward. “I was 
delighted with how things went last season but that was last season,” he said. 
“This is a new season and I have to take the confidence that I had and build on 
it again. I hope it will go as well as last season. He [the manager] picks 11 
players and I hope I will be one of them.”

Ángel Di María was bought for £59.7m last summer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/26/angel-di-maria-completes-move-to-manchester-united>
and posed a direct threat to Young. Yet it was the latter who became first 
choice as the Argentinian was dropped. “It’s one of those things – it’s 
competition,” Young said. “I’m getting to the back end of the scale [age] and I 
am beginning to feel it. But I still want to play every week.”

United beat Club América 1-0  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/18/manchester-united-beat-club-america>
in Seattle last week andSan Jose Earthquakes 3-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/pre-season-friendly-manchester-united-beat-san-jose>
 here on Tuesday. Van Gaal has limited his outfield players to a half per 
match. “Everyone wants to impress,” Young said. “You go out there and want to 
do as well as you can. That’s what it was like last tour and it’s the same this 
time. It’s about fitness but, us being Man United, we want to win every game. 
It’s going well, not bad. Another 45 minutes. In the first half we created 
chances. We were disappointed to concede [against Earthquakes] but we won and 
it’s all about fitness and match sharpness.”

Arsène Wenger on retiring: ‘Sir Alex has his horses. I have no horses’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/arsene-wenger-arsenal-alex-ferguson-new-season>
Last season Van Gaal played Young at wing-back, left-back and in midfield, as 
well as in his recognised wide attacking role. “These days you have to be able 
to play in one or two positions and last season the manager wanted me to play 
as a wing-back,” Young said.

“I think I adjusted to that well. When you have quality from back to front and 
have players who can play in different positions, then that can only be good 
for the squad. I just want to go out and give 100% and do as well as possible 
in whatever position I am asked to play.

“I have had to slot into different positions for him. I’m intelligent and have 
a good football brain and can read the game, so whatever the manager wants me 
to do I will do. This is a brilliant squad. You should watch training. Players 
take it seriously, just like they do in a match. They are disappointed when 
they lose training matches and that’s the way it should be here.”
 