
England v Montenegro, 12 October 2010
 Michael Regan/Getty Images 
Ashley Young insists he was fouled not once but twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/oct/13/ashley-young-dive-penalty-claims>
 when he was booked for diving in England's Euro 2012 qualifying draw with 
Montenegro. "I felt there was a foul beforehand in the first phase of play that 
didn't get given and I just couldn't do anything to get out of the way of the 
player coming in. I thought it was a penalty but we've just got to get on with 
it."

Manchester United v Queens Park Rangers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lt5UwnJCS8c>, 8 April 2012
 Owen Humphreys/PA 
Mark Hughes says a large number of Premier League managers have "lost faith" 
with officials after a weekend which included QPR's Shaun Derry being sent off 
after 14 minutes despite there being minimal contact with … yes you've guessed 
it, Ashley Young. The United winger was at least a yard offside when he 
received Wayne Rooney's pass in the area and hethen tumbled to the floor 
theatrically <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lt5UwnJCS8c>. Hughes said: "We are 
desperately disappointed with the performance of the referee, not only on that 
occasion, the vast majority of the game. It just felt as though he was a little 
bit too quick to put the whistle to his mouth – I think [Young] was still 
rolling around and he'd already given the penalty. Probably his assistant [Ceri 
Richards] at that point didn't have the opportunity to put his flag up because 
the penalty had already been given. The boy has gone over too easily and the 
referee has bought it unfortunately."

Manchester United v Aston Villa <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UF3QJvHApTI>, 
15 April 2012
 Andrew Yates/AFP/Getty Images 
Even Sir Alex Ferguson agrees that Ashley Young is attracting a reputation for 
going down too easily after "a dramatic fall 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UF3QJvHApTI>" to win the penalty for Manchester 
United's opening goal in the 4-0 defeat of Aston Villa at Old Trafford. Asked 
if Young, who clashed with Ciaran Clark after seven minutes, was getting a 
reputation for falling too easily,Ferguson said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/15/ashley-young-sir-alex-ferguson>
: "Yes. In the last week or two, yeah. I've never seen that in him, it's not a 
habitual thing in him. He was brought down, he just made the most of it. I 
think he played for the penalty. If the player decides to put his foot in and 
doesn't stay on his feet and read the situation, he has fallen into the 
situation. But he's definitely taken him. It was a dramatic fall. He overdid 
the fall but it's a penalty, there's no doubt about that and I don't think they 
can have any complaint because he has taken him."

Manchester United v Crystal Palace <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kSqZOEZ2fU8>
, 14 September 2013
 Darren Staples/Reuters 
David Moyes promises to reprimand Young after admitting that his player tried 
to con the referee to give Manchester United a penalty during their 2-0 home 
win against newly-promoted Crystal Palace. Television replaysclearly showed 
Young jutting out his leg <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kSqZOEZ2fU8> to make 
sure there was contact with the Palace midfielder Kagisho Dikgacoi before 
throwing himself to the ground. "I've always said I don't like diving," Moyes 
said. "Ash has put his leg into the lad's leg. The boy definitely puts his leg 
out and, rightly so, he deserved to get booked. I don't want my players diving. 
I don't want anybody doing it. I'll definitely say to Ash it's not what I want."

Real Sociedad v Manchester United <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_681MA2u5B4>
, 5 October 2013
 Peter Cziborra/Action Images 
Young wins a 69th-minute penalty for United – which was missed by Robin van 
Persie – afterreacting theatrically <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_681MA2u5B4>
 to a slight pull by the Sociedad midfielder Markel Bergara. The ITV pundit Roy 
Keane said: "Ashley Young has obviously gone down too much over the last few 
months, he's been heavily criticised in England, but of course we're playing in 
a foreign country and it's almost more acceptable. But I think he's conned the 
referee there."Ray Wilkins called the tumble "pathetic" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/06/manchester-united-david-moyes-ashley-young>
.
 