
Before Ashley Young made his way up the stairs of the Jimmy Murphy building, 
Louis van Gaal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal> could be 
found running an eye over a piece of paper marked “transfer list” and wondering 
what Manchester United’s chief executive, Ed Woodward, might think about being 
asked to find another £300m for new players.

We are here for Manchester United Foundation’s Dream Day 
<http://www.mufoundation.org/en/News/Archive/2015/04/Louis-van-Gaal-leads-Manchester-United-stars-at-Dream-Day.aspx>
, when the club open the doors of their training ground to supporters with 
life-limiting illnesses. United hold this event twice every year. Every player 
is involved and it was one of their guests, Mohsin Tanveer, who presented Van 
Gaal with that neatly typed wishlist. Van Gaal read it out loud: “Hummels, 
£36m; Clyne, £15m; Pogba, £75m; Bale, £120m; Memphis Depay, £30m; and Jackson 
Martínez, £25m.” A lot of money, Mohsin told him, but don’t forget United 
agreed a £750m deal with Adidas last year. Van Gaal liked this guy’s chutzpah. 
“I will have a word with Ed Woodward,” he said, folding up the piece of paper 
and putting it into his pocket.

Not too long ago, every United supporter might have had one of these lists. 
Yet we are here now, approaching the end of Van Gaal’s first season, and the 
need for change no longer seems so pressing. His team have outplayed Manchester 
City, Liverpool and Tottenham in the past month and the Dutchman described 
their performance at Chelsea last weekend as the best of his reign, albeit
ending in a 1-0 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/18/chelsea-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
. Increasingly, it feels like the old United are coming back and, along the 
way, Young has emerged as one of the season’s success stories.

English football has certainly been forced to reassess one of its forgotten 
men if we think back to last autumn and the natural sense of order after Ángel 
Di María, Britain’s most expensive footballer, had been added to a squad 
already featuring Adnan Januzaj, the player David Moyes had described as “young 
Johan Cruyff”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429868724038%2F6cd4c080-a3e4-4602-b069-dacb2b64eafa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Young%3A%20%E2%80%98Louis%20van%20Gaal%20challenges%20us%20every%20single%20day.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20we%20want%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Young%3A%20%E2%80%98Louis%20van%20Gaal%20challenges%20us%20every%20single%20day.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20we%20want%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429868724038%2F6cd4c080-a3e4-4602-b069-dacb2b64eafa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ashley Young with a young Manchester United supporter on the club’s Dream Day, 
held at the Aon Training Complex. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
Maybe we did not quite appreciate Young’s competitive instincts. The tattoo on 
his arm reads: “In life, if it’s not worth fighting for it’s not worth having.” 
He has certainly fought to establish his place in Van Gaal’s 4-1-3-1-1 system 
and there are not many people who would have predicted that whenDi María signed 
from Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/26/angel-di-maria-completes-move-to-manchester-united>
 for £59.7m.

Young accepts the point – “obviously, with Ángel coming in, and the price he 
was coming in at” – but he also took his encouragement from something Van Gaal 
said in his first week. “The manager said very early on that he was going to 
make up his mind on his squad from pre-season. I scored a few goals. I played 
well and, since then, the manager has shown that he meant it.”

His return to prominence was encapsulated in the 4-2 defeat of Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/12/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 when Young scored one, set up another two and subjected Pablo Zabaleta, a 
defender who played in the World Cup final, to a backheeled nutmeg. Young has 
always had quick feet and accuracy with his crossing but it is his ability to 
fit into the structural setup of Van Gaal’s “philosophy” that also appears to 
appeal to his manager.

“A lot of it is about positioning,” the player explains. “I think nowadays you 
have to think about football a lot more and about decision-making. I’m still 
operating as a wide player, and I’m still free to express myself, try to get 
one-v-one and get past someone, and there’s no better feeling than getting over 
a great cross and someone scoring. But I have also played left wing-back and 
right wing-back, which has been a bit new to me, and I’ve even had a go at 
left-back when we played Swansea, up against Wayne Routledge, and that was 
different as well trying to stop that kind of tricky winger. Players have to 
adapt nowadays and if you have a good football brain, if you can read the game, 
you can manage it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429868987627%2Fd4bfa6fb-ea3a-4c27-b149-6a1244da2c13-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Young%3A%20%E2%80%98Louis%20van%20Gaal%20challenges%20us%20every%20single%20day.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20we%20want%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Young%3A%20%E2%80%98Louis%20van%20Gaal%20challenges%20us%20every%20single%20day.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20we%20want%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429868987627%2Fd4bfa6fb-ea3a-4c27-b149-6a1244da2c13-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Ashley Young signed for Manchester United in 2011 but struggled to get into 
the starting XI under David Moyes: ‘Sometimes I wasn’t even in the squad.’ 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
We have certainly waited a long time for Van Gaal’s plans to click but there 
are now clear indications. On the left, Young’s link-up play with Daley Blind 
and Marouane Fellaini has been one of the more prominent features. “That’s been 
brilliant, the three of us playing in those triangles and the same the other 
side with Antonio [Valencia], Ander [Herrera] and Juan [Mata]. There are some 
cool heads there, and a lot of players who are now playing with more composure, 
not scared to give each other the ball, or play it in tight spaces.”

Van Gaal, he says, has provided the new club with a force of personality. “You 
don’t manage the teams he has managed without having that big, bold 
personality. He wants to be successful. He wants every detail spot on. As 
players, you want to be challenged and that’s exactly what he does: he 
challenges us every single day. It was always going to take time, but it is all 
starting to come together. If you look at the last run of games, even last week 
against Chelsea when on another day we would have scored two or three goals, we 
will definitely be back challenging for the title next season.”

By then, it would be a surprise if Young has not been awarded a new contract. 
His current one expires at the end of next season and the 29-year-old says 
there have not been any discussions yet about an extension. His expectation is 
that the first conversations will begin in the summer.

An England recall must also be possible for a player who has not been involved 
in Roy Hodgson’s plans since the World Cup qualifier against Ukraine in 
September 2013. “I felt I could have been in the last squad. All I can do is 
keep playing as well as I can for United. There are a lot of players competing 
for that wide attacking role and, if I’m brutally honest, if you aren’t playing 
regularly you can’t get picked. I found that out, missing out on the World Cup. 
He [Hodgson] said you had to be playing regularly and be on form and I wasn’t 
doing that. But I do believe I can get back in the squad. If I keep playing 
well for United, hopefully the England manager will come back.”

His newly improved status, and the increased sense of appreciation from the 
Old Trafford crowd, has also coincided with a controversy-free run, devoid of 
the dives that once led Sir Alex Ferguson to say he was going to speak to his 
player about the dangers of getting a bad reputation. Young has no appetite to 
discuss it at length but the truth is he always thought it was overblown. “I 
don’t want any controversy. We did have a conversation, we did talk about it 
and everyone is entitled to their opinion. It was talked about a lot but, for 
me, it was always down to the referees to give decisions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429869321925%2F1e4a8938-955c-4459-a408-ae526d7daac7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Young%3A%20%E2%80%98Louis%20van%20Gaal%20challenges%20us%20every%20single%20day.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20we%20want%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Young%3A%20%E2%80%98Louis%20van%20Gaal%20challenges%20us%20every%20single%20day.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20we%20want%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Fashley-young-manchester-united-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429869321925%2F1e4a8938-955c-4459-a408-ae526d7daac7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ashley Young, middle, celebrates with Wayne Rooney, left, and Juan Mata after 
the latter’s goal against Manchester City in the 4-2 win on 12 April, 2015. 
Photograph: Matt West/BPI/REX Shutterstock 
There is one thing, however, he does want to clear up. One day last week, 
Young went to his locker and found one of his team-mates (unidentified) had got 
there before him. “There was a bird above my locker. Not a real one. I think 
one of the lads must have gone to a garden centre and bought a fake pigeon.”

The joke goes back to an internet clip that shows something suspicious flying 
into Young’s mouth <https://vine.co/v/M3mhgEU2pjg> during the opening game of 
the season. This is his chance to put the record straight. “I can, 100%, 
absolutely confirm it was not bird poo. But I’d love to know who put that video 
out and how they did it. Or what my reaction might have been if it actually 
was.”

It’s not the orthodox way to wrap up a football interview. Yet everything 
about the Young story has been unusual bearing in mind the way his stock had 
fallen under Moyes. “The last manager had his plans and I wasn’t in the team. A 
couple of times I wasn’t even on the bench. It was disappointing but that was 
then and this is now.”
 