
In a turbulent century of political, social and economic uncertainty, the 
artist Claude Lorrain offered an image of the world as a place of calm beauty, 
where any change would be benevolent.

One of his greatest fans was the polymath Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who 
worshipped him for revealing "the world's beautiful soul", and went to Italy 
specifically to view it through Lorrain's eyes.

A new exhibition 
<http://www.ashmolean.org/exhibitions/future/?timing=future&id=58&exhibitionYear=2011>
 of the 17th-century artist's work opens on Thursday at the Ashmolean Museum in 
Oxford. And while Lorrain may have fallen out of fashion, it aims to 
demonstrate why he was once one of the most admired and expensive artists in 
Europe and a particular favourite of the English aristocracy.

"Germany was mad for him too," co-curator Martin Sonnabend said, "but England 
had the money."

He knows this to his cost: his museum, the Städel in Frankfurt, owns one 
beautiful Lorrain painting, some etchings, and recently managed to buy one 
drawing for a painfully large price from an English dealer. When the exhibition 
closes in Oxford in January it will travel to his museum as some reparation.

By the early 19th century two-thirds of all Lorrain paintings were in English 
collections, and the British Museum – a major lender to the exhibition – still 
owns 40% of all his drawings, with scores more and all his etchings in the 
Ashmolean collection.

"You'll find many a ducal Lorrain on our walls," said Christopher Brown, 
director of the museum, thanking the many anonymous private lenders for 
tolerating such big gaps on their walls for so long.

It was the calm, golden certainty of his light, Sonnabend says, that made him 
so beloved. At the height of the craze he inspired myriad artists, poets, 
composers, novelists and even landscape gardeners such as William Kent who laid 
out Rousham gardens near Oxford. Garden visits will be part of the exhibition 
programme.

The show includes the largest exhibition ever mounted of Lorrain's engravings, 
which Sonnabend particularly admires, including one extraordinary sequence 
commissioned by the Spanish ambassador showing the week of spectacle in Rome in 
1637, paid for by the Spanish, when one of their own was proclaimed "King of 
the Romans". In Lorrain's engravings the viewer can follow as in a graphic 
novel a wine fountain topped with a Hapsburg eagle exploding into fireworks, 
and a square tower falling apart to reveal first a round tower and then an 
equestrian statue of the new king.

Jon Whiteley, the senior assistant keeper of western art at the Ashmolean, 
hopes the exhibition will revive at least an echo of the craze for Lorrain. "It 
is true that he has fallen completely out of fashion," he conceded sadly. 
"There is something wrong with the world."

Claude Lorrain: the Enchanted Landscape is at the Ashmolean Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ashmolean-museum> in Oxford until 8 
January 2012.
 