
A grant of £5.9m from the Heritage Lottery Fund has brought the Ashmolean 
museum a step closer to owning a painting of a wistful young woman in a 
shimmering white dress byÉdouard Manet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/manet>.The Oxford museum now needs to 
raise a further £908,000 by the 7 August deadline.

The portrait of the violinist Fanny Claus, who would die eight years later of 
tuberculosis at the age of 30, is a study for Manet's more famous painting Le 
Balcon, now in the Musée d'Orsay collection in Paris and a key image of the 
impressionist movement.

The painting, Portrait of Mademoiselle Claus, has always been in private 
collections. It was bought in the studio sale after Manet's death by an 
admiring fellow artist, John Singer Sargent, and had only been exhibited 
publicly once since then before it resurfaced at auction last year, when it was 
sold to an overseas collector for more than £28m. The government then imposed a 
temporary export bar to allow a UK museum time to raise the purchase price of 
£7.83m, which includes a tax break as it is a painting entering a national 
collection. .

The grant was made through the new fast-track procedure introduced by the 
Heritage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> Lottery Fund last year 
to help national collections raise purchase funds quickly. Chief executive 
Carole Souter called it an extraordinary painting, "luminous, beautiful, a real 
masterclass in brush stroke technique".

The Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Fund charity has 
already given £750,000, and individuals and friends of the museum – one of the 
oldest public museums in the world and now the most visited in the UK outside 
London – have given a further £200,000.
 