
It has not been seen in public for 29 years, but yesterday Édouard Manet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/manet>'s Portrait of Mademoiselle 
Claus 
<http://arthistorynews.com/articles/870_Export_of_Manet_portrait_deferred__but_for_how_long>
 went on display at theAshmolean museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ashmolean-museum> in Oxford, launching a 
campaign to save it for the nation.

The unfinished 1868 painting depicts a young violinist, Fanny Claus, the close 
friend of Manet's wife Suzanne Leenhoff, sitting pensively on a balcony. It was 
a preparatory study for theLe Balcon 
<http://www.musee-orsay.fr/index.php?id=851&L=0&tx_commentaire_pi1%5BshowUid%5D=7121&no_cache=1>
 (1868–9), one of the major works of the impressionist movement, which hangs in 
the Musée d'Orsay in Paris. "I find it difficult to over-emphasise the 
importance of this picture," saidChristopher Brown 
<http://www.nationalmuseums.org.uk/members/?member=Ashmolean>, director of the 
Ashmolean. "Manet is a profoundly radical artist and this is a key picture – in 
some ways it's more radical and more appealing than Le Balcon."

The painting was bought by artist John Singer Sargent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jul/18/singer-sargent-sea-royal-academy>
 in 1884 and has remained in the UK since, though it has only been displayed in 
public once, at a 1983 National Gallery exhibition of Manet's work.

It was sold to a foreign buyer before Christmas for £28.35m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/dec/08/manet-painting-export-ban-fanny-claus>
, but the government placed a temporary export bar; on it in the hope that 
someone would come forward to keep the painting in the UK.

The painting's heavy tax liability means that, under a private treaty sale 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1984/51>, a British museum or gallery is 
entitled to buy the work at the comparatively knock-down price of £7.83m. Now 
the Ashmolean are mounting a bid to buy it for their collection before the new 
a deadline runs out in August.

"This is not really a conventional portrait – it's a study of form and 
colour," said Brown. "It's the very beginning of the impressionist movement, 
looking at people as objects to be studied. There's a link with an artist like
Lucian Freud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/feb/12/lucian-freud-portraits-national-review>
 who approaches his portraits in a very similar way. Although painted in the 
1860s, it has echoes today."

Brown acknowledged that in a time of austerity, raising £7.83m for a picture 
will not be easy. he museum will go to the Art Fund 
<http://www.artfund.org/index.php>, which assists public institutions to buy 
works of art, particularly those threatened with export; theHeritage Lottery 
Fund <http://www.hlf.org.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>; and "private individuals who are 
in a position to help".

Manet's works rarely come onto the market and command high sums when they do: 
last June, a Manet self-portrait set a record for the artist when it was was 
sold for £22.4m.

Even at £7.83m the Manet picture is much more expensive than the most recent 
high-profile work which was saved for the nation,Breugel's The Procession to 
Calvary, which cost £2.7m last January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/jan/06/bruegel-procession-calvary>
. However, it is a bargain compared to the £100m required in 2009 to keep a 
pair of Titian paintings,Diana and Actaeon and Diana and Callisto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/feb/02/titian-diana-actaeon-saved>
, in the UK. Brown said that he understood that the National Gallery felt 
unable to buy the Manet as they were committed to the second Titian.

There are only a handful of important pictures by Manet in the UK in 
institutions includingKelvingrove in Glasgow 
<http://www.mutualart.com/Organization/Kelvingrove-Art-Gallery-and-Museum/652C7FE377192B95/Artworks?artist=BEFBEF0CEAA0C0EB>
 and theNational Gallery 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/edouard-manet>. Brown said that 
acquiring the picture would give the Ashmolean's impressionist and 
post-impressionist collection, which has work by Toulouse-Lautrec and Pissarro, 
as well as other works by Manet, "an emphasis and strength that it doesn't 
presently have".

If the money is not raised, the picture will go to the foreign buyer. "The 
options are it goes to a public collection in this country for 25% of its value 
where it's seen by over a million visitors a year, or it goes into a private 
collection abroad," said Brown. "No doubt it would be lent to special 
exhibitions, but it would not be generally available. The owner may put it on 
loan to a public institution, but I have no reason to think that's the case."
 