
The five-year-old brain tumour patient Ashya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> will be admitted to a 
specialist Czech hospital on Tuesday where he is expected to undergo pioneering 
cancer treatment.

As the high court in London formally lifted all legal controls over the child, 
medics in Prague said they would assess Ashya's condition before the planned 
proton beam therapy.

Ashya was flown by private medical jet to Prague on Monday from the Materno 
Infantil hospital in Málaga where he had been treated for more than a week. He 
is due to be admitted to Prague's Proton Therapy Centre on Tuesday morning for 
tests before potentially undergoing specialist treatment next week.

His case made headlines after his parents took him from Southampton General 
hospital without the consent of doctors on 28 August. The couple, from Southsea 
in Portsmouth, travelled to Spain where they were arrested and held in custody. 
They were released when British prosecutors withdrew an arrest warrant in the 
wake of a public outcry.

The high court judge Mr Justice Baker appeared to question the decision to 
obtain a European Arrest Warrant, saying in a ruling on Monday: "I merely 
observe that as a consequence Ashya was left alone for several days."

The judge added: "Having heard the evidence, I conclude that there was no 
reason to stand in the way of the parents' proposal."

Ashya's father, Brett, said in Prague that his son was still in a weak state 
and would be observed closely by doctors before they decide whether he should 
undergo further chemotherapy prior to the proton beam treatment.

He said: "We're just so happy to be here. One month in trying to get here, 
pleading with the doctors, researching day and night to try and prove that 
proton was the best way to treat my son. In the end I couldn't convince them so 
we had to go spend time in the prisons – but eventually we made it, that's the 
main thing. We managed to get it all sorted out and be here at the proton 
centre. This is what we wanted from the beginning."

Ashya spent Monday afternoon under the observation of medics at Prague's Motol 
University hospital, from where he is due to be taken to the Proton Therapy 
Centre for the first time on Tuesday morning.

It is expected that the five-year-old will be treated under general 
anaesthetic at the specialist medical facility each day before being returned 
to the Motol University hospital's children's ward each evening.

The treatment is expected to cost up to £70,000. The children's charity 
Kids'n'Cancer has pledged to help fund the therapy alongside donations of 
around £40,000.

The high court formally lifted the legal proceedings over Ashya, who was made 
a ward of court when his parents were arrested in Spain last week. Baker said 
it was now up to his parents to decide which of the treatments on offer he 
should receive – conventional radiotherapy from a hospital in Southampton or 
the proton therapy available in theCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic>.

He said: "Responsibility about a child rests with his parents. In most cases 
the parents are the best people to make decisions about a child. The state has 
no business in interfering in the parental responsibility unless the child is 
suffering or is likely to suffer considerable harm."

The judge said that given what the local authority had known at the time about 
Ashya's removal from Southampton hospital to Spain, it had "acted entirely 
correctly in applying to the high court, and Judge Arthur was right in making 
Ashya a ward of court."

Both treatment options were reasonable, he said. "It is no business of this 
court or any other public authority to interfere in [the parents'] decision."

The judge concluded: "It only remains for me to express my hope that Ashya 
makes a good recovery. We send all our best wishes to Ashya and his loving 
parents."
 