
Cancer experts in Prague are due to give the go-ahead on Monday for 
five-year-old Ashya King to travel to theCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> for pioneering treatment 
which his parents say he was denied in the UK.

An expert panel will assemble at 8am in the Czech capital to decide whether to 
send a private medical jet fitted with appropriate equipment to transport the 
boy fromSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> where he is currently 
being treated.

The plight of the five-year-old hit the headlines after his parents Brett and 
Naghmeh King took him from Southampton General hospitalwithout the permission 
of doctors last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/01/ashya-king-timeline>.

The couple travelled to Spain where they were subsequently arrested and held 
in custody after British police raised the alarm. They were released when 
prosecutors withdrew an arrest warrant in the wake of a public outcry.

Now the family hope their son will fly to Prague where they hope treatment 
will begin at the Proton Therapy Centre in the next few days.

A post on the family's Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/1462059947403801/> on Sunday stated: "Ashya is 
doing well and they are just finalising the paper work (lots involved) and 
Ashya should be able to fly to Prague either today or tomorrow, fingers crossed 
everyone."

The therapy centre's director of strategy, Iva Tatounova, said the meeting on 
Monday was the final hurdle to ensure eveything was in order to begin Ashya's 
treatment.

"[The] preparation procedure can take up to 10 days but in the case of Ashya 
King <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> an expert panel of 
physicians have agreed to discuss the transportation details and additional 
treatment needed according to Ashya's current health condition on Monday 8th 
September at 8am," she said. "I do not anticipate there will be any problems."

Southern MÃ¡laga's Children's and Maternity Hospital has said Ashya is in a 
stable condition, and that a flight to Prague would not pose a problem to his 
health.

Family lawyer Juan Isidro Fernandez Diaz told reporters the boy was "in 
perfect condition to travel", and was playing with toys and his parents and 
brother yesterday.

The way was cleared for Ashya to travel to Prague on Friday when high court 
judge, Mr Justice Baker, who has been analysing issues surrounding Ashya's 
treatment since Tuesday, said he had been told that specialists there had 
considered a treatment plan.

A spokesman for University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust said: 
"[This] judgment will allow Ashya to get the treatment he urgently needs 
without any further delays.

"Throughout the period that we cared for Ashya and over the last few days, our 
only interest has been his health, medical treatment and welfare. We will 
continue to support any clinicians involved in his future care with advice and 
information."
 