
Brisbane Roar’s AFC Champions League campaign is still alive after a brave 1-0 
victory over Beijing Guoan in China on Wednesday night. Needing a win to stay 
in the hunt for a round of 16 berth, former Beijing Guoan striker Andrija 
Kaluderovic marked his return to a packed Workers Stadium with the decisive 
goal for the Roar late in the first half.

The Serbian, who was contracted to the Chinese Super League outfit for two 
years from 2012 but spent most of that time on loan to other clubs, tucked away 
a neat ball from rising talent Devante Clut to continue his rich vein of 
goalscoring form.

But the odds are still stacked against Brisbane following Suwon Samsung 
Bluewings’ dramatic 2-1 comeback victory over Urawa Red Diamonds in the other 
Group G match played on Wednesday.

It means Beijing and Suwon are both tied on 10 points, with the Roar back in 
third place on seven points and Urawa out of contention. Brisbane must beat 
Urawa in their final home game on the Gold Coast on 5 May and make up a goal 
difference deficit of four to have any hope of advancing.

But Beijing and Suwon will meet in the other group match, which will be held 
simultaneously, and a draw there will eliminate the Roar and ensure safe 
passage to the round of 16 for both teams.

Roar interim coach Frans Thijssen named his best possible side in China, 
choosing to start marquee man Thomas Broich and his understudy Clut together 
for the first time. Matt McKay, Luke Brattan, Brandon Borrello and Kaluderovic 
also played after they were among a host of players rested from Brisbane’s
A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> clash with Melbourne 
Victory on Saturday night.

Despite their fresh legs, Brisbane were on the back foot for almost the entire 
first half, holding on through wave after wave of Beijing attacks. But they 
delivered the ultimate sucker-punch five minutes from the break.

The move was swift – McKay found Clut in an advanced position, and the 
youngster used the outside of his foot to loft the ball over the home side’s 
defensive line. It fell perfectly for Kaluderovic, who was calm with the finish 
and also his celebration, out of respect for his former club.

That gave the Roar a 1-0 lead but they quite easily could have been several 
goals down had Beijing Guoan made the most of a litany of chances - they had a 
whopping 12 shots to three before halftime.

Brisbane were much better in the second stanza, enjoying several good passages 
of play and standing firm whenever their opponents went forward. Goalkeeper 
Jamie Young was kept busy throughout the night, making several important saves 
– including a diving effort to keep out a free kick from Pablo Batalla on the 
hour mark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fasian-champions-league-roar-wanderers-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86d52e56e2fcc4e3cc49f9b9f3f1b97136cdf77f%2F0_124_2923_1755%2F2923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Roar%20still%20alive%20but%20Wanderers'%20defence%20as%20good%20as%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fasian-champions-league-roar-wanderers-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Roar%20still%20alive%20but%20Wanderers%27%20defence%20as%20good%20as%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fasian-champions-league-roar-wanderers-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86d52e56e2fcc4e3cc49f9b9f3f1b97136cdf77f%2F0_124_2923_1755%2F2923.jpg>
 Nikita Rukavytsya celebrates scoring against Japan’s Kashima Antlers at a 
sodden Parramatta Stadium. Photograph: Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images 
Western Sydney Wanderers’ Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> title defence 
suffered a massive blow, with a 2-1 home loss to Japan’s Kashima Antlers in 
heavy rain at Parramatta. After taking a first-half lead through Nikita 
Rukavytsya, Wanderers conceded two second-half goals, the second coming in 
stoppage time.

The result pushed Kashima above the Wanderers, who are now last in their 
four-team group with just one round remaining. Western Sydney must now win 
their final match in China against group leader Guangzhou Evergrande and hope 
for a favourable result in the other final-round fixture.

While the Wanderers had their chances, Kashima deserved a good result for an 
enterprising performance after falling a goal behind. The hardy crowd of just 
over 5,000 who braved Sydney’s “storm of the decade” watched the Wanderers hit 
the front when Rukavytsya slotted the ball home after defender Naomichi Ueda 
made a hash of dealing with a through ball from Wanderers Japanese midfielder 
Takahagi Yojiro.

Wanderers goalkeeper Ante Covic was the busier of the two custodians and he 
made three first-half saves to preserve his team’s lead. Home striker Kerem 
Bulut had a shot pushed over the bar, but it was a rare opportunity for the 
Wanderers.

Kashima continued to push forward after the break and equalised half way 
through the second half when Shoma Doi cut inside and drilled the ball home 
with his left foot.


Gabu Shibsaki went close with a free-kick for the visitors before Kanazaki Mu 
made a perfectly-timed run in the first minute of stoppage time to drill home a 
left wing cross for the winning goal.
 