
Western Sydney defied all expectations to open their Asian Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> defence with a 
3-1 victory over Japanese giants Kashima Antlers.

The Wanderers entered this match against the J-League’s most successful club 
apparently a shadow of the side that conquered Asia to create Australian 
sporting history just three months ago.

With their A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> season in 
tatters having triumphed just once in their last 16 outings to sit last on the 
ladder, Tony Popovic’s men showed amazing character to put their domestic 
malaise behind them at Kashima Stadium on Wednesday to post their first victory 
in Japan.

The Wanderers took the lead courtesy of an own goal by Gen Shoji before Shoma 
Doi levelled. Yojiro Takahagi and Mark Bridge, who was involved in all three 
Wanderers’ goals, rounded out the scoring to give the title holders the perfect 
start to their defence.

The Wanderers fielded a vastly changed side to that which played in their 2-1 
loss to Adelaide on the weekend. Player of the ACL tournament last season, 
goalkeeper Ante Covic, was left behind along with the likes Iacopo La Rocca, 
Brendan Hamill and Romeo Castelen.

Assistant coach Ian Crook took the helm with Popovic watching from the stands 
as he serves his two-game suspension for his role in the on-field altercation 
during the explosive quarter-final against Guangzhou Evergrande last year.

The Wanderers may be the defending champions but it was Kashima who dominated 
the early stages. With less than five minutes on the clock Doi threatened with 
a powerful shot but sent it wide.

Wanderers gloveman Dean Bouzianis, in just his second appearance for the club, 
was forced into a goal-line clearance just moments later after a point-plank 
shot from Shoji.

Western Sydney began to work their way into the match with striker Tomi Juric 
proving their only major threat in the opening half, breaking through the 
Kashima backline to attempt two shots.

Juric continued to trouble the Kashima defence right after the break, the 
striker again managing to shake his marker to send a ball across the face of 
goal which the hosts just managed to clear.

But it was Kashima who would gift the Wanderers a goal in the 54th minute. 
Bridge struck a goal-bound volley, forcing an error from Kashima defender Shoji 
who put it in the back of his own net to give the Wanderers a 1-0 lead.

But just when the Wanderers appeared to have the momentum Kashima struck. 
Brazilian Caoi provided the perfect cross with Doi’s pin-point volley levelling 
in the 68th minute.

The Wanderers would have the final word with Bridge and Takahagi combining 
beautifully to regain the lead. Takahagi played the ball across to Bridge who 
sent it goal-bound for The Wanderers’ Japanese import to tap it home in the 
86th minute.

Bridge put the icing on the cake in extra time curling the ball into the back 
of the net for the 3-1 result.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fasian-champions-league-round-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f9d4207e0a9bd6163e453f0c8165c6b062762ff%2F0_196_2999_1801%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Wanderers%20open%20title%20defence%20with%20win%20as%20Roar%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fasian-champions-league-round-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Wanderers%20open%20title%20defence%20with%20win%20as%20Roar%20fall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fasian-champions-league-round-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f9d4207e0a9bd6163e453f0c8165c6b062762ff%2F0_196_2999_1801%2F2000.jpg>
 Matt McKay reacts during Brisbane Roar’s defeat to Beijing Guoan at Cbus Super 
Stadium on the Gold Coast. Photograph: Matt Roberts/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, Brisbane Roar’s ACL campaign got off to a disastrous start after an 
injury-time stunner consigned them to a 1-0 loss to Beijing Guoan.


The Roar were left shellshocked when a long-range free-kick from Beijing 
substitute Chen Zhizhao deflected off the head of new striker Andrija 
Kaluderovic and flew into the back of the net, two minutes into added time.


It was a cruel ending to a night that should have ended in glory for the Roar, 
but their failure to take advantage of a 10-man Beijing Guoan came back to bite 
them.


The visitors were a man short for most of the match following the dismissal of 
former Swedish international Erton Fejzullahu in the first half for stamping on 
the chest of Brisbane’s Adam Sarota.


But despite vast periods of dominance, the Roar – on their third foray into 
Asia – couldn’t convert their chances and paid the ultimate price.

The defeat means Brisbane face an uphill battle to qualify from a strong Group 
G, which also features Japanese powerhouse Urawa Red Diamonds and Korea’s Suwon 
Bluewings.


The match was played on the tourist strip because of a pre-booked Foo Fighters 
concert at Suncorp Stadium, with no other venues in Brisbane compliant with AFC 
standards.


The Roar’s remaining home games, against Suwon on March 17 and Urawa on May 5, 
will also be played at Robina, with the club claiming AFC regulations forced 
them to schedule all three matches at the same venue.


The official crowd figure was 6,851 – an impressive figure, given the rainy 
conditions and the fierce fan backlash to the Roar’s Gold Coast move.

Roar coach Frans Thijssen opted for experience in handing starts to veteran 
defender Shane Stefanutto and new recruit Luke DeVere, who made his first 
appearance for Brisbane since re-joining the club last month.


With the Chinese season yet to begin, the Roar looked sharper than Beijing 
from the start and largely dominated the first half. Their stranglehold on the 
contest firmed when Fejzullahu was given his marching orders in the 28th minute.

Fejzullahu was shown a straight red card after bringing down Sarota with a 
tackle from behind, and then needlessly sinking his boot into the midfielder on 
the follow-through.


Brisbane’s leading A-League goalscorer Henrique made his return from a 
hamstring injury off the bench in the second half, but not even he could spark 
the Roar into life.
 