
Western Sydney have defied a horror recent schedule to keep their Asian 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> 
defence on track, holding FC Seoul to a 0-0 draw.

The Wanderers had played seven matches in just 20 days prior to their trip to 
the Seoul World Cup Stadium to face the side they knocked out in the 
semi-finals last year.

The crucial point leaves the defending champions second in their group, behind 
Guangzhou Evergrande, halfway through the group stage and well placed with two 
of their three remaining group games at home.

But the heavy load continued to take it’s toll on Wednesday. Coach Tony 
Popovic, back on the sideline after serving a two-match ban, was forced into a 
last-minute change, starting striker Kerem Bulut in place of Tomi Juric who 
pulled up with hamstring tightness in the warm up.

Making matters worse, the Wanderers also lost fellow Socceroo Matthew 
Spiranovic to the same complaint late in the first half.

The Wanderers, who haven’t conceded a first-half goal in all 17 of their ACL 
games to date, were able to keep FC Seoul at bay in the opening stanza.

The five-time K-League champions put the Wanderers under pressure early with 
defender Anthony Golec forced into a crucial clearance in the 17th minute 
before the hosts’ Colombian import Mauricio Molina sent the rebound just over 
the crossbar.

Labinot Haliti found himself in space and took a chance from long-range in the 
32nd minute but sent it too high.

The Wanderers began to look dangerous before the break, with Bulut threatening 
while Molina also looked lively at the other end of the pitch but neither side 
could break through.

With key centre-back Spiranovic taken off in the 39th minute, Iacopo La Rocca 
was moved into the the centre of defence, with substitute Jason Trifiro taking 
the Italian’s spot in midfield.

Haliti was just millimetres away from breaking the deadlock in the 61st 
minute, rattling the crossbar with another long-range strike.

The Wanderers looked certain to score when a shot from Romeo Castalan 
rebounded and fell to Bulut in the 70th minute, but keeper Yoo Sang-Hoon 
diffused the point-blank shot.

Kim Hyun-Sung broke into the box in the 78th minute but failed to do much, 
with fellow substitute Lee Seok-Hyun attempting a strike just moment later.

Bulut has a golden chance to snatch a winner at the death but was denied again 
from close range by Sang-Hoon. Despite plenty of attacking intent neither side 
could find the back of the net.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Facl-western-sydney-wanderers-fc-seoul-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267518b87399be1d249f35b38ae7c92431f806e4%2F0_0_2652_1593%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Western%20Sydney%20hold%20FC%20Seoul%20to%20goalless%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Facl-western-sydney-wanderers-fc-seoul-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Western%20Sydney%20hold%20FC%20Seoul%20to%20goalless%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Facl-western-sydney-wanderers-fc-seoul-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F267518b87399be1d249f35b38ae7c92431f806e4%2F0_0_2652_1593%2F2000.jpg>
 Brisbane Roar’s Devante Clut celebrates one of his two goals against Suwon 
Bluewings. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAPIMAGE 
Brisbane Roar’s next generation took centre stage as they fought out an 
enthralling 3-3 draw with South Korean sideSuwon Bluewings.


Emerging midfielder Devante Clut scored twice in just his third appearance at 
senior level, while teenage forward Brandon Borrello’s rich vein of form 
continued with another goal at the Gold Coast’s cBus Super Stadium.


Clut’s second strike was a stunner from just outside the box with 10 minutes 
remaining, bringing the Roar back on equal terms just as they appeared destined 
for defeat.


The Roar had surged to a 2-0 lead after 22 minutes but their grasp on the 
match slipped after the break, and Suwon took full advantage through a Seo 
Jung-jin brace and a header from North Korean international striker Jong Tae-se.


The importance of a win was underlined for both teams when Beijing Guoan 
defeated Urawa Red Diamonds on Tuesday to consolidate their Group G supremacy, 
setting up Brisbane and Suwon for a likely battle for the second qualifying 
berth.


The two sides will meet again on 8 April, this time in Korea, where the winner 
will put themselves in the box seat for the round of 16.


Clut was one of six inclusions for the Roar from the side that fell to Sydney 
FC on Sunday, filling in the playmaker role in the absence of Thomas Broich, 
who was rested.


Any concerns about Brisbane’s ability to create without their star German 
midfielder were quickly allayed.


The Roar took the lead just 12 minutes in through Borrello, who ghosted from 
his marker to meet a cutback from Andrija Kaluderovic and finish neatly past 
Suwon goalkeeper No Dong-geon.


Ten minutes later it was two for Brisbane, this time with Borrello the 
provider on the back of some strong lead-up play through midfield.


Clut, who also scored on his A-League debut last year, was fed the ball just 
outside the box and then put his laces through it to find the bottom right-hand 
corner.


But Jung-jin pounced either side of the break, capitalising on two instances 
of sloppy Brisbane defending, to drag Suwon back into the contest.


His second goal was sublime, as he danced through three Brisbane defenders 
before delivering a clinical finish just five minutes after half-time.


When Tae-se nodded home at the back post to complete an excellent, flowing 
team move in the 71st minute, the Roar looked shot – only for Clut’s slice of 
brilliance to save the day.
 