
Reigning champions Western Sydney were knocked out of the Asian Champions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/asian-champions-league> despite 
beating Chinese powerhouses Guangzhou Evergrande 2-0 on a rain-soaked night in 
China.


Victory was only part of the equation. The Wanderers also needed the other 
match in their group being played simultaneously between Kashima Antlers and FC 
Seoul to end in a draw to secure second spot behind leaders Guangzhou and 
clinch a knock-out berth.

With the Wanderers ahead and the other clash level at 2-2 with just 12 minutes 
remaining, things appeared to be falling into place for the Wanderers with 
their title hopes on a knife edge. But Mauricio Molina’s injury-time winner for 
Seoul would end the Wanderers’ chances in the most dramatic fashion and render 
goals from Mark Bridge and Tomi Juric irrelevant.

The Wanderers now finish the group in third place, a point behind Seoul who 
progress instead.

It was hardly the most entertaining match with the heavily waterlogged pitch 
at Guangzhou Tianhe Sport Centre impeding any chance of a free-flowing 
encounter. But the Wanderers managed to deliver their end of their bargain, 
beating the 2013 ACL champions Guangzhou, who’ve won the last four Chinese 
Super League titles and are coached by Italian World Cup-winner Fabio Cannavaro.

Having already secured passage to the next round as group leaders, Cannavaro 
left out dangerous Brazilian duo Elkeson and Ricardo Goulart along with Chinese 
international Gao Lin. The Wanderers had their own exclusions with striker 
Kerem Bulut, defender Yusuke Tanaka and midfielder Kearyn Baccus all suspended.

Nikita Rukavytsya had the Wanderers’ first chance in the opening 20 minutes, 
trying his luck from a difficult angle but just missing. The hosts had several 
forays into attack with Zhao Xuri and Hung Bowen both threatening. But it was 
Bridge who would break the deadlock, launching onto a lose ball in the box to 
nutmeg Feng Xiaoting and put the Wanderers ahead in the 33rd minute.

Guangzhou came out firing in the second half but the Wanderers matched their 
pressure with Iacopo La Rocca putting keeper Li Shuai to work with a long-range 
missile. Romeo Castalan drew another save from Shuai with a blistering strike 
just after the hour mark.

Sensing the match slipping Cannavaro brought on prolific goal-scorer Elkeson 
and Goulart, who inflicted a hat-trick on the Wanderers in their 3-2 win last 
time the sides met, with less than half an hour remaining.


But Elkeson would last less than 10 minutes leaving the pitch with a hamstring 
complaint, with the Wanderers able to keep Goulart quiet. Yojiro Takahagi hit 
the post late with Juric attempting a strike in the dying minutes. The 
Socceroos striker would break through in injury time with a sensational finish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Facl-wanderers-win-but-title-defence-ends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ab9a2390536b85d6a50fc6d3ad8fd3562db2b11%2F0_78_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Wanderers'%20title%20defence%20ends%20despite%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Facl-wanderers-win-but-title-defence-ends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asian%20Champions%20League%3A%20Wanderers%27%20title%20defence%20ends%20despite%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Facl-wanderers-win-but-title-defence-ends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ab9a2390536b85d6a50fc6d3ad8fd3562db2b11%2F0_78_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 Brisbane’s Devante Clut shows his frustration during the defeat to Urawa Red 
Diamonds at Cbus Super Stadium. Photograph: Chris Hyde/Getty Images 
Brisbane Roar’s season also officially ended following a 2-1 defeat to 
Japanese powerhouse Urawa Red Diamonds on Tuesday night. Days after they were 
turfed out of theA-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> 
finals series, the loss at the Gold Coast’s Cbus Super Stadium also brings down 
the curtain on their AFC Champions League campaign.

Stand-in Urawa captain Shinzo Korogi put the visitors one up in the first half 
before substitute Yuki Moto drove a dagger through the Roar’s round of 16 hopes 
with a second goal close to the hour mark. Off-contract striker Andrija 
Kaluderovic pulled one back for Brisbane in the 70th minute – and while his 
effort sparked the hosts back into action, their fate was already sealed.

Beijing Guoan and Suwon Samsung Bluewings fought out a 1-1 draw in the other 
Group G game which was played at the same time, consigning the Roar to a 
third-placed finish. It is the third time Brisbane have failed to make the 
knockout stages of the tournament in as many attempts.

The loss ends Frans Thijssen’s tenure as interim coach with the Roar expected 
to unveil new boss Ramon Tribulietx in the coming days. The Barcelona-born 
Tribulietx, who coached Auckland City to a fifth consecutive Oceania Champions 
League title last month, arrived in Brisbane on Monday to complete contract 
negotiations.

Thijssen’s involvement with the Roar could also now be over as the club is yet 
to decide if it will retain him as technical director, despite an earlier 
promise to do so.

Despite it being a dead rubber for an Urawa side that was already out of round 
of 16 contention, several hundred Japanese fans made the trip and added colour 
and noise to the crowd of 5,941. Brisbane gave their own fans little reason to 
cheer, as they lacked any real penetration against the undefeated J.League 
leaders.

Although they left several key players back in Japan, the Reds still looked a 
class above. They took the lead in the 24th minute through Korogi, who was 
played in by a defence-splitting pass from Keita Suzuki and matched it with an 
equally classy far-post finish.

Moto made it 2-0 with his very first touch after coming off the bench to 
replace Korogi – his strike a near-fatal blow for a Brisbane outfit that needed 
Suwon to win and to make up a goal difference deficit of four in order to 
progress.
 