
I am a 14-year-old girl, and I want to be a dancer when I’m older. I feel as 
if I have an attachment to my dance teacher at school: we have a really good 
bond and I talk to her often about personal issues.

When I notice other people talking closely with her, emotions are triggered 
that affect me badly. (I suffered with depression last year; this mood isn’t 
constant in the same way, but feels similar in the short term.) It sounds 
overdramatic, but it’s something I can’t control. I know she’s just my teacher 
and that there’s no good reason I should feel like this when she appears close 
with other students, but it seems to be affecting me more and more, and I’m 
unsure what to do.

Often our relationships with our teachers, friends and people we date mimic 
those we had when we were young. If you weren’t given enough undivided 
attention when you really needed it, you can bring that into future dynamics.

The good news is, you can move on in a number of ways, and through a number of 
relationships. Could you get one-on-one tutorials with this teacher? Could you 
ask a friend to spend a certain day a week with you, regularly, one-on-one? Or 
simply ask someone to listen to you wholeheartedly for an hour or even an 
afternoon?

I share what sounds like the need you have for undivided connection time. I 
notice that when I get plenty of it, I no longer mind so much the times when I 
get a little less than I need. Another way I address this is to make sure I 
spend time alone, which allows me to see that often what I really need is 
undivided attention from myself.


Ask Alanis Morissette: my friends are freeloaders. How do I make them pay?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/22/ask-alanis-friends-freeloaders-how-make-them-pay>
This can take the focus and pressure off your teacher, and gently place it on 
making sure your needs are met from a handful of people in your life, people 
who are closer or know you better. In doing so, you might notice you are less 
affected by your teacher connecting with others.

Your needs are important, and anyone who offers their time to meet them – 
whether it is your teacher or another friend – is offering a real gift.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://alanis.com/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Campaign&utm_campaign=The%20Guardian%20Website%20Link>
. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morissette 
atask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>.
 