
Q This spring I planted a Vitis vinifera 'Müller-Thurgau' in the greenhouse, 
although it was described as an outdoor white grape. The main stem grew about 
6ft but never flowered. If I plant it outside and train the vine inside the 
greenhouse, would that help?
Jean O'Hagan

A Jean, your vine failing to flower in its first year is not down to its 
having been planted in the greenhouse. You need to initiate a spur system by 
encouraging laterals with winter pruning. Cut this year's growth hard back and 
train only one of next year's shoots to form the structure while allowing the 
secondary growth to form the spurs. The spurs (where the flowers are held) are 
cut to two buds in January.

Vines are traditionally planted outside the house so their roots are in more 
reliably damp ground. The body of the plant is then trained through an opening 
to revel in the heat within.

Q We've had subsidence that was attributed to ivy. Are there any evergreen 
climbers that would cover a shady wall without causing subsidence, or should I 
use pots to plant them in?
Susie Matthews

A It's best to plant climbers in the ground, as they always do better and are 
less dependent on you for watering. Spring-scented Holboellia and Akebia 
quinata are good evergreens. Lonicera japonica 'Halliana' keeps most of its 
foliage in the winter.

And finally: A couple of weeks ago, I responded to a query from a reader 
asking what could have toppled her sweet corn and stolen the cobs. I suggested 
squirrels, but several readers have written to say it is definitely badgers who 
are mad for it! Thank you everyone. Nothing you can do about it I'm afraid, 
short of a big fence or the good will of hoping they enjoyed it.

• If you have a gardening question for Dan, email ask.dan@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.dan@observer.co.uk>
 