
Asma al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asma-al-assad> stayed well 
clear of politics and chose a simple grey tunic, trousers and polo-neck sweater 
for her Mother's Day appearance with families of the martyrs of Syria's year of 
violence.

The clip <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r5ZT2helPgg&feature=youtu.be>, 
broadcast by Syrian state TV, shows the first lady speaking on Wednesday to a 
small group of people, many of them mothers with children, in an official 
building in Damascus. It identified them as "victims of terrorism".

Referring only to the "difficult conditions" the country is passing through, 
Assad maintained a philosophical tone around the theme of the role of the 
mother in the Syrian family and society. "If the father goes the foundation of 
the home is lost, but if the mother goes the heart of the home is lost with 
her," she said.

Assad made no mention of her husband but hinting at a possible future amnesty 
for rebels by the state, she said: "The mother loves her children and does not 
distinguish between them, and even if they have made mistakes, she still loves 
all of them."

The film shows women gazing emotionally at the president's wife as she speaks 
and then circulates, talking to guests while children draw pictures and paint 
their faces with the colours of the Syrian flag. "When a mother is lost the 
meaning of life goes and we feel that our souls will break. Nothing can 
compensate us,"

Speaking in informal Syrian dialect, Assad urged the audience to "preserve the 
love which our mothers put inside us and spread it all over the country".

The carefully edited clip ends with a song by the popular Lebanese performer 
Fairouz and Assad's fervent wish: "May god protectSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and all its people."

Syrian opposition sources said the film gave a rare glimpse of the president's 
wife performing her official duties and appeared designed to bolster her image 
after embarrassing revelations inleaked emails published by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/assad-emails> last week. "They want her to 
look strong and passionate and emotional," one activist said. "It's classic 
propaganda."
 