
It seems as though the obvious, apparently, needs to be repeated again. Bear 
with me, it's painstaking for me too.

When Vogue infamously featured Asma al-Assad <http://bit.ly/sdI55O> during the 
early period of the Syrian uprising in 2011, most level-headed folks were quick 
to point out the sheer bad taste and absurdity of the feature. It seemed 
surreal, yet unsurprising for a publication built on promoting the superficial, 
that the wife of a man running one of the world's most historically brutal 
regimes was being lauded for her daily sartorial choices as well as her 
promotion of democracy in her own home and "active citizenship" amongst her 
fellow Syrians.

In addition to this laughable angle, the piece was packed with declarations of 
Asma's "enigmatic" existence: she was, as the piece's title proclaimed, a "rose 
in a desert". The title implied more thansimply a painful cliche 
<http://bit.ly/Hw91nN)>. Roses are unable to grow in the desert for obvious 
botanical reasons that hopefully need no further explanation. Thus, Asma was 
not a "product" of the Muslim or Arab world. Heavens no. She was, with all her 
class, elegance, education and wardrobe successes, a product of the 
ever-constant "western culture". She was, as both the title and feature 
announced, a sight of beauty in a barren, deadly land. She was not a rarity in 
the desert, but an edaphological miracle. Yeah. Gag.

Despite the removal of the Vogue piece <http://gaw.kr/khzDgD> as a result of a 
critical but rightly guided internet ambush, the basic thesis of Asma "Emma" 
al-Assad as one of "us" who needs to be saved from herself and her husband 
persists. For this reason, the Vogue feature remains a pinnacle popular piece 
in framing the treatment of women in postcolonial states, where Jimmy Choo and 
Versace somehow ensure empowerment and sensibility.

The wives of the British and German ambassadors to the United Nations have 
recentlylaunched a campaign <http://bit.ly/Jch7WR> calling upon Asma al-Assad 
to "stop being a bystander" and start speaking out against her husband and his 
regime's gruesome crusade, which has left anestimated 10,000 Syrians dead 
<http://on.msnbc.com/hf5D4F>. The campaign's tedious open-letter video is 
accompanied by a petition thathas received quite a bit of traction 
<http://chn.ge/HTKbUA> in recent days, with over 22,000 signatures out of the 
goal of 25,000.

Oh yes, if the images of dead children and decapitated countrymen outside her 
own window do not touch the western sensibilities of Asma al-Assad, then no 
doubt a petition will. The fixation with Asma al-Assad as a rational, 
liberal-democratically educated woman with fashion and career receptivity seem 
to lead to the conclusion that she has the ability to stand against the very 
tyranny that safeguards her power-clad interests. Indeed, as the campaign and 
video insinuate: Asma has the ability (and perhaps even an interest!) to speak 
out against her husband's (note: possession of tyranny is not hers, but his 
alone) oppression. What this video and campaign ignore is, as Iwrote elsewhere 
<http://bit.ly/HcHhuH>, that Asma and her fellow first lady dictators are in 
fact active participants in upholding dictatorship and oppression of the very 
people they claim to represent.

They were never interested in freedom and democracy for their people, despite 
what their pre-"Arab spring" propagandist effortsmay have you believe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/08/gender-equality-middle-east>. To 
think so is to completely ignore the roles they have played to "provide a 
'feminine' and 'empowering,' 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/mmw/2012/04/first-lady-dictators-are-not-sexy-headlines/>
 as well as in some cases, 'western' face to the international public" in an 
attempt to cover the ugliness of their own dictatorships. Let us not forget 
that Asma's privilege – which cannot be reduced to the sexist materialist trope 
– comes at the prerogative of the people whom she, without hesitation, chose to 
step upon the moment she became a part of the al-Assad family. Syria's history 
of bloodshed and tyranny goes far beyond the confines of the past 13 months. 
And this is what Asma, with all her "western" sensibilities, knew. So why are 
so many rushing to implore her to save Syria from the hands of her husband, who 
enjoys the same privileges as she does?

The sad truth is that when Asma al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asma-al-assad> is clad in Louboutins and 
Louis Vuitton, speaking flawless British-accented English, she is the slightly 
tan-skinned enigmatic persona of "western civilisation". We applaud her. When 
she's a propagandist for tyranny, however, she is simply "misguided" but 
remains a hope for peace. And we must guide her back to her proper senses.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<https://twitter.com/#!/commentisfree>
 