
If she had looked even a little more closely Joan Juliet Buck might have 
noticed the thorns. In 2010 she wrote an article headlined "A Rose in the Desert
 
<http://www.presidentassad.net/ASMA_AL_ASSAD/Asma_Al_Assad_News_2011/Asma_Assad_Vogue_February_2011.htm>
" for US Vogue, praising the beauty and philanthropy of Asma al-Assad, wife of 
the Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad. The piece was published in the March 2011 
"Power" issue just as the Arab Spring was erupting in the Middle East. It 
caused a storm of criticism and was pulled off Vogue's website in May 2011, as 
it became clear how many of his own people Assad was willing to kill. Now Buck, 
whose Vogue contract was not renewed, has writtena riposte 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2012/07/29/joan-juliet-buck-my-vogue-interview-with-syria-s-first-lady.html>
 to the furore.

And yet, somehow, the mea culpa is almost as disastrous as the initial 
interview. From describing Asma as "the freshest and most magnetic of first 
ladies" in the original piece, Buck switches to the equally hyperbolic title 
"first lady of hell" and calls Bashar "the devil".Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> is no longer the orientalist fantasy 
of fashion magazines – the land of silk and ruins she described in her Vogue 
piece–- where Christian Louboutin has a home and Sting drops by. Instead, it is 
– equally unrealistically – a byword for evil, "Syria. The name itself sounds 
sinister likesyringe, or hiss," Buck writes. (This ridiculous description at 
least has had the cheering effect of sparking a funny Twitter hashtag 
#countriesbyvoguewriters - with tweets such as: New Zealand. Because the old 
Zealand is so last season)

The title of the Newsweek article is "Mrs Assad duped me", but it is never 
clear how. When Asma told her the Assad home was run on "wildly democractic" 
guidelines (her children "voted" to buy a chandelier made from comic books), 
did Buck think it meant her husband's election hadn't beenrigged 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/mobile/10338256>? Or when Asma stressed her NGO's 
work in making young people engage in "active citizenship", did Buck take it to 
mean Asma would cheer on protestors who sought to topple her husband?

In fact it's hard to tell if Buck asked Asma – or Bashar whom she also met – 
any real questions at all. Certainly not why anyone would marry a man whose 
fatherslaughtered 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/aug/01/hama-syria-massacre-1982-archive>
 20,000 people in three weeks. Nor even why, as she details in Newsweek, Buck 
was being followed. (In fact she seems more worried by the fashion sense of her 
stalkers than their intent, describing them as "wearing shoes from the 1980s 
and curiously ill-fitting leather jackets"). She did not ask why her phone and 
computer were bugged, or even why she had spotted something that looks like a 
mobile prison in the souk – all of which she brings up only in the Newsweek 
piece.

Buck does admit she should have done more research - she recollects asking a 
documentary maker, someone with a house in Aleppo, and an "aesthete" for their 
views. It's hardly rigorous but even so she manages to ignore a "passing 
reference" to extrajudicial killings to focus on Asma's looks ("to all 
appearances English").

To be fair to Buck she does explain that she had not wanted to meet the 
Assads, but Vogue told her they wanted no focus on politics at all. She also 
says she alerted her editors to her disquiet over the timing of the article. 
And that she was appalled at the regime's subsequent brutality. It seems clear 
that Vogue is equally to blame for the controversy.

But perhaps the telling point is when Buck admits she really wanted to see 
Syria's historical sites and so weighed up in her mind what the worst that 
could happen would be, "I would write a piece for Vogue that missed the deeper 
truth about its subject," before adding, oddly for a journalist, "I had learned 
long ago that the only person I could be truthful about was myself." So why 
write it at all?
 