
Her hair was tastefully curled, her makeup flawless and discreet. Asma 
al-Assad’s tone, too, was impeccably sober when she gave herfirst television 
interview in eight years <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OVT3ysM-5iM> earlier 
this week.


Like all Syrians, she told her interviewer in her light London accent, she 
felt “pain and sadness” when she met those injured and widowed by the conflict 
in her country and offered to help. “Could you ignore them? InSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> we believe in honouring our word. 
That’s important.”

The fact that the interviewee’s husband, Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, 
continues to dropbarrel bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/-syriaairstrikes-major-offensive-against-rebel-held-areas-of-aleppo>
 on his own civilians was not raised by the interviewer from the Russian 
state-backed television Channel 24, though there was an acknowledgement that 
there was “unprecedented” suffering on both sides of the conflict. Nor was the 
fact that Russia’s bombing in support of Assad’s regime hasled to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/syria-russia-war-crimes-inquiry-john-kerry>
widespread 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/syria-war-aleppo-attack-bombings-hosptial-ban-ki-moon-says-city-worse-than-slaughterhouse-a7336736.html>
accusations 
<http://news.sky.com/story/rebels-say-push-for-peace-in-syria-is-futile-as-russian-backed-bombing-intensifies-10592957>
 ofwar crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/25/boris-johnson-russia-could-be-guilty-war-crimes-syria>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fwho-is-asma-al-assad-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Asma%20al-Assad%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fwho-is-asma-al-assad-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Asma%20al-Assad%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fwho-is-asma-al-assad-video-explainer&media=>
Who is Asma al-Assad? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/21/who-is-asma-al-assad-video-explainer>
Why, she was asked instead, did the foreign media insist on criticising her 
family rather than focusing on her charity work? “That’s a question you have to 
ask them,” replied Assad.

Though the interview was hardly packed with revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/syrias-first-lady-asma-al-assad-says-she-rejected-offers-of-asylum>
, the decision to speak out after years of silence has reignited fascination 
with a woman who has variously been described as Syria’s“desert rose” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/01/the-only-remaining-online-copy-of-vogues-asma-al-assad-profile/250753/>
 and the “first lady of hell 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/syria/9458674/At-home-with-the-Assads-an-eerie-memoir-of-Syrias-first-family-before-the-slaughter-began.html>
”. How does this smart, elegant Londoner speaking the language of compassion 
square with the brutality of the regime her husband heads? And why was she 
speaking out now?

At home with the Assads: Syria's ruthless ruling family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/11/assads-syria-ruling-family> 
To David Lesch <https://new.trinity.edu/faculty/david-lesch>, a professor of 
history at Trinity University in San Antonio, Texas, and the author of a book 
calledSyria: The Fall of the House of Assad 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Syria-House-Assad-David-Lesch/dp/0300186517>, the 
first lady’s decision to surface was “a sign of confidence in terms of what 
they perceive to be their position – that they are winning. I think this is all 
part of a PR attempt to portray stability, inevitability, that they are in 
control of the country.

“I think they very much feel as though they are secure for the near future, 
because of thesupport they have received from Russia and Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/26/assad-confident-of-russian-support-for-syria-regime>
.”


Unlike the man she would go on to marry, Asma al-Assad did not grow up in the 
palace of a brutal dictator but in a pebble-dashed terraced house in Acton, the 
daughter of a Syrian-British cardiologist. She attended a Church of England 
school, where friends knew her as Emma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/11/assads-syria-ruling-family>, an 
ordinary student who was funny and friendly, though with an occasionally short 
fuse.

She studied French and computing at King’s College, London, then briefly 
became an investment banker in New York. Having met Bashar while he was 
training as an ophthalmologist in London, they reconnected in 2000 and married 
in secret later that year, months after he became president following the death 
of his father. She was 25.

There were great hopes, in the early years at least, that after years of 
brutal dictatorship, the young, western-educated doctor and his attractive 
British-born wife would preside over a period of greater openness and freedom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6de8b61de676cef29d6dc6b264aa5afc03572725%2F0_64_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asma%20al-Assad%3A%20from%20Syria's%20'desert%20rose'%20to%20'first%20lady%20of%20hell'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asma%20al-Assad%3A%20from%20Syria%27s%20%27desert%20rose%27%20to%20%27first%20lady%20of%20hell%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6de8b61de676cef29d6dc6b264aa5afc03572725%2F0_64_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Asma al-Assad voting with husband Bashar at a polling station in Damascus in 
April 2016. The opposition called the elections illegitimate. Photograph: 
AFP/Getty 
“People talked about the ‘Damascus Spring’ when Bashar succeeded his father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/03/highereducation.news>,” says 
Chris Doyle, director of the Council for Arab-British Understanding (CAABU 
<http://www.caabu.org/>). “There were changes, a sense of it being more open.” 
The new president was more approachable, he says, and some of the old guard 
were pushed aside. Expensive PR exercises burnished the image of the couple 
domestically and internationally.

But even in late 2010, when a writer for US Vogue interviewed Asma for what 
would become a notorious profile that called her “the very freshest and most 
magnetic of first ladies”, there were plenty of cracks appearing in the 
fairytale image.

By the time the piece was published the following year, Syria’s uprising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/02/global-warming-worsened-syria-drought-study>
 had begun, after a group of schoolboys aged between 10 and 15 from the village 
of Daraa werearrested and tortured 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/how-schoolboys-began-the-syrian-revolution/> for 
writing “The people want to topple the regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/11/inside-syria-rebels-call-arms>” 
on the walls of their school. Locals turned out in their hundreds to protest at 
their treatment, and the resistance rapidly spread (editor Anna Wintourlater 
disowned the first lady 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/syria/9325230/Syria-Vogues-Anna-Wintour-disowns-Asma-al-Assad.html>
 and the piece has been deleted from the magazine’s website).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d99937538e72ec8c8dbf107f91f487014ae83c%2F30_158_5314_3188%2F5314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asma%20al-Assad%3A%20from%20Syria's%20'desert%20rose'%20to%20'first%20lady%20of%20hell'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asma%20al-Assad%3A%20from%20Syria%27s%20%27desert%20rose%27%20to%20%27first%20lady%20of%20hell%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30d99937538e72ec8c8dbf107f91f487014ae83c%2F30_158_5314_3188%2F5314.jpg>
 People inspect the pit around the Sahra hospital after a barrel bomb strike on 
1 October. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty 
For a while, early in the conflict, there were questions over how much Asma 
knew about her husband’s activities. The wives of the British and German 
ambassadors to the UN madea video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/17/ambassadors-wives-asma-assad-syria>
 appealing to her in 2012 to “take a risk, and to say openly: stop the 
bloodshed, stop it right now”. She could not “hide behind her husband”, they 
said.

Syria's first lady, Asma al-Assad, says she rejected offers of asylum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/syrias-first-lady-asma-al-assad-says-she-rejected-offers-of-asylum>
But after a long and brutal conflict, there is little credibility in the 
suggestion she does not know, says Doyle, who believes she condones the 
activities of her husband’s regime. “I think it’s the analysis of some that 
they started to get very comfortable in power, and ... power corrupts,” he 
says. “They grew to love the position and the trappings of power and became 
more comfortable with the authoritarian bent of the regime.

“After five years of seeing such horrific levels of carnage, destruction and 
displacement, it’s hard to believe that she and others at the top of the regime 
are not fully aware of what’s going on.”

Any lingering doubt was laid to rest after the Guardian published emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/assad-emails-lift-lid-inner-circle>
 leaked from the couple’s private accounts that showedshe had been spending 
vast sums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/gilded-lifestyle-assad-coterie-conflict>
 on expensive jewellery, interior decor and clothes, even while bombs pounded 
impoverished Syrians.

The emails also illustrate the closeness of the couple’s relationship. “If we 
are strong together,” the first lady wrote to her husband in one email, “we 
will overcome this together … I love you.” These emails have circulated widely 
in Syria; so have Facebook photographs of members of the elite enjoying lavish 
parties while some in the country starve.

There are parts of government-controlled Damascus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/syria-civil-war-five-years-guardian-reporting>
 where, even five years into the devastating conflict, it is possible for the 
wealthy to live a comparatively normal life, and the Assads are no different. 
Though the vast presidential palace stands undamaged on its hilltop site, the 
couple and their three children Hafez, 14, Zein, 12, and Karim, 11, are widely 
believed by Damascans to be living in a closely guarded house in the leafy 
district of Malki.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa534b0dcd6ebfba0f8ca85409e10c8930e3d35f0%2F34_309_3055_1833%2F3055.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asma%20al-Assad%3A%20from%20Syria's%20'desert%20rose'%20to%20'first%20lady%20of%20hell'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asma%20al-Assad%3A%20from%20Syria%27s%20%27desert%20rose%27%20to%20%27first%20lady%20of%20hell%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fin-syria-we-believe-in-honouring-our-word-asma-al-assad-speaks-about-syrian-conflict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa534b0dcd6ebfba0f8ca85409e10c8930e3d35f0%2F34_309_3055_1833%2F3055.jpg>
 People during an ‘I Love Damascus’ marathon in Umayyad Square, Damascus. The 
wealthy can live a comparatively normal life in parts of government-controlled 
Damascus. Photograph: Omar Sanadiki/Reuters 
She walks the children to their Montessori school each morning. Hafez has 
begun to appear at youth events alongside his mother, leading to suspicions he 
is already being groomed for the next generation of the family business. He 
loves computing and has grown as tall as his father,a Facebook post 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/01/assad-children-learn-languages-practice-hobbies-160123091337305.html>
 declared earlier this year. He is also learning Russian.

And even as Asma has withdrawn from TV and is less frequently seen in the 
city, her image-building continues: the president and first lady maintain 
officialInstagram accounts 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BKz6OFHB7VT/?taken-by=asmaalassad>, hers showing a 
steady stream of humanitarian visits to wounded soldiers and smiling children. 
Every post comes already hashtagged: #WeLoveYouAsma.

In the stalls and small shops of the capital, trinkets showing the first 
family remain as ubiquitous as they ever were but few in Syria have any 
illusions about the president and his wife, according to a well-informed source 
– even among the Alawites, the minority Muslim sect from which the Assads 
originate.

“I think there’s a great resentment even among the Alawites towards the 
Assads,” says the source. “Because they feel they are the ones paying the 
price. Even inAlawite villages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/02/syria-massacre-reports-alawites-assad>
 you hear it. The graves for us and the palaces for them.”

“They have certainly lost whatever lustre they had prior to the outbreak of 
the civil war among most of the population, because that’s what the destruction 
of this war will do,” says Lesch, who came to know the president well in the 
period before the war.

“To many Syrians, they have lost their legitimacy to rule. So the big 
question, if he somehow does survive is: do they realise this? Does the regime 
adequately realise how much thepublic has moved away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/21/assad-government-trial-icc-syrian-opposition-coalition>
 from them?”
 