
Asma al-Assad, the British-born wife of Syria's president whose luxury 
shopping sprees during the regime's brutal crackdown on internal dissentwere 
revealed by the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/assad-emails>, is set to be added to an EU 
sanctions list targeting the country.

The 36-year-old former banker, who grew up in Acton, west London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/01/syria-british-born-first-lady>, 
will be among a number of Assad family members formally placed on the list when 
foreign ministers from the blocgather in Brussels on Friday 
<http://europa.eu/eucalendar/event/id/294096-foreign-affairs-council/mode/standalone>
, an EU official said, speaking anonymously.

Last week, a cache of what appear to be private emails from the Syrian 
president, Bashar al-Assad, his wife and other members of their inner circle, 
obtained by the Guardianshowed Asma al-Assad busy buying luxury goods from 
London and Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/14/gilded-lifestyle-assad-coterie-conflict>
, including jewellery, a £2,650 vase and £10,000 worth of candlesticks, tables 
and chandeliers.

"Asma al-Assad and several other family members will be added to the sanctions 
list later at the meeting of the Foreign Affairs Council, part of efforts to 
maintain the pressure on the Syrian government," the official said, adding that 
there would be no announcement before Friday.

Regime officials targeted in previous sanctions have faced asset freezes and 
bans on travel to the EU. If Asma al-Assad still possesses a UK passport – she 
lived in the country until she was 25 and it is not known whether she has 
renounced citizenship – she could still travel to Britain, albeitat possible 
risk of arrest for flouting previous sanctions as an EU national 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/syria/9149223/Bashar-al-Assads-wife-could-face-two-year-prison-term-for-sanctions-busting-after-shopping-spree.html>
.

The EU official, asked whether the revelations about the first lady's apparent 
shopping habits had prompted the move on sanctions, said the measures had been 
planned for some time: "These are legal measures and we need to make sure 
everything is accurate." The identities of the other family members to be 
targeted have not been revealed.

Asma al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asma-al-assad> had been 
viewed by some outsiders as a cosmopolitan, liberalising influence on her 
husband, most infamously in a Vogue magazine profile a year ago which called 
her "a rose in the desert … glamorous, young and very chic". But the cache of 
emails gave the impression of a woman wholly supportive of her husband as his 
regime's forces targeted artillery bombardments on civilian areas, most notably 
in the devastated western city of Homs. They also appeared to illustrate her 
utter detachment from ordinary Syrian life. The year-long crackdown has left at 
least 8,000 people dead.

The emails also showed that her father, Fawaz Akhras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/15/assad-emails-father-in-law-crackdown>
, a Syrian emigre and Harley Street cardiologist, appeared to advise his 
son-in-law on how best to respond to international condemnation of humanitarian 
atrocities such as video footage appearing to show the torture of children by 
Syrian forces.
 