
Date: Wed, 14 Dec 2011 08:20:26 -0800
From: [Bashar Jaafari]
Subject: Re: 
To: [Sheherazad Jaafari]

Dear Daughter !

I have just asked to send to you a BBC link related to an interview in English 
conducted with a so called former Syrian diplomat [XXXXXXXXXXXX], according to 
the reporter who did the interview with him . the reporter pretended that the 
syrian diplomat prefered to keep his identity anonymous " fearing for his life 
".

the topic of the interview was the meeting of the Security Council before 
yesterday . the reporter aired what I said at the Steak out addressing the UN 
reporters , then he asked the " anonymous diplomat to comment on what the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights had said as well as on my own comments . the 
former diplomat harshly criticized his own government ( as you will hear it 
from the link )accusing it of committing crimes against its own people, and 
then he said " I feel sorry for my colleague Jaafari for being at this position 
at the service of a bloodshed regime....." .

The BBC World Service in London called on me yesterday and asked me to comment 
on the defector diplomat's remarkes against his country and against myself .I 
rejected the offer .

i checked the voice of the " former colleague ' and could identify him beyond 
any doubt . [XXXXXXXXXXXX] .

[XXXXXXXXXXXX]

I would advise you to refer this matter to its high destination for 
consideration.I would recommend to deal with it very seriously because , later 
on , I'm quiet sure this anonymous diplomat will disclose his identity and will 
become out of a sudden another " star of the Satellite channels ", and that 
would be used as a first prove of defection in the Syrian diplomatic corps, 
something that it didn't happened till now .
 