
Fares closed all your twitter accounts!

>>

We are clean... However, I will keep an eye on new accounts

for his Excellency, all accounts are closed except one which is anyway 
inactive since 257 days.

Yours,

Fares

>>

From: Wannanosaurus [mailto:notifications-support@twitter.zendesk.com]

Sent: Thursday, January 05, 2012 10:27 PM

To: no_username

Subject: #4337251 Twitter Support: update on "Impersonation (reported by 
representative) - asm550"

##- Please type your reply above this line -##

Wannanosaurus, Jan-05 12:26 pm (PST):

Hello,

Thanks for the report. We've checked the account, and it is not in violation 
of the Twitter Rules (https://twitter.com/rules) at this time. We encourage you 
to keep an eye on it. If the account posts any misleading information going 
forward, please let us know. Just reply to this email with a detailed 
description of the content, and we'll investigate further.

Generally, an account will not be removed if, for example, it happens to have 
the same name as you, includes no Tweets, or makes it clear that it is not 
affiliated with or actively attempting to deceive and mislead others. We do 
suspend accounts that are clear attempts at impersonation, but our team 
investigates to make sure there is an active violation of our rules taking 
place.

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

no_username, Jan-04 11:32 pm (PST):

Thank you very much - I just checked the profile again and the exact spelling 
is:

@Bashar_alAssad

It may be worth informing you that this account uses Arabic language and last 
tweeted 257 days ago - has 441 tweets, 33 followers and following 38 users.

Thanks

Fares

From: Wannanosaurus [mailto:notifications-support@twitter.zendesk.com]

Sent: Thursday, January 05, 2012 1:28 AM

To: no_username

Subject: #4337251 Twitter Support: update on "Impersonation (reported by 
representative) - asm550"

Wannanosaurus, Jan-04 03:27 pm (PST):

Hello,

We need to confirm the username of the account you are reporting in order to 
proceed. Please reply to this email with exact spelling of the username you're 
reporting. You can either provide the exact username (@safety) or a link to the 
user's profile page (http://twitter.com/safety).

Please note, if a user deletes their account or changes their username, you 
will see a "Sorry, that page doesn't exist!" message when you try to view the 
account.

Thank you,

Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

Fares Kallas, Jan-03 10:22 pm (PST):

Thank you very much for your support - I was earlier informed that the account 
@Bashar_ alAssad was removed but it seems still active. Thank you for your kind 
attention and advise.

Fares

Wannanosaurus, Jan-03 11:02 am (PST):

Hello,

Thank you for providing this information. We have removed the reported profile 
from circulation due to violation of the Twitter Rules 
(https://twitter.com/rules) regarding impersonation.

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

no_username, Jan-01 07:38 am (PST):

Thank you for your reply,

I would like to follow up on the following accounts:

- @AsmaAkhras

- @Plaid-alAssad

-@SyrianPresident

Thank you and best wishes,

Fares

From: Wannanosaurus [mailto:notifications-support@twitter.zendesk.com]

Sent: Wednesday, December 28, 2011 11:45 PM

To: no_username

Subject: #4337251 Twitter Support: update on "Impersonation (reported by 
representative) - asm550"

Wannanosaurus, Dec-28 2011 01:45 pm (PST):

Hello,

Which account are you following up about?

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

Fares Kallas, Dec-24 2011 01:13 am (PST):

Thank you, I checked the account and they are still active. Please advise

if all accounts are removed?

Wannanosaurus, Dec-23 2011 10:35 am (PST):

Hello,

Thank you for providing this information. We have removed the reported profile 
from circulation due to violation of the Twitter Rules 
(https://twitter.com/rules) regarding impersonation.

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

Fares Kallas, Dec-22 2011 12:44 am (PST):

Thank you for your email and update. Attached is the authorisation letter

to act on the accounts related to the His Excellency the President.

Regards,

Fares

Fares Kallas, Dec-21 2011 10:39 pm (PST):

thank you for your email, I assume I will hear from you regarding the

remaining violating accounts:

- @firstladyasma

-@Asmafirstlady

-@FirstLadysyria

-@Asma_AlAssad

-@Bashar_alAssad

- @bashiralassad

- @Plaid-alAssad

- @SyrianPresident

Thank you for your attention

Fares

Wannanosaurus, Dec-21 2011 01:37 pm (PST):

Hello,

Thanks for the report. We've checked this account @asm550 and it is not in 
violation of the Twitter Rules (https://twitter.com/rules) at this time. We 
encourage you to keep an eye on it. If the account posts any misleading 
information going forward, please let us know. Just reply to this email with a 
detailed description of the content, and we'll investigate further.

Generally, an account will not be removed if, for example, it happens to have 
the same name as you, includes no Tweets, or makes it clear that it is not 
affiliated with or actively attempting to deceive and mislead others. We do 
suspend accounts that are clear attempts at impersonation, but our team 
investigates to make sure there is an active violation of our rules taking 
place.

We have removed the reported profile @basharelassad from circulation due to 
violation of the Twitter Rules (https://twitter.com/rules) regarding 
impersonation. Your faxed ID has been shredded.

We have removed the reported profile @AsmaAkhrasAssad from circulation due to 
a violation of the Twitter Rules (https://twitter.com/rules). We have contacted 
the user once more and are requiring them to make changes to their account in 
order for the account to be reinstated, and to avoid potential confusion.

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

Wannanosaurus, Dec-20 2011 04:17 pm (PST):

Hello,

I did not receive any new faxes from you yet. I have previously responded to 
your fax on Dec. 16, 2011.

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

Fares Kallas, Dec-20 2011 03:48 am (PST):

I would appreciate to hear from you. We have sent you the required documents 
by fax and did not hear from you yet.

Thank you

Fares

Wannanosaurus, Dec-16 2011 01:49 pm (PST):

Hello,

Thank you for bringing this to our attention. Twitter users are allowed to 
create parody, commentary, and fan accounts, as outlined here:

https://support.twitter.com/articles/106373

In response to your report, we are sending an email to the user 
@AsmaAkhrasAssad with recommendations for more clearly marking the account as 
being unaffiliated. Please allow 72 hours for the user to make any necessary 
changes. After 72 hours have passed, if you would like to file a subsequent 
report about potential user confusion from the account, please reply to this 
email.

Thanks for the report. We've checked the account @asm550, and it is not in 
violation of the Twitter Rules (https://twitter.com/rules) at this time. We 
encourage you to keep an eye on it. If the account posts any misleading 
information going forward, please let us know. Just reply to this email with a 
detailed description of the content, and we'll investigate further.

Generally, an account will not be removed if, for example, it happens to have 
the same name as you, includes no Tweets, or makes it clear that it is not 
affiliated with or actively attempting to deceive and mislead others. We do 
suspend accounts that are clear attempts at impersonation, but our team 
investigates to make sure there is an active violation of our rules taking 
place.

We have removed the reported profiles from circulation due to violation of the 
Twitter Rules (https://twitter.com/rules) regarding impersonation. Your faxed 
ID has been shredded.

-@asmafirstlady

-@firstladysyria

-@asma_alassa

To proceed with accounts for President, please send documentary evidence that 
you have authority to act on your client's behalf (i.e., agent's agreement, 
power of attorney, etc.)

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

no_username, Dec-15 2011 01:41 am (PST):

Fax has been sent and confirmation required.

Thanks

Fares

From: Wannanosaurus [mailto:notifications-support@twitter.zendesk.com]

Sent: Thursday, December 15, 2011 2:39 AM

To: no_username

Subject: #4337251 Twitter Support: update on "Impersonation (reported by 
representative) - asm550"

Wannanosaurus, Dec-14 2011 04:39 pm (PST):

Hello

We are sorry that the fax machine is causing you an inconvenience. I have 
checked the fax machine and can confirm that everything is working properly at 
the time I am sending this email.

Please note that this policy is in place to prevent against false and/or 
unauthorized reports.

Rest assured that this faxed information will be shredded as soon as it has 
been used to confirm your report. Additionally, we will be able to bypass this 
step for any future reports. For security reasons, we are only able to accept 
this information via fax; our systems strip incoming email attachments.

If a fax machine is unavailable, you can send a fax from your computer for 
free through third-party services such as FaxZero (http://faxzero.com/), Popfax 
(http://www.popfax.com/), or efax (http://www.efax.com/).

Thanks,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

no_username, Dec-14 2011 01:50 am (PST):

Dear Twitter Support,

It seems we are unable to reach you by fax. Please find enclosed the required 
documents.

Thanks

Fares

no_username, Dec-14 2011 01:49 am (PST):

Dear Twitter Support,

It seems we are unable to reach you by fax. Please find enclosed the required 
documents.

Thanks

Fares

no_username, Dec-13 2011 01:07 pm (PST):

Thank you for your email. The issue has not been resolved yet and I am at your 
request working with an attorney to respond to your emails and queries.

Thank you and will be writing to you shortly to follow up

Wannanosaurus, Dec-08 2011 11:39 am (PST):

Hello,

Thank you for bringing this to our attention. Twitter takes privacy matters 
very seriously. Thus, in order to process this request, we need to be in touch 
with either the person being impersonated or an authorized representative. As a 
reminder, parody impersonation accounts are allowed on the site as explained 
here: https://support.twitter.com/entries/106373

In order to avoid false and/or unauthorized reports, please provide a faxed 
copy of your client's valid photo ID (i.e., driver's license, passport) within 
48 hours of receiving this email.

If you are unable to provide your client's ID, please fax all of the following:

* A faxed copy of your valid photo ID (i.e., driver's license, passport)

* A copy of your business card, AND

* Documentary evidence that you have authority to act on your client's behalf 
(i.e., agent's agreement, power of attorney, etc.)

Please fax the documentation to Twitter at 415-222-9958. Include your ticket 
number (#4337251) and write "Attention: Policy Support, Twitter Inc. 
-Wannanosaurus." We need to be able to see your full name and photo on the 
faxed ID. This is a United States number, so be sure to include the appropriate 
international dialing code if you're sending from outside the United States.

This information will be kept confidential, and will be promptly deleted once 
we have used it to verify your identity. We appreciate your cooperation. For 
security reasons, we are only able to accept this information via fax; our 
systems strip incoming email attachments. If a fax machine is unavailable, you 
can send a fax from your computer for free through third-party services such as 
FaxZero (http://faxzero.com/), Popfax (http://www.popfax.com/), or efax 
(http://www.efax.com/).

Thank you,

@Wannanosaurus

Twitter Trust and Safety

no_username, Dec-04 2011 03:18 am (PST):

Username of reported account: @asm550

Name of person or company: HE The President and HE the First Lady of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>

Description: I am writing to you to seek your help and support with the below 
mentioned fraudulent twitter accounts purporting to be the President of Syria 
and The First Lady of Syria and we would like to officially request for these 
accounts to be removed or suspended. We believe that each of the following are 
clearly intending to mislead people via impersonation rather than act as 
spoof/humorous accounts:

- @asm550

- @AsmaAkhrasAssad

- @firstladyasma

-@Asmafirstlady

-@FirstLadysyria

-@Asma_AlAssad

-@Bashar_alAssad

- @BasharElAssad

- @bashiralassad

- @Plaid-alAssad

- @SyrianPresident

Please advise if you require any additional information from us; please also 
let me know when you expect action to be taken with regard to these accounts.

Thank you for your help and best regards

Job title: Director of Projects and Initiatives

Company name: Office of the First Lady

Company website (optional): http://www.mopa.gov.sy

Your relationship to person or company: Member of the Cabinet of He the First 
Lady

Full name: Fares Kallas

Email address: Twitter username (optional): n/a

Anything else? (optional): n/a
 