
The aim of Asteroid Day is to inform the public and raise awareness about the 
possibility that asteroids can collide with the Earth in the future. Today was 
chosen to highlight the risk because on thesame day in 1908 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2013/feb/08/tunguska-asteroid-comet-1908-siberia>
, a 30m object entered the atmosphere over a forested region in Siberia and 
exploded in mid­-air. The resulting shockwave and heat levelled the forest over 
an area larger than greater London.

Brian May: Asteroid Day can help protect the planet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/jun/30/brian-may-asteroid-day-can-help-protect-the-planet>
About twice a year an asteroid causes an explosion in the atmosphere that 
releases theenergy equivalent of the Hiroshima nuclear bomb 
<http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?feature=4380>. On occasion, you can see 
asteroid hits first hand in the night sky when a shooting star leaves a bright 
streak against the starry background. A shooting star is typically only a 
grain-sized particle that burns up in the atmosphere, but it is the same 
mechanism as a larger scale asteroid collision, only with fewer consequences. 
Asteroids are part of our natural environment and we have lived with them as 
long as we have existed.

Even though there is a regular influx of cosmic material to the Earth, an 
asteroid impact only rarely causes damage. Usually, asteroids are too small, 
explode too high or enter the atmosphere over uninhabited territory such as the 
ocean. However, in time intervals that can be measured in tens or even hundreds 
of years, an asteroid impact causes significant damage.

A relatively small impact event occurred over the Russian city of Chelyabinsk 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/30/chelyabinsk-meteorite-earth-warning-shot-space>
. Here, a 17 metre ­object caused a shock wave that shattered windows and 
injured about 1500 people. Impacting asteroids can measure hundreds of metres 
in diameter and have the potential to cause substantial damage to our 
civilisation. Such an event may lie many years in the future, but the damage 
that could be caused is reason enough to research asteroids and learn about 
their potential for natural disaster.

In contrast to other natural disasters, such as earthquakes, an asteroid 
impact is predictable. Shortly after an asteroid is discovered, its impact 
probability and time can be calculated to the hour, even if the potential 
impact is tens of years in the future. In addition, the impact location can be 
predicted to lie within a so­-called “impact corridor”, as shown in the image 
below. Because of uncertainty in the observations of asteroids, the impact 
prediction does not produce a point but a corridor that typically stretches 
across half the globe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fasteroid-strikes-are-a-threat-but-space-based-telescopes-would-reduce-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435665836462%2F0560a1ae-2e4f-4fd6-bb3a-8336d580081e-2060x1062.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asteroid%20strikes%20are%20a%20threat%2C%20but%20space-based%20telescopes%20would%20reduce%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fasteroid-strikes-are-a-threat-but-space-based-telescopes-would-reduce-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asteroid%20strikes%20are%20a%20threat%2C%20but%20space-based%20telescopes%20would%20reduce%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fasteroid-strikes-are-a-threat-but-space-based-telescopes-would-reduce-risk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435665836462%2F0560a1ae-2e4f-4fd6-bb3a-8336d580081e-2060x1062.jpeg>
 An “impact corridor” for an asteroid, which can be calculated tens of years 
into the future. Photograph: Clemens Rumpf 
To make use of the fact that asteroid impacts are predictable, an asteroid 
needs to be discovered before it impacts the Earth. But at the moment, we have 
only discovered about 1% of the asteroids that can impact the Earth in the 
future. This means the next asteroid impact will likely happen without warning, 
as happened in Chelyabinsk. What we need now are capable telescopes to help us 
discover all potentially threatening asteroids.

Space-based telescopes, such as the Sentinel mission 
<http://sentinelmission.org/sentinel-mission/> proposed by the B612 Foundation, 
orNasa’s proposed NeoCam mission 
<http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/asteroids/multimedia/pia16955.html>, would 
be able to discover most of the remaining asteroids within 10 years. Such 
telescopes would also help reduce uncertainty in the observational data. Less 
uncertainty means that we can make a clearer statement about whether or not an 
asteroid is likely to strike Earth. Similarly, better observations narrow the 
impact corridors, and allow us to make better predictions about where a 
potential impact might occur.

Considering the entire asteroid population, and averaging over many years, any 
region on Earth has an equal likelihood of being struck by an asteroid. The 
average impact distribution can be likened to a pile of many transparent, sharp 
images stacked above each other. Stacked in this way, the sharp images produce 
a blurred picture with little distinguishable information. But taken by 
themselves, each individual image represents the day-to-day knowledge of where 
an asteroid impact is most likely to occur. One such snapshot is shown below:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fasteroid-strikes-are-a-threat-but-space-based-telescopes-would-reduce-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435666247229%2Fc2d4f11c-1d94-4b26-8237-1bb074f05d4d-2060x958.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asteroid%20strikes%20are%20a%20threat%2C%20but%20space-based%20telescopes%20would%20reduce%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fasteroid-strikes-are-a-threat-but-space-based-telescopes-would-reduce-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asteroid%20strikes%20are%20a%20threat%2C%20but%20space-based%20telescopes%20would%20reduce%20risk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fasteroid-strikes-are-a-threat-but-space-based-telescopes-would-reduce-risk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435666247229%2Fc2d4f11c-1d94-4b26-8237-1bb074f05d4d-2060x958.jpeg>
 An illustration of asteroid impact risk. Photograph: ARMOR/University of 
Southampton 
The current knowledge of asteroid impact probability distribution changes over 
time because new observations improve our knowledge. But information like this 
can help disaster planning because it is our current best guess of where an 
asteroid might strike. Usually, impact probabilities are low, similar to 
winning the jackpot in the lottery. This is the daily situation that we live 
with, and not very worrisome. However, some asteroids stand out. In 2004, the 
asteroid Apophis had a 3% probability of striking Earth in the year 2029. In 
such a scenario, it is important to know where the impact can occur and what 
the consequences might be.

To support decision-making around the asteroid threat, researchers at the 
University of Southampton have developed software called ARMOR (Asteroid Risk 
Mitigation Optimization and Research tool) which can predict the impact sites 
of asteroids and the effects those strikes may have. The figures shown here are 
results from this research, which was presented to world experts at the
Planetary Defense Conference <http://pdc.iaaweb.org/> in April 2015.

What threat do asteroids really pose to life on Earth? - podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2015/jun/26/asteroids-threat-life-on-earth-podcast>
An asteroid impact can be averted by altering the trajectory of an asteroid. 
Our long- term goal is to support the design of these missions by providing 
knowledge of where an asteroid might hit and what damage it could cause.

Asteroids <https://www.theguardian.com/science/asteroids> are part of our 
natural environment. Smaller pieces of material collide with the Earth on a 
regular basis. Typically, a shooting star is the result, but a large asteroid 
impact can cause damage on a global scale. Telescopes are the next step to 
enable further investigation of this natural hazard. Early observations make it 
possible to predict the impact location and even enable deflection of the 
asteroid to avert an impact. We are not in a critical situation at the moment, 
and the continued effort of the dedicated planetary defence community aims to 
ensure that we are prepared when the next Tunguska asteroid is discovered.
 