
When Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong hoisted the Stars and Stripes on the moon, 
the act was purely symbolic. Two years earlier, mindful of Cold War animosity,
the 1967 Outer Space Treaty (OST) 
<http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/introouterspacetreaty.html>
 had decreed that outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, 
“is not subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty”.

In other words no country, not even the US, could own the moon or any other 
part of space, regardless of how many flags they erected there. Half a century 
on, though, the OST could prove the biggest obstacle to one of the most 
exciting new frontiers of space exploration: asteroid mining.

The reason lawyers could soon be poring over that 48-year-old document is that 
space mining could become a reality within a couple of decades.

In what is being seen as a major breakthrough for this embryonic technology, 
the government of Luxembourg has thrown its financial muscle behind plans to 
extract resources from asteroids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/03/luxembourg-aims-to-be-big-player-in-possible-asteroid-mining>
, some of which are rich in platinum and other valuable metals. It plans to 
team up with private companies to help speed the progress of the industry and 
draw up a regulatory framework for it.

One such firm, Deep Space Industries <https://deepspaceindustries.com/>, wants 
to send small satellites, called Fireflies, into space from 2017 to prospect 
for minerals and ice. The satellites would hitch a ride on a rocket, and larger 
craft would then be used to harvest, transport and store raw materials.

Metals such as nickel and iron, which are plentiful on Earth, could be 
processed while in orbit and used to build equipment or spacecraft. And it may 
eventually be possible to extract valuable minerals from asteroids cheaply 
enough for it to be worth bringing them back to Earth.

Rival Planetary Resources <http://www.planetaryresources.com/> has a slightly 
different plan, in which telescopes would be used to analyse asteroids before 
craft were sent to mine them. Its backers include Google co-founder Larry Page 
and billionaire businessman Ross Perot, and it thinks it could be operating in 
space by 2025.

How would asteroid mining work? A visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/feb/06/how-would-asteroid-mining-work-a-visual-guide>
One of the difficulties facing these would-be space miners is cost, which is 
fittingly astronomical.Nasa’s Osiris-Rex expedition 
<http://science.nasa.gov/missions/osiris-rex/>, which aims to bring just two 
kilos of asteroid material back to Earth by 2023, is set to cost $1bn. But Deep 
Space Industries thinks it can get the ball rolling by putting three of its 
Fireflies in space for just $20m.

The other obvious barrier is the technological progress that is still required 
if commercial asteroid mining is to become practically possible and 
economically viable.

However, considerable as these hurdles are, experts believe the legal 
component is the most pressing. Late last year, theUS government made an 
attempt to update the law on space mining, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/13/congress-claims-space-resource-rights-for-americans-to-exploit-new-frontier>
producing a bill that allows companies to “possess, own, transport, use, and 
sell” extra-terrestrial resources without violating US law. The problem is that 
putting this into practice violates the OST.

“The way a private company would enforce their right to mine is through a 
national court,” says space law expert Dr Chris Newman of the University of 
Sunderland. “In making a ruling, that court would exercise sovereign rights, 
contravening the OST. We will only know how this would play out if it is tested 
in court.”

US lawyer Michael Listner, who founded thinktank Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Law and Policy Solutions, says the 
US law is incompatible with the OST and risks souring international relations: 
“China and Russia will want in. If you have conflicts of law, things start 
getting dicey and that could lead to legal and political conflict.”

Newman believes that one reason why Luxembourg has included plans for drawing 
up a regulatory framework is to show the world that work is under way on 
untangling such legal knots. “This is something for investors to hang their hat 
on,” he says, “to give them confidence and say that there is a nascent legal 
framework.”

But Dr Gbenga Oduntan, a space law expert at the University of Kent, warns 
that the international community needs to get its act together quickly. “What 
we don’t want is a free-for-all over asteroids,” he says. “We need to come 
together and do that thinking, because the law we have right now does not allow 
us to repatriate resources for commercial purposes.”

One way to do this, he suggests, is to draw on existing legislation such as the
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 
<http://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf>, 
which governs how nations use the ocean. Another option might be to revive the
Moon Treaty of 1979 
<http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/intromoon-agreement.html>
, which deemed space to be the “common heritage of mankind” but failed to win 
support from any space-faring nation.

American 'space pioneers' deserve asteroid rights, Congress says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/13/congress-claims-space-resource-rights-for-americans-to-exploit-new-frontier>
Such complex legal wrangles could indeed prove harder to overcome than other 
difficulties, such as the huge costs involved. But some experts believe that 
investing large amounts early on could create a space economy in which costs 
are forced down by collaboration.

Ian Crawford, professor of planetary science at Birkbeck, London, says 
asteroid miners would most probably start off by mining water-ice, which can be 
broken down into hydrogen (for fuel) and oxygen (for supporting life).

It is much cheaper to produce water in space than to take it there, and this 
process could generate revenue and technical support from other players in the 
space game. Once companies had that revenue stream under their belts, they 
could start thinking more seriously about the more costly business of 
extracting minerals and bringing them back to Earth.

“Eventually you can imagine the whole process supporting itself,” says 
Crawford. “The main hurdle is the initial investment, and it seems these 
companies think they can get started and jump over that hurdle.” But he agrees 
that the more pressing concern is the legal picture, which “badly needs to be 
updated”.

Christopher Barnatt, professional futurist and author of The Next Big Thing: 
From 3D Printing to Mining the Moon 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Next-Big-Thing-Printing/dp/1518749577>, says history 
shows us that if governments such as Luxembourg’s get behind asteroid mining, 
the space industry will deliver on its promise.

“With the moon landings, the aspiration was way ahead of the technology. 
[President] Kennedy had spoken toNasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa>
 and they’d said it couldn’t be done. He thought it could. We’ve got evidence 
from throughout history that when we commit ourselves to a broad goal, we can 
achieve it.”

The ramifications could be huge, he believes, as progress in one technology 
spurs breakthroughs in another.

“If you can use asteroids to make fuel, a lot of space exploration becomes 
cheaper. Then there’s progress in robotics and artificial intelligence... it 
all starts to make things possible.”
 