
The asteroid that killed the dinosaurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/mar/05/dinosaurs-asteroid-science-climate-change>
 might have done so by setting giant reserves of crude oil alight, shooting 
soot around the globe and turning vast regions of the Earth into deserts, 
according to a new analysis.

The authors of the hypothesis say it would also explain a key mystery left by 
previous theories: why the dinosaur’s amphibious cousins – the crocodilians – 
survived the mass extinction.

The leading theory for what caused the extinction of the dinosaurs was a huge 
asteroid that hit the Earth in present-day Mexico 66m years ago. But exactly 
how that triggered the mass extinction was unclear. Current thinking is that it 
did it by sending dust around the world, blocking out the sun, or by polluting 
the atmosphere with sulphates, causing harsh acid rain.

More recently, researchers have suggested those initial effects were then 
multiplied by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jul/13/global-warming-implicated-in-dinosaur-extinction>
 rapidclimate changes around the globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/06/dinosaurs-killed-off-by-one-two-punch-of-climate-change-and-asteroid-strike-study>
.

Dinosaurs killed off by 'one-two punch' of climate change and asteroid strike 
– study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/06/dinosaurs-killed-off-by-one-two-punch-of-climate-change-and-asteroid-strike-study>
But if those things happened on such a large scale, it is hard to explain how 
anything survived at all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/09/dinosaur-extinction-reasons-jurassic-asteroid>
. Crocodilans were large, and unable to take cover easily like small reptiles, 
mammals and birds. Without fur or feathers – and being cold-blooded – they 
would have been susceptible to changes in temperature.

The new theory put forward by Kunio Kaiho, from Tohoku University in Japan, 
and colleagues is that the asteroid hit a large oil reserve, setting it alight 
and shooting soot into the stratosphere. From there it spread around the globe, 
blocking light.

Their modelling of that scenario shows it would have created an abrupt change 
in the climate, cooling the globe and decreasing the amount of rain. They found 
the soot layer would have lasted for between two and five years, depending how 
much soot was ejected, and conditions would have returned to normal after about 
10 years.

They also found that the climate changes were different at different distances 
from the equator. Further from the equator, extreme cooling and drying would 
have caused the extinction of both dinosaurs and crocodilians.

Why are dinosaurs extinct? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Brian Switek
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/09/dinosaur-extinction-reasons-jurassic-asteroid>
But the model found that closer to the equator there was drought but more mild 
cooling. The drought would have left land-based dinosaurs without a food 
source, as most plants temporarily died. But the riverine crocodiles could have 
continued to eat aquatic animals, most of which survived, since they don’t rely 
as much on land-based plants. And closer to the equator, the more mild cooling 
wouldn’t have been lethal to crocodiles.

The analysis is supported by evidence in the layers of the earth that were 
deposited shortly after the asteroid hit, where soot remnants have been found. 
The researchers found the soot both near the impact zone as well as on the 
other side of the world in Spain, suggesting a period when it covered the globe.

Paul Wignall from the University of Leeds in the UK, who wasn’t involved in 
the study, said it was a “sophisticated analysis”.

“Early attempts at modelling this extinction produced scenarios that were so 
cataclysmic – years of total darkness – that it was hard to see how any life 
could have survived,” he said.

“This is a much more nuanced attempt to model the conditions after impact.”

Wignall said he was left wondering where the soot came from, since the rocks 
near the impact site don’t appear to be carbon-rich.


The authors said the asteroid would have burned the oil reserves that were 
there, leaving none to see today. But nearby oil reserves that were formed 
millions of years before the impact, were “indirect evidence” that there could 
have been an oil reserve where the asteroid hit.

Asteroid that killed dinosaurs also intensified volcanic eruptions - study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/01/asteroid-that-killed-dinosaurs-also-intensified-volcanic-eruptions-study>
Stephen Brusatte from Edinburgh University said: “What this study does show, 
very convincingly, is that throwing a lot of soot into the atmosphere can cause 
very rapid climate change, on the order of a few years.”

Brusatte said soot might have caused the extinction on its own, but he was not 
convinced that it did.

“Whenever a six-mile-wide asteroid hits your planet with the force of over a 
billion nuclear bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/mar/05/dinosaurs-asteroid-science-climate-change>
, that’s a bad day. The asteroid also caused a heat pulse that would have fried 
the land immediately,volcanic eruptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/01/asteroid-that-killed-dinosaurs-also-intensified-volcanic-eruptions-study>
, earthquakes and tidal waves. All of this together with soot would have been a 
hideous cocktail, and I’m not sure if any one of these things was more 
important than any other.”

The work by Kaiho and colleagues was published 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep28427> in the journal Scientific Reports.
 