
Aston offers a broad range of degree courses, with particular success in 
business, science, engineering, health sciences, social sciences and languages. 
Some 70% of the 7,000 or so undergraduates take sandwich placement years or 
years abroad. The university is proud both of its student mix and diversity and 
of its excellent graduate employment rate (84.1% of 2006 graduates entered 
'graduate level' jobs, against a national average of less than 65%). Aston is 
located on a green, self-contained campus right in the centre of Birmingham - 
just five minutes from the Bullring and 15 from the station, so you're 
perfectly placed to take full advantage of the shops, clubbing and all other 
ways to divest yourself of whatever money you might have. Recent developments 
include a £22m extension to the business school and a £4m IT network upgrade.

Fees
£3,145 a year for all full-time undergraduate courses in 2008. Sandwich 
placement year fees are £1,570.

Bursaries
Means-tested bursaries of up to £800 a year. Students on full grant will 
receive £800, then on a sliding scale for those receiving a partial grant. All 
UK/EU students on a placement year will receive a placement bursary of £1000 
for that year.Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> on a 
year abroad get £500.

Accommodation
Guaranteed for eligible first years. Self-catering accommodation ranges from 
£65 to £101 a week. Meal plans available: around £270 a term will buy you two 
square meals a day.

Facilities
The campus boasts two sports centres and a 25 metre pool. Recent developments 
include The Loft, a state of the art social space. All student accommodation 
has internet access.

Transport
No need to worry about getting into town: you're there already. Excellent road 
and train links to virtually anywhere else, especially Manchester, London and 
going west. Can be busy though.

Contact
Tel: 0121 204 3000
Web: www.aston.ac.uk <http://www.aston.ac.uk/>
Email: ugenquiries@aston.ac.uk <mailto:ugenquiries@aston.ac.uk>
Accommodation: www.aston.ac.uk/accommodation/ 
<http://www.aston.ac.uk/accommodation/>
 