
Astronaut James Halsell Jr seemed the very definition of someone with the 
right stuff – an Air Force Academy graduate and decorated test pilot, he flew 
on five space shuttle missions, either as commander or pilot. Nasa even turned 
to him for leadership as it was picking up the pieces after theColumbia disaster
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/01/columbia-space-shuttle-anniversary-nasa>
 in 2003.

Now, a decade after his retirement from the space agency, the 59-year-old 
Halsell’s life has taken a shocking turn: he is charged with murder after an 
early morning car crash killed two young sisters on a lonely stretch of highway 
inAlabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>.

State police said alcohol and speed may have been factors in the crash.

Troopers said a vehicle driven by Halsell collided about 2.50am on Monday with 
a Ford Fiesta in which 11-year-old Niomi Deona James and 13-year-old Jayla 
Latrick Parler were riding. The girls were thrown from the car and died. 
Neither had been wearing a seatbelt, the authorities said.

Halsell, who lives in Huntsville, was arrested and released from jail on 
$150,000 bail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fastronaut-who-flew-five-shuttle-missions-on-charge-over-car-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe52f2a7288a587289a472eb18f3adb9c5536f3a5%2F0_90_1550_929%2F1550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Astronaut%20who%20flew%20five%20shuttle%20missions%20charged%20with%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fastronaut-who-flew-five-shuttle-missions-on-charge-over-car-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Astronaut%20who%20flew%20five%20shuttle%20missions%20charged%20with%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fastronaut-who-flew-five-shuttle-missions-on-charge-over-car-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe52f2a7288a587289a472eb18f3adb9c5536f3a5%2F0_90_1550_929%2F1550.jpg>
 James Halsell speaks to reporters at Cape Canaveral, Flordia, in April 2000. 
Photograph: Peter Cosgrove/AP 
The girls’ father, Pernell James, 37, had driven to Texas to pick them up at 
their mother’s home in Houston for a summer-long visit to Alabama, said Dennis 
Stripling, mayor of the town of Brent.

“It’s very tragic, a sad thing that has happened,” Stripling said. “They were 
like 20 minutes from home when this accident happened.”

The father was expected to be released from a hospital on Tuesday. A woman in 
his car, Shontel Latriva Cutts, 25, was listed in fair condition.

The crash happened in a remote, wooded area on the edge of Tuscaloosa county 
with no highway lampposts.

Halsell, who told officers he had been driving to Louisiana to pick up his 
son, did not remember the crash, documents said.

Halsell’s vehicle rear-ended the car carrying the children, documents showed, 
pushing the vehicle across a lane and causing it to flip.

“Halsell’s speech was slurred, eyes were dilated, clothes dishevelled and he 
was unstable on his feet and smelled of alcohol,” the trooper wrote in a court 
deposition, according to the newspaper.

Halsell graduated from the US Air Force Academy in 1978 and later finished 
first in his class at test-pilot school. He applied for everyNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> astronaut class from 1978 to 1990, 
when he was accepted.


An online biography by Nasa said Halsell went to work in the aerospace 
industry in 2006 after a career that included five shuttle flights starting in 
1994. He spent more than 1,250 hours in space,serving as commander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2000/may/24/spaceexploration> on three 
shuttle missions and pilot on two others.


He also led Nasa’s return-to-flight planning team after space shuttle Columbia 
disintegrated during re-entry in 2003.

In Brent the mayor said city hall was collecting monetary donations to help 
the girls’ family with funeral expenses and other needs.
 