
Positive news from AstraZeneca.

The pharmaceuticals group has announced that an experimental biotech drug to 
treat asthma had performed well in two late-stage clinical trials. Benralizumab 
is likely to be submitted to US and EU regulators in the second half of 2016 
and, if all goes well, come to market next year.AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> hopes it will compete 
strongly with existing treatments from the likes of GlaxoSmithKline and Teva.

The company has previously suggested Benralizumab could reach annual sales of 
around $2bn, which would give a real boost to its drugs portfolio. It had made 
the sales forecast as part of its defence against the unwanted takeover attempt 
by Pfizer.

The update has lifted AstraZeneca’s shares by 37p to £39.52, and analyst Brian 
White at Cantor Fitzgerald said in a buy note:

With the focus in respiratory moving towards the treatment of severe disease, 
we believe that AstraZeneca has a commendable effort targeting several distinct 
patient subtypes largely facilitated by the expertise at [its subsidiary] 
Medimmune. For example, despite GlaxoSmithKline’s lead time advantage with the 
approval of Nucala and other emerging competition, benralizumab has the 
potential to be a best in class therapy, we believe, targeting the IL-5 
receptor resulting in a potent reduction in key inflammatory cells 
(eosinophils) in the treatment of severe asthma.

We believe that the prospects for the pipeline will only really begin to 
become clear from 2018 onwards and consequently we believe that this future 
potential is best captured using a discounted cash flow to reflect the value 
inherent in the pipeline...We initiate with a buy recommendation and a target 
price of 4700p.

Shore Capital’s Dr Tara Raveendran said:


Astrazeneca reported positive phase 3 data for benralizumab, its novel 
biologic for severe asthma. Benralizumab was well tolerated and met its primary 
endpoint in two pivotal phase 3 registrational trials (SIROCCO and CALIMA) and 
the data was consistent with that observed in previous trials. Full data will 
be presented at upcoming conferences... Benralizumab is also in development for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, with phase 3 data expected in 2018. We 
have peak sales of around $900m, with launch in asthma in 2017.
 