
AstraZeneca has hit back following an unwanted £63bn takeover approach from 
Pfizer by setting out a new growth plan that targets a 75% rise in annual 
revenue by 2023. The release came as one of the group's top 10 shareholders 
backed Labour leaderEd Miliband's call for a public interest test in big 
foreign takeovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/04/ed-miliband-letter-pfizer-astrazeneca>
, and a former AstraZeneca boss warned Pfizer could act like a praying mantis 
and "suck the lifeblood out of its prey".

The Anglo-Swedish drugmaker rejected a second, slightly higher takeover 
proposal from Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/02/astrazeneca-rebuffs-second-pfizer-bid>
 on Friday. Speculation is growing that the US firm could approach shareholders 
directly in a hostile bid, although Pfizer's boss, Ian Read, reiterated on 
Monday that he would continue to push for a friendly transaction recommended by 
the boards of both companies.

AstraZeneca's boss, Pascal Soriot, admitted there was a "wide range of 
opinions" among shareholders about the proposed tie-up, but insisted that "so 
far overall the response we've had has been supportive". He hailed his firm's 
growing pipeline of new drugs, which is particularly strong in cancer 
treatments that target the body's immune system and did not exist a year and a 
half ago. "Our transformation is almost complete," he said, warning that "any 
disruption would have a negative impact on our delivery to deliver ... A 
pipeline is something that is very fragile ... A company is not a machine, it's 
a group of people."

Soriot added that the drugmaker, Britain's second-largest, was pushing ahead 
with its move to Cambridge by 2016, with some senior staff saying they wanted 
to move earlier than planned.

AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> shares fell by 
137p, or 2.8%, to £46.71 on Tuesday, below Pfizer's revised bid of £50 a share. 
Analysts have said the US drugmaker, known for Viagra and cholesterol fighter 
Lipitor, will have to offer £55-£56 a share or even up to £60.

The business secretary, Vince Cable, said the government would approach the 
deal from a stance of "even-handed neutrality", while the chancellor, George 
Osborne, said the government would support the takeover if it provided jobs for 
Britons.

Martin Gilbert, who heads Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement>, one of 
AstraZeneca's main investors, said Pfizer's takeover bid should be looked at 
closely because of AstraZeneca's role in British science. "We do have to look 
at this in UK terms because it is so important for our research and development 
in the UK, and Pfizer unfortunately has this reputation of being ruthless 
cost-cutters," he told BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

Veteran investor Neil Woodford has also expressed his confidence in Soriot's 
ability to deliver an independent future for the company. Other shareholders 
have indicated they would be open to a takeover at the right price.

The drugmaker's former boss Sir David Barnes, who oversaw the merger of 
Sweden's Astra and Britain's Zeneca in 1999,warned that the Pfizer deal would 
not be in the best interests of patients or Britain's science base 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-27295068>. "There is danger in becoming too 
big," he told the BBC.

"The risk is that the past history of Pfizer has shown that they tend to 
extract destructive synergies, they have done that in the past. I have a great 
concern that they will act like a praying mantis and suck the lifeblood out of 
their prey." He added that ifPfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> wanted to take advantage of the 
UK's lower tax rate and "patent box" tax break, it should invest in the UK by 
building its own labs in Cambridge.

On Sunday, Miliband accused the government of "cheerleading" for Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/04/ed-miliband-letter-pfizer-astrazeneca>
 and called for an independent assessment of whether a takeover would be in 
Britain's national economic interest.

Pfizer bosses are to be called to appear before two parliamentary select 
committees to explain their takeover bid. The business, innovation and skills 
committee will take evidence from both Pfizer and AstraZeneca "soon", before 
the 26 May deadline for the US firm to table a formal bid. Thescience and 
technology committee will also scrutinise the deal at a hearing on 14 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/05/pfizer-astrazeneca-mps-investigation-science-industry>
, when it will question the science minister, David Willetts.

The Unite and the GMB unions have stepped up their calls for an urgent meeting 
with Cable to press the case for jobs.

Unite's assistant general secretary Tony Burke said: "Ed Miliband's sensible 
intervention at the weekend for a national interest test should be acted on, 
neither the German or the French governments would be simply waving through a 
takeover on this scale."

In its strategic update, AstraZeneca said it is targeting annual revenues of 
more than $45bn by 2023, compared with $25.7bn last year, although 2017 
revenues are estimated to be the same as last year's. The update was in stark 
contrast to lacklustre results from Pfizer on Monday. First quarter sales 
dropped 9% to $11.4bn as blockbusters such as Lipitor and Viagra face 
competition from cheaper generic alternatives.

Mick Cooper, an analyst at investment research firm Edison, said: "AstraZeneca 
has provided a robust rationale for why it believes Pfizer's bid significantly 
undervalues the company. Its forecasts are credible and underline our 
long-standing view that the market currently underestimates the potential of 
its programmes. The transformation under Pascal Soriot is clear, in particular 
with its pipeline, and Pfizer will have to work hard to convince shareholders 
of the merits of its case. This is a story which is set to run and run."

AstraZeneca set out expected revenues from new drugs in coming years, 
including blood-thinning pill Brilinta which is forecast to bring in annual 
revenues of $3.5bn in 2023.

Diabetes and respiratory illnesses, two of the company's key areas, are 
forecast to bring in $8bn of revenues each by that date. The drugmaker has also 
pencilled in mid- to high-single digit growth from emerging markets, building 
on growth in China, where it saw revenues leap by 22% in the first quarter of 
this year. The company received another, minor boost by winning US regulatory 
approval for its new heart drug Epanova.
 