
AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> has warned that 
revenues and profits will fall this year as the drugmaker loses patent 
protection on its cholesterol pill Crestor in the US.

The Anglo-Swedish group is rebuilding its pipeline of new medicines to replace 
older drugs such as Crestor and the heartburn pill Nexium. It is forecasting a 
mid single-digit percentage decline in both revenue and core earnings per share 
this year.

The news sent AstraZeneca shares down 4.3% to £42.20, well below the £55 a 
share price offered by the US drugmaker Pfizer nearly two years ago whenit 
tried to take over the group in a £70bn deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/19/pfizer-pulls-out-battle-pharmaceutical-takeover-astrazeneca>
.

Its chief executive, Pascal Soriot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/10/soriot-rewarded-with-5-pay-rise-after-repelling-pfizer-takeover-bid>
, said: “Clearly 2016 will be a very challenging year due to the loss of 
exclusivity for Crestor in the United States [in May]. It is a very, very big 
product.” But he added: “People should not get lost in the woods. The key 
question is what is the company going to look like in a year or two. The 
pipeline continues to swell.”

AstraZeneca has been investing heavily in immuno-oncology – cancer treatments 
that harness the body’s immune system to fight tumours. It is an area where 
competition is heating up, alongside diabetes, respiratory and cardiovascular 
drugs.

The company’s new lung cancer drug Tagrisso made $19m in sales in less than 
two months after being launched in the US in November, and has just been 
approved by European regulators.

Tagrisso is the first drug on the market to target a group of patients whose 
tumours have spread and developed a mutation that is resistant to other 
treatments. AstraZeneca also has high hopes for Lynparza, for advanced ovarian 
cancer, which made $94m last year following its US launch at the end of 2014. A 
gout treatment, Zurampic, received the green light from US regulators in 
December.

After a trough in profits and sales this year and next, the drugmaker expects 
to make a comeback and stuck to its target of achieving annual sales of $45bn 
by 2023, from $24.7bn last year.

Soriot also said Britain was better off inside the European Union than 
outside, echoingcomments made by the GlaxoSmithKline boss, Sir Andrew Witty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/03/britain-better-inside-eu-says-glaxosmithkline-andrew-witty>
 on Wednesday. The fact that new medicines only have to be approved by one 
single regulator “makes us more effective as an industry” and is more cost 
effective for patients, Soriot said.
 