
A new lung cancer pill from AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> has been approved by US 
regulators, in a major boost for the British drugmaker.

AZD9291, which will be sold as Tagrisso, is for advanced non-small-cell lung 
cancer, the most common form of lung cancer. Tagrisso targets a genetic 
mutation, known as T790M, that helps tumours evade current lung cancer pills. 
The drug will be made available to patients in the US as soon as possible and 
its price will be “comparable to other oral cancer therapies,” a spokeswoman 
said. AstraZeneca will reveal the price early next week.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death among men and women, 
accounting for a third of cancer deaths, more than breast, prostate and 
colorectal cancers combined.

The treatment, developed in Cheshire, is one of several highlighted by 
AstraZeneca chief executive Pascal Soriot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/30/astrazeneca-showcase-new-cancer-drugs-us-conference>
 in his defence againsta £69bn takeover approach from American rival Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/26/pfizer-abandons-attempt-astrazeneca-pharmaceutical>
, the maker of Viagra, last year. AstraZeneca estimates that Tagrisso could 
bring in sales of $3bn (£2bn) a year but analysts are more cautious, 
forecasting sales of $1.1bn in 2020. The company needs new blockbuster 
medicines to make up for sales losses on older drugs that are losing patent 
protection.

Cancer breakthroughs trigger big pharma interest in drugs and deals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/01/cancer-breakthroughs-trigger-big-pharma-interest-drugs-deals>
The once-daily Tagrisso tablet had a “significant effect on reducing tumour 
size in over half of patients who were treated,” said Richard Pazdur of the 
FDA’s centre for drug evaluation and research.

Its approval means AstraZeneca has taken another step forward in its ambition 
to bring six new cancer treatments to patients by 2020, following the recent 
launch of Lynparza for ovarian cancer in the US.

The approval comes just two-and-a-half years since Tagrisso was first tested 
on humans. It had received breakthrough status in the US and has also received 
accelerated assessment in the EU following its filing in the summer, as well as 
priority review in Japan.
 