
AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> has agreed to 
sell its antibiotics division to Pfizer, the US drugs company that failed in 
its bid to buy the group in a takeover battle two years ago.

In a deal that could be worth more than $1.5bn (£1.1bn), the British 
pharmaceutical group said it would sell its late-stage small molecule 
antibiotics business in most markets outside the US toPfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer>.

Pfizer will make an upfront $550m payment when the deal is completed towards 
the end of this year and a further $175m in January 2019. The US company will 
also pay up to $250m when certain milestones are reached and as much as $600m 
in sales-related payments, plus royalties on certain drugs.

AstraZeneca repelled an unwanted £69bn takeover approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/26/pfizer-abandons-attempt-astrazeneca-pharmaceutical>
 from Pfizer in May 2014. This was due to opposition from UK politicians and 
scientists who said the deal would undermine Britain’s standing as a centre for 
research.

Pfizer has since been on an acquisition spree and tried to buy Botox maker 
Allerganto create the world’s biggest drugmaker, but the US government quashed 
the deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/pfizer-allergan-merger-collapse-reveals-real-motivation>
.

AstraZeneca said it was selling the antibiotics business to concentrate on 
respiratory and autoimmunity, cardiovascular and metabolic diseases and 
oncology. It said Pfizer, whose most famous drug is Viagra, has a large 
anti-infectious disease division, giving it greater commercial strength to 
develop and sell the drugs.

Luke Miels, the head of AstraZeneca’s antibiotics business unit, said: “This 
agreement reinforces our strategic focus to invest in our three main therapy 
areas where we can make the greatest difference to patients’ lives. Our strong 
science in antibiotics will continue to serve a critical public health need 
through Pfizer’s dedicated focus on infectious diseases.”

Pfizer will acquire the rights to develop and sell drugs such as 
Merrem/Meronem, which treats pneumonia and other diseases in hospital patients, 
and ATM-AVI, which is under development to treat multidrug-resistant bacterial 
infections.

Governments are trying to encourage drug companies to come up with new 
antibiotics as infections become resistant to treatment. Dame Sally Davies, the 
chief medical officer for England, has said the threatened loss of antibiotics
is on a par with terrorism and climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/19/englands-chief-medical-officer-warns-of-antibiotic-apocalypse>
.
 