
On a day when leading shares are surging ahead, mainly due to the pound 
tumbling to a new 31 year low and boosting exporters,AstraZeneca is heading in 
the other direction.

Its shares are down 21p at £50.20 after it said its heart drug Brilinta had 
failed to help patients with circulatory problems in their legs, showing no 
benefits over an older blood thinning treatment, Sanofi’s Plavix.

So AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> is less 
certain of a $3.5bn a year sales target for Brilinta by 2023. Ludovic Helfgott, 
head of the Brilinta business, told Reuters:

We don’t believe the goal of $3.5bn is attainable. I think it would be 
unrealistic to believe that.

Liberum analysts said:


This was a study designed to evaluate whether Brilinta offered benefit over 
Plavix in a new indication, peripheral artery disease, but the result was 
negative (no benefit over and above Plavix). No impact on existing indications.

We had only around $200m in our numbers for this indication by 2021 anyway so 
the impact on earnings is small for us (less than 1%) although others may have 
been more optimistic.

We also believe AstraZeneca was expecting contribution from this indication in 
order to get to the Brilinta peak sales target outlined at the time of the 
Pfizer bid and expect the stock to underperform today on this negative news.

Meanwhile Cantor Fitzgerald said:

The announcement that Brilinta has failed to meet primary end point in the 
EUCLID trial of benefit over Plavix (clopidogrel) in symptomatic peripheral 
artery disease is clearly a disappointment as the company looks to flesh out 
the Brilinta prescribing label post ACS [acute coronary syndrome]; striving to 
mimic the breadth of indications enjoyed by Plavix (clopidogrel). That being 
said we continue to forecast Brilinta sales in excess of $1bn this year and 
maintain our +$2bn sales target for 2018 reflecting its strong position ahead 
of Plavix in the more important ACS indication.
 