
AstraZeneca <https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> has agreed to 
buy ZS Pharma, the US biotech company, for $2.7bn (£1.8bn) in cash, thwarting 
the ambitions of a Swiss rival in the deal-hungry pharmaceutical sector.

Britain’s second biggest drugs company followed Thursday’s upbeat annual 
results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/nov/05/ftse-falls-ahead-of-bank-rate-decision-but-astrazeneca-and-rsa-rise>
by announcing a $90 a share deal to snap up ZS Pharma’s technology to develop 
treatments for hyperkalemia, or high potassium levels. The condition can result 
in chronic kidney disease or chronic heart failure.

Revealed: how AstraZeneca avoids paying UK corporation tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/04/how-astrazeneca-avoids-paying-uk-corporation-tax>
ZS Pharma’s ZS-9 treatment is under review by the US Food and Drug 
Administration and could produce sales of more than $1bn a year if approved, 
AstraZeneca said. The tasteless crystals, mixed with water and taken orally, 
absorb potassium rapidly and flush it out through the digestive system.

Actelion of Switzerland said in September it had started talks with ZS Pharma, 
based in San Mateo, California, that could have led to a bid. The US company 
has about 200 employees across three sites in California, Texas and Colorado.

Pascal Soriot, AstraZeneca’s chief executive, said: “Hyperkalemia can be a 
life-threatening condition for patients with chronic kidney disease and chronic 
heart failure. However, the risk is underappreciated and prevalence is 
increasing.

“This acquisition complements our strategic focus on cardiovascular and 
metabolic disease by adding a potential best in class treatment to our 
portfolio of innovative medicines.”

The acquisition is part of a deal frenzy sweeping the pharmaceutical sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/aug/04/shire-joins-biotech-bonanza-with-baxalta-bid>
 as companies look to cut costs and buy new treatments to replace ageing drugs 
whose patents are expiring.

AstraZeneca has made a number of acquisitions to gain specific products and 
was the subject of a failed£70bn takeover approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/26/pfizer-abandons-attempt-astrazeneca-pharmaceutical>
 by the US company Pfizer last year. Pfizeris in talks with Allergan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/29/pfizer-allergan-eigh-up-big-pharma-mega-merger>
, the maker of Botox, to form the world’s biggest healthcare business. 
Dublin-based drug firm Shire has been linked with a number of potential 
takeovers,including of Radius Health in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/oct/16/astrazeneca-slips-on-us-diabetes-news-but-shire-climbs-on-deal-talk>
.
 