
AstraZeneca’s boss has warned of major healthcare changes in the US after 
Donald Trump’s surprise election victory.

Pascal Soriot, chief executive of the UK drugmaker, said the Affordable Care 
Act, known asObamacare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2014/apr/30/obama-healthcare-boost-us-economy-spending>
, which has helped millions of Americans get health insurance, was likely to be 
scrapped or substantially altered once Trump takes office. The Senate’s 
majority leader Mitch McConnell said this week thatRepublicans would move 
quickly to roll back the legislation 
<http://senate%20majority%20leader%20mitch%20mcconnell%20of%20kentucky%20said%20wednesday%20that%20republicans%20would%20move%20quickly%20to%20roll%20back%20the%20affordable%20care%20act/>
.

Drug stocks surged on Thursday as fears of tough action on medicine prices 
faded. Hillary Clinton, the Democrat presidential contender, had vowed to 
tackle high pricing.

Business winners and losers from a Donald Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/business-winners-and-losers-presidency>
However, Soriot was cautious, saying “price pressure … is not going to go 
away”. He told reporters: “Nobody knows what the new landscape will look like. 
It’s reasonable to assume it will change substantially.

“What we can reasonably expect is that the Affordable Care Act will either be 
repealed or substantially modified.” He said he hoped that any changes would 
still support innovation and the development of new medicines.

His comments came as AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> reported weaker than 
expected sales for the third quarter. Revenues fell by 4% to $5.7bn, hit by 
cheaper generic versions of the group’s cholesterol pill Crestor.

Earnings benefited from a one-off tax payment of $453m, owing to agreements on 
transfer pricing between the UK, Canada and Sweden. This meant core earnings 
per share rose by 28% to $1.32. The company has also been cutting sales and 
administration costs but expects research spending to be higher this year than 
last.

Soriot reiterated that the company remained on track to return to growth in 
the second half of next year, adding that there would be no patent expiries 
between then and 2024.

The new cancer drugs Tagrisso and Lynparza are performing well. Tagrisso is 
expected to be approved in China, which has a high prevalence of non-small cell 
lung cancer, sometime next year after receiving a priority review.

AstraZeneca suffered a setback last month when the US regulator ordered it to 
halt clinical trials of its new immunotherapy durvalumab as a treatment for 
head and neck cancer following bleeding incidents. Other trials are continuing, 
and data on a combination with another new drug, tremelimumab, to treat lung 
cancer are expected in the first half of next year.

Soriot remains under pressure to deliver, following the board’s rejection of a 
£69bn takeover offer from Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/19/astrazeneca-board-reject-pfizer-takeover-bid>
 in 2014. AstraZeneca shares dropped by 4.6% to £43.67 on Thursday – below the 
£55 price offered by the US pharmaceutical giant.
 