
What keeps you motivated? Knowing something about the hardships that 
asylum-seekers face. Until I started teaching this group, I hadn't realised 
what kinds of ordeals many go through. They are still being hidden away on 
boats with no idea of their destination and with almost no perception of their 
opportunities. It makes me think how lucky I am.

Best teaching moment? When students approach me after class with questions 
relating to their situation. They might need help with forms for college or 
housing applications. It gives me the feeling that some good has come from my 
lessons.

And worst? When a lesson doesn't go to plan. I'm left despondent because of 
the time I've invested in preparation. I've only been teaching for a few months 
and I'm left wondering whether I'm really cut out for this. The advice I get 
is, see what you can learn for the next time.

Biggest challenge? We don't get enough teaching time with students. Research 
indicates that learners attending community classes once a week can take up to 
six years to achieve college standard. We share a church building and only have 
restricted access to class space. Our brief time with the students has to be 
used extremely effectively.

What have you learned? It really is amazing how positive my students are, 
given the ordeals of the asylum process. I realise that I take certain things 
for granted, such as joining a library, sending emails for jobs or considering 
options for part-time study. These sorts of things can be a major task for them.

What next? Working overseas is my main aim. I'm thankful for what I can learn 
as a teacher here and continue to develop my skills and knowledge.

Top tip? Stay involved with as many other teachers (ideally those with more 
experience) as possible. They are invaluable for advice. In Glasgow, we are 
lucky to have an Esol resource centre where we can swap notes.

â€¢ Since gaining his Celta qualification last year, Cameron Hodgson, 43, has 
been teaching free English classes for asylum-seekers in a project in the 
Springburn area of Glasgow
 