
At least 10 people died on Thursday when Taliban insurgents wearing military 
uniforms mounted a six-hour gun and grenade siege on a court complex in northern
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, an assault that 
highlights the country’s fragile security situation.

The attack in the usually tranquil city of Mazar-i-Sharif occurred just before 
the start of the Taliban’s traditional spring offensive, set to be the first 
fighting season when Afghan security forces battle insurgents without full Nato 
support.

Explosions rang out as assailants wearing suicide vests lobbed grenades and 
exchanged gunfire with Afghan security forces, setting ablaze one of the 
buildings in the compound, according to a reporter at the scene.

Dozens of people were left wounded, with reports emerging of blood shortages 
in hospitals and urgent appeals for donors circulating on social media.

“Around noon, four assailants dressed in military uniforms breached the main 
gate of the appeals court in Mazar-i-Sharif and started firing gunshots and 
throwing hand grenades inside the complex,” said Abdul Raziq Qaderi, the acting 
provincial police chief of Balkh province.

“Five security personnel and five civilians were killed and 66 others were 
wounded,” he added.

Noor Mohammad Faiz, a senior doctor at the local public hospital, confirmed 
the toll, adding that some of the wounded were in critical condition.

“Police, prosecutors, court staff, women and children are among those 
wounded,” Faiz told AFP.

The insurgents were holed up inside the complex for six hours, surrounded by a 
large number of Afghan security forces, before they were taken down.

The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, which underscores 
Afghanistan’s precarious security situation as US-led foreign troops pull back 
from the frontlines after a 13-year war against theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>.

“Our mujahideen have carried out a martyrdom attack ... in Mazar-i-Sharif 
city,” Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid said.

Militant attacks are relatively rare in Mazar-i-Sharif, a city well known as a 
melting pot of diverse cultures and religious influences where liberal 
attitudes coexist with conservative traditions.

Thursday’s attack comes a day after an American soldier was killed by an 
Afghan counterpart in eastern Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/08/afghan-soldier-opens-fire-on-us-troops>
, the first insider attack since Washington announced a delay in troop 
withdrawals from the country.

Nato’s combat mission formally ended in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/28/us-nato-formally-end-war-afghanistan-kabul-ceremony>
, but a small follow-up foreign force has stayed on to train and support the 
local security forces.

President Barack Obama last month reversed plans to shrink the US force in 
Afghanistan this year by nearly half, an overture to the country’s new 
reform-minded leader, PresidentAshraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>.

Hosting Ghani at the White House for their first presidential head-to-head, 
Obama agreed to keep the current level of 9,800 US troops until the end of 2015 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/25/world/asia/ashraf-ghani-of-afghanistan-wants-us-troops-to-stay-longer.html?_r=0>
.

The Taliban, who have waged a deadly insurgency since they were ousted from 
power in late 2001, warned that the announcement would damage any prospect of 
peace talks as they vowed to continue fighting.

Taliban insurgents have already stepped up suicide attacks on government 
targets following an Afghan army offensive that began in southern Helmand 
province more than two months ago.

The uptick in attacks has taken a heavy toll on ordinary Afghans.

The number of civilians killed and wounded in Afghanistan jumped 22% in 2014 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=50111#.VSa1lGbd79I>, a recent UN 
report said, as Nato troops withdrew from combat.

The UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan attributed the rise to an 
intensification in ground fighting, resulting in a total of 10,548 civilian 
casualties last year.

Afghan forces are currently bracing themselves for what is expected to be a 
bloody summer push by the Taliban. The government has also raised the ominous 
prospect of Islamic State making inroads into Afghanistan.


 