
What's one piece of your privacy worth? About a dollar a day, suggests telecom 
giant AT&T.

The company's latest internet service offering 
<http://gigaom.com/2013/12/11/atts-gigabit-service-is-70-if-you-let-it-spy-on-your-searches/>
 in Austin, Texas comes in two flavors. The company might as well call them the 
"some privacy" and "no privacy" services. The cheaper version gives customers a 
discount in return for being targeted more intrusively than ever by 
user-specific advertising.

Let me explain: the company's Austin experiment is a test to see what a 
specific market will bear in highly specific conditions. AT&T is offering some 
Austin neighborhoods its "U-verse with GigaPower" product, which comes in $99 
per month "standard" and $70 per month "premier" editions, the latterrequiring 
an agreement 
<http://www.att.com/esupport/article.jsp?sid=KB421828#fbid=kPqYZOD3-QC>to let 
AT&T "use your individual web browsing information, like the search terms you 
enter and the web pages you visit, to tailor ads and offers to your interests".

The trial highlights several realities about internet service in America. 
First, of course, is the relatively low speed and high cost of most service, 
due to the so-called "marketplace" of just one or two providers in most cities. 
AT&T's Austin offering is 10 times the speed of the comparable Comcast service 
where I live, at about the same price. Why? Competition, which barely exists 
elsewhere in the US. This is plainly a response to Google's upcoming 
fiber-to-home product inAustin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, as 
opposed to any serious move by the telecom company to innovate on price or 
service.

The AT&T website is quite vague about what the company actually plans to do in 
its surveillance of customers' web use, and how it will conduct that 
surveillance in the first place. Their promise:

[AT&T] will not collect information from secure (https) or otherwise encrypted 
sites, such as when you enter your credit card to buy something online or do 
online banking on a secure site.

Interesting wording, because it suggests AT&T could choose to do otherwise, 
but unless it's hacking basic security systems, that shouldn't be possible in 
any case.

Encryption is the easy dodge for customers who want to get the lower price and 
thwart AT&T's extra surveillance, of course. A customer could simply use a 
virtual private network (VPN), which creates an encrypted tunnel for all data. 
Will AT&T permit this? There's no hint in the terms of service.

Nonetheless, what AT&T is doing has one real virtue: telling customers 
explicitly that they will trade money for privacy. In an internet economy today 
where we are given few if any choices of this sort, that's progress of a kind.

Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and other major 
internet companies have made it clear that our use of their services is free 
only in one narrow sense. As the saying goes, we, the users, are the product 
being sold to others – mainly advertisers – and we have absolutely no control 
over the data being collected, massaged, bartered, and sometimes abused.

AT&T's isn't the first to foray in this area. Internet service providers have 
been looking for years to find ways to leverage their unique hold over 
customers – their ability to probe what we do and make money off it, despite 
the blatant invasion of privacy that represents. US and British telecom 
companies have experimented with the"phorm" product  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/phorm>that snooped on browsing habits, 
one of several such attempts over the years.

This kind of thing should clearly not be permitted, period. ISPs should 
provide one service only: the connection and the data. Yet the AT&T Austin 
offering does suggest ways we could encourage other kinds of providers to 
behave better. If Google et al offered paid services that guaranteed no 
snooping on my data, I'd be much happier about using them.

One area where this is especially necessary is in mobile. App developers have 
taken extreme liberties with our personal privacy by demanding a variety of 
"permissions", as they're called in the Android ecosystem, before we're allowed 
to download and use their products. Permissions can include access to our 
phone-calling and contacts, location data, and much more. Sometimes app 
developers lie about what they're doing. The US Federal Trade Commission 
recently made a settlement with one that had been collecting location 
informationdespite promises to the contrary 
<http://www.networkworld.com/news/2013/120513-android-flashlight-app-developer-settles-276642.htm>
.

A recent study  <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2341311>by 
two University of Colorado economists suggests that mobile phone owners would 
pay for some privacy. On a per-app basis, wrote Scott Savage and Donald M 
Waldman, users were "willing to make a one-time payment for each app of $2.28 
to conceal their browser history, $4.05 to conceal their list of contacts, 
$1.19 to conceal their location, $1.75 to conceal their phone's identification 
number, and $3.58 to conceal the contents of their text messages. The consumer 
is also willing to pay $2.12 to eliminate advertising". And the more 
experienced a user was with the technology, the more he or she was willing to 
pay – strongly suggesting that educated technology users don't like what's 
being done to them.

For a few months this year, it appeared that Google was going to be one of the 
truly good guys in one respect, offering built-in privacy tools for mobile 
devices running the latest Android operating system. Sadly, the company removed 
them in an update, with anabsurd explanation  
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2013/12/google-removes-vital-privacy-features-android-shortly-after-adding-them>
that raises even more suspicions about its commitment to privacy. There are 
other ways to block invasive apps, but those typically involve mucking with the 
device in ways that average users should be wary of trying.

But again, the question of privacy when it comes to the telecom ISPs like AT&T 
is a different matter entirely, and more worrisome. Not only are they in a 
position of enormous power over their customers, they are notoriously 
contemptuous of our privacy; see AT&T's "it's none of your business 
<http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/12/06/att-responds-to-shareholders-concerns-on-user-data/?hpw&rref=technology&_r=0>
" response to shareholders seeking accountability for the company's willy nilly 
handover of data to security services. Moreover, they increasingly insist on a 
right to decide what bits of data get to us, in what order, and at what speed, 
and they increasingly determined to monetize our use of the services beyond the 
already hugely profitable provision of connections.

We need laws, with teeth, that stop these companies from treating us all like 
mice in experimental labs. We also need end-to-end encryption of everything we 
do online. (VPNs are useful for now, but not the ultimate solution.) Until that 
happens, we need to recognize that the internet industry is much more 
interested in its bottom line than our privacy. For now, if I have to buy some 
privacy – and decide I can trust the promises companies make – I'll do so, 
gladly.
 