
The telecoms giant AT&T has had an “extraordinary, decades-long” relationship 
with the National Security Agency, it was reported on Saturday.

Citing newly disclosed NSA documents dating from 2003 to 2013, the New York 
Times said 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/us/politics/att-helped-nsa-spy-on-an-array-of-internet-traffic.html?_r=0>
 in a story published withProPublica 
<https://www.propublica.org/article/nsa-spying-relies-on-atts-extreme-willingness-to-help>
 that AT&T was described as “highly collaborative” with an “extreme willingness 
to help” with government internet surveillance.


In June 2013, the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden leaked thousands of 
documents to media outlets including the Guardian. The following April, the 
Guardian and the Washington Postwere awarded a Pulitzer prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/14/guardian-washington-post-pulitzer-nsa-revelations>
 for reporting on the story.

The new documents show that AT&T gave the NSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa> access to “billions of emails as they 
have flowed across its domestic networks”, the Times and ProPublica said. The 
reports also said AT&T provided “technical assistance” in “wiretapping all 
internet communications at the United Nations headquarters” in New York City.

The documents also show that the NSA’s budget for its relationship with AT&T 
was twice as large as that of the next-largest such programme, and that the 
company placed surveillance equipment in 17 of its US internet hubs.

NSA collected Americans' email records in bulk for two years under Obama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/27/nsa-data-mining-authorised-obama>
The Times said the new documents did not name AT&T, but said analysis by its 
reporters and ProPublica revealed “a constellation of evidence” that pointed to 
the company.

The Times also pointed to the publication by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/jun/27/nsa-inspector-general-report-document-data-collection>
 in June 2013 of a draft NSA inspector general report on email and internet 
data collection, under the codename Stellar Wind, which did not name AT&T or 
MCI, a company purchased byVerizon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/nsa-phone-records-verizon-court-order>
. The Times said the report “describes their market share in numbers that 
correspond to those two businesses, according to Federal Communications 
Commission reports”.

The Times quoted an AT&T spokesman, Brad Burns, as saying: “We do not 
voluntarily provide information to any investigating authorities other than if 
a person’s life is in danger and time is of the essence.”
 