
The telecoms giant AT&T has agreed to pay $85bn to buy the media powerhouse 
Time Warner <https://www.theguardian.com/media/time-warner> and create one of 
the world’s largest media, TV and telecoms firms.


Trump uses Gettysburg address to threaten to sue sex assault accusers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/donald-trump-gettysburg-contract-with-america-sue-accusers-hillary-clinton>
The boards of the two companies unanimously approved the deal on Saturday. 
AT&T will pay $107.50 per Time Warner share, in a combination of cash and 
stock, worth $85.4 billion overall.

The deal, which combines America’s second-largest wireless telecoms company 
with the owner of HBO, CNN, Cartoon Network and the Warner Brothers movies, is 
likely to face tough regulatory scrutiny due to fears it could lead to less 
consumer choice and higher prices. If approved, the deal would be the biggest 
in the world this year.

AT&T’s CEO, Randall Stephenson, says he does not anticipate government 
blocking the acquisition, which the company says is expected to go through by 
the end of 2017. Time Warner’s CEO, Jeff Bewkes, says he expects all of his 
company’s creative and business executives to stay on “for a number of years”.

The Republican presidential nominee said on Saturday he would block the deal 
if he were elected. Ina speech in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/donald-trump-gettysburg-contract-with-america-sue-accusers-hillary-clinton>
, Donald Trump said AT&T’s purchase of Time Warner would give the combined 
group “too much concentration of power” and would “destroy democracy”.

Speaking about his continuing battle with the “dishonest mainstream media”, 
Trump said: “They’re trying desperately to suppress my vote and the voice of 
the American people.

“As an example of the power structure I’m fighting, AT&T is buying Time Warner 
and thus CNN, a deal we will not approve in my administration because it’s too 
much concentration of power in the hands of too few.”

Trump said he would also consider “breaking” up the last big media deal, 
Comcast’sacquisition of NBC Universal in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/13/comcast-general-electric-nbc-universal-rockefeller-plaza?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+theguardian%2Fmedia%2Frss+%28Media%29>
. “Deals like this destroy democracy,” he said.

Telecoms companies are increasingly seeking to buy into cable TV providers and 
content producers, in order to offer more extensive packages to consumers. AT&T 
spent $48bnbuying the satellite TV provider DirecTV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/19/att-directv-takeover-deal> 
last year, making it the country’s largest pay-TV provider, with 25 million 
customers. The company has also spent hundreds of millions improving its 
infrastructure to give consumers a better experience watching video content on 
their mobile phones.

Buying Time Warner would give AT&T, which has a market value of $226bn, access 
to the Harry Potter and Batman film franchises as well as hit TV shows such as 
The Big Bang Theory and Game of Thrones.

The rival telecoms company Verizon is in negotiations to buy Yahoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/can-verizons-bid-for-yahoo-survive>
 and has already bought AOL, owner of the Huffington Post.

The AT&T-Time Warner deal vindicates Bewkes’s, decision to turn down a 
$85-a-share takeover approach from 21st Century Foxtwo years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jul/24/rupert-murdoch-time-warner>
. Shares in Time Warner jumped 8% to $89.48 on Friday, when speculation about 
the proposed deal was first reported.

Brian Wieser <http://www.pvtl.com/team/>, lead researcher at the analytics 
firm Pivotal, said the deal would present the new entity with potentially 
insurmountable difficulties.

Wieser said that while the marriage of a producer and a distributor might at 
first look similar to the successful Comcast, following its purchase of NBC 
Universal, an AT&T-Time Warner entity would present unique challenges. Other 
entities, he said, made more sense for the always-a-bridesmaid Time Warner.

“DirecTV and Time Warner in a lot of ways is more similar than Time Warner and 
AT&T,” he said. “It looks like a hedge against the commoditization of 
infrastructure.”

Verizon's bid for Yahoo on the rocks ahead of latest revenue results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/can-verizons-bid-for-yahoo-survive>
Cash-rich telecoms companies such as AT&T are facing a crisis as their 
wireless businesses reach maturity and fixed-line income continues to erode.

“AT&T is an acquisition machine and interested in empire preservation if 
nothing else,” said Wieser.

“Time Warner has always been for sale at the right price. It’s not a position 
that creates any synergies and it does create some dis-synergies, like the 
problem of managing a global media company from Texas. It’s a standalone entity 
that gets lost when it’s part of a much bigger conglomerate.”

AT&T faces tough choices, said Wieser: “If the prospects for wireline growth 
are negative and the prospects for wireless growth tepid, what do you do to 
make sure your business grows?”

Time Warner, too, faces problems. The trend of “cord-cutting” – people getting 
TV over the internet – has eaten into the cable subscriptions that are vital to 
its networks.

There is also increasing competition from players such Netflix, Amazon Prime 
and Google’s YouTube. In August, Time Warner bought a 10% stake in the 
streaming service Hulu.
 