
Imagine if the postal service started offering discount shipping in exchange 
for permission to scan every letter you receive and then target you with junk 
mail based on the contents of your personal mail.

One of the largest telecommunications companies in America, AT&T, is doing 
just that for customers of its super-fast gigabit broadband service, which is 
rolling out in select cities. Though a few months ago, it dropped the use of an 
undeletable “supercookie 
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2014/11/att-ditches-tracking-header-program-verizon-still-refuses>
” that tracked subscribers’ web browsing activity, AT&T reportedly plans to
track and monetize 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2015/02/18/att-offers-data-privacy-for-a-price/> 
its broadband customers’ internet activity – “webpages you visit, the time you 
spend on each, the links or ads you see and follow, and the search terms you 
enter <https://www.att.com/esupport/article.jsp?sid=KB421828&cv=803>” – to 
deliver targeted “ads online, via email or through direct mail”.

The tracking and ad targeting associated with the gigabit service cannot be 
avoided using browser privacy settings: as AT&T explained, the program “works 
independently of your browser’s privacy settings regarding cookies, 
do-not-track and private browsing.” In other words, AT&T is performingdeep 
packet inspection <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_packet_inspection>, a 
controversial practice through which internet service providers, by virtue of 
their privileged position, monitor all the internet traffic of their 
subscribers and collect data on the content of those communications.


What if customers do not want to be spied on by their internet service 
providers? AT&T allows gigabit service subscribers to opt out – for a $29 fee 
per month.

But charging extra for privacy has significant social justice implications: 
broadband access is hard to come by for many communities, and subscribers on 
the lower rungs of the income ladder may not be able to afford an additional 
fee to protect their privacy.Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy>
 should not be reserved for the rich, and the poor should not be forced to 
choose between broadband, an essential tool in modern life, and their privacy.


Moreover, it is not clear what gigabit subscribers get when they pay the $29 
fee to opt out. AT&T says that it “may collect and use web browsing information 
for other purposes, as described in our Privacy Policy, even if you do not 
participate in the Internet Preferences program.” But the company’s mainprivacy 
policy <https://www.att.com/gen/privacy-policy?pid=13692#menu> also discusses 
tracking web browsing activity and using subscriber data for advertising 
purposes.

Even worse, the virtual lack of competition in the broadband market makes it 
difficult for many subscribers to jump to another, more privacy-protective 
company.

AT&T does not have a stellar track record when it comes to protecting its 
subscribers’ information from government intrusion, as the company’s early
collaboration with the NSA <https://www.eff.org/nsa/hepting> proved. There is 
no doubt that this sort of detailed tracking piques the interest of all sorts 
of surveillance-minded government agencies.

There is one silver lining to this dark cloud: AT&T says it is not attempting 
to monitor its customers’ connections to encrypted websites (like Google, 
Yahoo!, Facebook and Twitter),which could endanger its customers’ security 
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/02/further-evidence-lenovo-breaking-https-security-its-laptops>
. This is small comfort, however, given the wide array of websites that do not 
support HTTPS by default. That includes major retailers Amazon and Barnes & 
Noble, which raises lifestyle and reader privacy concerns. Activity on 
unencrypted mobile apps is also vulnerable to AT&T tracking if the mobile 
device is logged onto the gigabit service via Wi-Fi.

There is one possible solution to the dilemma AT&T is forcing its subscribers 
into: like so many other web privacy problems, this one can be solved by 
encryption. By funneling their traffic through aVPN service 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network>, AT&T customers can 
bypass AT&T’s deep packet inspection, thus preserving their privacy. (And given 
that many VPNs cost far less than $29 per month, customers would save money 
over AT&T’s opt-out fee.)

However, customers should not be forced to take these sorts of extra 
precautions to protect their privacy.Internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> service providers sit in an 
incredibly privileged position in the network. They should not be tracking 
subscribers’ internet activity or monetizing that activity. AT&T should be 
ashamed of itself for putting profit over privacy.
 