
Anyone who has spent a chilly half-hour waiting for a double-decker may 
already have doubted the existence of a deity. But for those who need further 
proof, a nationwide advertising campaign aimed at persuading more people to 
"come out" as atheists was launched today with the backing of some of Britain's 
most famous non-believers.

The principal slogan – "There's probably no God. Now stop worrying and enjoy 
your life" – can already be seen on four London bus routes, and now 200 bendy 
buses inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and 600 across the 
country are to carry the advert after a fundraising drive raised more than 
£140,000, exceeding the original target of £5,500.

The money will also pay for 1,000 advertisements on London Underground from 
next Monday and on a pair of giant LCD screens opposite Bond Street tube 
station, in Oxford Street. Organisers unveiled a set of quotes from public 
figures – includingAlbert Einstein 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/alberteinstein>, Douglas Adams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/douglasadams> and Katharine Hepburn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/katharinehepburn> – who have endorsed atheism, 
or at least expressed scepticism about a Creator. The words "That it will never 
come again is what makes life so sweet" are quoted from the poet Emily 
Dickinson.

At the launch in a heated marquee next to the Albert Memorial, the television 
comedy writer Ariane Sherine, creator of the campaign, said: "You wait ages for 
an atheist bus and then 800 come along at once. I hope they'll brighten 
people's days and make them smile on their way to work."

She suggested the campaign in a Guardian Comment is free blogpost last June 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/jun/20/transport.religion>, 
saying it would be a reassuring alternative to religious slogans threatening 
non-Christians with hell and damnation. At today's launch she said the sheer 
number of donations,which were still coming in 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/jan/06/religion-atheism>, 
demonstrated the strength of feeling. "This is a great day for freedom of 
speech in Britain. I am very glad that we live in a country where people have 
the freedom to believe in whatever they want."

Joining Sherine were Richard Dawkins, author of The God Delusion, Hanne 
Stinson, from the British Humanist Association (BHA), the philosopher AC 
Grayling and Graham Linehan, who wrote Father Ted, Black Books and The IT 
Crowd. There were messages of support from the actor Stephen Fry and the writer
Charlie Brooker <http://commentisfree.guardian.co.uk/charlie_brooker/>.

According to the BHA, "huge numbers" of people in Britain have non-religious 
beliefs – between 30 and 40% of the population, with a higher figure, between 
60 and 65%, in young people.

Hanne Stinson said: "We all, whether we have religious or non-religious 
beliefs, have a right to be heard, and no one particular set of beliefs has any 
more right to influence the public debate than any other. The message isn't 
aimed at people with religious beliefs – it's aimed at atheists and agnostics."

Most commentators recognised the slogan as a simple statement of non-religious 
belief and appreciated that it was designed to reassure people there was no 
reason to worry about being non-religious, she said. "People can lead a happy, 
enjoyable and rewarding life without religion."

Prior to the launch, Sherine was concerned that the posters would be banned 
from buses operated by Stagecoach, the second largest public transport company 
in the UK. Its co-founder Brian Souter is a member of the Church of Nazarene, 
an international evangelical Christian denomination.

A Stagecoach spokesman said all adverts on its buses were vetted before being 
published. "This particular advert is being carried on a number of bus 
operators' vehicles across the UK. We took advice from theAdvertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Standards Authority in advance 
of publication and we have been advised the advert complies with the relevant 
guidelines and legislation."

The theology thinktank Theos welcomed the campaign, saying it was a "great 
way" to get people thinking about God. "The posters will encourage people to 
consider the most important question we will ever face in our lives. The slogan 
itself is a great discussion starter. Telling someone 'there's probably no God' 
is a bit like telling them they've probably remembered to lock their door. It 
creates the doubt that they might not have."

A statement from the Methodist Church thanked Dawkins for encouraging a 
"continued interest in God".

The success of the British initiative has inspired atheists around the world. 
The American Humanist Association launched a bus advertising campaign last 
November with the slogan, "Why believe in a god? Just be good for goodness' 
sake", appearing on the sides, rear and insides of Washington DC's 230 buses.

The subsequent news coverage generated mostly negative phone calls and emails, 
with the largest number going directly to the organisers. Hundreds of 
complaints were sent to Metro, the government body responsible for the city's 
buses and subways. The poster provoked two counter-campaigns by devout 
Christians.

From Monday, buses in Barcelona bearing a Spanish translation of the British 
slogan will hit the streets, to the consternation of the city's Catholic 
hierarchy, while Italy's Union of Atheist, Agnostics and Rationalists plans to 
roll out atheist buses.

Atheists in Australia have fared badly with their campaign. Attempts to place 
slogans such as "Atheism – sleep in on Sunday mornings" on buses were rejected 
by Australia's biggest outdoor advertising company, APN Outdoor.
 