
What keeps you motivated? Seeing my students from week to week. When I get 
bogged down with the banality of admin, having contact with English language 
learners who need the classes to help them survive from week to week reminds me 
that what I do can help people. I enjoy being able to simplify their learning 
journey and, sometimes, helping them with the most everyday problems such as 
letters from council or visiting the doctor.

Best teaching moment? I was very lucky to set up a family English for speakers 
of other languages (Esol) project that got a lotÂ of attention in Scotland. We 
were invited to a Q&A session with the education minister and she gave us some 
tremendous comments. I felt very proud. From this, we were considered to offer 
a strong model for family Esol, and several other institutions and local 
authorities based their family learning initiatives on the project.

And worst? Being stumped by an advanced student's grammar question, I felt 
rather embarrassed.

What have you learned? That if the lessons aren't interesting and useful then 
students won't come back. That's particularly true of my community students. 
They often work very hard and in their very precious time off they choose to 
come to English class. They deserve the classes to be of worth.

Biggest challenge? Juggling the demands of my job with my new part-time hours. 
I'm doing the same job, just reduced teaching hours, after having my first baby.

What's next? In the future I'd like to do some further study, another Master's 
or a PhD perhaps, this time in the English language field. I'd also like to 
expand the provision at our college so that we can offer our students a wide 
range of opportunities and progression options.

Top tip? I always have three or four really good (and fun) emergency 
activities up my sleeve because no matter how much you've planned, you never 
know what's going to happen in class.

Since gaining a Celta in 2007, Pauline Blake-Johnston, 39, has taught Esol 
students in Fife, Scotland. She oversees a range of Esol provision at a further 
education college in Fife

If you are a full-time teacher, you are established in your current teaching 
role and you have an inspiring story to tell, we would like to hear from you. 
Send us yourClass Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jun/17/class-report-invitation>
 