
I'd heard all about New Zealand: sleepy; sheepy; 1950s England; dull and 
duller colonial cakes and overcooked roasts. Forget it. Auckland is so 
deliciously cosmopolitan that I'm wondering quite why I don't live there. 
Auckland is the world's most populous Polynesian city. It's an isthmus circled 
by dramatic extinct volcanos, rubbed by the unpolluted South Pacific waters and 
with more boats per inhabitant than any city in the world. Auckland has a warm 
climate, with fertile farmland and seas that teem with fish. The city is 
blessed with a first-class eating and drinking scene that makes our own seem 
smug and flat. Here are some of the top places to eat:

Prego, an Auckland institution (226 Ponsonby Road, +64 9 376 3095, prego.co.nz 
<http://www.prego.co.nz>; mains from around £10, no reservations), has an 
all-NZ wine list to die for, delicate pizzas and seafood pastas, juicy and 
olive-oily grilled fish, equally well-oiled service, happy punters, and prices 
that make those in London restaurants laughable.

In the shiny city centre, Peter Gordon (owner of Providores and Tapa Room in 
Marylebone, London) runs two gorgeous, slick joints.Dine (SkyCity Grand Hotel, 
90 Federal Street, +64 9 363 7030,skycitygrand.co.nz 
<http://www.skycitygrand.co.nz>; mains from £15) is his paean to Pacific Rim 
cuisine, pulled off with verve and class. Across the road,Bellota (91 Federal 
Street, +64 9 363 6301,bellota.co.nz <http://www.bellota.co.nz>; mains from 
£10) is Peter's take on a Spanish theme; with its dark leathery alcoves, 
Bellota has to be the loungiest, sexiest, flirtiest tapas bar ever.

In the upcoming neighbourhood of Kingsland, you'll find Auckland's best pies 
and friendliest crowd atThe Fridge (507 New North Road, +64 9 845 5321), and 
for tasty, casual, Italian/Mediterranean food, in a cool, noisy environment, 
head toCoco's Cantina (376 Karangahape Road, +64 9 300 7582, cocoscantina.co.nz 
<http://www.cocoscantina.co.nz>; mains from around £8).

Matakana Village (matakanavillage.co.nz <http://www.matakanavillage.co.nz>) is 
a beachside community an hour's drive north of Auckland in wine country, and is 
devoted to food and drink. There's a superb upmarket butcher, a cool chippie, 
andThe Vintry (+64 9 423 0251, thevintry.co.nz <http://www.thevintry.co.nz>) 
which sells hundreds of award-winning NZ wines by the glass, bottle and case. I 
love that you can take your wine into the glamorous cinemas next door (
matakanacinemas.co.nz <http://www.matakanacinemas.co.nz>). Heron's Flight 
Vineyard (49 Sharp Road, +64 9 422 7915, heronsflight.co.nz 
<http://www.heronsflight.co.nz>) serves local cheeses, fish, game and 
Sangiovese wines on its terrace.

•Direct return flights with Air New Zealand from London to Auckland from £999, 
airnewzealand.co.uk <http://www.airnewzealand.co.uk>; hotel and package deals 
from Heritage Hotels,heritagehotels.co.nz <http://www.heritagehotels.co.nz>
 