
It has captured the birth of a new baby 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/3113-my-new-family>, clashes at the G20 protests 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/2899-injury>, London marathon runners 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/everyone?find%5Bpg_rated%5D=true&page=1148> gasping 
for breath,cheery observations from Stephen Fry 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/13392-sandyboo> and bad jokes from Tony Blackburn 
<http://audioboo.fm/profile/Tonyblackburn?page=9>. Less than three months since 
its launch, the sound-sharing websiteAudioBoo <http://audioboo.fm/>, is well on 
the way to becoming the YouTube of the spoken word.

Its success has prompted media companies to incorporate it into coverage of 
this summer's festivals and sporting events. ITV's coverage of the FA Cup later 
this month, for example, will hear fans' views of the game and armchair 
commentaries via AudioBoo on their mobile phones. And the British Library wants 
to use it to capture dialects, accents, oral histories and neighbourhood 
soundscapes.

"It's not only a recording device, it's also a publishing device and that's 
its great appeal," saidRichard Ranft 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/18051-richard-ranft-from-the-british-library-s-sound-archive-praises-audioboo>
, the head of the library's sound archive. "It has fantastic potential – it 
allows people to easily capture an event as it happens. All you need is your 
phone, you don't have to use recording equipment."

AudioBoo, which was partly funded by Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>, was launched in March as a 
website and free iPhone application, although it can now be used on other 
mobiles and landlines. It allows users to make "boos" – digital recordings – up 
to five minutes long. At the press of button, they can then be published online 
as a mini-podcast. The AudioBoo website allows users to comment on the 
recordings, share them on other sites, and follow other users.

Its take-up has been encouraged by celebrities and the media's use of boos at 
news events, including theGuardian's coverage of the G20 protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2009/apr/02/g20-summit-liveblog>.

Stephen Fry's endorsement to his 450,000 followers on Twitter also helped. The 
broadcaster and gadget enthusiast has recorded boos, complete withaudience 
participation <http://audioboo.fm/boos/16611-qi_boo>, while hosting TV show QI 
and at the recording of the new series of the Radio 4 programmeI'm Sorry I 
Haven't a Clue <http://audioboo.fm/profile/stephenfry?page=2>. At one point 
Fry's first boo <http://audioboo.fm/boos/7734-a-test-recording>was being 
listened to 46 times a second.

Mark Rock, the head of a small team who devised AudioBoo in an office beside a 
railway line in south London, points to a graph that tracks growth over the 
last three months. "That's the G20 spike, that's the Stephen Fry spike, that's 
the Tony Blackburn spikette, and that's Chris Moyles," he said.

Blackburn's transatlantic DJ's patter is currently one of the prolific voices 
on Audioboo. "It's reinvented him," said Rock. "He keeps ringing me up and now 
he wants to do radio phone-ins on AudioBoo." There have even beentribute boos 
to Blackburn <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18978-bowling-boo>.

It was when Chris Moyles <http://audioboo.fm/profile/chrisdjmoyles> starting 
using the service and playing Blackburn's boos on his Radio 1 breakfast show 
earlier this month that it began to go mainstream.

In the last week alone more 66 hours of material were uploaded – almost a 
fifth of its total since March.

This week the website is expected to top more than 1m page views since it 
launched and 30,000 downloads to mobiles, making it one of the most successful 
UK-made iPhone applications.

Most of the users are in the UK, but a random 24-hour period last week 
illustrates how AudioBoo is being used and how it's spreading. Recordings 
included:a cat purring in Brooklyn <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18984-happy-cat>; 
office banter in Kosovo <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18983-a-hot-lunchtime>; 10-pin 
bowling in Cardiff <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18978-bowling-boo>; square dancing 
in Berlin <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18676-square-dancing>; a steam train in 
Australia <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18872-puffing-billy-boo>; two lads from 
Yorkshire talking on helium <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18623-helium-bye>; 
clarinet practising in Ayrshire 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/18738-tooli-clarinet-boo>; the sound of the Dutch coast
 <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18936-the-sea>; the dawn chorus in Sefton 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/18852-dawn-chorus-boo>; doing the laundry in Bangkok 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/18651-my-washing-machine>; a bootleg clip of a concert 
in Brighton 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/18712-congolese-afro-cuban-cha-cha-jazz-boo>; and 
swearing from a traffic jam on the M6 <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18673-m6-lament>.

James Cridland, head of future media technology at the BBC, says such content 
is a goldmine for radio stations. "Letting your listeners generate great audio 
will really transform your radio station 
<http://james.cridland.net/blog/2009/05/06/audioboo-makes-it-to-the-mainstream/>
 – far more than texts or emails ever will," he said.

AudioBoo has been talked about as next thing in social networking. Some fear 
it will simply be a spoken version of banal Twitter updates. Or worse –boos on 
the lavatory <http://audioboo.fm/boos/18657-on-the-toilet> are disturbingly 
frequent. 

"The rubbish makes you appreciate the good ones," said Rock.

Cridland said it would not compete with Twitter or radio. "It's probably going 
to be more niche than that – it's primarily audio so it's hard to play around 
with while you're at work. But it brings back the power of the spoken voice."

Ranft agrees. "I'm pleased people are  talking about in terms of it 
reinventing radio. It's difficult to convey emotions in text, but it comes 
across immediately in the voice," he said.

He is talking to Rock about setting up AudioBoo channels for the library's 
sound archive to help members of the public build up its research collection. 
Schoolchildren could get involved to record how telltale words such as bath are 
pronounced in their area, Ranft says.

"It takes recording out of the realm of the specialist," he said.

Rock imagines publishing daily boos from the library's archive. "If a 
recording of Queen Victoria popped up I'd listen to it, just as I listened to 
Tony Blackburn's first audioboo."
 