
Not content with signing another new cluster of deals, the developers behind 
iPhone podcasting app AudioBoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo>
 are planning to raise funding for the product by, appropriately, crowdsourcing 
bundles of equity.


AudioBoo is crowdsourcing its funding. Photograph: James Cridland 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/jamescridland/613445810/>/Some rights reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/deed.en_GB>

Best Before want to sell packages of 1% of the product for £10,000 each, 
selling a maximum of 20% of the equity.

"It's a social product, so why not extend that idea to create a new funding 
model?" said chief executiveMark Rock. For a modest podcasting application, 
AudioBoo has built an impressive profile in a very short space of time - why 
does he think that is? "Because audio has been so ignored for so long, and 
we're doing something fresh and new with it."

Venture funding wasn't an option because the product is moving too fast, he 
said. Explaining AudioBoo's business model, he said there will always be a free 
version because that helps build traction and a the userbase. But the 
five-minute limit for audio clips will be reduced to two or three once a 
paid-for service is introduced. That would cost £36 per year and be targeted at 
professional bloggers and podcasters. Audio clips would be limited to ten 
minutes and include extra features like an upload queue - an advantage over the 
current free version requires each file to be uploaded before another can be 
recorded.

Rock said he wants to 1% funding deals to be bought up by media organisations, 
who will get even greater functionality including moderation tools, content 
management and  various powerful back-end features that larger content 
organisations expect. Particularly if they have paid £10,000 for a corporate 
investment in the product...

As well as the Guardian, media users so far have included the Financial Times 
tech section, theTelegraph's Kate Day <http://audioboo.fm/profile/kate_day>, 
BBC London <http://audioboo.fm/profile/BBCLondon949>, FiveLive, BBC Radio 1's 
Big Weekend <http://audioboo.fm/profile/essentialmix> and ITV.com's coverage of 
theFA Cup Final <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2009/may/29/itv-twitter> 
- so expect any of those to be potential investors.Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2009/may/29/itv-twitter> is also an 
investor, supporting AudioBoo with around £30,000 of finding through4IP.

Among that cluster of new deals is an arrangement with voice to text service 
Spinvox, the voicemail specialists. For jouralists - who already made good use 
of AudioBoo during theG20 demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2009/apr/01/channel4-apple> - this will 
be very interesting indeed. Rock said the service will take a few minutes to 
turn around up to ten minutes of audio using Spinvox's automated technology.

"Strategically, AudioBoo will get big by creating lots of niches, like news, 
radio and music," said Rock. "We'll never be entirely a music app, but if you 
think about the social audio around music, like rehearsals or backstage, that's 
an interesting business model." That thinking explains a deal with the audio 
collaboration siteSoundcloud (we used their excellent embed tool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2009/mar/18/sxswi-events1> during SXSWi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sxswi> and interviewed them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2009/mar/16/tech-weekly-podcast-sxswi>
). Details are being finalised, but essentially AudioBoo users will be able to 
copy their audio into their Soundcloud account.

Another deal means AudioBoo will be used by Adam & Joe for their Glastonbury 
show onBBC 6 show, and the British Library is using AudioBoo to encourage the 
public to 'save our sounds <http://audiobooth.net/node/419>' for their digital 
archive project.

Rock said AudioBoo has notched up some impressive user statistics so far: Over 
the past week, one recording has been made every five minutes, the website is 
pulling in 350,000 unique users each month excludingRSS and iTunes links 
andaround 800 hours of audio has been uploaded by more than 30,000 registered 
users so far.
 