
Audioboo <http://audioboo.fm> is brewing a new feature that will let users 
send private messages to each other - like Twitter's direct messages, but 
audio. Destination: Massive.

Describing it as a social answerphone, Audioboo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/pda/2010/jun/07/digital-media-audioboo> thinks 
it should be ready for release next month. When it does launch (Audioboo is 
finishing it as we write), users will see an inbox for their private messages 
and will be able to send a private message to any other Audioboo user. 
Presumably the 'block' feature comes later.

The advantage over an actual voicemail message is much like the advantage of 
sending a DM onTwitter <http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/twitter>; you 
don't need their mobile number. You just need to be both using the service. 
Audioboo also keeps your messages stored, unlike your mobile operator, along 
with your geo-location data and any associated imagery, file names and so on.

Thinking about how Audioboo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo> 
is used and what it plugs into gets very interesting. If you're not in a 
position to type a message, you can record and send a boo instead. There's a 
five minute limit (though a planned pro version would allow you more) - but 
five minutes of audio is a lot more message than 140 characters.

The fruits of Audioboo's partnership with Pure radios (Pure was one company 
behindAudioboo's recent funding 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/pda/2010/jun/07/digital-media-audioboo>) could 
also be interesting. Next month the first Pure connected radios will include 
Audioboo in their digital menu. That means you could record an Audioboo mesage 
on your radio and, like Audioboo chief executiveMark Rock  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/jul/19/mark-rock-mediaguardian-100-2010>
says, send it to your Gran. Who's obviously an Audioboo user.

"It's difficult to actually talk to people you've connected to on social 
networks since you rarely know their telephone number. What private boos allow 
you to do is simply to connect to them via voice, which is often a much richer 
experience than text. When you add in the location and image data we provide, 
then we think private boos are going to be a really interesting way for people 
to stay in touch."

Eventually, users will receive a notification on whatever device they use when 
a DM arrives, which means the mobile apps will be updated soon after launch. 
And where does this lead? Think beyod voicemail. This gets interesting if you 
think about the one-to-many modle on Twitter, where we want to follow 
interesting people. Audioboo's direct messages will be about receiving 
personalised audio from brands or popular channels.

"The core central concept behind this is the personalisation of audio - 
something that radio or broadcast services currently do very badly," said Rock.

"It's a fan club approach. Subscribe (possibly for a fee) to Stephen Fry's 
Audioboos <http://audioboo.fm/stephenfry> and get personal messages from him, 
which may be general to his subscribers or, potentially, a birthday message 
just for you alone."

You read it here first. In the meantime, click through for a map of the 
International Nation of Boo <http://audioboo.fm/boos/map>:
 Audioboo map  