
It's AudioBoo again... Takeup during the G20 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/g20> has taken AudioBoo by surprise, 
apparently. When the Guardian's news reporterMatthew Weaver 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/blog/2009/mar/31/g20-summit-protests> first 
started linking, the site had 20,000 requests in 14 minutes and was peaking at 
50 file requests a second.

Some hasty re-engineering was required to keep everything online with demand 
up fifty fold. AudioBoo is powered by Amazon S3.
 AudioBoo started creaking under the weight of G20 traffic 
Channel 4 can claim part of the credit for AudioBoo's success after investing 
in itsthrough 4ip <http://uk.techcrunch.com/2009/01/22/4ip-backs-audioboo/> 
earlier this year. Perhaps recognising the sudden wave of interest, AudioBoo 
changed the bare bones design today to incorporate the logo , which makes much 
more sense. The embed could still do with a big more detail though, including 
the file length and the name of the file. But it's early days, and maybe they 
will save a better graphic for the paid-for later this year.

4ip's Dan Heaf <http://www.4ip.org.uk/blog/audioboo_the_story_so_far/> blogged 
about the tool today, saying it has been averaging 1,200 downloads a day from 
the iTunes App Store.

"For me the most exciting thing is seeing how AudioBoo is being used," wrote 
Heaf.

"When 4iP invested in AudioBoo it hoped to support a fledgling UK start-up 
build a tool to empower users to better create audio journalism or first person 
narratives. I hoped it might see the creation and sharing of first person audio 
commentary by location and tag."

AudioBoo  <http://blog.audioboo.fm/2009/04/01/g20-mapped-by-boos/>is mapping 
all geo-tagged recordings - which makes for an interesting visualisation on the 
day's action and a handy way for police to target anyone reporting things they 
don't like. Theoretically.

â€¢ The Guardian has also done a map of the action 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interactive/2009/apr/01/g20-summit-london-protest-map>
.




 