
The iPhone audio recording tool Audioboo <http://www.audioboo.fm> had a 
thoroughly decent outing on the Guardian site this weekend with news reporter
Matthew Weaver using it to report from the G20 protests 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/blog/2009/mar/26/g20-protests> in London.

AudioBoo only launched officially through the iTunes Store 
<http://itunes.apple.com/WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/viewSoftware?id=305204540&mt=8>
 two weeks ago but has already been picked up by some enthusiastic audio 
bloggers. The app is free but producers Best Before will introduce expanded 
features in a paid-for version.

Marcus Romer, artistic director at at Pilot Theatre 
<http://www.pilot-theatre.net/redesign/default.asp?idno=17451>, is 
experimenting with AudioBoo to update the group's website as it tours its Lord 
of the Flies production. Heading into niche community territory theDiecast Audio
 <http://www.diecastaudio.com/shows/diecastaudio-shows/> site has started using 
AudioBoo as a super simple way of producing its podcasts.

And photographer and social media wizard Christian Payne 
<http://ourmaninside.com/2009/03/20/my-audioboo-podcast/> has been using it for 
his personal podcasts. As he says: "Yes you need an iPhone but this will not be 
so in the future. And besides, look at the kit you used to need. Even on the 
cheap you are looking at some kind of audio recorder and a computer. Some 
people use mixers. Now all you need is a free app AudioBoo and an iPhone."

For Matthew Weaver, it was a way of quickly turning around interviews with 
people on the street with demonstrators at the G20 protests including die-hard 
protester and activistMark Thomas 
<http://www.audioboo.fm/boos/1931-mark-thomas-in-press-tent>: 

AudioBoo records on to your iPhone and then uploads the file to the AudioBoo 
site with related pictures, tags and the location of the recording plotted on a 
Google Map. Embed code and a URL means the file can be shared and pasted into 
your own blog. AudioBoo alsoplotted each one of Weaver's interviews 
<http://blog.audioboo.fm/2009/03/28/the-guardian-gets-into-audioboo/> on a 
larger map, tracing the path of the demonstrations across London.
 