
Audley Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison>, who has 
flirted with derision for much of his professional career, is going to box on. 
And, despite his humiliating defeat by David Haye, he is dreaming still against 
all odds and logic of fighting for the world title again.

"After spending some time away reflecting on the fight and outcome, I have 
made the decision to continue my journey in boxing," Harrison said in a 
prepared statement.

"I give David credit as I never expected him to hurt me as he did, but anyone 
could see it was a premature stoppage [in round three] and I should have been 
allowed to carry on and ride out the rough patch, even if that meant I would 
have got KO'd."

The "if" in that statement is as redundant as was his punch-free performance.

This is a declaration that will dumbfound boxing fans, more than half a 
million of whom paid Â£14.95 to watch his challenge for Haye's WBA world title 
on Sky Box Office. The live gate, sold out for weeks in advance, was 22,000, 
and those present cat-called the beaten Harrison out of the ring after a truly 
abject performance.

Yet, paradoxically, it is the nature of the defeat that has persuaded him to 
fight on. "Any sportsman would not want to finish his career like that," his 
promoter Eddie Hearn said.

"And what else is he going to do? If he had gone out and got battered over 
eight or nine rounds it would have been different. But he wasn't that hurt. He 
had a bit of concussion but he said later he wished he had been knocked out 
cold. If he had taken a beating, people would have said it was OK.

"He will probably have a couple of eight-rounders in America, and take it from 
there. He's still No 2 in Europe and could challenge again for that title and 
then, who knows, be in place for another world title shot. Our fighter, Albert 
Sosnowski, fights Alexander Dimitrenko for the title on Saturday night, so 
that's an option.

"People will say we are clutching at straws, but they said we were clutching 
at straws when he got the fight withDavid Haye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/davidhayeboxing>."

Hearn is convinced Harrison is still a major draw. "The average Saturday night 
viewing figures for Sky are between 100,000 and 200,000. When Audley won 
Prizefighter, the number was 555,000. When he knocked out Michael Sprott in the 
last round, it was 590,000.

"When he fights here again, the audience will be huge, even though his 
credibility is at an all-time low. How do you explain that?

"When he returns to Britain, he could fight someone like Tyson Fury, because 
Audley fancies that fight."

The promoter said he has grown to like Harrison since they first met 18 months 
ago. "He came to us and said he just wanted a couple of six-rounders. I said we 
could do better than that. And we did.

"Audley is a nice guy, but there is no place worse than a boxing ring in which 
to be humiliated. He's taken a lot of stick in the past, but he wants to carry 
on. Despite what people might think, Audley is a fighter. It's what he does for 
a living. What else is he going to do?"
 