
Nan Graham <http://www.danaroc.com/inspiring_121905nangraham.html>, who now 
works at US publisherScribner 
<http://www.simonandschuster.net/content/destination.cfm?sid=33&pid=427728> (a 
subsidiary of the mighty Simon & Schuster), is a very good and experienced 
editor, and a sensible person. In the UK she looks afterHanif Kureishi 
<http://www.contemporarywriters.com/authors/?p=auth57> and Monica Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jun/01/fiction.features1>, and has a 
reputation for good taste and the feisty support of her writers.

So if Nan has just paid $5m for Audrey Niffenegger 
<http://www.audreyniffenegger.com/>'s second novel after the astonishing 
success ofThe Time Traveler's Wife 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/the-timetravelers-wife-by-audrey-niffenegger-573715.html>
, I'd be willing to bet it will be a finely calculated gamble, and one based on 
a careful consideration of the manuscript.

Graham's reported comments to the New York Times about Her Fearful Symmetry (a 
title derived from William Blake to describe a novel set in Highgate cemetery 
with Marx's grave as a backdrop) suggest that Niffenegger's new book is 
seriously commercial. "She really has defied custom," says Graham, "and written 
a spectacular second novel." This, she went on, cheerfully boosting her new 
acquisition, "is one of the hardest things to do in the universe." Well, up to 
a point, Lord Copper.

Whatever the qualities of Her Fearful Symmetry – we'll have to wait and see 
about that – this deal is a classic example of the recession advance. That's to 
say, a huge payout for a brand-name writer who can be expected to work the 
necessary magic for Scribner at the checkout and generate turnover in a 
sure-fire way that would not be possible with, say, 20 or 30 less high-profile 
novels, the so-called "mid-list titles" (the real losers in this recession).

For better or worse, this kind of money for these brand-name titles is going 
to become common practice in the US-UK book world during the recession: stand 
by for a rash of "giant advance" headlines.

In some ways, though, the Niffenegger news is misleading. In fact, it's not 
even that humongous an advance: I can think of about 10 well-known writers – 
rather more discreet than Niffenegger and her agent – whose recent contracts 
are adjacent to $5m.

But Niffenegger is nevertheless an interesting case: devoted fans, spectacular 
US sales, a low-key personal style and a quasi-literary approach to some very 
commercial fiction, all of which plays well in the marketplace. The 
Marx/Highgate element might just be a stroke of inspiration. My guess is that 
Scribner may have just got itself a bargain.
 