
The compulsion when I'm writing has often been: "Let's kill them all!" I can 
make my characters' lives really quite miserable. I don't feel a duty to give 
hope or do the right thing, only to get inside the person's head and try to 
understand how horrendous some things might feel.

I haven't seen the film of The Time Traveler's Wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130980/time-traveler-s-wife> and 
probably never will. I feel the direct opposite of curiosity, whatever that is. 
The theory is that if I don't see it, maybe I can believe it's brilliant. I was 
told that it veers into soppy territory, and that's the one thing I try to keep 
out of my work.

If you put in creativity, money, time, emotion, you're on your way to 
a functioning society or world. If you suck those things out, raise school 
fees, close down libraries, everything grinds to a halt – ideas, culture, jobs. 
There's nothing special about that.

Growing hurts. I say this as somebody who, in one school year, went from 5ft 
2in to 5ft 8in. It was a hell of a spurt.

I have an incredible memory of visiting Highgate Cemetery in June. It was 
a bright day and it was green, it was lush, but it was quite broken. I fell in 
love with it, and wrote a book [Her Fearful Symmetry]. I would like to be 
buried there. I would have an epitaph reading: "Easily bored".

I over-research. Years go by. My publishers get annoyed. I don't like this 
feeling that everything has to be rushed.

The problem I have with party politics is: how many people really believe in 
the ideas they're shouting about? It's amazing what people will preach 
about for the sake of a career. The other day, several ex-Republican 
politicians came out in support of gay marriage. It's like they retire and you 
find out what they really think.

I generally expect things not to go very well. Occasionally people do lovely 
things and surprise me. It's better that way.

My desire to meet Aubrey Beardsley 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aubrey_Beardsley> waxes and wanes. Sometimes I 
think I would rather preserve my ideas about his work, but I occasionally 
wonder what he would have thought about art post-Duchamp 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marcel_Duchamp> – things like the Armory Show 
<http://www.thearmoryshow.com/> and modernism.

I learned a lot from my first love. He was a Dutch scientist 17 years older 
than me and he exposed me to many things I didn't know about. I am seeing 
someone else now and I think I have got better at being patient in 
a relationship, letting things come along.

I enjoy being a redhead. As an artist I approve of it – it's a better colour.

Someone told me my work was defined by loss and I suppose I am interested by 
the fact that whether you're happy or traumatised, you're always going to move 
on. Your feelings will alter whether you want them to or not.

Audrey Niffenegger's new illustrated fairy tale, Raven Girl 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224097871>
 (£16.99, Cape), is being performed as a ballet at the Royal Opera House from 
24 May to 8 June (roh.org.uk <http://roh.org.uk>)
 