
Like some grandchild of the aimless war veteran in Cold Chisel’s Khe Sanh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dTjvG4WJD_A>, Augie March’s One Crowded Hour 
speaks no less definitively of Australian themes than that musical monolith did 
in 1978.

You could be forgiven for missing the lineage: there’s no mention of obvious 
local landmarks or night flights from the harbour city; none of the broad, 
rough tongue of the working class man. This is rendered more subtly, ideas and 
evocations delivered in the dulcet tones of an ambitious young literary man, 
graduated into the middle class. Yet, like any descendent who knows his salt, 
the song comes back to find itself tilling the same soil as those who went 
before: youthful longing, thwarted ambition, sex, class, war and loss.

Topping Triple J’s Hottest 100, named APRA’s song of the year and netting the 
Australian Music Prize in 2006,One Crowded Hour 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LejMbZjZUvk> was a breakthrough hit for the 
Melbourne band. Opening with a faint, ghostly organ-esque keyboard chord and a 
single guitar, the song starts simply enough. An unexpected moment of insight, 
expressed with a perfect, poetic twist on an old aphorism: “If love is a bolt 
from the blue, then what is a bolt but a glorified screw? And that doesn’t hold 
nothing together.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLejMbZjZUvk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLejMbZjZUvk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLejMbZjZUvk&media=>
Lyricist Glenn Richards is more concerned with “the way words move together” 
than following a singular narrative, though One Crowded Hour disguises this. It 
presents first and foremost as a simple romantic waltz around love and longing. 
A closed circuit of straight rhyming lines, the chorus is the biggest culprit 
in this deception. Three lines of hope chords build the anticipation of love 
and salvation, a ship sallying forth toward a “beacon in the gloom”. But 
despite the build up, the tonal closure makes the story one of an ill fate 
preordained, the final line let down that “one crowded hour would lead to my 
wreck and ruin”.

The song comes together with the gradual addition of new elements: that 
ghostly organ, a lone, quiet bass guitar, a Greek chorus of oohs echoing in the 
background as if to confirm that everything happened just as our narrator said 
it did. It builds slowly, like a late summer storm rolling gently across Port 
Phillip Bay, until it’s become a whirling, churning carnival of sound. It holds 
the rare sparkle of the carnival, too: a kaleidoscopic twinkling of ideas, 
images and snatches of scenes at once sharp and dreamy.

And it’s the lyrics that really make it shine. Having cribbed the title from a 
biography of Australian war photographer, Neil Davis, who spent his life 
documenting the horrors of the late 20th century in south-east Asia, the line 
back to Khe Sahn reveals itself again. There’s reference to the protagonist 
“learning the languages they speak in hell” and a baby taken from her mother 
and “raised to be a lady – now she can’t keep her mouth shut.”

The nursery rhyme references of the second verse mix the dish running away 
with the spoon and class envy into a “pleasure pen” that’s “not for the likes 
of you and me”. There’s an ache to the song that comes from all these different 
places but that hits the same bruise every time: the loss, longing and 
restlessness that comes from deep in the soil but lives in the very marrow of 
our bones.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwEJlGOwNLwE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwEJlGOwNLwE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwEJlGOwNLwE&media=>
Richards’ lyrics convey an almost spiritual onomatopoeia. Sound out “there’s 
nothing there, it’s like eating air” and find the vowels shape your mouth into 
the experience of doing just that. “Like drinking gin with nothing else in” 
curves your cheeks into that sour, sore-jawed sneer of hard liquor on unwilling 
taste buds.

Despite the title coming from that Australian biography, it seems apt that the 
book title (and thus the song title) should have come from a British officer 
and poet before even that. Thomas Osbert Mordaunt wrote The Call as a paean to 
the worth of “glorious life” via the sacrifices of war. Lucky for us, there’s 
always been something of the 18th-century war poet pulling the strings in Augie 
March’s lyrics, and only Richards could twist this line from a cosseted 
officer’s rallying cry to reflect on the lie beneath.

Like the tradition of walkabout, One Crowded Hour follows the songlines of 
Australia’s spirit: ambition and thwarted hope, isolation and empathy, longing 
and restlessness, the lie of a classless society – all with an eye for beauty, 
however doomed. Like an old slide projector throwing out images against the pub 
wall, it’s as Australian as it comes, a worthy successor to the simple 
pleasures of Khe Sahn. There’s still no salvation to be found at the end of our 
search, but for one crowded hour, the search itself is more than worth the 
effort.
 