
Aung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> has 
pledged to promote human rights in Myanmar’s troubled Rakhine state as the 
Nobel laureate made her UN debut as her country’s de facto leader.


In a scene unthinkable several years ago, the one-time opposition icon who was 
put under house arrest for years by a military junta took the rostrum of the
United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> on Wednesday 
to speak for Myanmar.

But some western supporters who long fought for Suu Kyi’s freedom have voiced 
dismay as, now a politician, she refuses to recognize the Rohingya – a 
persecuted Muslim minority in the overwhelmingly Buddhist nation.

'No Muslims allowed': how nationalism is rising in Aung San Suu Kyi's Myanmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
Suu Kyi did not mention the Rohingya by name in her address. It is a 
contentious issue among Buddhists in Rakhine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/aung-san-suu-kyi-tells-un-that-the-term-rohingya-will-be-avoided>
, who consider the Rohingya to be illegal immigrants from neighboring 
Bangladesh and customarily call them “Bengali”.

 But she pledged to back a commission led by former UN chief Kofi Annan that 
was recently set up to advise on Rakhine state, where thousands of Rohingya 
have spent four years in dire displacement camps.

“There has been persistent opposition from some quarters to the establishment 
of the commission,” she said, referring to protests that have met the advisers.

“However, we are determined to persevere in our endeavor to achieve harmony, 
peace and prosperity in the Rakhine state,” she said.

“I would like to take the opportunity to ask for the understanding and 
constructive contribution of the international community,” she said. “By 
standing firm against the forces of prejudice and intolerance, we are 
reaffirming our faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of 
the human person.”

Before heading to New York, Suu Kyi met at the White House with Barack Obama, 
who agreed to scrap remaining sanctions againstMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>.

US policymakers privately say that they recognize Suu Kyi faces intense 
domestic pressure in Myanmar, where the Rohingya are the target of widespread 
public derision and are not even considered citizens.

Suu Kyi, the daughter of independence leader Aung San, has a delicate 
relationship with Myanmar’s generals. In her UN address, she referred to her 
country mostly as Myanmar and not as Burma, the usage insisted upon by her 
opposition party when she was under house arrest.
 