
Aung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> plans to 
create a role for herself that will give her similar powers to that of a prime 
minister in the new Myanmar government, further circumventing a constitutional 
ban on her serving as president.

The Guardian view on Myanmar’s new government: a hard row to hoe | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/the-guardian-view-on-myanmars-new-government-a-hard-row-to-hoe>
The bill to form a state counsellor role, with specific reference to the 
70-year-old Nobel laureate in the text, was the first piece of legislation put 
to parliament on the first day of office for the democratically-elected 
National League for Democracy (NLD) government.

It passed the upper house on Friday but needs lower house approval and a 
presidential sign-off before becoming law, conditions that are likely to be met 
with an NLD majority in both chambers and an NLD-appointed president.

Blocked from the presidency under a junta-drafted 2008 constitution, Aung San 
Suu Kyi is to head four cabinet posts including foreign affairs, president’s 
office, education, and energy ministries.

As state counsellor, the longtime democracy campaigner would also work with 
political parties and organisations, effectively giving her influence in the 
executive and the legislative arms of government.

Importantly, the role allows her to keep a foot in parliament as her cabinet 
appointments had forced her to step down from the legislature. Observers have 
likened the position to a prime minister-type role.

“The object of the proposal from the bill committee in the upper house 
parliament is to fulfil the wishes and interests of people who voted on 8 
November 2015,” NLD lawmaker Aung Kyi Nyun told parliament.

Before Aung San Suu Kyi won a victory in the November elections, she promised 
to be “above the president” –Htin Kyaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/htin-kyaw-myanmar-president-electon-aung-san-suu-kyi-nld>
 is a trusted school friend who is expected to act as a proxy.

The bill led to the first political battle Aung San Suu Kyi has fought with 
the military in parliament since thepresident was sworn in on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/myanmar-swears-in-htin-kyaw-as-first-civilian-president-in-decades>
.

The army-aligned Union Solidarity and Development party (USDP) opposed it, 
saying it was unconstitutional. Members of the military, who are automatically 
given 25% of parliamentary seats, also argued against the bill, saying it 
should be referred to a constitutional tribunal.

Army politician Col Hla Win Aung warned that the bill could “destroy” the 
balance of power between the legislature, executive and judiciary.

Aung San Suu Kyi is blocked from becoming president  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/aung-san-suu-kyi-to-hold-a-ministry-in-myanmars-government>
as she has children with foreign nationality, a clause the military leaders 
made sure to write into the constitution. Her late husband was British.

Her government is smaller by about a third than the outgoing military-aligned 
administration. It includes a ministry of ethnic affairs, which will likely 
address issues from Myanmar’s 40% minority ethnic populations.

The seat is held by Naing Thet Lwin, an ethnic Mon born in 1940 who led an 
anti-government movement in 1988, according to theMyanmar Times. 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/national-news/nay-pyi-taw/19609-who-s-who-myanmar-s-new-cabinet.html>

The daughter of the country’s assassinated revolutionary hero, Aung San Suu 
Kyi is the only woman in the cabinet.

There has also been controversy in Myanmar over the appointment of Kyaw Win as 
planning and finance minister. The longtime civil servanttold 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/business/19597-nld-finance-minister-admits-to-bogus-phd.html>
 the Myanmar Times that the doctorate listed on his official party profile was 
fake.

The 68-year-old said he was a shocked to discover that his credentials were 
bogus after netizens alerted him that he had been scammed by company in 
Pakistan. His CV, issued by the NLD, showed he held a PhD from Brooklyn Park 
University, an online organisation that sold fraudulent degrees.


“I am not going to call myself Dr any more, as I know now that it is a fake 
university,” hesaid 
<http://www.mmtimes.com/index.php/business/19597-nld-finance-minister-admits-to-bogus-phd.html>
.

Thura U Aung Ko, a senior member of the outgoing USDP, is minister of 
religious and cultural affairs. The retired military officer was seen as close 
to Suu Kyi during the past five years as democratic reforms were gradually 
implemented.

Agence France-Presse contributed to this report
 