
Aung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> will be 
a minister in Myanmar’s new cabinet when it takes power in April, the speaker 
of parliament has said, ending weeks of speculation over whether the leader of 
the country’s governing party would hold a formal position in government.

The names of 18 ministers were announced in the capital, Naypyidaw, on Tuesday 
during a parliament session that lasted less than 15 minutes. The speaker, Mann 
Win Khaing Than, only read out names and did not detail which portfolios the 
Nobel laureate or any of the other ministers would take.

However, a separate list obtained by Reuters news agency, which it said was 
from parliament sources, showed thatAung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> would lead four 
ministries: minister of the president’s office, foreign affairs, electric power 
and energy, and education.

“It doesn’t matter how many ministries she takes as she will run the whole 
government anyway,” said Win Htein, a senior National League for Democracy 
politician close to Aung San Suu Kyi.

Aung San Suu Kyi, 70, and her NLD party have provided infrequent and scant 
details on their plans for government since winning a large majority in the 
historic November election.

Earlier this week, the NLD spokesman, Zaw Myint Maung, suggested Aung San Suu 
Kyi might not take a cabinet position and insteadrule as party leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/aung-san-suu-kyi-unlikey-to-take-seat-in-myanmar-government>
 leader from parliament. As part of the executive she will have to leave her 
position as an MP.

Only 18 of 21 ministers were disclosed in Tuesday’s short and vague 
announcement in parliament, adding to speculation that Aung San Suu Kyi will 
lead more than one ministry.

“Aung San Suu Kyi will entrust the party in parliament in the hands of other 
NLD elders, as expected, and assume a role within the cabinet,” said Nyantha 
Maw Lin, the managing director at political consultancy Vriens & Partners in 
Yangon.


“She understands that ultimately, power lies with the executive, which holds 
the reins on the peace process, foreign policy, the economy and, most 
importantly, relations with the military.”

Before the election, the leader had vowed to be “above the president” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/aung-san-suu-kyi-nominates-htin-kyaw-myanmar-president>
, working around a junta-drafted constitution that bars her from the country’s 
most powerful position because her two children and late husband are British.

Htin Kyaw, a close adviser, was elected president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/myanmar-parliament-elects-htin-kyaw-as-first-civilian-president-in-53-years>
 this month and is expected to act as a proxy for Aung San Suu Kyi.

The daughter of the country’s assassinated revolutionary hero, Aung San Suu 
Kyi is the only woman on the list of names. Others include Thein Swe, a former 
political prisoner, and Naing Thet Lwin, an ethnic minority from the Mon 
National party.

It also includes Thura U Aung Ko, a senior member of the outgoing 
military-aligned Union Solidarity and Development party, a reflection of Aung 
San Suu Kyi’s desire to be inclusive and not alienate army generals.

The army retains significant power and the military commander-in-chief 
appoints the ministers of defence, home affairs and border affairs from members 
of the defence services, or Tatmadaw.

Reuters contributed to this report.
 