
More than 50 years after he died, the first Australian to be killed in action 
during theVietnam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> war has finally 
come home.

Warrant officer Kevin Conway is among 33 Australian casualties of the conflict 
whose bodies are being repatriated from Singapore andMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> for burial by their families.

Attached to US forces, Conway was killed during the battle of Nam Dong on 6 
July 1964 and was cited by his commander for a Victoria Cross.


The remaining 32 bodies being returned were buried at Terendak cemetery in 
Malaysia, on what is still an operating military base, meaning access for 
families was restricted.


They include 21 Vietnam veterans, three killed in Malaysian conflicts, two 
spouses and six children.


“We have found the families who are finding this most difficult are families 
of the six children who died, who found it very, very difficult to leave their 
children behind when they returned to Australia,” said Ken Corke, director of 
the office of Australian war graves.

Two military planes carrying the bodies arrived at Richmond air base in 
Sydney’s northwest, where families will be given time to grieve during a 
private ceremony. A procession through western Sydney will follow.

Vietnam: The Real War – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/apr/22/vietnam-the-real-war-a-photographic-history-by-the-associated-press-in-pictures>
Neil Bond, whose uncle, corporal Reg Hillier, was killed in combat in 1965, 
said his mother never stopped lobbying for her youngest brother’s return.


“It just devastated her ... not having anywhere to grieve and the fact that he 
wasn’t honoured like the rest of them,” he said.

“I’m not a spiritual person but ... I do think she’s probably going to be 
there [at the repatriation].”

“It’s an historic and important day in Australia’s proud military history for 
Vietnam veterans and relatives,” said Bob Shewring, who led the Vietnam 
Veterans Association campaign.

“It will finally right a terrible wrong.”

Changes to repatriation laws in 1966 meant families of Australians killed in 
overseas conflicts could have their loved ones brought home at the government’s 
expense, but the law change was not retrospective for those who had already 
lost their lives.


“Like many of us, most of them were quite young, they would have been thinking 
that nothing was going to happen like that that affected them and the reality 
of that policy really didn’t come home to roost when the sad occasion of their 
child dying happened and they were found they were not even able to make a 
decision, they were just told they had to leave them behind,” Corke said.

The government-funded repatriation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/25/families-of-soldiers-who-died-in-vietnam-war-offered-help-to-bring-them-home>
 program was announced by former prime minister Tony Abbott last year, after 
years of consultation between the Australian, Malaysian and Singapore 
governments.

It was the right decision said Veterans Affairs minister Dan Tehan: “The 
families will get the closure they deserve, but also it gives us a chance as a 
nation to stop, pause and reflect on the service and sacrifice that our Vietnam 
veterans made on behalf of our nation.”


The offer was made to 36 families, with only three choosing to leave their 
loved ones in Malaysia.

Australia lost 521 service personnel in the Vietnam war between 1962 and 1975 
<https://www.awm.gov.au/atwar/vietnam/>, with 3,000 wounded.
 