
Get off to a flyer

Against a man who has dominated the tour and beaten all and sundry for the 
best part of two years, it almost goes without saying that starting slowly is 
likely to be a recipe for disaster. Of their three most recent grand slam 
meetings, Djokovic has won the first set in each, although two of them were in 
tie-breaks. If Murray is going to win, the chances are he is going to need to 
get inside Djokovic’s head and winning the first set may be one way he can do 
it. He managed it atthe US Open in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/11/andy-murray-us-open-novak-djokovic1>
 and atWimbledon in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-wimbledon-2013-novak-djokovic>
 and we all know what happened then. If he has recovered well enough from 
having 24 hours less than Djokovic to prepare, and he is ready from the first 
ball, anything is possible.

Andy Murray takes rational approach to facing the mighty Novak Djokovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-australian-open-final>
Same level of intensity

Anyone who saw the first two sets of Djokovic’s semi-final with Roger Federer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/novak-djokovic-roger-federer-australian-open>
will have appreciated it as some of the most outstanding tennis we have ever 
seen, not only at the Australian Open. As the great Rod Laver said here on 
Friday: “It was just quite incredible the speed he was getting around the court 
and being able to hit great shots down the line, just an inch inside the line. 
When Roger came to the net, Novak had all the answers and he played 
beautifully.” As important as matching his tennis is matching his intensity. If 
Murray comes out a little flat, for whatever reason, he is unlikely to have 
enough about him to win; if, on the other hand, he gets pumped up, in 
Djokovic’s face at times and generally stands up to be counted, he might just 
have a chance to win the title here, at the fifth time of asking.

Attack the forehand 

Perhaps it would be better to say stay away from the backhand. The Djokovic 
backhand is so strong, usually, that it pays to steer clear if at all possible. 
The forehand is much improved in the past few years but remains the side to 
target at the important times. Technically, it is not quite as sound as the 
backhand and when he is not quite on his game, Djokovic has a slight tendency 
to lift the ball long. It was a tactic that worked especially well when Murray 
beat Djokovic to win the 2012 US Open, using his serve out wide from the deuce 
court to great effect, often yielding an error or an easy third shot. As Murray 
said on Friday: “You can’t afford to do anything poorly. I need to execute my 
gameplan, not have any lapses in concentration and just play as best a match as 
I can.” He knows that even if he does, it might not be good enough, but going 
after the forehand on big points will be part of that plan.

Play to the crowd

Say goodnight to the bad guy: villain role fits Novak Djokovic against Federer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/novak-djokovic-villain-role-roger-federer>
As a five-time champion at Melbourne Park, Djokovic has long been a fan 
favourite here, even if Federer remains supreme in that department. But if 
there is one thing we know about Djokovic, it is that he does not like it when 
the crowd gets on his back. He hasbecome better at coping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/novak-djokovic-villain-role-roger-federer>
 but, quite understandably, he still finds it hard to understand why they might 
want his opponent to win and occasionally he can let it rattle him. Murray 
needs to find a way to get the crowd on his side early on, either by his own 
play or by being gutsy. Australians love winners but they also love an underdog 
and a trier so having lost in four previous finals, they will not need much 
encouragement to back him in this one.

Don’t fall for the mind games

Murray will not have forgotten what happened a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/01/australian-open-final-2015-novak-djokovic-andy-murray>
 when he had Djokovic wobbling, having split the first two sets and gone an 
early break up in the third. It was at that stage that Djokovic began to clutch 
his ankle, seemingly in real pain and unable to move properly. Looking over the 
net and seeing his opponent struggling spooked Murray and though he ought to 
have known better – after all, it is not the first time Djokovic has looked 
down and out and suddenly run around like a hare – it got to him, he lost focus 
and barely won another game. As Murray said on Friday, the 2015 final is a good 
indicator that his tennis is good enough to be close to Djokovic and he will 
take heart from the fact that hebeat him in Canada last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/16/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-rogers-cup-tennis>
. If he can cut down on the monologues, conserve his energy and play his best 
then he will give himself a chance of breaking his losing run in finals here.
 