
Shane Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-watson> is still 
restricted by a calf injury and is unlikely to feature in the second Test.

Australia trained at St George’s Park on Tuesday, one of two sessions the 
squad has at the Port Elizabeth venue before the potentially series-deciding 
Test starts on Thursday.

Watson batted in the nets, but instead of taking part in the main fielding 
session he completed some short shuttle runs under the watchful eye of team 
doctor Peter Brukner.

“We don’t even know much about it. He’s batting well, moving well when he’s 
batting, but I don’t know when his next bowl is,” paceman Peter Siddle said 
after the side’s first training session in Port Elizabeth. “We’ll just have to 
wait and see.”

When news broke of Watson’s calf issue 10 days ago, team physio Alex Kontouris 
suggested the plan was for the all-rounder to “be able to train unrestricted by 
two or three days’ out [from a Test]”.

As such, it is unlikely national selectors will have to make a tough decision 
on how to fit Watson in their XI until at least 1 March, when the third Test 
starts in Cape Town.

In the absence of Watson, Michael Clarke is likely to again throw the ball to 
part-time medium pacerDavid Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-warner>. Warner, who is now charging 
in off his long run-up instead of sending down leg-breaks at training, finished 
with figures of 0-3 from two overs in the first Test.

“It’s been good fun working with him [Warner], he’s actually a pretty good 
student,” Siddle said. “He’s been in the nets working on his little off-cutters 
and leg-cutters. “He listens. He likes to joke around, but he’s switched on and 
he likes to work hard at anything he tries.

“They’re coming out alright. We’ll be looking forward to him taking that first 
wicket with medium pace - he’ll live off that for a very long time.”
 