
Australia's coach, Darren Lehmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-lehmann>, is happy to sit back and 
let England rake over the mistakes of their 5-0 Ashes whitewash.

While Lehmann has been credited with fostering the contented environment that 
saw Australia turn around their fortunes so significantly this winter, England 
have dissolved into chaos.

Andy Flower has denied issuing an ultimatum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/08/andy-flower-kevin-pietersen-england-future>
 to end his, or Kevin Pietersen's, England career, but it is a topic Lehmann is 
unwilling to delve into.

"I'm not going there to be perfectly honest," he said. "That's for them to 
work out. We've got enough to worry about getting ready for a one-day series 
here and then a Twenty20 series â€“ the World Cup is a focus as well. The England 
team have got decisions to make. They'll make them I'm sure."

The five-match one-day international series begins in Melbourne on Sunday and, 
while Lehmann will again take charge of Australia, Flower has returned to 
England before beginning his Ashes review.

Flower ceded control of the limited overs teams to Ashley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> just over a year ago, and the 
time away will at least allow him to plot his next move.

Giles and England's ODI team will get some welcome relief from Mitchell Johnson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-johnson>, following Cricket 
Australia's decision to rest the fast bowler for the first game. The national 
selector John Inverarity said: "Mitch has had a brilliant summer with the Test 
side and while he is a crucial member of the ODI squad it is important that he 
has a bit of a break now.

"The [national selection panel] will be looking to provide a break, also, for 
most of the players in the ODI squad who played in the Tests against England."

Lehmann confirmed that Johnson would return for the second ODI in Brisbane on 
17 January. "He'll play in Brisbane, definitely," he said. "It's one of his 
home towns so he'll play there. It's obviously been a very big summer for him. 
So we'll just give him a short little break and make sure he's getting fresh 
for the other one-dayers.

"It's important that we put the best side that we possibly can out, but 
understanding that it's been a hectic five Test matches. Some of the Test boys 
especially are weary."

Lehmann ruled out the possibility of resting a number of first-choice players 
in the same game as he looks to build towards a home World Cup in 12 months' 
time. "We'll sum it up as we go. We certainly don't want to go down the path we 
have previously where we've rested clumps of players," he said. "We want to 
make sure we put together a good squad looking ahead to the World Cup. This 
one-day format is very important for us."
 