
An Australian friend once told me that in his home country it was considered 
rude to sit silently in the back of a taxi if you were travelling alone. He was 
probably pulling my leg, but the result is that whenever I pick up a cab in 
Australia, I sit up front and throw myself zealously into conversation with the 
driver, terrified that otherwise he'll think I'm a stuck-up Pom.

This paid particular dividends last week at Sydney airport. Hearing that I'd 
flown in especially to watchEngland lose the Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/05/england-ashes-defeat-australia-johnson-harris>
, my cabbie gave me a long lecture on why Phil Hughes should be in the 
Australia team for Steve Smith, romanticised about Mark Waugh ("the prettiest 
bat I've ever seen," he swooned), then mentioned in passing that his uncle had 
batted for England in the 1920s and 30s. "Oh really?" I asked. "What was his 
name?" "Herbert Sutcliffe 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/england/content/player/20413.html>," he replied.

Saying that Sutcliffe "once batted for England" is like saying that Michael 
Jackson once did a bit of moonwalking. Sutcliffe, of the famed "Hobbs and 
Sutcliffe" opening partnership, is one of the greatest Yorkshiremen ever to 
furrow his brow at a fast bowler. But then Don, his nephew, turned out to be an 
unusually modest Aussie, who had played Sheffield Shield and Grade cricket with 
Neil Harvey and Greg Matthews, and faced Frank Tyson and Fred Trueman at the 
Waca in 1958. He'd been eight when his father, Bert's brother, had put his 
family on a boat and taken them halfway round the world to escape England 
during the second world war. Just old enough to receive one cherished piece of 
advice from his uncle on opening the batting: "Keep your head down, and watch 
the bowler's arm at all times."

I had expected Don to have plenty to say about an Australian team that was 
well on its way to thrashing England 5-0, and he did, but it wasn't as 
complimentary as you would imagine. No disrespect to England, he said, but 
Australia were going to get shown up when they played South Africa. "Shane 
Watson and Chris Rogers will fail because they can't play the moving ball," Don 
confidently predicted. "You mark my words, Philander and Steyn are going to tie 
our batsmen up."

Over the three days of the devastatingly brief Sydney Test that followed, I 
found that this kind of frank admission of inadequacy was shockingly prevalent. 
Time and again I would hear, from Australians themselves, how poor their team 
was, and how unlikely the whitewash. It wasn't carping so much as disbelief. 
How could a team with a top five that regularly failed to make 150 between them 
managean Ashes feat achieved only twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/05/ashes-2013-14-australia-england--whitewash>
 previously in history?

Having expected to arrive to a tide of Australian triumphalism, this 
widespread self-effacement took me aback. We'd all read the stories of how the 
Gabba had turned into a cauldron of bullyboy malice. A friend who had been in 
Brisbane told me how she had watched Matt Prior practising in the nets to the 
noisy accompaniment of insults and expletives from a group of boors. There had 
been nothing friendly about the rivalry that followed on the pitch, and no 
promise of quarter from the supporters either.

And yet here, hardcore Aussie fans, who usually enjoy nothing more than a Pom 
being crushed beneath their heels, were saying what a shame it wasto lose 
Graeme Swann mid-tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/dec/22/ashes-graeme-swann-retirement-england-spin>
, and how sorry they felt for Alastair Cook. As Kevin Pietersen walked out to 
bat on the third day at the SCG, I overheard one local spectator explaining to 
his companion: "I mean, I don't want him to get a 100 or anything. But I would 
quite like to see a cameo 60 …" Gloating had turned to pity. It's a sensation 
England fans with long memories may recall from theLord's Ashes Test of last 
summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/21/england-win-second-ashes-test-australia>
.

The last few years haven't been kind to Australian sport. From a London 
Olympics studded with failure (their lightest medal haul in 20 years) to last 
summer's Lions tour, it has been a lean old time, and as far as the cricket was 
concerned, no one was expecting matters to improve for quite a while.

Now, all unlooked for, life is looking up. First an Australian skipper won the 
America's Cup, then therugby league team took the World Cup. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/30/new-zealand-australia-rugby-league-world-cup-final>
 Now even Lleyton Hewitt is enjoying a comeback, beating Roger Federer towin 
the Brisbane International, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/05/roger-federer-lleyton-hewitt-brisbane>
 and just in time for the Australian Open, tennis finds itself welcome in the 
sports pages, thanks to Bernard Tomicmaking it to the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/10/bernard-tomic-battles-back-to-defeat-sergiy-stakhovsky-in-sydney-semi>
 in defence of his Sydney International title ("Only in Australia," commented 
my friend Malcolm, "would you get a headline story about the world No51.")

The instinct, in these circumstances, is to brace oneself for the onslaught of 
unbearable Aussie swagger. To invest in some sort of toughened steel for the 
psyche, to fashion a carapace that will withstand the bragging that has always 
tended – in English eyes at least – to be associated with Australian sporting 
success. But before we run for our anti-smug shelters, it's worth dwelling on 
one final image of the Sydney Test.

As the crowd filed out of the SCG, their bouffant hair still studded with 
pieces of green and gold ticker tape, it wasn't the strut you noticed, but the 
smile. The big, goofy grins that betrayed just how astonished and pleased they 
were with their win. The kind of disbelieving, overjoyed faces that England 
fans tend to wear whenever they get to watch an Ashes victory. It turns out 
that – underneath it all – they're just like us.
 