
Monash University has defended a heart transplant study that killed 
greyhounds, saying the study is valuable for Australians facing life-saving 
surgery.

The study cut off oxygen to the greyhounds, removed the hearts for temporary 
preservation before they were transplanted into another dog.

The animal rights group Humane Research Australia (HRA) has criticised the 
study 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/shocking-greyhounds-suffocated-hearts-removed-revived-and-killed-second-time-20160911-grdphx.html>
, which aimed to see whether the heart donor pool could be increased with 
donation after circulatory death.

Taxpayer funds reportedly used for secret primate experiments in Sydney labs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/24/taxpayer-funds-reportedly-used-for-primate-experiments-in-sydney-labs>
The joint study by the university and the Alfred hospital was critically 
important and the animals were not in any pain, Monash University said in a 
statement.

“The research was approved by an independent ethics committee at the Alfred 
Medical Research and Education Precinct with representatives from animal 
welfare organisations on strict conditions: any discomfort to the animals would 
be absolutely minimal, there were no other existing research alternatives, and 
that the research was critically important,” the university said on Monday.

“At no time were the animals subject to pain, they were under deep anaesthetic 
and unconscious for the entire procedure.”

HRA has questioned the relevance of using canine hearts for research on human 
heart transplants.

“The researchers themselves have previously conducted human studies, so it is 
extremely difficult to comprehend why they would conduct studies utilising 
hearts of a completely different species, and why the project proposal was 
approved by the [Alfred’s] animal ethics committee,” HRA said in itscase study 
report 
<http://www.humaneresearch.org.au/case-studies/dogs-killed-twice-deliberately-suffocated-hearts-removed-transplanted-and-resuscitated-and-then-kill>
.
The university said the research had contributed to heart transplant knowledge.

Scientists told to stop wasting animal lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/18/animal-lives-wasted-in-drugs-safety-tests>
“Monash understands that the outcomes of this research will have a valuable 
influence on the 100 Australians – and thousands of people in the world – 
facing life-saving surgery,” a spokesman said.

The university said it had not used dogs in medical research for over 12 
months.
 