
Trying to win a grand slam title when Kim Clijsters is on the other side of 
the net is a tough enough task in itself; doing it when the world's most 
populated country is following your every move is something else altogether. As 
China's leading player for several years now, Li Na has become used to dealing 
with the hopes of a nation but when she plays the Belgian in the final of the
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Saturday 
even she will do well not to be weighed down by the burden of expectation.

The 28-year-old is already the first Chinese player to reach a grand slam 
singles final, by beating Caroline Wozniacki 3-6, 7-5, 6-3, but if Li can beat 
Clijsters her place in history will be assured. Investment in tennis in her 
homeland only really began in 2001 when they were awarded the right to host the 
Beijing Olympics and Li is now one of four Chinese in the women's top 100. The 
world No11 has long been China's leading light but with an estimated 14 million 
people there playing the sport regularly, a victory for Li may just kickstart a 
newÂ generation.

Li said: "I think maybe because I am in the final, maybe many young players or 
children will see and think, maybe one day we can do the same or even better 
than her. Someday they will feel more confident because, the ChinaTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Federation is maybe not so 
interested in tennis. But right now, maybe they will say, 'maybe we should be 
looking around tennis'. So I think if we do better, more people will come to 
watch and pay attention."

When Li and Zheng Jie returned home to Beijing after reaching the semi-finals 
here last year, they were given a rapturous welcome, even if Li did have to put 
up with one local journalist who felt her technique on her forehand had let her 
down. He was quickly shot down by his colleagues and the party began. It is a 
fair bet that were she to beat Clijsters the celebrations would top anything Li 
has seen.

It seems strange to think that when she was struggling to break into the top 
100 Li decided that a career in the media might be preferable to scrambling 
around the lower levels of the tour. She took two years off between 2002 and 
2004 to go to university and, though her talent had never been in doubt, she 
said the break gave her the motivation she had been lacking. When she returned 
to the tour, she soon rocketed up the rankings.

As Clijsters said after her 6-3, 6-3 demolition of the world No2, Vera 
Zvonareva, Li's best quality is that she is "never beaten", as she showed in 
her semi-final win over the world No1, Wozniacki. The Dane looked home and dry 
when she led by a set and 4-2, 40-0, but Li woke from her slumber, saved a 
match point at 5-4 down and went on to win the last two sets.

Despite all the people who will be there to cheer her on, one person will be 
missing. Her mother, Yan-Ping, has never seen her daughter play a professional 
match. "I think she prefers to stay at home," Li said. "I have asked her many 
times to come with me and she just says: 'No, I have my life, I don't want to 
come with you.'"

Li beat Clijsters in their most recent encounter in the final of the warm-up 
event in Sydney earlier this month, a match the Belgian led 5-0 only to lose 
her way. But when it matters, the 27-year-old is generally a different animal 
and victory would give her a fourth grand slam title and her third since she 
came out of a two-year retirement in the summer of 2009.

"It's never over [with Li]," she said. "I think she's a good player and we're 
very similar types of players. It'll be an interesting one. She's obviously 
playing with a lot of confidence; so am I. It's nice to be in the situation 
with the last two standing and trying to finish on top. It should be a good 
one."
 