
The Australian economy grew by 0.9% in the September quarter, taking 
year-on-year growth to 2.5%,Australian Bureau of Statistics data 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/5206.0Main%20Features1Sep%202015?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=5206.0&issue=Sep%202015&num=&view=>
 shows.

 Increases in exports, household consumption and housing construction drove 
growth.


Exports in goods and services rose by 4.6%, the sharpest increase in 15 years. 
Mining <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mining> exports were up 5.2%, 
while private and public investment fell by 2.9% and 9.2% respectively.

Reserve Bank leaves cash rate at record low of 2% for seventh straight month
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/01/reserve-bank-leaves-cash-rate-at-record-low-of-2-for-seventh-straight-month>
The resources sector continued to perform strongly, but investment in mining 
has fallen to 4.5% of gross domestic product (GDP), less than half the 
contribution of investment in the non-mining sector, which stands at 9.7% in 
the September quarter.

“There are positive signs of a strengthening economy and signs that our 
economy is heading in the right direction,” the treasurer,Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, said on Wednesday. 
“Employment is growing at the fastest annual pace in five years and workforce 
participation is increasing.”


By contrast, overall growth for the June quarter was a sluggish 0.2%.

Morrison’s predecessor, Joe Hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/joe-hockey>, who lost his portfolio 
after September’s leadership spill and subsequently left politics, welcomed the 
results on Twitter.
Joe Hockey (@JoeHockey) 
Very,very pleasing GDP numbers for the Sept. Quarter.
 <https://twitter.com/JoeHockey/status/671863150103257089> December 2, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JoeHockey/status/671863150103257089> 
Morrison said the figures reflected an economy in transition.


“We’re not replacing services for mining,” he said. “What we’re doing is 
broadening the economy as a whole and we’re diversifying the economy as a 
whole.”

Morrison noted particularly strong growth in New South Wales and Victoria, and 
said he hoped cities would play the role that mining had previously.

“So the prime minister’s focus on cities policy as an economic driver I think 
is a very clever one,” he said.

The Greens said the figures showed that Australia has its eggs in one basket: 
resources.

“It’s concerning that growth is still so heavily reliant on mining exports, 
because it leaves us exposed to changing prices and demand,” the Greens 
treasury spokesman,Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, said. “The figures 
confirm we must redouble our efforts to grow the new economy, including by 
making Australia a renewable energy superpower.”

Morrison played down the sharp decrease in public investment, saying those 
figures moved from quarter to quarter and that “no particular analysis” could 
be drawn from them at the moment.

He also gave Labor a kick over its emissions target of a 45% reduction of 2005 
rates by 2030.

“There is no room for indulgent policies that go off and cost the economy and 
cost jobs,” Morrison said.

Labor said the figures show that the economy is not doing as well as it could.

“Without strong mining exports, the economy would have clearly struggled to 
generate much growth at all in the September quarter,” the shadow treasurer, 
Chris Bowen, said. “Without a solid pick up in non-mining investment, the 
economy will struggle to replace the hole being left by the fall off in mining 
investment.”

 