
Australian chickpea farmers are celebrating an exceptional end to 2016 as 
record prices and surging demand round off the UN’s aptly designated 
international year of the pulse <http://www.fao.org/pulses-2016/en/>.

Prices for Australian chickpeas reached $1,250 a tonne last week after farmers 
had planted a record-breaking million hectares across Queensland andNew South 
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales>.

Pulse trader Rob Brealey told the ABC in July 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-07-21/championing-the-chickpea/7649180?pfmredir=sm>
 that the price surge was spurred by disappointing harvests on the 
subcontinent. “The cupboard is bare in terms of India and Pakistan,” he said.


You’d be surprised how much you can do with a chickpea – Yotam Ottolenghi 
recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/26/chickpea-recipes-patties-meatballs-stew-vegetable-side-yotam-ottolenghi>
Australia sends 98% of its chickpeas overseas, making it the world’s largest 
exporter of the popular legume. They primarily flow toIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, which in 2015 bought 80% of the 
total crop.

Prices have steadily risen through India’s substandard production year, 
although the country remains the world’s largest producer of chickpeas. In 
April, prices were $880 per tonne and have only risen since.

Chickpea farmer Barry Baker told the Australian he considered this year’s 
harvest his “best crop ever”.

A July crop forecast from Pulse Australia 
<http://www.pulseaus.com.au/storage/app/media/markets/20160721_Australian-Pulse-Crop-Forecast.pdf>
 said farmers were so keen to take advantage of this year’s prices that “normal 
winter planting times have been thrown out the window”.

“Our phone has being running hot with growers and advisers seeking information 
and advice on late sowing of chickpeas in New South Wales andQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>,” it said.

This month’s prices have come as a relief to farmers who had feared the 
prospect of rot and fungal diseases due to heavy rain in September,the ABC 
reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-20/chickpea-crop-threatened-by-rain/7860352>
.

Last year set a record for Australian chickpea production, with Pulse 
Australia’s statistics 
<http://www.pulseaus.com.au/storage/app/media/markets/20160309_Australian-Pulse-Crop-Forecast.pdf>
 claiming the nation’s farmers harvested 1,013,000 tonnes. In 2012, British 
farmerswere advised to grow more chickpeas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jul/10/curry-ingredients-sustainability>
 to open up new markets and reduce dependence on exports.
 