
Great Britain will be represented in the men’s and women’s singles semi-finals 
of a grand slam for the first time since 1977 after Andy Murray and Johanna 
Kontasaw off David Ferrer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/andy-murray-downs-david-ferrer-to-advance-to-australian-open-semi-final>
 andZhang Shuai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/johanna-konta-marches-into-australian-open-semi-final-by-beating-shuai-zhang>
, respectively, in the Australian Open last eight.

Gaël Monfils v Milos Raonic: Australian Open quarter-final – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/27/gael-monfils-v-milos-raonic-australian-open-quarter-final-live>
In December 1977, John Lloyd and Sue Barker both reached the semi-finals in 
Melbourne, with Lloyd going on to reach the final where he was beaten by the 
American Vitas Gerulaitis. After winning the French Open in 1976, Barker lost 
7-5, 6-4 to the Australian Helen Cawley, who lost out to Evonne Goolagong in 
the final.

“I didn’t feel I did much wrong,” Konta said after her 6-4, 6-1 triumph. “She 
definitely raised her level and made me work for it. It was a great battle to 
be a part of.” Victory earned her a semi-final against the German Angelique 
Kerber, who earlier on Laver Arena pulled off a surprise 6-3, 7-5 win over 
Victoria Azarenka, who was seeded 14th after coming back from injury, but 
playing way above that to this point.

Asked about her Australian and British affiliations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/johanna-kontas-australian-open-run-a-minor-consolation-to-local-fans>
, the Sydney-born player said: “Actually I am a tri-citizen. I’ve got a 
Hungarian passport as well. Just add that into the mix, guys. I mean, I’m 
pretty much the female version of Jason Bourne. But I definitely belong to 
Great Britain.”

Murray prevailed against his Spanish opponent Ferrer, 6-3, 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, 6-3 
after three hours and 19 minutes, but might have wrapped it up in three had he 
not faltered in the tie-break. A turning point arrived when organisers closed 
the roof near the beginning of the third set, which pleased Murray and 
seriously upset Ferrer.

“It made it a little bit easier to return as it was quite windy earlier,” 
Murray said. “It was good for us to get a little break because we played some 
brutal rallies. I like playing indoors. I grew up in Scotland. The weather’s 
not quite like here. The start wasn’t so good, a lot of unforced errors, but we 
started playing a lot of long rallies in the second and third sets.”

Meanwhile, Jamie Murray and his new partner Bruno Soares also reached the 
semi-finals of the men’s doubles.

News of their victories have been greeted with delight, led by Murray’s mother 
Judy. “Look who’s in the last 4? :)),” she tweeted with a picture of Konta 
taken from courtside. The six-times grand slam winner Boris Becker, who is now 
Novak Djokovic’s coach, also tweeted a message of support. “Well done #Konta ! 
First #British woman to reach semis @AustralianOpen since #Durie #83 …”
judy murray (@judmoo) 
Look who's in the last 4? :)) #JoKo <https://twitter.com/hashtag/JoKo?src=hash>
#AusOpen <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AusOpen?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/4MwqXOMRrE <https://t.co/4MwqXOMRrE>
 <https://twitter.com/judmoo/status/692192225997033472> January 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/judmoo/status/692192225997033472> 
Durie, who was actually beaten in the quarter-finals by Martina Navratilova 
that year but did go on to reach the last four at the US Open, added: “Jo did 
it in style in the end! Brilliant … so composed & confident. Fabulous 
@JoKonta91 #history”.

Konta will now bid to become the first British woman since Virginia Wade to 
become a women’s grand slam singles champion. “I’m so thrilled for her,” Wade 
said. “What a great girl she is and what a great effort.

Johanna Konta: I’ve had to dig deep and find where my happiness comes from
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/09/tennis-johanna-konta-venus-williams-us-open>
“You look at so many of the young British players and you think they’ve got 
the game, why can’t they just take it one step further?”

Wade added: “It’s a combination of the confidence you build from winning some 
matches, and she likes her home towns – she started off playing so well at 
Eastbourne which is where she lives and now she’s feeling at home with the 
Australian background that she has.

“It’s just thrilling. The confidence has just built and once you start winning 
one win deserves another win, and why not?

“She’s had a relatively nice little draw for herself so take the opportunity, 
she might never get such a good opportunity again.”
 