
Of all the enduring images from England’s 20-point thrashing by Australia at 
last year’s World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-2015-live>
 – and there were a fair few – perhaps Joe Launchbury’s misery when collecting 
a thoroughly undeserved man-of-the-match award best sums up the stark 
humiliation of it all.

There were numerous better performers that night, all wearing green and gold, 
andnone more so than Bernard Foley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, scorer of two tries – the first of which left Launchbury with a face full of 
grass - and 28 points in one of the most beguiling fly-half performances 
Twickenham has witnessed. And after he had been earmarked as the Wallabies’ 
weak link, no less.

Fourteen months, a 3-0 whitewash in England’s favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/25/england-sweeping-statement-whitewash-australia-eddie-jones-vunipola-robshaw-rugby-union>
 and anawful lot of talk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/eddie-jones-australia-england> 
have passed under the bridge since then. Indeed England,unrecognisable under 
Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/25/eddie-jones-england-whitewash-australia-michael-cheika>
, seek a 14th win in a row but, as they have not tasted defeat since, Foley’s 
masterclass is relevant to Saturday’s match. Not least because 11 of England’s 
starting XV were on the receiving end, but also because, after a poor June 
series against England and an indifferent Rugby Championship,Foley is back in 
form. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/06/wales-australia-bernard-foley-rob-howley-autumn-international-rugby-union>

“He probably wouldn’t have been that happy with the way that he performed 
against England, some of the matches against New Zealand, but he seems to have 
taken a step forward on this tour,” says Nick Farr-Jones, Australia’s World 
Cup-winning captain in 1991 and a member of the 1984 grand slam side.

“He didn’t go quite as well during the England series in Australia. Through 
their tactics they were able to shut him down a lot. We really struggled, 
despite having a lot of possession. But now his vision is great, his confidence 
is high, his speed and individual attacking skills are terrific but I think 
more importantly, he’s calling the shots out there, he’s calling the plays.”

Eddie Jones seems to agree. He has showed his disdain for the Wallabies’ scrum 
but has acknowledged Foley, who has shredded Wales and scored the crucial points
against Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/scotland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 andFrance on this tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/wallabies-question-scrum-tactics-despite-bruising-win-over-france>
, ranks among the best three fly-halves in the world, the inference being 
Beauden Barrett and George Ford are the others.

The 27-24 loss to Ireland last Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/ireland-v-australia-rugby-union-autumn-internationals-live>
 means a first grand slam for Australia since Farr-Jones and co is not on the 
line buthaving been 17-0 down in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ireland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, the Wallabies demonstrated the kind of attacking potency that blew Wales away 
and that England are yet to encounter this autumn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbernard-foley-wallabies-australia-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdd3a78cbf1cffa99d7049d2d057edc959c57416%2F0_342_4620_2772%2F4620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%E2%80%99s%20Bernard%20Foley%20back%20to%20best%20and%20ready%20to%20beguile%20England%20again%20%7C%20Gerard%20Meagher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbernard-foley-wallabies-australia-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%E2%80%99s%20Bernard%20Foley%20back%20to%20best%20and%20ready%20to%20beguile%20England%20again%20%7C%20Gerard%20Meagher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbernard-foley-wallabies-australia-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdd3a78cbf1cffa99d7049d2d057edc959c57416%2F0_342_4620_2772%2F4620.jpg>
 Foley trains at Harrow School ahead of Saturday’s clash at Twickenham. 
Photograph: Dan Mullan/Getty Images 
Perhaps Foley has taken time to readjust his backline in the absence of Matt 
Giteau and he made five appearances at No12 in the Rugby Championship, which, 
all told, were mixed. But Reece Hodge’s fast start to his international career 
and Tevita Kuridrani’s form at outside-centre – he has scored in all four of 
Australia’s autumn Tests – have empowered the fly-half again and Farr-Jones 
believes Stephen Larkham, Australia’s backs coach and 1999 World Cup-winning 
No10, must take credit.

“For once I’ve seen Larkham’s hand on that backline,” he adds. “And Bernard 
Foley is really instrumental in creating those structures. If you look at some 
of the great Australian teams over the decades, one of the common denominators 
is that the No10 has been a terrific player that has been able to call the 
shots. We all know what Larkham’s qualities were when he wore the gold jersey 
and I can see a lot of that in the way that Foley is thinking about the game, 
structuring the game, mixing the game up.”

Brexit, Yarde’s braids, Ali and Southgate – how Eddie Jones warms up for 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/eddie-jones-australia-england> 
While he may not be as quick as Barrett, Foley’s sevens background makes him 
an obvious threat with ball in hand and his ability to play flat, to put his 
runners through gaps, is delightful to watch. His kicking is often questioned 
but when the stakes are highest he has a habit of delivering. Scotland can 
attest to that, while anyone who saw him kick the last-gasp winning penalty for
Michael Cheika’s Waratahs in the 2014 Super Rugby final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/02/waratahs-end-title-drought-with-victory-over-crusaders-in-super-rugby-final>
 would have known better than to question “the Ice Man” at Twickenham last 
October.

Alofa Alofa, the Harlequins wing who was part of the Waratahs side in 2014, 
says: “I never thought he’d miss. He’s great under pressure. He was great for 
us throughout the season. He’s played sevens, he could attack the line as well 
as a passing game.

“It’s great to have a 10 who can attack like that. He was great all over the 
field. I rate him as one of the best. I hope he continues to play the way he is 
and becomes one of the all-time greats.”

If Larkham’s influence on Foley is clear, then Cheika’s is similarly apparent, 
having coached him at the Waratahs and given him the platform to shine on the 
international stage. But Farr-Jones does not believe the Australia coach is 
winning all his battles, not least with his counterpart Jones.

“Cheika has to become more mature when it comes to overreacting to little jibes
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/australia-michael-cheika-not-revenge-england-eddie-jones>
,” he says. “I suspect there was a little bit of truth in what Steve Hansen 
said about Eddie getting the better of him. The incidents in Auckland, where 
Cheika focused on being portrayed as a clown, I think that was a silly 
overreaction by Michael.

“I’m sure Michael will mature as a coach, just as Eddie has matured 
significantly. I think [Eddie] was a dud coach when he was in Australia and now 
he’s become a very good coach. He was too prescriptive, he didn’t get the best 
out of his players. He sent them on with a robotic message and we played a very 
bland type of rugby that wasn’t creative and wasn’t typical Wallaby rugby. He’s 
acknowledged that he has become a far better coach than when he was down here 
coaching the Wallabies.”
 