
Senior members of the Australian army have vetoed plans for a black-tie dinner 
in Perth,Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>, because the 
venue chosen by local officers is a club that does not allow female members.

The Perth-based 13th Brigade was scheduled to hold its annual dinner this 
month at the Weld Club, a 145-year-old institution that only permits men to 
become members.

Women, be they army officers or partners of army officers, would have been 
granted entry for the purpose of the function.

But complaints to the Australian army command in Canberra led to the event 
being scrapped.

Time, gentlemen: when will the last all-male clubs admit women? | Amelia 
Gentleman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/30/time-gentlemen-when-will-last-all-male-clubs-admit-women>
“The Australian army’s Perth-based 13th Brigade reconsidered their 
arrangements for an end-of-year function after local concerns were raised to 
the chain of command regarding the membership practices of the Weld Club,” an
Australian defence force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-military> spokesman said.

According to the West Australian, the club was chosen as a venue 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/wa/a/32982009/army-cancels-dinner-at-top-men-only-club/#page1>
 after the Irwin barracks in Karrakatta, where the function is usually held, 
was deemed unsuitable because they army had increased alcohol prices in the 
mess in an attempt to crack down on drinking within the ranks.

The Weld Club was founded in 1871 and named for Sir Frederick Weld, then 
governor and the club’s first patron, who no doubt found its location on the 
corner of the Esplanade and Barrack streets, opposite Government House, 
extremely convenient.

Its earlier days appeared devoted to drumming up cricket teams. An 1892 report 
in the Western Maildescribed a match 
<http://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/33074230> “between the members of 
the Weld Club and the World, the latter being principally members of the 
[Melbourne Cricket Club]” in which the latter won decisively.

Now it is a place where suitably respectable men may be invited to go through 
a rigorous application process for the privilege of paying $1,200 a year to 
dine in the company of other similarly vetted men. The club prides itself on 
privacy and exclusivity – even its website is member’s only.

According to the Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/news/money-wont-open-the-door-to-this-club-20110415-ihtjf>, 
which smuggled a journalist across club lines in 2011, non-members seeking 
entry must give both the name of a member and the password to be granted access 
to its hallowed halls. (Once inside, the report noted, the names of secret club 
officials could be found on a list pinned to a noticeboard.)

Men’s only clubs remain a surprisingly common choice for formal functions in 
Australia, althoughmembership is reportedly dwindling 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/behind-closed-doors-clubs-are-losing-their-grip/story-e6frg8zx-1226567059162>
.

David Morrison, former chief of army, named Australian of the Year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/david-morrison-former-chief-of-army-named-australian-of-the-year>
A decision in July to host the St Vincent’s surgical forum dinner at the 
Melbourne Club, one of the oldest men’s only clubs in the country,was 
criticised as tone-deaf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/holding-surgical-dinner-in-men-only-club-criticised-as-a-tone-deaf-decision>
 given frequent reports of sexism lobbed against surgical departments.

In 2015 the women’s group of the Queensland Liberal National party was 
criticised for plans to hold its International Women’s Day event at a men’s 
only club called Tattersalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/04/queensland-lnp-international-womens-day-event-to-be-held-at-men-only-club>
 in Brisbane.

The opposition defence spokeswoman, Gai Brodtmann, said hosting an Australian 
army function at a men’s only club was “clearly incompatible” with the defence 
white paper’s goal of “promoting diversity and inclusion”.
Gai Brodtmann (@GaiBrodtmannMP) 
Male-exclusive clubs are clearly incompatible with Defence White Paper's goal 
of "promoting diversity & inclusion".https://t.co/lH79GUoTHm 
<https://t.co/lH79GUoTHm>
 <https://twitter.com/GaiBrodtmannMP/status/790424602203742209> October 24, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/GaiBrodtmannMP/status/790424602203742209> 
The Australian defence force has made high-profile efforts to make the army a 
more gender-inclusive place and hasintroduced targets for female recruitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/24/australian-defence-force-creates-targets-to-increase-number-of-female-recruits>
.

The former head of the army, David Morrison, was named Australian of the Year 
in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/david-morrison-former-chief-of-army-named-australian-of-the-year>
 for his efforts to promote gender equality and combat sexism and sexual 
assault in the armed forces.
 