
It has been the longest year for Michael Cheika and a few days before 
Australia’s 15th Test of the year, against England at Twickenham on Saturday, 
he preferred to talk about the match rather than exchange morebarbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/england-dan-cole-eddie-jones-australia-michael-chieka-illegal-scrum-rugby-union>
 with Eddie Jones. Asked if the pair would enjoy a beer together after the 
match, the Wallabies’ head coach replied: “That is between me and him but I do 
not think there will be any problem with it.”

Nathan Hughes replaces England’s injured Billy Vunipola against Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/nathan-hughes-two-changes-england-rugby-union-face-australia-team-twickenham>
His tone did not suggest he would use it as an opportunity to pour the beer 
over the head of his England opposite number. The only time Cheika became 
animated during his media call to announce his side for the final international 
of the year, one that contains four changes from the team who startedthe defeat 
by Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ireland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 last weekend, was when he was asked about the claim this week by the former 
Wallabies centre Glen Ella, who was used as an attack consultant by Jones 
during the summer tour of Australia, that Cheika still had nightmares about the
3-0 series whitewash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
.

“I would not say nightmares but you do not like losing, do you?” he said. 
“It’s funny, everyone is up in front of the bus when they have had a win. A guy 
like Glen in particular is always up in the front for a handout when he has had 
a win but when it is tough and you have to run uphill I have not seen that 
bloke or a few others around.”

Ella said before the tour that unless Cheika returned home with a record of at 
least 50%, he would face the sack. “I do not think Glen is working with England 
any more, so any Aussie who would support England against Australia, especially 
a guy who has played for the Wallabies, there’s got to be a reason why,” Cheika 
said.

“I don’t know if he’s bitter. Maybe they want to get us kicked out and have a 
job there, I’m not sure. We have improved since we last played England; we are 
going well and when that happens, as it did for us last year, you have to 
stay humble.”

Only one of Cheika’s changes is enforced, with Will Genia back in France with 
Stade Français, who are not obliged to release him for an international match 
played outside the official window. Cheika has reverted to the side who started 
the five-match tour with acrushing victory over Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/wales-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-math-report>
 in Cardiff – apart from on the left wing, where the Fijian Sefanaia Naivalu, 
reputed to be the fastest player in Australian rugby, replaces Henry Speight.

The second-row Kane Douglas and the No8 Lopeti Timani return at forward, with 
Cheika sacrificing a lineout option in the back row for a ball carrier. “It 
will be a physical contest and Lopeti is a good player for that type of 
battle,” Cheika said. “Kane showed aggression when he came on against Ireland 
and the idea is to play good rugby, get stuck in, be physical and do all the 
things that we like to do. It is not about revenge for the summer: Test matches 
stand alone in their importance.”

Jones has not missed an opportunity to wind up Australia, questioning the 
legality of their scrummaging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
 and saying that, although the Wallabies finished runners-up in the Rugby 
Championship, he thought Argentina were the best team in the tournament after 
New Zealand. “He is just geeing up,” Cheika said.

“He has always operated with a chip on his shoulder and now things are going 
well, and there is no chip, he is looking for one. He is respected in 
Australia, a coach who took us to the2003 World Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/oct/28/vault-rugby-world-cup-2003-england-victory>
 when we did not expect to go well. He said he was not respected when he was in 
Australia in the summer but I don’t know where that comes from.”

Three of England’s national sides, both codes of rugby and cricket, are 
coached by Australians. Asked if he could see himself coaching another country, 
Cheika replied: “Probably not but, if a person decides to do that, that’s OK. 
No one was saying anything about it when Eddie was coaching Japan. Each to 
their own.”

England are looking to complete their first unbeaten year since 2003 when they 
defeated Jones’s Australia in the World Cup final and they have the opportunity 
to equal their record of 14 consecutive victories. Eight of Australia’s 14 
Tests this year have finished in defeat and the loss in Dublin ended their 
grand slam quest.

“We are playing for a lot of pride,” Nick Phipps, Genia’s replacement at 
scrum-half, said. “Stephen Moore [Australia’s captain] has pointed out that 
this is the last time the 2016 side will play together. We have had some low 
periods this year and finishing it off as well as we can is important to us. We 
want to do it for the fans and the coaching staff. It is not about revenge for 
the summer; it is about us.”
 