
We live in uncertain times, which is as it should be in sport – so Roger 
Federer wants his fifthAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title, Andy Murray his 
first, and when they meet in the semi-finals on Friday only a fool would make 
either of them an uncontested favourite. However, one man closer to the action 
than any poor scribbler, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, pondered briefly, went through the 
options, and declared for Murray to stand tallest in the final on Sunday.

The Frenchman had not long left the Rod Laver Arena after taking Federer to 
five sets in a quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/23/federer-beats-tsonga-australian-open>
 sprinkled with magic, so his impressions could not be more immediate or 
relevant.

"Andy didn't lose one set yet," the seventh seed said, "so he's in a good 
position. Novak [Djokovic] had tough matches, but I'm sure he's going to be in 
good shape. Roger had this match, which was tough, but we only played three 
hours and [34 minutes] because we are aggressive players, and we don't spend 
too much time in one point. So … I would say Andy."

That will be heartening, but not definitive – even from a player as 
distinguished as Tsonga. The numbers lately mean less than they once did. The 
odds shift with the wind.

Murray – who, as Tsonga points out, has yet to drop a set in five matches and 
whosewin over Jérémy Chardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/23/andy-murray-chardy-australian-open>
 saw him not only play to a pleasing peak but preceded Federer's five-set angst 
by several hours – will be the fresher and (using numbers that cannot be 
tinkered with) the younger by six years. Yet this, surely, remains an 
even-money contest.

None of that will matter, of course, when Murray and Federer face each other 
in a re-run of an encounter Murray would probably like to forget, the final in 
2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/31/andy-murray-roger-federer-australian-open>
. Still growing into his game, the Scot did not do himself justice that night 
and was afterwards reduced to a lachrymose heap.

If there was any sense of a shift in mood, it might have been in Federer's 
renewed respect for Murray, which has grown in the past year.

"I've played Andy [a lot] in the last six months or a year, so I know what to 
expect," he said, "whereas it would be different if I hadn't played him. He has 
changed his game, playing more offensive. I'm looking forward to it. Obviously 
he's a great player, and I was very happy for him when he won his first grand 
slam and the [Olympic] gold. I'm expecting a tough, tough match.

"He's obviously a different player today [than in 2010]. I like the matches 
with him. A lot of them are very close. I very often have to come up with some 
great playing against him in the slams when it mattered. But we'll see if I can 
produce it again."

Can he? There is no formula to calibrate how genius either dissipates or 
endures. There were moments against Tsonga when Federer looked as vulnerable as 
a lamb wandering into an abattoir, and then, when it mattered, he roared back 
like a lion, winning 7-6, 4-6, 7-6, 3-6, 6-3. Many of the rallies were short 
and sharp. That will not be the case tomorrow.

There were knowing souls who did not think Federer could dredge up a final 
effort in the fifth set to see off an opponent buoyed by fresh self-belief.

Tsonga, a talented but diffident player, has come to life under his new coach, 
the savvy, tough Roger Rasheed, an unforgiving fitness guru who the Frenchman 
said wanted the win more than even he did. But Rasheed could not hit the ball 
for him, and Federer closed out the match after a final flickering of French 
resistance.

Murray, meanwhile, was quick to dismiss the notion that he is "under-cooked", 
to use a hackneyed expression that means little – except, perhaps, the opposite 
of knackered. "Today was a decent test," he said of a tricky engagement in a 
changeable breeze against Chardy, who played his shots from start to finish. 
Murray won going away, 6-4, 6-1, 6-2 in 1hr 51min, some way short of the 
examination his peers have endured. "But," he said, "I played a lot of tennis 
in December. I had some good matches in Brisbane. So I can't be disappointed 
about being in the semis of a slam without dropping a set. That would be silly."

He admitted he felt "probably a little bit calmer", than at the same stage 
last year. Then he faced Djokovic – and it turned into afive-hour bar fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/27/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open?INTCMP=SRCH>
. It would be surprising if Federer stretched him that far, although, as he 
pointed out, "you never know for sure", in tennis.

If T-shirts could win slams, Murray's, embroidered with "Prepare, attack, 
destroy" (which he wore again in a Wednesday night hit-out on the second show 
court in Hisense Arena) would be potent. It is Ivan Lendl's mantra, the "hit 
him in the nuts" manual of the street fighter he has been drilling Murray with 
for a year as his mentor. Murray is ready for a war. Is Federer? We will soon 
see.
 