
Brad Hodge struck successive sixes in the final over as Australia snatched a 
dramatic five-wicket victory over South Africa in the rain-affected second 
Twenty20 international in Durban.

In a match reduced to seven overs a side due to the weather, Australia looked 
set to fall short in their pursuit of a testing victory target of 81 despite 
David Warner clubbing 40 off 16 balls at the top of the order. However, with 13 
needed off the last four balls of the match, Hodge swung Wayne Parnell for two 
huge sixes and then off the next delivery Australia clinched the win with a 
wide.

The victory puts them 1-0 up in the three-match series, with the first game 
abandoned without a ball being bowled due to heavy rain in Port Elizabeth. This 
match also looked set to fall foul of the weather before it was finally given 
the go-ahead, albeit in a truncated format.

South Africa struggled initially after being sent in to bat, with Hashim Amla 
managing to only score four off nine balls. His dismissal though, caught and 
bowled by Nathan Coulter-Nile, proved to be a huge blessing in disguise as it 
brought Quinton de Kock and Faf du Plessis together – and they joined forces in 
devastating fashion.

Together they put on an unbroken 74-run stand in 5.1 overs with De Kock 
smashing 41 off 20 with four sixes and two fours, while the captain, Du 
Plessis, struck two sixes and two fours in his 13-ball 27 not out.

That helped South Africa to a total of 80 for one, but it still proved to be 
not enough thanks to first Warner and then Hodge. Warner looked to be winning 
the match on his own as he smashed five fours and two sixes in his 40, but his 
dismissal put South Africa back in the box seat – only for the 39-year-old 
Hodge (21 not out) to snatch victory right at the death.
 