
Ryan Harris condemned South Africa's captain Graeme Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/graeme-smith> to defeat in his last 
international match as the fast bowler sealed a 2-1 series win for Australia in 
the dying moments of the third Test at Newlands . The Queenslander bowled Dale 
Steyn and Morne Morkel in the same over as the home side, trying to bat out a 
draw, were all out for 265 with 27 balls remaining on a dramatic day in Cape 
Town.

Australia thus handed South Africa just their second series defeat in 26 Test 
series under Smith, whoannounced his retirement from international cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/04/graeme-smith-retires-the-spin> 
on Monday after a stellar 12-year career.

At one stage his team looked set to pull off a stunning rearguard action and 
earn a share of the series. However Harris, who will fly home to undergo knee 
surgery, put in one final push to swing the ball and hit the wickets of Steyn 
and Morkel to spark wild celebrations for Australia.

"I think something we've become really good at is never letting go," said 
Smith afterwards. "We've certainly been outplayed in this Test match but we 
still found a way to take it as deep as possible."

Michael Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/michael-clarke>, Australia's 
captain, said: "Ryan Harris at the start of the day was struggling to walk, let 
alone bowl. For him to keep running in and do a job for us, he deserves a lot 
of credit."

Australia's opener David Warner, who hit centuries in both innings, was named 
man of the match, and the series.

South Africa's intent to settle for the draw and not chase the nominal target 
of 511 to win, was clear from the beginning of the day, when they resumed on a 
parlous 71 for four.

The nightwatchman Kyle Abbott and AB de Villiers scored only 24 runs in the 
first 25 overs but, crucially, they kept the Australian bowlers at bay as the 
fielders crowded the bat. Abbott was finally dismissed after a 114-minute vigil 
when he left a James Pattinson delivery and was bowled, but that was the only 
wicket to fall before lunch.

Australia took the second new ball after the break though, and struck two 
vital blows in the second session. First, Harris found the edge to remove De 
Villiers after a stay of five hours and 26 minutes that brought 43 runs from 
228 deliveries, and then Faf du Plessis was trapped lbw by Steve Smith for 47.

That left Australia needing three wickets to win, but Vernon Philander and JP 
Duminy saw South Africa to tea, to leave the home side with 33 overs to see out 
in the final session.

The pair reduced that figure to 20 overs before Duminy was caught at leg slip 
for 43 off the bowling of Mitchell Johnson, but the drama was not over there.

Philander continued to fight, and was involved in a moment of controversy when 
he was given out caught at short-leg off Johnson only for the third umpire, 
Richard Illingworth, to rule that his right hand was off the bat at the time 
the ball brushed the glove.

The decision angered Clarke, who became entangled in a war of words with Steyn 
as a drinks break signalled the final hour, or 15 overs. "Honestly, if anybody 
was out of line it was me and I apologised to the opposition player that I was 
out of line to," Clarke said afterwards. "A player who I have the utmost 
respect for, who tries to kill me every time I bat, who batted exceptionally 
well, and I was out of line. Let's just say he got me at a bad time because 
we'd just had a decision that didn't go our way â€“ but that's the game, and as 
captain of your country you've got to be able to cop that on the chin."

Philander and Steyn whittled it down to five overs to survive, seeing off 
tough spells from Johnson and Pattinson, but then Harris returned to write the 
final part of the script and give Australia the honours from a memorable Test 
series.

Reflecting on a less-than-fitting farewell Smith, who became South Africa's 
captain at the age of 22 having played only eight Tests, said: "It would have 
been a wonderful fairytale if we had hung on there, but I think I saw enough 
qualities today in what the guys showed that the Proteas will be really strong 
for a period of time. The strength of character we saw today is what this team 
is all about."
 