
Global technology group Hewlett Packard’s newest cybersecurity employee spent 
the past two years grilling burgers at McDonald’s. Like many on the autism 
spectrum, the young man in his 20s possessed an impressive range of IT skills 
to match or even outshine most university graduates.

But unlike the average graduate, he didn’t have the social skills to make it 
past an interview. This is a common stumbling block for those on the spectrum, 
according to the psychologist Jay Hobbs fromSpecialisterne 
<http://au.specialisterne.com/> – a non-profit agency finding employment for 
people with autism.

“Being able to communicate and sell yourself was the barrier for him,” he says.

“But he was absolutely excellent. He’s one of those young men who is 
self-taught, so he was a very capable guy.”

An estimated 230,000 Australians live with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) 
<https://www.autismspectrum.org.au/content/what-autism>, which is defined as a 
developmental condition that affects the way a person relates to their 
environment and their interaction with other people.

The lifelong condition is well recognised and treated among children, but 
there is less support for adults with autism. Those on the spectrum describe 
meeting “the cliff” after secondary school – likening the sudden lack of 
assistance to falling off a cliff.

Recent research attests to the lack of support: the labour force participation 
rate is about 42% 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/4428.0Main%20Features62012>
, compared with 53% labour force participation rate for people with 
disabilities and 83% for people without disabilities.

Jeanette Purkis, an author and advocate for the autism community, says many 
people on the spectrum struggle with job interviews as they often find the 
sensory experience and social interactions in an interview challenging. “Being 
in front of three people who are essentially deciding their future and firing 
questions they aren’t prepared for off at them is unlikely to enable an 
autistic person to demonstrate their skills,” she says.

“Autistic people often do much better in recruitment processes which enable 
them to demonstrate their skills over time and not in a high stress situation 
like an interview,” Purkis adds.

Hobbs says it’s an opportunity missed. “When I was working as a teacher in 
Queensland, I met some really interesting people who had some excellent skills, 
who in some cases after secondary schools just sat at home and wrote on blogs.

Code like a girl: if you can learn to read music, you can learn to program
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/08/code-like-a-girl-if-you-can-learn-to-read-music-you-can-learn-to-program>
“They weren’t able to get opportunities to get a job largely because of the 
interview process. Someone with autism finds it a bit difficult to communicate 
and sell themselves as opposed to actually doing what the job would be – 
programming or testing software for example.”

Yet the tide is turning for unemployed or underemployed people with autism. 
More companies are ditching the stereotypes of Dustin Hoffman’s Rain Man and 
Sheldon Cooper from The Big Bang Theory, and realising the benefits of 
employing people on the autism spectrum.

Big names include mining company Weir Minerals, cloud computing firm 
Salesforce, Bankwest and Hewlett Packard. Software multinational SAP has even 
committed that people with ASD will account for 1% of its global workforce by 
2020.

The director of human resources at SAP Australia and New Zealand, Lisa 
Christy, says the goal is consistent with the percentage of people on the 
spectrum in the general population.

“SAP believes that a cornerstone element of innovation is the diversity of 
those who participate in the creative process and the perspectives they bring 
to the table, including the perspective of those on the autism spectrum,” she 
says.

The effort to broaden the company’s diversity beyond race or gender started in 
2012 when SAP Labs India hired five employees on the spectrum. Successful pilot 
projects in India and Ireland demonstrated the positive impact of empowering 
autistic people with a job that played to their strengths.

Research points to the clear corporate advantages of hiring autistic staff, 
including a surge in innovative and creative thinking.

A study by Curtin University’s school of public health 
<http://news.curtin.edu.au/media-releases/research-highlights-benefits-employing-people-autism-spectrum/>
 found that the cost of employing an autistic person was comparative with the 
cost of employing a non-autistic person. The research involved almost 100 
employees and 59 employers, who reported benefits from employing staff with 
ASD, including a high attention to detail and when compared with staff without 
ASD, a higher work ethic and quality of work.

Add to the momentum, comments by the PayPal founder, Peter Thiel, who has long 
been a proponent of hiring staff with autism and Asperger’s to avoid what he 
describes as “herd-like thinking and behaviour”. In his bookZero to One 
<https://www.amazon.com/Zero-One-Notes-Startups-Future-ebook/dp/B00J6YBOFQ>, 
Thiel says people with Asperger’s have a single-mindedness that gives startups 
a unique advantage.

The Grattan Institute is wrong. We need more science students, not fewer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/25/the-grattan-institute-is-wrong-we-need-more-science-students-not-fewer>
This theory stems from the idea of neurodiversity 
<https://www.amazon.com.au/NeuroDiversity-Birth-Idea-Judy-Singer-ebook/dp/B01HY0QTEE/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1470362857&sr=8-1&keywords=judy+singer+neurodiversity>
, a term first coined by the Australian sociologist Judy Singer, who sees 
autism as a natural brain variation, not a brain disorder.

Dr Tele Tan is not surprised by the corporate world’s increasing interest in 
hiring autistic people. Tan, from Curtin’s autism academy for software quality 
assurance, oversees a weekend coding club for secondary students aged 12 to 16. 
The club, like others across Australia focusing on IT and robotics, is where 
autistic teenagers explore their technical talents while also picking up social 
skills.

Tan’s students typically have high attention to detail and an ability to 
concentrate on tasks and do repetitive tasks, making them ideal for companies 
searching for an innovative edge.

“There is anecdotal evidence that people on the spectrum have a huge 
innovation behind them – out of the box thinking, a non-traditional way of 
thinking,” he says. “They can potentially solve big problems.”

But autistic people aren’t limited to the IT industry. Specialisterne has 
recently launched theAutism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> and 
Agriculture employment scheme to develop career paths for those with autism in 
specialist animal care roles. The organisation is also taking aim at other 
industries, including art and engineering. It’s the start of a new frontier for 
people with autism.
 