
Let’s be frank: most of us find job interviews stressful. Being bombarded with 
questions by a stranger who holds your future career in his or her hands is a 
high-stakes situation that is unlikely to be pleasant. If you have been 
unemployed for any period of time, you will know from experience that the 
pressure to succeed mounts. “This could be make or break,” you think to 
yourself, sweating anxiously in your scratchy shirt.

But imagine, for a moment, that you are also autistic. That you have trouble 
with social interaction, and that, while your friends and family might be 
understanding, strangers rarely are. On top of this, there’s the pressure to 
answer questions honestly – but you’re not sure how honest is too honest. Do 
you say that you got sacked from your last job because your social difficulties 
meant you weren’t seen as a “team player”? Do you “come out” with your 
disability despite the fear that it might count against you? Everything from 
the brightness of the lights to the office background noise makes you feel 
completely overwhelmed. And then there’s the fact that there are huge gaps on 
your CV that are difficult to explain without stating the truth, which is that 
workplaces are rarely geared towards people like you.

All this is highlighted by the National Autistic Society’s new film 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>, which shows an autistic man undergo a number of 
job interviews with managers who, mainly through ignorance, lack understanding 
and empathy about the challenges autistic people might face in a work 
environment. It’s a stark and affecting piece of work that coincides with the 
launch of an NAS report into the autism employment gap. Just 16% of autistic 
adults are in full-time paid work, and only 32% are in some kind of paid work 
(obviously, some autistic people will be unable to work, but there are also 
many who would love to do so). The film raises some issues that go some way to 
explaining why this might be, while offering a much-needed reminder to 
employers that not everyone is cast from the same mould.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh8iF0TAmyr4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh8iF0TAmyr4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh8iF0TAmyr4&media=>
 The National Autistic Society’s new film. 
But it’s not all negative. People on the spectrum may struggle with certain 
workplace activities and interactions, but increasing numbers of companies are 
recognising how recruiting “neurodivergently” – actively seeking out people 
whose brains could be said to be “wired” differently – can bring a whole range 
of skills and abilities to a workforce. GCHQ’s neurodiversity programme is a 
prime example <http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/Magazine/article1583418.ece>
. Nurturing more than 300 neurodivergent employees, the programme recognises 
that people with autism, Asperger’s, dyspraxia and dyslexia might have 
qualities that are deemed a strength rather than a condition. Such strengths 
might include anything from phenomenal logic and maths skills and a 
photographic memory to a “tunnel vision” approach to problem-solving, and many 
more talents in-between. While it’s important not to get too preoccupied with 
what you might call Rain Man syndrome – the belief that all people with autism 
spectrum disorders (ASD) have some kind of savant quality; this is a stereotype 
that, as the sister of a severely autistic brother, I find intensely 
frustrating – it is heartening to see workplaces adopting a nuanced approach to 
autism.

One such workplace is the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/diversity/disability/neurodiversityatthebbc>. At the 
all-party parliamentary group on autism for the launch of the NAS report, I was 
introduced to Leena Haque and Sean Gilroy, both members of the finance team who 
are responsible for Project Cape (Creating a Positive Environment), which they 
set up in order to improve the support given to neurodivergent employees, as 
well as highlighting the skills and talents such individuals can bring to the 
table. Haque is on the spectrum, and when we meet in a crowded, noisy room in 
the House of Commons, with some of the busiest flock wallpaper, carpet and 
ceiling adornment I have ever seen, she is feeling unsurprisingly anxious. 
(Afterwards, I describe the choice of room to my mother as a “massive autism 
fail”. My own brother would have lasted at most a couple of seconds in there, 
before completely freaking out. It just goes to show that even groups set up 
with the specific aim of making things more accessible to people with autism 
can get it wrong.)

Haque is highly qualified, with degrees from Durham University and the LSE, 
but because of her autism found it difficult to find employment. “It was hard 
to get into work and then to find the right level of support and understanding 
once in work,” she says. “Line managers and colleagues may have heard of 
autism, but the level of understanding and empathy with what this actually 
means for me is often what was missing.

“This all changed when I joined the BBC and met my fellowship of superheroes, 
as I call them – the group of colleagues who have helped and supported me. The 
training scheme I joined had made appropriate allowances and adjustments to the 
recruitment process, although it was still challenging for me. The training 
scheme also provided additional support for me once I started and I was able to 
disclose my condition, but I could see there was room for improvement, 
particularly for people who had neurodivergent conditions.

“I suggested that the BBC could help people understand more about the issues 
facing neurodivergent people in employment, previously referred to as hidden 
disabilities – and with its support, Cape was born.”

With support from Gilroy, her line manager, and Ian Haythornthwaite, the BBC’s 
director of finance, Cape delivers the message that people with neurodivergent 
conditions are welcome at the BBC. “Our message is that individuals aren’t 
weird, they are just part of a neurodiverse spectrum upon which we all sit,” 
Haque says. Cape has the seal of approval from the director general, Tony Hall, 
and the deputy director general, Anne Bulford.

It means that the next generation of BBC employees with ASD will find 
themselves supported and championed. “We promote the skills and abilities of 
people with neurodivergent conditions, highlighting the strengths of 
differently wired brains which see and access a neurodiverse reality through a 
different lens,” says Gilroy. Initiatives so far have included two 
point-of-view films that aim to convey the experiences of someone who is 
neurodivergent. The first highlights the challenges that people can face at 
work, whilethe second, more immersive offering 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZLyGuVTH8sA> looks at the same issues through 
360VR (virtual reality).

Project Cape has also improved accessibility at BBC MediaCityUK Salford, and 
run workshops on unconscious bias set in the scenario of a zombie apocalypse. 
It is also doing things in the wider community, taking part inthe Design 
Manchester festival <http://designmcr.com/> to explore the idea of a 
neurodiverse-accessible journey through Manchester, and is hoping to offer 
similar suggestions to towns and cities across the UK.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZLyGuVTH8sA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZLyGuVTH8sA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZLyGuVTH8sA&media=>
 Project Cape’s immersive film. 
It’s inspiring to see a company such as the BBC taking such a creative and 
innovative approach to diversity. That’s not to say that there isn’t still a 
long way to go until society accepts and understands what it means to be 
autistic, dyslexic or dyspraxic to the point where people feel that they can 
talk about their conditions without fear of prejudice and discrimination. But 
as our economy becomes increasingly tech-orientated, the benefits of employing 
people who might excel in, say, processing, become apparent. Silicon Valley 
already employs a much higher than average number of people on the autistic 
spectrum, and this year Microsoft ran a conference on “neurodiversity in the 
hi-tech workforce 
<https://www.microsoftevents.com/profile/form/index.cfm?PKformID=0x104330f858>” 
– withSteve Silberman, author of NeuroTribes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/11/neurotribes-legacy-autism-steve-silberman-review>
, as keynote speaker – which was attended by delegates from companies such as 
Google and Apple.

The benefits of such enlightened thinking are clear. “Organisations should 
recognise that there are many ways people communicate and they should be more 
open to understanding this,” says Gilroy. “If they get this right, it will open 
up recruitment processes and employment and they will be able to reap the 
reward of accessing an untapped market of creative and technical ability.”

And often, Haque says, it doesn’t take much to be more inclusive. “It is often 
simply about empowering an individual, so they can feel comfortable in sharing 
their feelings, as well as making sure you listen to what they need.”
 