
The important role vitamin D plays in early life is back in the spotlight 
after Australian researchers noticed a link between a deficiency during 
pregnancy and autism.

The study found pregnant women with low vitamin D levels at 20 weeks’ 
gestation were more likely to have a child with autistic traits by the age of 
six.

The finding has led to calls for the widespread use of vitamin D supplements 
during pregnancy, just as taking folate has reduced the incidence of spina 
bifida in the community.

Study offers potential breakthrough in care of children with autism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/25/autisc-children-therapy-method-potential-breakthrough-care-preschool-autism-communication-trial>
“This study provides further evidence that low vitamin D is associated with 
neurodevelopmental disorders,” said Professor John McGrath from the University 
of Queensland’s Brain Institute, who led the research alongside Dr Henning 
Tiemeier from the Erasmus Medical Centre in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>.

McGrath said supplements might reduce the incidence of autism, a lifelong 
developmental condition that affects, among other things, how an individual 
relates to their environment and other people.

“We would not recommend more sun exposure, because of the increased risk of 
skin cancer in countries like Australia,” he said. “Instead, it’s feasible that 
a safe, inexpensive, and publicly accessible vitamin D supplement in at-risk 
groups may reduce the prevalence of this risk factor.”

Vitamin D usually comes from exposure to the sun, but it can also be found in 
some foods and supplements.

While it’s widely known vitamin D is vital for maintaining healthy bones, 
there’s also a solid body of evidence linking it to brain growth.

You think autistic people have no empathy? My little boy is so empathetic it 
hurts | Louise Milligan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/you-think-autistic-people-have-no-empathy-my-little-boy-is-so-empathetic-it-hurts>
The study examined approximately 4,200 blood samples from pregnant women and 
their children, who were closely monitored as part of the long-term “Generation 
R” study in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Blood samples with a vitamin D reading of less than 25.0 nmols is considered 
deficient.

Autism <https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> and child development 
expert Professor Andrew Whitehouse from the Telethon Kids Intstitute is an 
advocate for the use of the essential vitamin during pregnancy and said the 
results of this study are not totally surprising and potentially very important.

But they are not conclusive and need to be put into perspective.

“There are likely dozens, if not hundreds, of different mechanisms that can 
lead to autism. Now this study gives us an inkling of one possible mechanism 
but before we think about anything we need to see a replication of this 
finding.”

Vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy has previously been linked to many 
different conditions including schizophrenia, asthma and reduced bone density.

The fake cures for autism that can prove deadly | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/13/fake-cures-autism-prove-deadly>
“What we know is that vitamin D during pregnancy is very important for how the 
baby develops,” said Whitehouse.

Earlier this year, an Australian study, published in the Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology, showed vitamin D wasn’t just important during 
pregnancy but also in the first decade of a child’s life.

Researchers at the Murdoch Children’s Institute found evidence of a clear link 
between a lack of vitamin D in early childhood and allergic disorders 
<http://www.australianallergycentre.com.au/the-new-link-between-vitamin-d-and-food-allergy/>
 such as asthma and eczema.

 