
A “hidden pool” of women who have grown up with undiagnosed autism is coming 
to light as mothers researching their children’s spectrum disorders recognise 
themselves in their findings.

“There are far more undiagnosed mothers out there than we have ever thought,” 
saidDr Judith Gould 
<http://www.nas.org.uk/services/diagnosis/professional-team/dr-judith-gould.aspx>
, lead consultant and former director of theLorna Wing Centre for Autism 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/services/diagnosis.aspx> who developed the first and 
only female-specific diagnostic tests, and who trains doctors in how to 
recognise late adult female diagnosis.

“These women are coming to prominence now because there’s more information on 
autism in girls and women on the internet, so they can research their children 
and in doing so, diagnose themselves,” said Gould.

Professor Simon Baron-Cohen, founder of the Autism Research Centre at 
Cambridge University <https://www.autismresearchcentre.com/> and the Class 
clinic <http://www.cpft.nhs.uk/services/class-clinic.htm>, dedicated to 
diagnosing adults with autism, agreed: “[Undiagnosed mothers are] definitely a 
growing phenomenon. Putting a number on it is impossible but I’m sure it’s a 
big number because women seeking diagnoses of autism were likely to be 
dismissed until just a few years ago, because autism in females was thought to 
be very rare.”

My condition enables me to help my children develop a joyful version of autism
Rachel Cotton 
The National Autistic Society estimates that there are currently about 700,000 
people living with autism in the UK – more than one in every 100 of the 
population. About 20% of autistic people are thought to have been diagnosed as 
adults, although no national figures for adult diagnosis are available. 
Anecdotal evidence, however, suggests numbers are rising: Baron-Cohen says that 
four years ago, 100 cases in Cambridgeshire were referred to his clinic. In the 
first four months of 2016 alone, it received 400 referrals.

Autism among women and girls has only started to be widely acknowledged in the 
past two to three years. The men to women ratio is now recognised as being 
between 3:1 to 2:1, although someexperts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/21/m-in-the-middle-girls-autism-publish-novel-limpsfield-grange>
 believe there are just as many females with autism as there are males.

Autistic women are, however, still likely to remain undiagnosed. A survey 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/~/media/20F5BD5ADBDE42479F126C3E550CE5B0.ashx> by the 
National Autistic Society 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/?gclid=CJjG4eG46c8CFWkz0wodoggFVQ> found that 42% of 
females have been misdiagnosed, compared with 30% of males, whiletwice as many 
women were undiagnosed compared with men (10% compared with 5%) 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/about/what-is/gender.aspx>.

But experts are warning that these mothers risk having their children forcibly 
adopted in the fight to get them diagnosed and supported, as social workers 
misinterpret the parent’s autistic traits as indicating potential harm to the 
child.

“Their own autism, often undiagnosed, means they put professionals’ backs up 
and can be accused of causing or fabricating their children’s condition,” said 
Gould.

Melanie Mahjenta was accused of a rare form of child abuse, fabrication or 
induced illness 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Fabricated-or-induced-illness/Pages/Introduction.aspx>
 (FII), by social services during her fight to get her three-year-old daughter 
diagnosed with autism.


“Rosie was made a  “child in need 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/relationships/looking-after-people/local-authority-services-for-children-in-need/>
” because for three and a half years, I kept challenging the doctors who 
refused to diagnose her,” said Mahjenta. “Looking back, I probably did put 
people’s backs up because I’m autistic. But I knew how hard life would be for 
Rosie if I didn’t get her the right support.

“I understand that my autism makes me a difficult person to deal with: I don’t 
know when to back off when I know I’m right. I can’t look people in the eye, so 
I come over as being shifty. Autistic people get hyper-focused but they mistook 
my obsession as a sign I was unstable.

How Disney gave voice to a boy with autism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/how-disney-gave-voice-to-a-boy-with-autism>
“But although those traits are hard for people to deal with, my autism was 
ultimately a good thing,” she added. “Perhaps a neurotypical person would have 
thought the doctor knew best and backed off. Or they would have stopped 
fighting because they feared losing their child. But I fought on and because of 
that, Rosie has finally been diagnosed with autism.”

New research 
<http://www.autismwomenmatter.org.uk/.../positive-negative-experiences-of-325-autistic-mo...Cachedwww.autismwomenmatter.org.uk/.../positive-negative-experiences-of-325-autistic-mo...Cachedwww.autismwomenmatter.org.uk/.../positive-negative-experiences-of-325-autistic-mo...Cachedhttp://www.autismwomenmatter.org.uk/research/positive-negative-experiences-of-325-autistic-mothers-vs-91-typical-mothers-online-survey-autism-and-motherhood/>
 written by Baron-Cohen,Alexa Pohl 
<https://www.autismresearchcentre.com/people_pohl> of the Autism Research 
Centre and Monique Blakemore ofAutism Women Matter 
<http://www.autismwomenmatter.org.uk/> has found that one in five mothers of an 
autistic child, regardless of whether the mother had a diagnosis herself, has 
been assessed by social services. One in six of those mothers reported that 
their children had been forcibly placed for adoption through a court order.


“These are very worrying statistics,” said Baron-Cohen. “Whether these mothers 
have a formal diagnosis or not, if a lot of these mothers who have autistic 
children have undiagnosed autism themselves, they might struggle with 
communication with professionals and appear confrontational rather than 
diplomatic. The risk is that social services see this as a difficult mother 
rather than recognising her communication issues are a part of her own 
disability.”

Dr Catriona Stewart, founder of the Scottish Women’s Autism Network 
<http://www.autismnetworkscotland.org.uk/swan/>, who has studied autism for 
over 10 years, described “a hidden pool of women who have grown up with 
undiagnosed autism”.

She said: “These women can finally recognise the condition in themselves 
because they can use the internet to research their children’s condition, then 
seek a diagnosis for themselves from a world that’s finally ready to 
acknowledge them.”

Stewart only realised she was autistic when investigating her daughter’s 
autistic symptoms. When she was considering getting her daughter assessed for 
autism, she was advised by “a friend who is both a very experienced clinical 
psychologist within theChild And Adolescent Mental Health Services 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/for_parents/services_children_young_people/camhs> 
system and the mother of an Asperger’s boy” that Stewart herself should get a 
private diagnosis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fautism-hidden-pool-of-undiagnosed-mothers-with-condition-emerging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaa5a74907c0f70296965f8a020fb75bd2a14f53%2F0_0_4528_6864%2F4528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Autism%3A%20'hidden%20pool'%20of%20undiagnosed%20mothers%20with%20condition%20emerging&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fautism-hidden-pool-of-undiagnosed-mothers-with-condition-emerging%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Autism%3A%20%27hidden%20pool%27%20of%20undiagnosed%20mothers%20with%20condition%20emerging&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fautism-hidden-pool-of-undiagnosed-mothers-with-condition-emerging%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaa5a74907c0f70296965f8a020fb75bd2a14f53%2F0_0_4528_6864%2F4528.jpg>
 ‘My children know it’s natural to feel what they feel’ says Rachel Cotton. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
“She said to not go through the NHS if I could avoid it and that I needed to 
be warned: because I was the only other adult in my daughter’s life who 
recognised she had issues, people would see me as being the problem,” said 
Stewart.

“Some of us working in this field are becoming increasingly aware and 
increasingly concerned about the numbers of autistic women whose attempts to 
get help for their children and themselves are greeted with hostility, 
combativeness and ultimately in some cases, the removal of their children,” she 
added.

“The assumption is that being autistic for a mother instantly raises concerns 
as to the welfare of the child,” she said. “But there is no evidence to support 
that idea. They express the ability to demonstrate empathy, affection, 
responsibility, love for their children as you would expect any other mother to 
do. To me, this is a human rights issue.”

Rachel Cotton, 45, only discovered she had autism when researching her 
daughter’s symptoms five years ago. She believes her condition makes her a 
better mother.

“My condition enables me to help my children develop a joyful version of 
autism rather than the negative one that leads to adult depression and 
alcoholism,” she said. “Because I have autism, my children know it’s natural to 
feel what they feel. My children can ask me if my brain does this and that, and 
I can explain my brain does but other people’s don’t.”

A spokesperson from Cafcass, the body which represents children in family 
court cases, said the decision to take a child into care, including adoption, 
requires a local authority to prove to the court that a child is suffering, or 
is at risk of suffering, significant harm.


“Such decisions are not made lightly,” she said. “They are informed by 
assessments carried out by local authority children’s services and Cafcass, 
drawing on work with the child, parents and any professionals involved with the 
child. This helps determine how the child can be kept safe and what is in their 
best interests.”

A Department for Education spokesperson said: “Children are referred to social 
services only where there is concern for their welfare and there are clear 
guidelines in place to help professionals identify families who may be in need 
of support.

“Assessment should build upon the history of every individual case, responding 
to the impact of any previous services and analysing what further action might 
be needed,” she added.
 