
Sitting on defence



England and Owen Farrell dig deep to win 14-man battle with Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
The growth in England’s attacking game was the feature of the wins against 
South Africa and Fiji but afterElliot Daly’s dismissal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/england-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-international-live?page=with:block-583970e0e4b0e0ad2d75d44b#liveblog-navigation>
 inside the opening five minutes against Argentina they were under siege for 
long periods, restricted to sniper fire. The two tries they conceded came 
either side of half‑time when they were down to 13 men, with Dan Cole in the 
sin-bin, but it was defence that earned them a notable27-14 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, given the numerical advantage the Pumas had for virtually an hour. They 
attempted 163 tackles to Argentina’s 70, Tom Wood and Courtney Lawes to the 
fore with 17 each, and if they were helped by the reluctance of their opponents 
to play for position, preferring to run from deep, England’s line speed forced 
the Pumas to often play behind the gain line. While Eddie Jones said before the 
game it would be his side’s biggest test of the autumn, Australia will be more 
astute and tactical. Almost certainly without Billy Vunipola, it will be 
another case for the defence.

Cheika mate


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fautumn-internationals-five-talking-points-england-win-argentina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf5bae845017237ac4eee1739b2fcef1432babce%2F31_267_4490_2694%2F4490.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Autumn%20internationals%3A%20five%20talking%20points%20after%20England%20beat%20Argentina%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fautumn-internationals-five-talking-points-england-win-argentina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Autumn%20internationals%3A%20five%20talking%20points%20after%20England%20beat%20Argentina%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fautumn-internationals-five-talking-points-england-win-argentina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf5bae845017237ac4eee1739b2fcef1432babce%2F31_267_4490_2694%2F4490.jpg>
 Michael Cheika’s Australia take on England on Saturday. Photograph: Paul 
Faith/AFP/Getty Images 
The players were still on the pitch when Jones launched the first 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
 of what will be several broadsides against Australia and his old pal and 
opposite number Michael Cheika before Saturday. He accused the Wallabies of 
scrummaging illegally, pointing to four successive scrum penalties awarded 
against themin Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/wallabies-question-scrum-tactics-despite-bruising-win-over-france>
 and saying he wanted a meeting with the match referee, Jaco Peyper, to discuss 
the issue, cheekily inviting Cheika to attend. Never mind that scrums have 
reduced in importance over the years and Australia fielded a reserve front row 
in Paris, Jones is using the media to discomfort opponents who can point to the 
scrum penalties conceded by England at the end of the first half against 
Argentina that resulted in Dan Cole visiting the sin-bin. Cheika said after his 
side’sloss to Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ireland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 on Saturday that he had complaints about the referee, Jérôme Garcès, but was 
not allowed by World Rugby to express them in public. He who pays the Peyper a 
visit may call the tune this weekend.

In the red



Daly picked a bad time to take out an opponent in the air, who hit the ground 
head-first. His action came days after World Rugby announced a crackdown on 
challenges, in defence and attack, that had the potential to cause head 
injuries. Until then, referees had been content, apart from the most clearcut 
cases, to flourish yellow rather than red cards and leave it to citing officers 
and disciplinary panels to take further action. The belief now is that it was 
not enough of a deterrent and more teams are likely to find themselves a player 
short in the coming weeks. A numerical disadvantage has tended to be more 
telling in rugby than football but the increased openness of the game has 
mitigated that, asIreland showed in South Africa in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/south-africa-ireland-first-test-match-report>
 and Munster did against Glasgow last month when both had players sent off in 
the opening half but went on to win. England responded quickly to Daly’s 
dismissal, regrouping and recalibrating without having to wait for half-time 
instruction, further evidence of their growth in the last year. Leadership on 
the field is now a strength.

Northern lights 

With one match in the autumn series to go, the Six Nations are guaranteed a 
rare victory over the Rugby Championship. They lead 8-6 and, when the summer 
tours are taken into account, 13-12 this year. All the Six Nations sides have 
won at least once this year and only France failed to do so this month, running 
New Zealand close on Saturday night. South Africa and Argentina return home 
having been whitewashed and all four have lost at least once, withNew Zealand 
losing to Ireland in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 and Australia having their grand slam quest derailed in Dublin. England and 
Ireland, who became the first home union since England in 2002 to beat South 
Africa, New Zealand and Australia in a calendar year, look closer to New 
Zealand than the All Blacks’ three Rugby Championship rivals. The gap is 
between the World Cup holders and the rest rather than between the hemispheres 
but with the season in the south almost as long as that in Europe, with the 
added demand of significant long-distance travelling, the value of end of 
season tours now appears purely financial. Take away the two encounters between 
Ireland and the All Blacks and this month has served up little of note.

Eddie Jones sets his sights on Australia after ‘outstanding performance’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
Ten out of 10



Jones may have been dismissive of him but the New Zealand outside-half Beauden 
Barrett has been voted World Rugby’s player of the yearfor very good reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/the-breakdown-beauden-barrett-artistry-fly-half>
. He scored his ninth try of the year in Saturday night’s victory over France, 
a remarkable figure for an outside-half, and his running game marks him out 
from his rivals. Dan Carter stood slightly deeper at the end of his 
international career but Barrett attacks the line and maximises his options, 
able to exploit space himself and create it for those around him. His is a 
fitting award because it recognises the shift in the game away from defence and 
the renewed value of a scheming outside-half; tries are the currency 
now. George Ford is getting there, more of a passer than a runner but blessed 
with a sublime touch. Will the Lions take note?
 