
Team of the autumn

Michael Aylwin England. Either them or Ireland. And, no, that doesn’t mean 
they’re better than New Zealand, just that their performances were the story of 
the autumn. In the end,completion of unbeaten year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-australia-fast-start-no2>
 trumps historic victory. We’ll remember England’s win over Australia the 
longest, but don’t underestimate the quality of thatwin over a Fiji team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 that was pretty much a Top 14/Premiership select XV, norbeating Argentina with 
14 or 13 men for 75 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/england-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-international-live>
.

Andy Bull Ireland. As well as England did to win all four Tests they played it 
has to be Ireland, simply becausethey beat New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
. It was only the All Blacks’ fourth defeat the last five years, and it snapped 
an 18-game winning streak, the longest in the history of the sport.

Autumn internationals: All Blacks still top but southern powers feel Test 
fatigue | Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/04/autumn-internationals-new-zealand-lions-six-nations>
Robert Kitson Ireland. Beating the All Blacks in Chicago was not just a result 
for the ages but a spellbinding performance. While England may have racked up 
four autumn wins they did not produce an 80-minute effort of equal intensity.

Gerard Meagher England. It has to be after four wins from four matches. There 
seems to be a fair bit of room for improvement but who cares if they continue 
to beat what’s in front of them and show this kind of resilience. Notable 
mentions for Ireland and their performance in Chicago,New Zealand for 
reasserting themselves in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/ireland-new-zealand-match-report-autumn-internationals-rugby-union>
 and a swashbuckling Australia side who found themselves on the wrong end of 
some rather generous refereeing at Twickenham.

Paul Rees Ireland. They beat the All Blacks, and by taking them on rather than 
trying to stop them, before overcoming adversity and Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361f73b624a74da5a68f31187a27b3a651201540%2F0_96_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers'%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers%27%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361f73b624a74da5a68f31187a27b3a651201540%2F0_96_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
 Santiago Cordero scored a fantastic, length of the field try for Argentina 
against England at Twickenham. Photograph: Henry Browne/Reuters 
Player of the autumn

MA Conor Murray. This is the battle of the No9s. As England and Ireland vie 
for team of the autumn, so Ben Youngs and Murray vie for the player. Youngs was 
the more consistent (Murray’s kicking was a bit off in the return match against 
the All Blacks), but Murray’s performance in Chicago was one for the ages. All 
four home nations have live contenders for the Lions at No9

AB Billy Vunipola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/tonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens>
. Prolific as he is when he plays, he was even more conspicuous in his absence 
last Saturday. Nathan Hughes had an excellent match standing in for him at No8, 
but England still looked a lesser side without Vunipola’s ball-carrying.

Attentions turn to Lions tour with England and Ireland top of the class | Paul 
Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/england-ireland-scotland-wales-rugby-lions>
RK Billy Vunipola. Closely pursued by a couple of twinkling Irish stars in 
Conor Murray and Tadhg Furlong but England’s No8 is developing into a 
game-shaping presence to make even New Zealanders envious.

GM Jonny Gray. One day he’ll miss a tackle again but considering he has not in 
750 minutes and has reportedly missed just six since he started playing for 
Scotland it may be a long wait. He made 24 against Australia and also scored a 
try, has shown a quite remarkable work-rate throughout and he can play too. 
Warren Gatland will not want for second-row depth when choosing his Lions locks 
but Gray will surely make the cut.

PR Robbie Henshaw. He failed to complete Ireland’s series because of injury, 
but he came of age, a No12 who combines bustle with initiative
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03596683e9a82711e38cc6a8493e1378c102128d%2F0_65_4182_2508%2F4182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers'%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers%27%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03596683e9a82711e38cc6a8493e1378c102128d%2F0_65_4182_2508%2F4182.jpg>
 England’s Marland Yarde celebrates beating Israel Folau to the ball to score 
against Australia after fine buildup play from Jonathan Joseph. Photograph: 
Mitchell Gunn/Getty Images 
Try of the autumn

MA Kenki Fukuoka for Japan against Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/japan-wales-south-africa-rob-howley>
. Argentina’s second against England for artistic merit, but it was scored 
against 13 men. New Zealand’s first in Dublin was a sustained symphony of 
excellence and intent. But Japan’s second against Wales was executed with such 
confidence and precision, featuring some players who have barely entered the 
international arena, that it serves yet further notice of a growing force in 
the game.

AB In the five games I saw live, Marland Yarde’s against Australia. Not for 
his finish so much as Jonathan Joseph’s nous in the buildup, when he made the 
split second decision not to run or pass but instead thread a little chip 
through an eye-of-the-needle-gap in Australia’s line.

England 37-21 Australia: how the players at Twickenham rated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-twickenham-ratings>
RK Slightly wind-assisted because England were down to 13 men at the time but 
Argentina’s length-of-the-field score finished off by the excellent Santiago 
Cordero early in the second-half was an absolute cracker.

GM Tempting to say Kuridrani’s stunning finish against France but, considering 
it probablyshould not have counted 
<http://laws.worldrugby.org/?law=22.12&language=EN>, Kenki Fukuoka’s effort 
against Wales leaves the biggest imprint. The pace and accuracy with which 
Japan moved the ball to the left wing was not only impressive in itself but the 
ponderousness of the Welsh side they were up against only served to emphasise 
its quality.

PR Santiago Cordero for Argentina against England at Twickenham. A sweeping, 
fluent length of the field movement that offered a reminder of the Pumas’ 
potential.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F460da0a560600ef22efdfe29d75142b11ca11d8e%2F0_109_3824_2294%2F3824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers'%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers%27%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F460da0a560600ef22efdfe29d75142b11ca11d8e%2F0_109_3824_2294%2F3824.jpg>
 Ireland’s Conor Murray celebrates scoring the third of his team’s five tries 
in their historic victory over New Zealand in Chicago. Photograph: Dan 
Sheridan/INPHO/Rex/Shutterstock 
Best match

MA Ireland v New Zealand. The Chicago edition, obviously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
, although theDublin return was pretty special too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/ireland-new-zealand-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. England-Australiathreatened to hit the heights while it was close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, and theWallabies’ battles with Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/scotland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 andIreland will live long in the retelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ireland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. But none shook us to the core like those faraway scenes from Soldier Field.

AB Ireland 40-29 New Zealand. So compelling that pretty much every last person 
in my carriage on the late train out of Cardiff after Wales v Australia 
gathered around a stranger’s iPhone to watch a dodgy feed of the final few 
minutes.

RK New Zealand losing at Soldier Field is hard to beat but for sheer final 
whistle euphoria it was a toss-up between Italy beating South Africa and 
Germany defeating Uruguay. The world of rugby grows ever more competitive.

GM Ireland 40-29 New Zealand. A blistering start from Ireland, the inevitable 
riposte from the All Blacks and wherewithal from Joe Schmidt’s side to keep it 
together at the end. The figure of eight tribute to Anthony Foley before 
kick-off was poignant – there was also a lovely Munster banner in the crowd 
that read “God took Axel to tackle Jonah” – and as it was, inspirational.

PR Ireland and New Zealand in Chicago, and not just because of the shock 
result; a match compelling for its rawness and skill.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00685da5167c550960b6d63a3b7e81b1bb873ff2%2F0_33_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers'%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers%27%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00685da5167c550960b6d63a3b7e81b1bb873ff2%2F0_33_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Italy captain, Sergio Parisse, celebrates scoring during his side’s 
landmark win over South Africa in Florence. Photograph: Alessandro 
Bianchi/Reuters 
Worst performance of the autumn

MA South Africa. Take your pick. The Italy defeat was the most shocking, so 
let’s go for that, but there is a serious concern here. The financial power in 
England and France has torn Pacific Island rugby apart and now it’s moving on 
to the next. South Africa have been stripped bare. Australia are wobbling. New 
Zealand are holding out. For now. But not even they are above this particular 
menace to rugby’s global balance

AB South Africa, who looked like a shadow of themselves all tour long. They 
lost all three matches they played, andin Florence went down to Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
 for the very first time in their history. They’ve a long, hard road ahead.

RK Not difficult. Wales were dire against Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/12/wales-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-internationals-live>
 in their opening November Test, although the Springboks have seldom looked 
more beatable than over the past month.

GM The South Africa Rugby president Mark Alexander. The Springboks run him 
pretty close, defeat to Italy was a new low and their performance against a 
pretty poor Wales side was dreadful, but when the president of the union, on 
two occasions releases damning statements within minutes of full time it is 
clear that problems run deeper than the field of play.

PR South Africa thought they could not get any lower after losing in Italy but 
managed it the following week in Cardiff, identifiable as Springboks only 
because of their kit. The Test game is too small for them to wither.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535095ae56670d1e661639a3a1569c72cd0a1580%2F0_336_4741_2845%2F4741.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers'%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Autumn%20internationals%202016%20verdict%3A%20Guardian%20writers%27%20highs%20and%20lows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fautumn-internationals-2016-verdict-guardian-writers-highs-and-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535095ae56670d1e661639a3a1569c72cd0a1580%2F0_336_4741_2845%2F4741.jpg>
 Fans watch at Twickenham on as England and Australia’s packs do battle at the 
scrum. Photograph: Jed Leicester/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
Gripe of the series

MA The adoption of talent from the Pacific Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/pacific-islands-rugby-union-fiji-samoa-tonga>
. Not so much a gripe, more a respectful acknowledgement. We live in a global 
village, and the Vunipolas and Faletaus of this world no doubt feel as British 
as they do Tongan. But teams up here are increasingly benefiting from raw 
materials that come from somewhere else. The least we can do is change the 
qualification laws back to the way they were and not tie players to one nation. 
When their adoptive countries have done with these guys, let them play for the 
countries of their forefathers. And if that means a half-Scottish, half-Welsh 
player, say, gets to switch mid-career from Wales to Scotland, so be it. In 
fact, good.

AB Twickenham has been in good voice all autumn, but it’s just a shame that so 
many fans there seem to think they can’t support their own team without calling 
for the referee to send off the opposition’s players.

RK A fairer revenue share agreement for visiting Test teams has to be a 
priority. The disparity in financial muscle between major European nations and 
their Pacific Island visitors is increasingly vast.

GM A good few. England and Wales wearing money-spinning away kits at home, 
inconsistent refereeing – in particular Jaco Peyper’s contrasting approaches in 
Dublin and at Twickenham did not sit well – and Australia playing two matches 
outside of the World Rugby window which denied them access to their 
overseas-based players; putting it bluntly, the gulf in quality between Nick 
Phipps and Will Genia is vast and may well have made all the difference on 
Saturday. The pittance the Fiji players received for their Twickenham outing is 
also troubling but to call it a gripe seems trivial so of the rest, Genia’s 
absence rankled most.

PR The value of the autumn internationals has fallen with the season in the 
south as long as the north’s, and more demanding on players in terms of travel. 
Series in June and November short-change spectators; take out Ireland’s games 
against New Zealand and Australia and the Wallabies’ first half performances 
against Wales and England, and the southern hemisphere left an imperceptible 
imprint. And time should be up for exploitative fourth internationals.
 