
Insurance firms Aviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> and 
Friends Life have both reported better-than-expected annual profits before a 
£5.6bn takeover, which is expected to be approved by shareholders later this 
month.

Aviva, the UK’s largest insurer, is acquiring Friends Life at a critical time, 
with life insurance firms under pressure from new UK pension rules which have 
triggered a collapse in sales of annuities.

Aviva posted a 6% rise in operating profit to £2.17bn for 2014, a touch higher 
than expected. Friends Life beat City forecasts by a greater margin with a 38% 
jump in operating profit to £556m.

Aviva lifted its final dividend by 30%, taking the total to 18.1p a share. Its 
shares rose more than 6% to 564.17p, while Friends Life’s gained 5.6% to 
428.87p, making them the two biggest risers on the FTSE 100 index in morning 
trading on Thursday.

The Friends Life brand will disappear after the takeover, which will bring 
cost savings of £225m, in part through 1,500 job losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/19/aviva-1500-job-losses-friends-life-merger>
. Aviva’s chief executive, Mark Wilson, declined to give more details about the 
cuts, saying the company wants to consult staff first.

Aviva employs 16,000 people in the UK, including 5,000 in its York and 
Sheffield-based life and pensions business.

There has been a lot of scepticism about the proposed deal. It would be the 
biggest in the UK insurance industry since CGU merged with Norwich Union in 
2000, which ultimately created Aviva. But investors are expected to vote it 
through at a meeting on 26 March.

Shore Capital analyst Eamonn Flanagan said: “Our view remains one of concern 
as to why Aviva felt the need to do the deal and the distractions involved in 
an even bigger turnaround story amidst ever greater regulatory oversight.”

Wilson described it as “the right acquisition at the right time” that would 
speed up the next phase of Aviva’s turnaround. He has streamlined the 
management structure and sold under-performing businesses to focus on growth 
markets such as Poland, Turkey and Asia.

Wilson said a lot of people thought Aviva was unfixable two years ago when he 
replaced Andy Moss as CEO after an investor revolt over executive pay and the 
company’s poor performance.

“We’ve come a long way in the last two years,” Wilson said, adding that there 
was still much to do.

He likened it to being “in a large boat with a lot of leaks and you don’t know 
which leak to put your hand over first. But we’ve certainly stopped those leaks 
and we’ve found that the boat’s starting to move a whole lot faster.”

Wilson said Aviva was ready for next month’s UK pension changes that allow 
retirees to use their pension pots as they choose, rather than forcing them to 
buy an annuity. Annuities, which provide a regular monthly sum throughout 
retirement,have long had a bad reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/01/uk-pensions-spending-spree-old-age-plan>
. They are seen as bad value for money but Wilson says he believes they could 
become attractive again once interest rates rise.

New annuity sales at Aviva fell 16% as bulk annuity sales (the pension pots 
sold to companies that provide pension schemes for their employees) failed to 
outweigh a drop in individual annuity sales. Friends Life reported a 15% drop 
in annuity sales.

The Friends acquisition will boost Aviva’s fund management arm, adding £70bn 
and taking total funds under management to more than £300bn. Aviva is working 
on the turnaround of the business, which was recently fined £17.6m by the City 
watchdog for “systems and controls” failures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/24/aviva-fined-fca-asset-management-failings-aviva-investors-trades>
 and paid £132m in compensation to eight funds.
 