
The dockers' strike in July 1984 (Revealed: Thatcher's plan to use army during 
miners' strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/03/margaret-thatcher-secret-plan-army-miners-strike>
, 3 January) was indeed one of the crucial episodes in the coal dispute of 
1984-5, not least in revealing the duplicitous ways in which the Thatcher 
governments defeated their opponents in the labour movement. The dockers' 
action was provoked when the British Steel Corporation unloaded materials on 
the Humber. This work was normally conducted by dockers under the national dock 
labour scheme, which provided employment and income security, and was an 
element of the wider social democratic legacy of the 1940s that Thatcher and 
her ministers were incrementally dismantling. Thatcher's transport secretary, 
Nicholas Ridley, pledged in the House of Commons that there were in fact no 
plans to abolish the scheme. The dockers returned to work, although some with 
major misgivings, and the government's immediate economic difficulties arising 
from the miners' strike were resolved. With the miners isolated and then 
defeated, the dock labour scheme was abolished in 1989. 
Jim Phillips
University of Glasgow

• I welcome confirmation that Arthur Scargill's 1984 analysis of the 
government's plans for the mining industry has been vindicated. The initial 20 
closures were the thin end of the wedge that would lead to the decimation of 
British coal mining. I await apologies from David Cameron (on behalf of his 
hero, Mrs Thatcher) and the Daily Mail, who continually called him a liar, 
traitor and "the enemy within".
Tony Jones
Aberystwyth, Ceredigion
 