
‘Whenever I went to see my grandma,” says Hannah Peel, “we always had the same 
conversation. She would ask me who I was and what I did, and I would say that I 
was a musician, that I played the violin – that she’d actually given me her 
younger brother’s violin. I would tell her how she and my grandad used to sing 
together. And she would always just smile, nod, and say, ‘Mmm, oh, I love you.’ 
She had no idea at all what I was talking about.”

Dementia and Alzheimer's leading cause of death in England and Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
Peel, a musician <http://www.hannahpeel.com/> known for her work with the 
Magnetic North and a variety of ambitious solo projects, had been watching her 
grandmother slowly slip into dementia for years. From the early befuddlement of 
lost objects, items she thought stolen, to the run of confusions and 
contradictions that led to her eventual diagnosis, it was a deeply distressing 
experience for the family.

Then one Christmas, having read about the positive effect music can have on 
people with dementia, Peel wondered if she could connect with her gran through 
some of her most familiar songs. “I said to my dad: ‘Why don’t we sing to her 
and see what happens?’ And from a place of not knowing us at all – from giving 
her Christmas gifts and her saying, ‘Oh thank you, what’s this for?’ – she 
completely woke up and started singing the lyrics. She was aware of what was 
going on around her. As we left she said: ‘Happy Christmas!’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRnyZ2_qKbN4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRnyZ2_qKbN4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRnyZ2_qKbN4&media=>
Tenderly by Hannah Peel on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RnyZ2_qKbN4>
Peel found the effect so overwhelming she began to write a song about her 
gran. That one song led to her new album,Awake But Always Dreaming 
<https://hannahpeel.tmstor.es/> – in part an exploration of dementia, but also 
a celebration of her gran’s life and of the wonders of the human body. As well 
as referencing Italo Calvino’s novelInvisible Cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2011/jun/02/venice-biennale-italo-calvino>
, it features contributions from producer Erland Cooper and Hayden Thorpe of
Wild Beasts <https://www.theguardian.com/music/wild-beasts>, a cover of Cars in 
the Garden by the Blue Nile’s Paul Buchanan, and recordings of those circuitous 
conversations she had with her gran.

“All the tracks lead us into her world and wondering where she is,” says Peel. 
“And so that became the record, starting with the youthfulness and slipping 
into that world and the rabbit hole of dementia.”

Alive Inside documentary shows the healing power of music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-news-blog/2012/apr/12/alive-inside-documentary-healing-music>
There are 850,000 people with dementia in the UK. By 2025, this number is 
expected to pass one million. It is nowthe leading cause of death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
 among British women. While a cure has yet to be found, much has been 
discovered aboutthe effect that music can have on sufferers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-news-blog/2012/apr/12/alive-inside-documentary-healing-music>
, even when the disease is at its most advanced stage. As the neurologist 
Oliver Sacks said: “Music evokes emotion, and with it memory. It brings back 
the feeling of life when nothing else can.”

Several viral videos have captured this feeling of life: the sheer delight 
music can bring. Recently, there wasthe joyous footage of Ted McDermott 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-lancashire-37058260>, a 79-year-old 
former Butlins Redcoat who was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s three years ago, 
being driven around by his son as he sang along to Quando Quando Quando. There 
has also been a raft of projects – from English Touring Opera’s Turtle Song, a 
songwriting programme for sufferers and their companions, to Arts4Dementia and
Music for Life <https://wigmore-hall.org.uk/learning/music-for-life>, a 
long-running scheme at London’s Wigmore Hall that brings together musicians, 
dementia patients and carers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8q0-WxsI1DA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8q0-WxsI1DA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8q0-WxsI1DA&media=>
Cars in the Garden by Hannah Peel featuring Hayden Thorpe on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8q0-WxsI1DA> 
Because music requires little mental processing, relying instead upon the 
motor centre of the brain, pairing it with everyday activities can enable 
patients to develop a rhythm that helps recall the memory of that activity, and 
improve cognitive ability. Researchers have found that playing music from 
someone’s young adult years, from around 18 to 25, is likely to provoke the 
strongest response. As patients enter late-stage dementia, music from their 
childhood may prove more powerful.

Peel found this to be the case with her gran. “She used to sing around the 
house when she was younger,” she says. “Apparently, she would sing WB Yeats’s 
poemThe Lake Isle of Innisfree 
<https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/lake-isle-innisfree>. My father couldn’t 
remember the melody, but he used to recite the words and say, ‘Mum, can you 
remember them?’ and she would just recite them. Later, she wouldn’t get that 
far – but if it was Christmas carols, she would sing along.”

The theory is that the auditory system is the first part of the brain to fully 
function, meaning that from 16 weeks old you are receptive to music. “So 
anything you hear early on is soaked into that part,” says Peel, “and that’s 
the last part of the brain to be affected by dementia. They think, because it’s 
right deep down in the centre, it’s the last thing to be touched.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fawakenings-hannah-peel-on-how-she-harnessed-musics-power-to-cut-through-dementia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb604ed975595ed2e154c8a579ec1d75a39b13a2%2F0_0_2357_3171%2F2357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Awakenings%3A%20Hannah%20Peel%20on%20how%20she%20harnessed%20music's%20power%20to%20cut%20through%20dementia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fawakenings-hannah-peel-on-how-she-harnessed-musics-power-to-cut-through-dementia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Awakenings%3A%20Hannah%20Peel%20on%20how%20she%20harnessed%20music%27s%20power%20to%20cut%20through%20dementia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fawakenings-hannah-peel-on-how-she-harnessed-musics-power-to-cut-through-dementia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb604ed975595ed2e154c8a579ec1d75a39b13a2%2F0_0_2357_3171%2F2357.jpg>
 Hannah Peel’s grandparents, Robert and Joyce, on their wedding day. 
Peel wanted to understand the science behind the disease, and turned to Selina 
Wray 
<https://twitter.com/SelinaWray?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, a fellow Barnsley native who works at the Institute of Neurology at 
University College London, researching dementia forAlzheimer’s Research UK 
<http://www.alzheimersresearchuk.org/>. “I grow cells in the laboratory from 
patients who have dementia and those who don’t – and look at what it is that 
leads them to die,” says Wray. “We’re trying to understand the very earliest 
things that go wrong, with the idea that if we can discover what those things 
are, we can stop them happening.”

For Peel, visiting Wray’s laboratory and seeing dementia cells up close was a 
chance to find unexpected beauty in the disease. “They take on these complex 
structures,” says Wray. “And because every cell is made up of thousands of 
proteins and quite often we’re interested in one or two, we use colours to 
label them. They look a little like fireworks.” Peel recalls: “As soon as I saw 
them I thought, ‘It’s like the stars! It’s like astronomy!’ It felt like an 
awakening – how it all connected, in a scientific and artistic and musical way.”

Peel is about to perform Awake But Always Dreaming at a special event at St 
Leonard’s Church in Shoreditch, east London 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/hannah-peel-presents-awake-but-always-dreaming-tickets-28148015472>
. “It feels really fitting,” she says, “because it’s not the perfect church – 
it’s got flaking walls and the pews are a bit rocky. It just feels as if it 
encompasses everything the mind is.” The evening has been put together with 
Alzheimer’s Research UK, and there will be readings by the actor Christopher 
Eccleston, film and poetry from Lavinia Greenlaw, and new work from the 
director and choreographerShelly Love <http://www.shellylove.co.uk/>, all 
tackling dementia. The idea is to show “there is hope and it can be beautiful, 
because you can still find connections with people through music and poetry”.

This Christmas, Peel’s music also appears as part of Alzheimer’s Research UK’s 
charity appeal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=59pahEPbgfw>, animated by 
Aardman and narrated by Stephen Fry. She has also launched Memory Tapes, a 
project inviting participants to makeplaylists of their lives 
<http://www.hannahpeel.com/memory-playlist/>. “I think of it like a time 
capsule,” she says, “so that, if ever I fall into dementia, there would be a 
mixtape of the songs that connect for my children and grandchildren.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfoIJn4vqFEY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfoIJn4vqFEY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfoIJn4vqFEY&media=>
All That Matters by Hannah Peel on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=foIJn4vqFEY> 
Peel’s gran died earlier this year, at the age of 98, seven years after her 
diagnosis. “We had to stay with her for nearly two weeks, essentially just 
watching her breathe. And then she faded away.” Best to remember her as Joyce 
Peel, the “beautiful soprano” who moved to County Armagh to marry an organist, 
who loved music and her family and singing in the choir her husband conducted.

Music shone through my wife’s Alzheimer’s | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/28/music-shone-through-my-wifes-alzheimers>
The experience has changed Peel’s relationship with the people she loves. She 
calls home more often, does not take her parents’ presence for granted. Do 
they, I wonder, discuss the music that binds them? “My mum doesn’t like my 
music and never has quite got it,” she says frankly. “She’s very direct. I’d do 
a gig and after she’d say: ‘It’s not my cup of tea.’”

Peel gave her the new album with some trepidation – not even telling her that 
it had been inspired by her gran. “She rang after about three weeks and said, 
‘I’ve been listening to your record every single day.’ And I thought, ‘Oh my 
god, what’s she going to say?’ But she said, ‘I cannot stop listening to it – 
it’s the most beautiful thing you have ever done. Every day I discover 
something more in it.’ She’d never said anything like that before. That’s a 
kind of breakthrough.”

• Awake But Always Dreaming is out now on My Own Pleasure. Hannah Peel plays 
St Leonard’s Church 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/hannah-peel-presents-awake-but-always-dreaming-tickets-28148015472>
, London, on 24 November, in conjunction withAlzheimer’s Research UK 
<http://www.alzheimersresearchuk.org/> and The Vine Collective 
<https://twitter.com/vine_collective>. This article was amended on 24.11.16 to 
correct a mistake in the name of the album title and its producer.
 