
The insurance company Axa has said it will remove around €500m (£355m) of coal 
investments from its portfolio, in a move that reflects long-term concerns in 
theinsurance industry over climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/15/axa-warns-companies-linked-fossil-fuel-risk-reputations>
.

The company has also pledged to triple its investments in green technologies 
and services to more than €3bn by 2020 and provide investors with more 
information on the risk to its investments from climate change.

Henri de Castries, chairman and chief executive of the French insurer, said 
the company’s duty to its shareholders and policyholders dictated the decision, 
citing current scientific advice that the world must avoid warmingof greater 
than 2C above pre-industrial levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
 to avoid the worst consequences of climate change. He said: “It is our 
responsibility, as a long-term institutional investor, to consider carbon as a 
risk and to accompany the global energy transition. The burning of coal to 
produce energy is today, clearly, one of the biggest obstacles from reaching 
the 2C target.”

He added: “For this reason, Axa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> has 
decided to divest from the companies most exposed to coal-related activities.” 
But this would only apply to “assets managed internally”, he said.

The company said it would remove from its portfolio and refrain from future 
investment in mining companies that derive more than half of their turnover 
from coal mining, and in electrical utilities that take more than half of their 
energy from thermal coal power plants.

The partial divestment was accompanied by the caveat that the company would 
rely on specialist data providers to identify the companies involved, and the 
new investment criteria would not extend to “other carbon-intensive industries 
or other types of coal-related businesses for which exposure data is 
insufficiently reliable”. The divestment applies only to the company’s general 
account.

Companies with fossil fuel investments have come under pressure in recent 
years to disclose their exposure to the risk of climate change. The Guardian’s
Keep it in the ground campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/mar/16/keep-it-in-the-ground-guardian-climate-change-campaign>
 has highlighted fossil fuel divestment and called on the Wellcome Trust and 
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, to divest from fossil fuel assets.

Christiana Figueres, the UN’s top official on climate change, said governments 
could set the direction on reducing emissions, but that businesses must be the 
“engine of change”.

François Hollande, the president of France, urged pension funds in particular 
to disclose their risk from fossil fuel assets, at aconference this week in 
Paris focusing on business and climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/20/francois-hollande-calls-for-miracle-climate-agreement-at-paris-talks>
. This December, world governments will meet in Paris to forge a new global 
agreement on climate change, with commitments from both developed and 
developing countries to limit greenhouse gas emissions, with a view to 
remaining within the 2C threshold that scientists say is necessary if global 
warming is not to become catastrophic and irreversible.
Campaign 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/03/climate-embeds/campaign-form/update/promos/campaign-embed-form.html> 