
France’s Axa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> has sold its UK 
investment, pensions and insurance businesses, including SunLife, to UK insurer 
Phoenix in a £375m deal.

The deal will transfer £12.3bn of assets under management and more than 
910,000 policies to Phoenix. The sale includes the pension and investment 
businesses Embassy and SunLife, which offer life cover to the over-50s. The 
Bristol-based SunLife has been part of the French insurance giant since 1996.

Exit from EU would damage Britain and Europe, says Axa chairman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/07/exit-from-eu-would-damage-britain-and-europe-says-axa-chairman>
Clive Bannister, chief executive of Phoenix, said the acquisition of the 
Embassy and SunLife businesses was another important step forward in the firm’s 
growth strategy. Phoenix specialises in buying life assurance businesses that 
are closed to new customers.

Bannister said: “We will invest heavily to ensure a smooth transition of the 
two businesses from Axa to Phoenix and we are committed to delivering the 
highest level of service to both direct and IFA [independent financial adviser] 
customers, as we do for our existing customers. Looking ahead, we believe there 
will be further consolidation in the UK life industry and we will continue to 
explore further opportunities as they arise.”

The agreed sale completes Axa’s exit from the British life and savings market. 
It recently sold its Elevate business, a platform which handles almost £10bn of 
UK investments, to Standard Life, as well as an Isle of Man offshore bonds 
business to Life Company Consolidation Group.

The disposals mean a loss of €400m 
<https://www.axa.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/axa-to-sell-its-investment-pensions-direct-protection-businesses-in-the-uk-to-phoenix>
 for the French company, but will enable it to focus on property and casualty, 
health and asset management in the UK.

Axa also announced changes in its top management, ahead of the arrival in 
September of new chief executive Thomas Buberl. He has led Axa’s German 
business for four years and was chosen in March to succeed Henri de Castries, 
who is leaving the company earlier than expected. De Castries built Axa into 
one of the world’s largest insurance companies through acquisitions in Europe 
and emerging markets, including in China and Colombia.

Earlier this week, Axa decided to pull out of tobacco investments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/23/axa-to-divest-18bn-of-tobacco-investments>
, saying it would sell its €1.8bn (£1.4bn) portfolio and calling on rivals to 
follow suit. Buberl referred to the tragic human cost of tobacco and the huge 
economic cost.
 