
Henri de Castries might just be the most powerful man in the world. He is 
chief executive and chairman of one of the world’s biggest insurers, Axa, and a 
member of France’s illustrious noble house of Castries. But De Castries is also 
chairman of theBilderberg group <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg>, 
a collection of political and business leaders from Europe and North America 
that meets in private every year to debate “megatrends and major issues facing 
the world” – or which is secretly running the world if you are a conspiracy 
theorist.

With this in mind, De Castries’s penchant for making dramatic comparisons is 
worth taking seriously. The charismatic Axa boss compares investing in fossil 
fuels to investing in asbestos-related companies in the 50s or 60s, the rise of 
the internet to the advent of electricity at the end of the 19th century and, 
perhaps most alarmingly, therecent fall in Chinese share prices  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/27/china-stock-market-biggest-fall-2007>
with the Wall Street Crash of 1929.

If the cost of non-clean technologies rises because fewer people are willing 
to invest, it will lead to a reorientation
Henri de Castries 
De Castries says the stock market slump in China is “more worrying” than the 
Greek debt crisis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debt-crisis>. An 
estimated 100m Chinese households have invested in shares, he explains, meaning 
there could be an impact on consumer spending. This would hurt western 
companies that have become reliant on Chinese consumers for growth, such as 
carmakers and luxury brands.

“Of course there are parallels [with 1929],” De Castries adds. “In any 
strongly emerging economy you have these sort of behaviours. One of the very 
interesting things was that the US economy was doing pretty well, but the stock 
market was inflated. When it started to collapse, Morgan [John Pierpont Morgan 
Jr, head of the bank JP Morgan]] organised a consortium of banks to try to stop 
the bleeding – exactly the way, at the very same point of the curve, the 
Chinese authorities tried to rally the brokers to try to stop the decline. The 
impact on the real economy was only a couple of quarters later, because you 
need to have people feel the pain, understand that you have lost money.”

Axa to divest from high-risk coal funds due to threat of climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/22/axa-divest-high-risk-coal-funds-due-threat-climate-change>
However, the Frenchman believes that policy makers have learnt from the 
mistakes of 1929, and from how the 2008 financial crisis was handled.


“The Chinese economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy> of 
2015 is not the US economy of ‘29,” he adds. “A lot of decision makers are much 
more aware of what the consequences of monetary policies are, and the 
efficiency of the Chinese government in 2015 and its grip on the civil society 
is probably higher than the grip the US authorities had on their own public 
opinion at the time. So we will see. It is interesting. History in the making.”

Despite concerns about the Chinese stock market, Axa continues to run two 
joint ventures in China, including one with the biggest bank in the world, the 
Industrial and Commercial Bank ofChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>
 (ICBC). In total, Axa now controls €1.4tn (£990bn) through its asset 
management business, making the company one of the biggest institutional 
investors in the word, and De Castries ideally placed to comment on the shape 
of the global economy.


De Castries, 60, is speaking from Axa’s offices in the City of London after 
the insurance group posted a 12% rise in first-half underlying profits to a 
record €3.1bn, helped in part by a weakening of the euro and the fact there 
were fewer natural catastrophes during the period. Profits in the UK rose 27% 
to £150m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Faxa-boss-henri-de-castries-on-coal-do-you-really-want-to-be-the-last-investor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17d185b235d29fcc4c0370f121be8eb79ea2b2ac%2F0_16_3593_2155%2F3593.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Axa%20boss%20Henri%20de%20Castries%20on%20coal%3A%20'Do%20you%20really%20want%20to%20be%20the%20last%20investor%3F'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Faxa-boss-henri-de-castries-on-coal-do-you-really-want-to-be-the-last-investor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Axa%20boss%20Henri%20de%20Castries%20on%20coal%3A%20%27Do%20you%20really%20want%20to%20be%20the%20last%20investor%3F%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Faxa-boss-henri-de-castries-on-coal-do-you-really-want-to-be-the-last-investor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17d185b235d29fcc4c0370f121be8eb79ea2b2ac%2F0_16_3593_2155%2F3593.jpg>
 Chinese investors look at share prices of shares at a stock brokerage house in 
Hangzhou city. Photograph: Imaginechina/Corbis 
“If you look at the key business lines of the group – life and savings, health 
and protection, property and casualty, and asset management ­– both revenues 
and earnings are progressing on all fronts,” says De Castries, who has worked 
forAxa <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> for 26 years and led the 
insurer since 2000.

There are rumours in the City that the company, which is the second-biggest 
insurer in the world behind Allianz, could make arival bid for RSA after Zurich 
revealed it was considering a deal worth potentially more than £5bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/06/rsa-boss-says-zurich-must-make-its-bid-plans-clear-stephen-hester>
.

“We never comment on these sorts of things,” De Castries says. “We always look 
on them with great interest, but we never comment. I won’t surprise you in 
giving you this answer.”

However, De Castries admits that the insurance industry could be ripe for more 
deals. “The industry is not very concentrated worldwide,” he says. “The two 
biggest players in the world are Allianz and us, and we barely have 3% of the 
market each. Does it mean that from a corporate standpoint it is the right 
thing to do at this stage? Hmm, not sure.”

One surprise strategic move that De Castries has made in recent weeks was to 
announce that Axa would sell off coal investments held by its fund management 
arm, which are worth €500m, and treble investments in green technology to €3bn.

Bilderberg looks to the future but is stuck in the past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/bilberberg-looks-to-the-future-but-is-stuck-in-the-past>
The private sector has a decisive role to play in tackling climate change, 
says De Castries.

“The private sector is important because it is the place where investments are 
taking place. If the cost of investing in non-clean technologies goes up 
because there are less people willing to invest, then it is going to lead to a 
natural reorientation of the investments.

“I haven’t noticed one negative reaction from the shareholders. Look back and 
would you have been a conscious investor in the 50s or in the 60s in 
asbestos-related companies, had you known what would come afterwards? Probably 
not. I am not saying it is the same thing, but there are some techniques, some 
sectors, some products where the case is now very clear – everything shows that 
it is not sustainable. Do you really want to be the last investor?”

However, De Castries is reluctant to go a step further and sell off oil 
investments, claiming it is a different case to coal.

“It is way too early to say,” De Castries says. “It is clear that oil is a 
different case, shale gas is a different case. What we say today, and it is a 
relatively new approach – I think we are the first very large financial 
institution – is that for us the coal case is clear.”

As well as trying to save the planet, De Castries is working on securing the 
future of the European Union. Last month, he met George Osborne, whom he counts 
as a friend, to discuss the prospect of a British exit from Europe –or Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/14/brexit-what-would-happen-if-britain-left-eu-european-union-referendum-uk>
 – and the chancellor’s push for reform.

De Castries warns that it would be “like a divorce” for Britain to leave the 
EU, and “severely damaging” for both parties.

“I think this country has joined Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> for much more than pure 
economical reasons, not being part of it would clearly diminish both the status 
and influence of the UK,” De Castries explains. “It would make the UK a big 
Switzerland. Switzerland is pretty prosperous but I would say it never had the 
ambition of being a model for the world.

“It’s like a divorce. Of course it would be severely damaging. But rather than 
looking at that, I prefer to look at the half-full bottle. What I would like to 
see is more people explaining why it is good for the UK to stay, rather than 
saying why it would be bad to leave.

Axa IM warns that companies linked to fossil fuels risk their reputations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/15/axa-warns-companies-linked-fossil-fuel-risk-reputations>
“Everybody recognises the fact there are things which need to change, but 
after all it is the Brits who invented [the saying] ‘don’t throw the baby out 
with the bathwater’. So don’t throw Baby Europe out with the bathwater. There 
are very positive reasons to think that even if the baby is still not fully 
satisfactory, there are things which can be improved. It is better to face the 
challenges of this next century together rather than being like the former 
Gallic tribes trying to face the Romans one by one.”

Given how strongly De Castries feels about Britain staying in the EU, did he 
make sure it was discussed at the latestBilderberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg> meeting last month?

De Castries laughs, before a lengthy pause. “Look at the Bilderberg agenda and 
you will have the answer.”

Given the Bilderberg agenda is not available publicly, this reply will do 
little to appease critics of its secretive approach. Although its chairman 
hints that Britain and the future of the EU is high on the agenda.

“The only thing I can sayabout that is it’s pretty clear sensible people have 
that in mind and they want to try to find answers to that.”

 * This article was amended on 10 August 2015 to correct a quote from Henri de 
Castries. He referred to John Pierpont Morgan’s involvement in organising a 
consortium of banks during the 1929 stock market crash, not that of Montagu 
Norman.
 