
Unions expressed fears about swingeing job cuts in the insurance industry 
after the owner ofFriends Provident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/friendsprovident> revealed plans to slash 
£75m in costs as part of a £2.75bn takeover of Axa's British life and pensions 
business.

The buyout firm Resolution said it aimed to make the savings within four years 
by merging the Axa business with Friends, which it bought for just under £2bn 
last year. The firm, the brainchild of entrepreneurClive Cowdery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/clive-cowdery>, also announced a new way 
of funding the £2bn cash call it needs to complete the transaction. It will ask 
its shareholders to guarantee part of the rights issue, rather than big City 
firms.

Ten of its largest shareholders had agreed to guarantee about half of the cash 
call, cutting the size of the fees Resolution needs to pay to secure the funds. 
Instead of paying more than 3% of the whole amount being raised,Resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/resolution> has been able to cut its 
costs to 1.75% it will pay to the shareholders for the amount they 
sub-underwrite and 2.7% to the City firms backing the rest.

The move to reduce its costs comes as the Office of Fair Trading begins its 
investigation in to the fees City firms charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jun/10/oft-investigate-share-underwriting-fees>
 and follows the controversy Prudential faced in the cost of its abandoned 
takeover of AIA, the Asian operations of US group AIG.

The Unite union expressed concern about jobs and the impact on the final 
salary schemes enjoyed by the 2,000Axa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> staff being transferred.

Siobhan Endean, Unite national officer, said: "The sale of the Axa life 
protection business will cause the workforce considerable anxiety as they now 
have serious concerns about the security of their jobs and the drive by 
Resolution to reduce costs."

The bulk of the savings – 40% – will take place in sales and marketing, with 
the remainder largely coming from customer service, IT and business support 
operation with Resolution pledging to produce a 100-day plan to reorganise the 
businesses.

Cowdery's business model is predicated upon being able to seal a number of 
take- over bids, kickstarted by the Friends Provident takeover last year and 
eventually selling the enlarged operation in 2012. He has some faithful 
followers in the City and those major institutions, some of whom are also 
underwriting the rights issue, will be offered 17 new shares for every one they 
hold at 150p. This is a 38% discount to the theoretical ex-rights price of 
242.2p, based on Resolution's closing price on 11 June when trading was 
suspended after news of the talks with Axa emerged.

John Tiner, chief executive of Resolution, said: "We remain disciplined on the 
selection of pricing of possible transactions."
 