
I live in a house that was underpinned in 1990, which is now on the market. 
Axa, my buildings insurer, is refusing to cover any future owner. I have lost 
one buyer for this reason. I have written toAxa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> but have had no reply. Without 
insurance the house is unsaleable. I am told insurers are obliged to continue 
cover in these circumstances â€“ is this so?JS, Chislehurst

It looks like Axa has done a U-turn on this since we became involved; either 
that or it needs to work on staff training.

Once your prospective buyer dropped out, you are adamant you spoke to two 
separate people at Axa on two different occasions and were told both times 
that, indeed, your insurance cover could not be offered to a future owner.

However, Axa says it not only has no record of being contacted by a potential 
buyer for your property but that it has "a clear stance" that it will offer 
insurance in this situation.

It is not actually obliged to continue cover for subsidence, but the 
Association of British Insurers says insurers should do under its voluntary 
best practice guidelines.

These state: "Where an insurer has previously agreed to continue cover and the 
property is subsequently sold, it would be good practice to extend the 
arrangement to the purchaser, subject to satisfactory information about the new 
owners, especially their previous claims record and the new owner's agreement 
to continue management of ongoing risks (where appropriate)."

Axa has now contacted you to confirm that it will extend cover to a new owner. 
It has provided you with a letter to this effect that you can show to any 
prospective buyers. Good luck with the house sale.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at 
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto: consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Bachelor & Brignall, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number.
 