
The transformation of Melbourne’s inner suburbs got underway in earnest in the 
late 1980s, but Port Melbourne in 1990 – like Fitzroy, Collingwood or North 
Melbourne – retained a kernel of working-class culture for maybe a decade more 
before the pips squeaked. It was in Port Melbourne at this time that I met 
Colin, my sister’s then boyfriend, who was working as a wool sorter a stone’s 
throw away and who would introduce me to the unique world of the Cosmic Psychos 
through his heavily punished record player.


Like Colin, the Cosmic Psychos originated from the world beyond zone three, in 
parched rural Victoria, but found their musical home in inner Melbourne during 
the 1980s, particularly St Kilda (the long abandoned seaside resort of 
Melbourne’s affluent 19th century classes) which then convincingly held the 
title as Melbourne’s cultural Sodom. But like Colin down at the woolsheds, the 
Psychos never made the complete transition to urban life, lead singer and 
bassist Ross Knight remaining down at the farm.

But this is what makes the Cosmic Psychos unique in the Australian music scene 
– they were a bridge between the seediest cultural elements of inner Melbourne 
and the blokey alienation of rural Australia. It’s often forgotten that not 
everyone in rural Australia is a rusted-on conservative or card-carrying member 
of the National Farmers’ Federation. Like the city, each town has its enclaves, 
which sometime spawn something unique.

The Cosmic Psychos are such a product, with a foot planted in the urban and 
rural world without surrendering to either – they pick what they like from each 
and that is their special appeal for fans. Seattle, as a geographic black hole 
for American rock bands, may have produced grunge, but the Psychos had to 
fashion their own unique brand of yobbo-rural punk for themselves.

When the Cosmic Psychos released Go the Hack in 1989, it was on high rotation 
in Albert street.She’s a Lost Cause 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UaR_EVo3Gao> was unmistakably punk rock in its 
fuzzy, wah-wah guitar assault and punchy if laconic vocal delivery, but clearly 
not cut from the same fabric as moral punk disorders like Henry Rollins or The 
Dead Kennedys. In the vocals was unalloyed doggerel, totally unaffected and 
unapologetic, accompanied by a visceral wall of heavy riffs and guitar 
feedback, tailor-made for smashing down beers after a hard day’s work.

She’s a Lost Cause remains the most renowned track from the album (it would go 
on to be covered by riot grrrl group L7) but Back in Town is more emblematic of 
the Psychos’ unique place in Australian punk-rock history and will probably 
remain the last linkage to a cultural phenomenon which was already strange: 
rural-based punk rock. While much punk fare emerged from art schools and 
universities, the Cosmic Psychos were adamantine, quartz-hard and self-hewn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIr1Cvvaei2k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIr1Cvvaei2k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIr1Cvvaei2k&media=>
One only need look at the album cover to understand what a unique outfit they 
were and are. How many punk-rock albums show band members standing on top of 
bulldozers, sporting skin-tight pale denim, windcheaters, mud-cloven work boots 
and non-ironic mullets? Bands likeThe Sailors 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_AKA9S3DgHk> with their mannered, macho 
bravado could only ever hope to emulate the genuine article.

The idea of hard working lads making an assault on the city from “old 
Footscray” to “going to kick a few heads/going to have some fun” is the theme 
of Back in Town and there is no subtext. The sentiment is echoed through their 
whole catalogue of albums and will never count as high art, which is probably 
why it is so engaging for their small legion of fans, which have included Buzz 
Osborne from The Melvins, Kurt Cobain, Eddie Vedder, Colin and yours truly.

Listening to it won’t lead to any epiphanies, but there’s much to enjoy from 
the raw energy it offers in a world full of rock produced within an inch of its 
life.
 