
Steve Coogan doesn’t wear ageing makeup any more as Alan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge>. He doesn’t need it. 
After 25 years in the role, the smile lines have finally caught up with him and 
he’s the same vintage as the middle-aged middle Englander.

Today, a second series of Mid Morning Matters webisodes will reunite us with a 
character many were first introduced to on VHS (some early adopters even came 
to know him through cassette tapes of On the Hour, the BBC Radio 4 programme). 
And here’s another strange sign of the times: in 1991, the same year Partridge 
was born, Hale and Pace had a No1 single with The Stonk.

Pitting Partridge against the Stonkers might feel cruel, but time is crueller 
to comedy than most things. It makes many jokes unfunny or unintelligible, as 
tastes change and topical references recede from collective memory. It’s only a 
select few comic creations that can last a generation or longer. Usually, they 
are ensembles (The Simpsons, The Marx Brothers) or double acts (Eddie and 
Patsy, Abbott and Costello). For a lone character to score a quarter century 
and still be evolving is very, very rare.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Falan-partridge-mid-morning-matters-clip-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F12%2F1455282243032%2FKP_1790566_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20Mid%20Morning%20Matters%20clip%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Falan-partridge-mid-morning-matters-clip-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Partridge%3A%20Mid%20Morning%20Matters%20clip%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F12%2Falan-partridge-mid-morning-matters-clip-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F12%2F1455282243032%2FKP_1790566_crop_640x360.jpg>
Alan Partridge: Mid Morning Matters clip - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/feb/12/alan-partridge-mid-morning-matters-clip-video>
Let’s count the hurdles to get here. Partridge is a beloved character given 
his own spin-off series after appearing in On the Hour. Spin-offs have produced 
things like The Simpsons – but also disastrous shows such as the Fast Show 
spin-off Swiss Toni and the bizarre M*A*S*H spin-off W*A*L*T*E*R, where the 
lead character, Radar O’Reilly, tries to commit suicide in the first episode 
(yes, really).

Transitioning to the big screen is even more fraught, unless your name is Mike 
Myers. Ninety minutes of a character with a 90-second half-life has resulted in 
some of the worst cinema ever made. Partridge’s Alpha Papa is a good film on 
its own, but compare it with Kevin and Perry Go Large or Keith Lemon: The Film, 
and you start to sense its best-in-show achievement.

Detail and minutiae are at the petty heart of Alan. Most characters inhabit a 
world; Alan is a world unto himself

A large part of the thanks must go to the Gibbons brothers, the writer twins 
who pitched fresh scripts on spec to Steve Coogan’s Baby Cow production company 
– and who were just 12 when the character came to life. They also cannily 
identified what went wrong with so many other comedies on celluloid. (A big 
budget yields a big scenario and the movies become stuck in a form gag or the 
character lost in space. Sex in the City … but in Abu Dhabi!) Instead, the 
brothers were interested in scenarios like Dog Day Afternoon that dealt with 
“the detail and minutiae of being in a siege”.

Detail and minutiae are at the petty heart of Alan Partridge. In fact, you can 
take one small detail from the show and let it keep expanding exponentially. 
Think of Alan’s driving gloves: we know immediately that their string backs 
will “get a bit of extra purchase” on the wheel of a Lexus or a Rover 
(certainly not a Mini Metro), or a Kia Optima with writing down the side (not 
vandalism this time). The gloves are one key element in a personal style that 
is “sports casual” or “imperial leisure”. They steer down a motorway or on the 
not-yet-pedestrianised streets of Norwich city centre, while their wearer 
lip-syncs to the second single of a two-hit wonder. If it’s a bad day, they may 
be smeared with Toblerone and en route to Dundee. Most characters inhabit a 
world; Alan is a world unto himself.

Who else could produce something like the Twitter account Accidental Partridge 
<https://twitter.com/accidentalp>, where people send in real-life Alanisms? 
There are more than a thousand, from Sky Sports News’ “Big talking point today; 
should Bridge be considered as a sport?” to BBC London’s “Is it wrong to 
exercise in a graveyard?” What’s at the root of every Alanism? Bad taste and 
forced banter. Crap, basically – but a very distinct kind of crap that makes a 
slapstick still-life out of the world around us.

As GK Chesterton memorably put it, a man can be entirely great while also 
entirely foolish: it’s the “grossness and gorgeousness” of his folly that makes 
us forever love him. And that’s Partridge. “Alan is a gift to a writer because 
he can be contradictory,” Rob Gibbons has said. “He can be liberal and 
rightwing, stupid and well-read. Almost anything you think might be funny, Alan 
can get away with. But the other thing about Alan [now] is that he’s a bit more 
at ease with himself. He’s well into middle age and he’s comfortable with that.”

Mid Morning Matters is on Sky Atlantic at 10pm on 16 February
 