
Joel Fitzgibbon has criticised the National Farmers Federation for being the 
flag bearer for the government’s planned backpacker tax and has asked it to 
work with him to get a better deal for farmers.

The opposition spokesman for agriculture said Treasury officials had told him 
the Coalition’s plans to impose a 19% tax on working holiday makers rather than 
the initial 32.5% would not stem the losses of backpackers travelling to 
Australia.

“Treasury told us that at 19% the fall off in backpackers would have been as 
great as they would have been under 32.5 so we have a problem,” he said.


“I am going to fight for farmers and if the NFF came to the same conclusion 
and stopped being the flag bearer for 19% we might get more progress towards a 
better deal for farmers.”

Life's a beach as backpacker tax fiasco descends to new lows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/lifes-a-beach-as-backpacker-tax-fiasco-descends-to-new-lows>
The Coalition announced in the 2015 budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-savings-hit-surprising-targets-backpackers-and-fly-in-fly-out-workers>
 it planned to tax backpackers at 32.5% from July 2016 but this caused an 
outcry from agricultural industries, which rely on young holiday makers for 25% 
of their workforce.

The government implemented a review during the election, pushed the decision 
out to January 1, 2017 and then announced in September it would revise its 
planned tax down to 19%.

While the bills have passed the lower house, Labor and the crossbenchers have 
referred the legislation to a Senate committee, which will report on 7 November.

With only three more sitting weeks, the bills need to clear the Senate before 
the 1 January 2017 start date to provide growers with certainty.

The chief executive of the NFF, Tony Mahar, accused Labor of further 
exacerbating the uncertainty for farmers at a time when applications for fruit 
pickers had dropped by up to 50% in some areas.

He said growers were not only considering the prospect of leaving fruit and 
vegetables to rot, but also revising planting schemes for next year’s crops.

“I would ask the ALP to come out and clarify their position on which rate they 
support,” Mahar said.

“They have had 15 months to make position clear and raising the prospect of 
lower tax rates at this late stage further amplifies the uncertainty that has 
surrounded this whole process.


Budget savings hit surprising targets: backpackers and fly-in-fly-out workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-savings-hit-surprising-targets-backpackers-and-fly-in-fly-out-workers>
“We have agreed to 19% for the sake of certainty. Suggestions we are flag 
waving for government are way off the mark. We are flag waving for agriculture 
and the farmers.”


Tourism-related industries say the tax will hit regional economies by cutting 
the amount spent in those areas. Backpackers have been attracted to work on 
farms as a way of extending their visas.

While the NFF opposed the 32.5% rate, it has supported the revised measure of 
19% with a 95% tax on backpackers’ superannuation earnings when they leave 
Australia. The bills also increase the passenger movement charge by $5.

Fitzgibbon would not commit to blocking the backpacker tax bills and 
associated tax increases in the Senate. The decision has yet to go to the Labor 
caucus.


Fitzgibbon says the fact that the government has tied the backpacker tax to an 
increase in the passenger movement charge and a 95% tax on working holiday 
makers’ superannuation on the way out of Australia makes the decision difficult.
 