
How does a choreographer connect to the work of academics and their research 
interests? That's a question that I mulled over in my new role as knowledge 
producer atthe Cultural Institute at King's 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/cultural/culturalinstitute/index.aspx>, a programme that 
connects academics from King's College London with artists. I'd spent more than 
25 years mining human physicality for meaning through movement so I decided to 
see what the college offered in terms of alternative narratives of the body.

I chose film studies (bodies interpreted through a lens), cultural studies 
(the body in society), geography (the body in landscape), robotics (body 
mechanics) and neuroscience (inscape of the body).There followed some of the 
most intense, inspiring and informative conversations I have ever had. 
<http://londondance.com/articles/features/translocations/> The passion with 
which the academics spoke about their work was palpable. I listened spellbound. 
I wish school had been more like this. As I had – sadly – anticipated, the 
world of contemporary dance was a closed book to all but one of them. Not for 
the first time, I wondered what contemporary dance lacked in its dissemination 
that it failed to embrace the very individuals who would respond to its 
seriousness of purpose.

Reading on mobile? Click here to view <http://vimeo.com/90032997>

I started by inviting my chosen academics to a dance showing. It was a 
refreshing exercise: a private performance (which involved a filmed extract 
from my dance workBruise Blood <http://vimeo.com/90128027> and two dancers 
performing live) unencumbered by the politics of theatre presentation. I had no 
idea what the response would be to this unfamiliar and non-verbal world of 
movement. I knew from experience that when an Indian woman talks about dance, 
even in the abstract, people create images in their head that inevitably 
involve lotus hands and some drums. They found my choice of music for Bruise 
Blood (an electronic remix ofSteve Reich <http://www.stevereich.com/>) not what 
they expected. However, there was no doubt they were engrossed.

When I asked them to write about their experience of watching dance, there was 
a bit of persuading to be done in some quarters, understandably. I would feel 
the same if asked to write my thoughts on neuroscience after one visit to a 
laboratory. However, my intention was to put dance, rather than them, in the 
dock. Instead of writing technically about dance, I wanted them to bring their 
own highly refined terminology to bear on the form. In this way, both dance and 
academics would change locations and effect a mutual migration.

The texts produced were brilliant in their variety and scope. They ranged from 
the kind of in-depth analysis any choreographer would die for to a spontaneous 
spoken riff. These unique pieces were the basis of the six films that became
Translocations <http://londondance.com/articles/features/translocations/>.

Each film owes its personality to both the academic featured and their reading 
of the dance. For example, the sparkling analysis offered by the head of film 
studies is counterpointed by her still presence against a projected backdrop of 
moving images. The geographer's perspective on ensemble choreography is 
heightened by his position on the street, among the real-life "street ballet" 
of the Strand.

I wanted Translocations to be more like visual radio than conventional films. 
I hope these portraits of passionate people reveal something about their own 
work, and in that process reveal something about the power of dance to speak 
across departments and disciplines.

• Watch the six Translocations films here 
<http://www.shobanajeyasingh.co.uk/works/translocations/>
 