
The truth may currently feel stranger than fiction, but Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s emergence as a political 
leader – and even his presidency – has been predicted in fictional dramas more 
than once. The outcomes, notably, have not been good.


In 2000, Bart to the Future, an episode of the Simpsons 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lxjM1yCcqTQ> in which Bart imagines his coming 
years, showed Lisa Simpson taking over as “America’s first straight female 
president” from an outgoing President Trump. “As you know,” she tells her team 
in the Oval Office, “we’ve inherited quite a budget crunch from President 
Trump.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlxjM1yCcqTQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlxjM1yCcqTQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlxjM1yCcqTQ&media=>
 Bart to the Future: the Simpsons, 2000. 
She asks how bad things have got, to be told the country is broke, as the 
previous regime invested in the nation’s children but “created a generation of 
ultra-strong super-criminals”.

What may have seemed, 16 years ago, an implausible fantasy was intended as “a 
warning to America”, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/17/simpsons-president-trump-prediction-was-meant-as-warning-to-us>
 the episode’s creators toldThe Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/simpsons-writer-who-predicted-trump-876295>
 earlier this year.

“The important thing is that Lisa comes into the presidency when America is on 
the ropes, and that is the condition left by the Trump presidency,” the 
episode’s writer Dan Greaney said. “What we needed was for Lisa to have 
problems that were beyond her fixing, that everything went as bad as it 
possibly could, and that’s why we had Trump be president before her.”

A potential president Trump “just seemed like the logical last stop before 
hitting bottom,” he said. “It was pitched because it was consistent with the 
vision of America going insane.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doz7_JP7ROvA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doz7_JP7ROvA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Doz7_JP7ROvA&media=>
 Trumptastic Voyage: The Simpsons 
Fifteen years later, after Trump did in fact announce his candidacy, a new 
Simpsons short, Trumptastic Voyage, poked fun at the wannabe world leader (and 
his hair).

Images from this cartoon – of Trump at the presidential podium and descending 
an escalator in Trump Tower – have, wrongly, been circulated on social media 
(and now in some old media, too, notablyThursday’s front page of the Sun 
<https://twitter.com/TheSun/status/796479369048899586>) as part of that 
16-year-old prophecy.
The Sun (@TheSun) 
Tomorrow's front page: The Simpsons' most absurd prediction in its 27-year 
history has come truehttps://t.co/dvpjgCQwMH <https://t.co/dvpjgCQwMH> 
pic.twitter.com/PYINTerjlL <https://t.co/PYINTerjlL>
 <https://twitter.com/TheSun/status/796479369048899586> November 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TheSun/status/796479369048899586> 
The world's newspapers react to Trump's election victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/the-worlds-newspapers-react-to-trumps-election-victory>
Trump has also been credited by the co-creator of the Back to the Future 
movies as the inspiration for Biff Tannen, the bullying bad guy character of 
the time-travelling 1980s trilogy.


In the second film, Back to the Future II, Biff has become “one of the richest 
and most powerful men in America” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S4m848bh1iY> 
by cheating at gambling, formed a “vast empire” called Biffco, and successfully 
lobbied to legalise gambling and build an enormous casino hotel. When the film 
was released in 1989, Trump was already well known as a casino and property 
mogul.

Interviewed by The Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/10/21/how-back-to-the-future-predicted-trump.html>
 last year, co-writer Bob Gale confirmed he had Trump in mind when he created 
the character. “We thought about it when we made the movie! Are you kidding? 
You watch Part II again andthere’s a scene where Marty confronts Biff in his 
office <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l9c1k_m6POA> and there’s a huge 
portrait of Biff on the wall behind Biff, and there’s one moment where Biff 
kind of stands up and he takes exactly the same pose as the portrait? Yeah.”

The interviewer notes that in the movie, Biff uses the profits from his casino 
to shake up the Republican party and assume political power himself, 
transforming his local town Hill Valley into “a lawless, dystopian wasteland 
where hooliganism reigns, dissent is quashed” and citizens are encouraged to 
call him “America’s greatest living folk hero.”

“Yeah, that’s what we were thinking about,” replies Gale. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
In a less cryptic prediction, the Simpsons creators also released a brief 
animation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tLSy8Tl2bjs> earlier this year in 
which Homer is considering whether to vote for Trump or Clinton. He watches a 
TV presentation which shows President Trump in bed when the situation room 
phone rings at 3am. Beside him on the bed is a book entitled “Great speeches: 
A. Hitler.”

“Not now, I’m on Twitter!” yells Trump, who pauses to tap into his phone: “And 
[Massachussetts senator]Elizabeth Warren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/elizabeth-warren> tweets too damn much. 
Glad I exiled her.”

He then lifts the phone to say: “Oh and put my name on the Lincoln memorial, 
make [New Jersey governor] Chris Christie eat a worm just for laughs, disband 
Nato, and make me some scrambled eggs on a gold plate.”

He then rings a bell, summoning a team of makeup artists who paint his face 
orange, place fake mittens over his tiny hands and put a shaggy dog on to his 
head. The phone rings again. “We’re too late? Chinese fleet is advancing? Just 
build another wall. YES, IN THE OCEAN, LOSER.”

The TV presentation ends with a voiceover stating it is “paid for Americans 
who are really starting to miss Obama”.
 