
The skeletons of two women who died more than 1,000 years and miles apart, but 
who shared conditions which would have filled their short lives with pain, go 
on display inan exhibition opening in Glasgow <http://www.gla.ac.uk/hunterian/> 
this week.

One was a tiny teenager who died in the early 19th century, and was given a 
pauper’s funeral in a densely packed south London cemetery reserved for what 
the exhibition curator, Jelena Bekvalac, called “the abject poor” – including 
many workers in the Southwark brothels.

She was well under five feet tall, and by the end of her short life would have 
been in agony, her pitted skull revealing the scars of the open sores of 
tertiary syphilis, the then incurable disease with which she was probably born. 
Her bent leg bones may be another symptom of the disease, or caused by rickets, 
another condition usually related to poverty and poor diet.

 The other woman was Pictish, possibly with royal connections, given a 
high-status burial around the year 700 AD. She was laid under an imposing cairn 
on the beautiful Scottish island of South Uist in the Outer Hebrides – yet like 
the London girl, she suffered from shockingly worn and decayed teeth, and bone 
conditions related to dietary deficiencies.

“It is impossible to look at these bones without feeling an emotional 
connection to these people who died so long ago,” Bekvalac said.

The decayed teeth of both women reveal how they lived and what they ate: the 
Pictish woman, who lived beside a sea teeming with life, ate almost no fish or 
seafood. The marks in the teeth of the London girl showed that in her short 
life she went through several periods of near starvation, until she died before 
her 20th birthday, and was buried in theCross Bones cemetery 
<http://www.crossbones.org.uk/#/history/4527977516> in Borough, south London. 
In the 16th century John Stow’s Survey of London recorded it as a burial ground 
for “single women”, a euphemism for prostitutes, and it was grossly overcrowded 
by the time it was closed in the mid 19th century as a danger to public health.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Four-buried-bones-exhibition-skeletons-dietary-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c0674422dcb64821a6633e7cc49f7f0f87d5ff2%2F0_0_3500_2315%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bad%20to%20the%20bone%3A%20skeleton%20exhibition%20reveals%20dietary%20disease%20across%20social%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Four-buried-bones-exhibition-skeletons-dietary-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bad%20to%20the%20bone%3A%20skeleton%20exhibition%20reveals%20dietary%20disease%20across%20social%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Four-buried-bones-exhibition-skeletons-dietary-disease%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c0674422dcb64821a6633e7cc49f7f0f87d5ff2%2F0_0_3500_2315%2F3500.jpg>
 Jelena Bekvalac, curator of human osteology at the Museum of London and Emily 
Sargent, curator at Wellcome Collection, check the skeleton of a female aged 
between 17-25 years old from Crossbones in Southwark who suffered the ravages 
of syphilis. Photograph: Callum Bennetts/MAVERICK PHOTO AGENCY 
The exhibition, which includes striking contemporary views of the sites by 
Thomas Adank, has been jointly created by the Museum of London, where Bekvalac 
is curator of human osteology in one of thelargest collections of human remains 
<http://archive.museumoflondon.org.uk/Centre-for-Human-Bioarchaeology/AboutUs/Default.htm>
 taken from one location anywhere in the world, the Wellcome Collection, and 
the Hunterian medical museum in Glasgow, which has contributed remains from its 
own collection and from other Scottish museum collections.

Emily Sargent, curator at Wellcome Collection, said: “Spanning thousands of 
years and from opposite ends of the country and social scales, the bones of 
these individuals offer us a rare and special glimpse into history. Yet we 
identify with their rotten teeth or broken bones, and are reminded that 
skeletons can tell us more about what people lived with, rather than what they 
died from.”

Mass grave reveals prehistoric warfare in ancient European farming community
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/aug/17/mass-grave-prehistoric-warfare-ancient-european-farming-community-neolithic>
One of the London skeletons is of a man who was shot with an arrow which 
lodged within his spine, but survived – only to die in the Black Death plague 
of the late 1340s, buried with hundreds of others in a pit in East Smithfield. 
“He is certainly one who who might have come back to haunt us, bitter at his 
fate,” Bekvalac said.

The southerners have been joined by skeletons from Scotland, including one 
found at Tiree in 1912, with such startlingly well-preserved bones that local 
people objected bitterly when it was removed to a museum, believing the 
archaeologists were desecrating the grave of a recent ancestor. Recent research 
has revealed that the bones are not around 2,000 years old, like a nearby Iron 
Age settlement, but Neolithic, more than 5,000 years old. They revealed the 
earliest known case of rickets in the UK, leaving the woman with misshapen leg 
and chest bones.

There are also the remains of an adolescent male from the Horse Cross cemetery 
in Perth, with a gaping skull fracture suggesting he may be a murder victim.

• The exhibition is open, with free entry, at the Hunterian Museum 
<http://www.gla.ac.uk/hunterian/> until 8 January, and will then travel on to 
Bristol and Leeds next year.
 