
Take your seats for a grand ensemble smackdown: George Smiley and Marilyn 
Monroe look set to slug it out at this year's Baftas, withTinker Tailor Soldier 
Spy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142611/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy> 
andMy Week with Marilyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142796/my-week-with-marilyn> picking up 
16 nominations apiece. Both pictures won nods in the overall film, British 
film, director, adapted screenplay, cinematography, editing, production design, 
makeup and hair, costume, sound and music categories, but it was the 
heavyweight casts that pushed each production well into double figures.

Tinker Tailor's Gary Oldman is up for best actor as reserved spook George 
Smiley in Tomas Alfredson's critically-lauded adaptation of the John le Carré 
cold war thriller, while Benedict Cumberbatch, Colin Firth, John Hurt and Kathy 
Burke have supporting nods. Michelle Williams's lead in Simon Curtis'sMy Week 
with Marilyn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/my-week-with-marilyn> was 
predictably applauded; less certain was the recognition for fellow cast members 
Eddie Redmayne, Kenneth Branagh, Judi Dench and Zoe Wanamaker.

The third-place runner up was Margaret Thatcher biopic The Iron Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140396/iron-lady>, which clocked 14 
nominations (including four for its actors), followed by silent charmerThe 
Artist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142801/artist>, with 13. 
Much-fancied civil rights dramaThe Help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142864/help> earned 12, as did Martin 
Scorsese's first family film,Hugo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142805/hugo> (earlier this week, it was 
announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/04/martin-scorsese-bafta-fellowship-award>
 that Scorsese will be honoured with a Bafta fellowship). Today's result will 
be welcome news for the studio behind the veteran director's first foray into 
3D;at the Golden Globe nominations in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/15/golden-globe-nominations-2012>, 
Hugo trailed with a disappointing three nominations, while The Artist helped 
strenghten its odds for a best picture win at February's Oscars by leading the 
pack with six.

One major surprise was the 13 nominations showered upon War Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142607/war-horse>, Steven Spielberg's 
adaptation of Michael Morpurgo novel. The first world war-set epic, though 
tipped as an awards frontrunner earlier in the season, had been hobbled by just 
two Globe nods, as well asa snub yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/05/writers-guild-america-bridesmaids>
 from the Writers Guild of America. Today's backslap (including a supporting 
actress hat-tip to Emily Watson) looks to give the film a fresh lease of life 
as the sprint towards the final awards furlongs gathers pace. Spielberg has in 
fact racked up 18 nominations today; his other film of the last year,The 
Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142790/adventures-of-tintin>, won five. 
The films will compete against each other in every category except best 
animated film.

Terrence Malick's apocalyptic Cannes-winner The Tree of Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/139929/tree-of-life> failed to earn 
nods in any major category (though Emmanuel Lubezki's cinematography was 
applauded), and there was disappointment for David Croneberg's adventure in 
erotic psychiatry:A Dangerous Method 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142798/dangerous-method> was recognised 
only for its costume design. Richard Ayoade's debut,Submarine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137865/submarine> also secured only one 
nomination (for best British film), while Andrew Haigh'sWeekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141120/weekend>, which won much acclaim 
for its quiet portrayal of a fleeting gay affair, found no love from Bafta 
voters. Other highbrow hits which failed to turn up on the list include Terence 
Davies'The Deep Blue Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142851/deep-blue-sea>, Andrea Arnold's 
Wuthering Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142867/wuthering-heights> and Joanna 
Hogg'sArchipelago <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/139928/archipelago>.

Other snubs include Stephen Daldry's Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close, Nick 
Murphy's The Awakening, the Daniel Radcliffe-starring The Woman in Black and 
Madonna'sW.E. <https://www.theguardian.com/film/we>. Steve McQueen's sex addict 
drama Shame was nominated for four awards but will not, as expected, compete in 
the race for best director nor for best picture.

Paddy Considine's first full-length feature, Tyrannosaur, fared better with 
five nominations (best film, best British film, plus nods forPeter Mullan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peter-mullan>, Olivia Colman and Eddie 
Marsan). The ratio of tips to wins is expected to be favourable for this 
hard-hitting romance between a charity shop worker and a troubled alcoholic.

There was cheering news, too, for motor racing documentary Senna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141505/senna> – which did not make the 
15-strong Oscars documentary shortlist earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/21/senna-kapadia-oscars-2012> but is 
up for six Baftas, including best film.

Meanwhile, the Harry Potter team would be forgiven for a healthy 
capitalisation on the 11 nominations for the final instalment in the series. 
Deathly Hallows Part Two looks certain to pick up gongs in technical 
categories; whether Alan Rickman will triumph over Christopher Plummer (for 
Beginners) in the best supporting actor wing looks less certain.Drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142036/drive>, Nicolas Winding Refn's 
moody Ryan Gosling vehicle, joined Harry Potter in the 11 nods club.

The usual suspects cropped up in the lead acting categories – Meryl Streep 
(The Iron Lady) and Charlize Theron (Young Adult 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142806/young-adult>)) for best actress, 
Leonardo DiCaprio (J Edgar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142807/j-edgar>), Michael Fassbender 
(Shame) and Jean Dujardin (The Artist) for best actor – but the wide scope of 
the longlist allowed for some surprise inclusions. Carey Mulligan picked up a 
leading actress nod for her role in Drive, to add to her supporting nomination 
for Shame. Ezra Miller was recognised for his portrayal of the teenage Kevin in 
Lynne Ramsay'sWe Need to Talk About Kevin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141828/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>, 
alongside Tilda Swinton as his mother. That film, which won just one nomination 
at the Globes (for Swinton), fared much better today, with 10 nominations.

A grand total of 285 films were eligible for entry this year, with the first 
round of voting whittling these down to (mostly) 15 in each category. The next 
round of voting began at 10am today; that will reduce each to a five-strong 
shortlist, to be released on 17 January. The ceremony itself, hosted this year 
byStephen Fry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-fry>, takes place on 
12 February.
 