
A special Bafta award, for outstanding British contribution to cinema, was 
given toBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Films, and – like the same 
award given to Film4’s Tessa Ross in 2013 – it is in recognition of an 
influential developer of films backed by a TV broadcaster.

Recent work to emerge from the outfit includes Testament of Youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/testament-of-youth>, Mr Holmes and Mrs 
Brown’s Boys D’Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mrs-browns-boys-movie>, and it is 
headed up by Christine Langan, who was appointed to the role in 2009. Having 
begun her career at British Screen, she worked for Granada TV before being 
taken on as a production executive at BBC Films in 2006.

In her time at BBC Films, Langan has overseen the likes of In the Loop, 
Armando Iannucci’s Oscar-nominated politics-and-media satire;An Education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/an-education>, the Lynn Barber memoir that 
provided a star-making role for Carey Mulligan; andWe Need to Talk About Kevin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>, the Lionel 
Shriver adaptation directed by Lynne Ramsay.

Langan, like Ross, specialises in nurturing talent through the early stages, 
and has won much renown in the industry for her ability to pull projects 
together:We Need to Talk About Kevin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>, for example, 
was stalled for years until Langan asked for a lower-budget version to be 
constructed.

Langan told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/28/film-producers-oscars-christine-langan-bbc>
 that “working in the independent sector, you’re in the lunatic gang anyway, 
hoping for some magic – a really unusual story or a really knockout performance 
– so of course awards are important.” Having had so many films scoop individual 
awards, Langan and her team will no doubt be quietly pleased to have been 
recognised in this fashion.
 