
The Bafta nomination list reveals a three-way contest between big 
frontrunners: Steven Spielberg’s cold war dramaBridge of Spies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/05/bridge-of-spies-film-review-tom-hanks-steven-spielberg-cold-war-gary-powers-u2>
 (which appears to have scored higher than in the Golden Globes), Todd Haynes’s 
1950s-set love storyCarol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/26/carol-film-review-cate-blanchett-todd-haynes-rooney-mara>
 and Alejandro González Iñárritu’s tough survivalist thrillerThe Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/the-revenant-review-gut-churningly-brutal-beautiful-storytelling>
. They have respectively nine, nine and eight nominations. They are three 
thoroughly excellent films, with enough inherent value to resist the cloying 
layers of award-prestige that settle at times like these.

However, as always, there are snubs and omissions which are exasperating: it 
is disappointing that no fully British film makes the actual best film category 
— the Baftas’ outstanding British film list always has something of the 
“Commonwealth Games medal” feel — although the continued awards momentum for 
Carol will be highly gratifying for this film’s British producers Stephen 
Woolley and Elizabeth Karlsen. And in factThe Danish Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/31/the-danish-girl-review-redmayne-tom-hooper>
,Ex Machina <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/22/ex-machina-review> and
Brooklyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/brooklyn-review-saoirse-ronan-shines-in-nick-hornby-colm-toibin-drama>
 have all done well in the general tally.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20'A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual'-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20%27A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual%27-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
Rampling and Courtenay discuss 45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/aug/26/charlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview>
But it’s excruciating that Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtenay, so superb in 
Andrew Haigh’s marital crisis drama45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/45-years-review-tom-courtenay-and-charlotte-rampling-superb-as-couple-freshly-possessed-by-the-past>
, have been left off the best actress and best actor lists. Just as withTimothy 
Spall’s non-appearance for Mr Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/14/timothy-spall-mr-turner-snubbed>
 last year, it seems Bafta has obtusely found a way to overlook world-class 
British acting talent — although Maggie Smith has rightly been noticed for her 
imperious performance in The Lady in the Van. To ignore Smith would be to 
trigger some kind of constitutional crisis. I would also have liked to see 
Carey Mulligan rewarded for her excellent but overlooked performance inFar From 
the Madding Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/02/far-from-the-madding-crowd-review-carey-mulligan-shines-in-hardy-perennial>
.

Other big nominees that have crept up on us are Spotlight, Trumbo and The Big 
Short, three true-life stories from the US which have impressed Bafta voters 
even though these films have yet to be released in British cinemas.Trumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/trumbo-review-bryan-cranston-toronto-tiff>
 is the story of Dalton Trumbo, the blacklisted screenwriter in the McCarthy 
era;Spotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/spotlight-review-catholic-church-child-abuse-film-decently-tells-an-awful-story>
 is about the Boston Globe’s investigative reporters uncovering the scandal of 
a Catholic Church child abuse cover-up andThe Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/the-big-short-review-ryan-gosling-brad-pitt>
 is an adaptation of Mike Lewis’s book about the Wall Street mavericks who did 
well out of betting on the 2008 crash. These are movies which are admired for 
their high-mindedness and water-cooler talking-point qualities, although I have 
to say Spotlight is nowhere near as taut and tense as All the President’s Men, 
to which it keeps getting compared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbaftas-nominations-2016-reaction-snubs-charlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96043a4fcfdf0a2dc014bbe2f1b4e5490a5167e0%2F0_30_2419_1450%2F2419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bafta%20nominations%202016%3A%20snubs%20for%20Courtenay%20and%20Rampling%20reawaken%20last%20year's%20Mr%20Turner%20outrage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbaftas-nominations-2016-reaction-snubs-charlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bafta%20nominations%202016%3A%20snubs%20for%20Courtenay%20and%20Rampling%20reawaken%20last%20year%27s%20Mr%20Turner%20outrage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fbaftas-nominations-2016-reaction-snubs-charlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96043a4fcfdf0a2dc014bbe2f1b4e5490a5167e0%2F0_30_2419_1450%2F2419.jpg>
 Spotlight: Michael Keaton, Liev Schreiber, Mark Ruffalo, Rachel McAdams, John 
Slattery and Brian d’Arcy James as the reporting team uncovering abuse by 
priests. Photograph: Kerry Hayes/AP 
And at the risk of being ungracious, I confess the continuing awards momentum 
and saucer-eyed reverence forMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> is slightly baffling, 
which gets seven nominations. I found it tremendously enjoyable, but as 
visually daring entertainment it is inferior to Inside Out and as 
action-thriller spectacle inferior to the new James Bond, Spectre, and to the 
outstanding new Star Wars offering. But something in its undoubtedly watchable 
craziness has struck a chord and Charlize Theron is always very good.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fbrooklyn-saoirse-ronan-john-crowley-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446562128409%2FKP_581333_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saoirse%20Ronan%20and%20John%20Crowley%3A%20'Emigration%20is%20a%20potent%20part%20of%20the%20Irish%20psyche'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fbrooklyn-saoirse-ronan-john-crowley-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saoirse%20Ronan%20and%20John%20Crowley%3A%20%27Emigration%20is%20a%20potent%20part%20of%20the%20Irish%20psyche%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fbrooklyn-saoirse-ronan-john-crowley-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446562128409%2FKP_581333_crop_640x360.jpg>
Watch a video interview with Saoirse Ronan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/nov/04/brooklyn-saoirse-ronan-john-crowley-video-interview>
As for best actress, if there is any justice it will go to Saoirse Ronan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/nov/04/brooklyn-saoirse-ronan-john-crowley-video-interview>
 for her wonderful performance in Brooklyn: a luminous, subtle, effortlessly 
unshowy piece of work — althoughBrie Larson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/20/room-wins-toronto-film-festivals-peoples-choice-award-tiff>
, Cate Blanchett, Alicia Vikander and Maggie Smith are all in their ways, 
worthy contenders. As far as the men go, this could beLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/31/leonardo-dicaprio-actor-crush-bim-adewunmi>
’s year: he was tremendous in The Revenant, althoughMichael Fassbender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/steve-jobs-review-apple-co-founder-danny-boyle-michael-fassbender-aaron-sorkin>
’s more obviously polished and accomplished portrayal of Steve Jobs might pinch 
it.


For adapted screenplay, I should like to see Phyllis Nagy win for her masterly 
version of Patricia Highsmith’s original novel The Price of Salt, later renamed 
Carol. Quentin Tarantino should surely win best original screenplay forThe 
Hateful Eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/07/the-hateful-eight-review-tarantino-triumphs-with-a-western-of-wonder>
 and again it is odd that Tarantino does not feature in the best director list. 
Ennio Morricone’s fascinating score for The Hateful Eight has a well-merited 
nod.

Asif Kapadia’s remarkable Amy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/16/amy-review-asif-kapadias-amy-winehouse-film-is-a-tragic-masterpiece>
, a passionate, intimate study of Amy Winehouse, quite rightly has nominations 
for documentary and best British film. I certainly wouldn’t want to bet against 
him getting the first of these.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Fex-machina-exclusive-clip-oscar-isaac-domhnall-gleeson-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418313461684%2FFace-to-face-...-Alicia-V-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex%20Machina%3A%20watch%20a%20clip%20of%20Oscar%20Isaac%20and%20Domhnall%20Gleeson%20in%20Alex%20Garland's%20sci-fi%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Fex-machina-exclusive-clip-oscar-isaac-domhnall-gleeson-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex%20Machina%3A%20watch%20a%20clip%20of%20Oscar%20Isaac%20and%20Domhnall%20Gleeson%20in%20Alex%20Garland%27s%20sci-fi%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Fex-machina-exclusive-clip-oscar-isaac-domhnall-gleeson-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418313461684%2FFace-to-face-...-Alicia-V-014.jpg>
Ex Machina: watch a clip of Oscar Isaac and Domhnall Gleeson in Alex Garland’s 
sci-fi thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/dec/12/ex-machina-exclusive-clip-oscar-isaac-domhnall-gleeson-video>
From the outstanding British debut nominations, the obvious frontrunner is 
Alex Garland’s dazzlingly assuredsci-fi thriller Ex Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/25/ex-machina-review-mark-kermode-alex-garland-vikander>
 (which has four other nominations) with Alicia Vikander as the eerily 
self-aware AI-bot whose thoughts and feelings may be entirely genuine. Garland 
himself is hardly a newcomer to the industry having long established himself as 
a writer, but this debut as a director has had everyone talking since the film 
came out.

There is also Sean McAllister’s A Syrian Love Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/a-syrian-love-story-review-refugees>
, his wrenchingly powerful study of Syrian refugees, and also The Survivalist 
by Stephen Fingleton, the much admired post-apocalyptic story set in Northern 
Ireland, slated for release later next month. Another very much admired but 
perhaps not very hyped movie on this nomination list is Naji Abu Nowar’sTheeb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/theeb-review-bedouin-boy-in-the-fog-of-war>
, a classic action adventure set in the Middle East in 1916, in the manner of 
David Lean. (It also has a best foreign language film nomination.) There is 
also Debbie Tucker Green’s tremendous lo-fi dramaSecond Coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/second-coming-review-idris-elba-delivers-virgin-birth-mystery>
, starring Idris Elba and Nadine Marshall, a mysterious yet convincing 
naturalist drama about what would happen to a couple when the woman appears to 
have become pregnant without sex. For what it’s worth, it is my favourite from 
this particular nomination category.

So this Bafta list is the usual mix of unexceptionable tributes, obtuse 
omissions, and decent pats-on-the-back for underdogs. Right now I’m guessing 
Todd Haynes for best director, Bridge of Spies for best film with Saiorse Ronan 
andLeonardo DiCaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> up on 
stage for best actress and best actor.
 