


Bangladesh’s security forces have arrested three suspected Islamist militants 
over the murders of two prominent secular bloggers, including the alleged “main 
planner”, who the police say is a British citizen of Bangladeshi origin.

The Rapid Action Battalion, a paramilitary police unit, said it had arrested 
Touhidur Rahman, 58, and two other “active members” ofAnsarullah Bangla Team, 
which was banned in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/28/bangladeshi-blogger-ananya-azad-named-hitlist>
 over aseries of killings of bloggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/two-suspected-islamists-arrested-over-killing-of-secular-bangladesh-blogger>
.

The RAB said Rahman was the mastermind and financier of the attacks on 
bloggers Avijit Roy and Ananta Bijoy Das, who were killed earlier this year.

The suspects were arrested on Monday night in raids in Dhaka, Bangladesh’s 
capital, and appeared with authorities at a news briefing on Tuesday.

Mahmud Khan, the head of the RAB’s media wing, said another suspect who was 
arrested, Sadek Ali, acted as a bridge to communicate with Jasim Rahmani, the 
alleged head of Ansarullah Bangla Team. Ali, 28, became involved with Rahmani 
while working as a printing-press worker, Khan said.


Rahmani is currently in jail awaiting trial in the murder of another blogger, 
Ahmed Rajib Haider, in Dhaka in 2013.

Khan said the third suspect, 35-year-old Aminul Mollick, was a broker at a 
passport office and helped members of the group make fake passports so that 
they could travel abroad if necessary.

 The RAB did not allow the detainees to talk to reporters at the news briefing.

Khan said Rahman, 58, is an information technology expert and returned to 
Bangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> from the UK in either 
2011 or 2012. He then got in touch with Rahmani, who inspired him to work for 
the group.

“He is the main planner of all the recent killings of the bloggers,” Khan said.

During interrogation after their arrests, Khan said, the men admitted that a 
team of four or five took part in the killing of Roy, a Bangladesh-born US 
citizen. The same team was involved in the attack on Das, Khan said.

Four secular bloggers have been hacked to death in Bangladesh since the start 
of the year, including Roy and Das.

Roy, a US citizen who was born in Bangladesh, was murdered in February by a 
gang wielding machetes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/american-atheist-blogger-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
 in an attack in Dhaka.

Das, 33, was killed in similar fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/may/13/another-secular-blogger-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
 when he was on his way to work at a bank in the north-eastern city of Sylhet 
on 13 May.

A spokeswoman for the UK Foreign Office said: “We are aware of reports that a 
British national has been arrested in Bangladesh and are seeking clarification 
from the authorities. We stand ready to provided consular assistance.”
 