
Police in Bangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> have 
charged five suspected Islamic extremists with the murder of an atheist 
blogger, one of four secular writers hacked to death in the south Asian state 
this year.


 Washiqur Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/blogger-hacked-death-bangladesh-dhaka>
, 27, who wrote under a pen name on Facebook and repeatedly criticised 
religious conservatives, was killed near his home in the capital, Dhaka, in 
March.

 Police brought the charges – the first in any of the four murders this year – 
in a Dhaka magistrates court on Tuesday, which will now decide whether to open 
a trial or order further investigations.

 Authorities in Bangladesh have been under international pressure to 
demonstrate their commitment to protect free speech in the poor but fast 
developing Muslim-majority country.

Bangladesh blogger becomes second to be murdered in a month
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/blogger-hacked-death-bangladesh-dhaka>
 Police have been criticised for the slow pace of investigations 
<http://www.dhakatribune.com/crime/2015/aug/11/blogger-murder-probes-sluggish> 
into the killings.

Muntashirul Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, a Dhaka police 
spokesman, told Agence France-Presse: “We’ve submitted a charge sheet against 
five people for the murder of blogger Washiqur Rahman. The five were charged 
with murder.

 “They include an organiser of the Ansarullah Bangla Team (ABT) and four 
others who are its supporters,” he said, referring to a banned local militant 
Islamist group, which police have blamed in all four murders.

 The group has been linked to al-Qaida in South Asia, a local affiliate 
launched by the extremist organisation about a year ago.

 Two of the suspects in the killing of Rahman are students at a religious 
seminary. They were tackled at the scene of the attack by local transgender 
people – known as hijras in the subcontinent– as they tried to flee and held 
until police arrested the suspects.

Rahman’s death came just weeks after a Bangladesh-born American atheist 
blogger was murdered in Dhaka by machete-wielding attackers.

Saiful Islam, the additional deputy police commissioner, said: “The organiser 
of ABT, Hasibur Rahman, also known as Abdullah, recruited the other four and 
trained them for nearly three months for the specific purpose of murdering 
Washiqur.

 “They rented a room in Dhaka’s Jatrabari neighbourhood for this purpose and 
carried out reconnaissance on Rahman for two days before the murder,” he said, 
adding that three of the alleged killers were arrested by police, while 
Abdullah had absconded and the fifth was still at large.

In August, police arrested seven suspected Islamists, including a British 
citizen of Bangladeshi origin, for the murder of two other atheist bloggers.

The most recent victim was Niloy Chakrabarti, also known as Niladri 
Chattopadhyay,who was murdered with machetes  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/07/machete-gang-kills-secular-bangladeshi-blogger-niloy-chakrabarti>
after a gang broke into his flat in Dhaka.

Chakrabati had told police of threats against him and requested protection 
weeks before he died.

 The murder in February of another Bangladeshi-born US citizen, Avijit Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/american-atheist-blogger-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
, a science writer and blog moderator, prompted outrage around the world.

More than 150 writers, including Margaret Atwood, Salman Rushdie, Yann Martel 
and Colm Tóibín,signed a letter condemning the series of fatal attacks  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/22/margaret-atwood-salman-rushdie-protest-impunity-of-bangladesh-bloggers-killers>
and calling on the country’s government “to ensure that the tragic events … are 
not repeated”.


 All victims had been active on social media, criticising the extremist Muslim 
ideologies that have gained strength in officially secular Bangladesh in recent 
years or arguing in favour of progressive causes.
 