
The controversy over bankers' bonuses will be aired before the Treasury select 
committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_committees/treasury_committee.cfm> next 
week when the bosses of the three banks in which the taxpayer has major stakes 
will give evidence in what is expected to be a robust session.

The committee, chaired by Labour MP John McFall, is using its first meeting of 
2010 to summon Stephen Hester, chief executive ofRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, Gary Hoffman, 
chief executive of Northern Rock and Eric Daniels, chief executive of Lloyds 
Banking Group, as part of its ongoing work on the banking crisis.

At the session on Tuesday the committee intends to cover remuneration 
policies, lending to small business and consumers, and the timescale for sales 
of the taxpayer's 84% stake in RBS, 43% in Lloyds andNorthern Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/northern-rock>, which was nationalised in 
February 2007.

The issue of pay is most controversial at RBS, which has been forced to hand a 
power of veto to UK Financial Investments, the body which controls the taxpayer 
stakes in the banks, over any bonuses it wants to award to its investment 
bankers.

The move has caused some frustration at RBS and prompted Hester to complain 
about the politicisation of the bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/dec/15/rbs-bank-bonuses>. Hester is 
being summoned to appear before the committee at a time when his own pay deal 
is under scrutiny following the bank's admission that it intends to review its 
long-term incentive plans for directors.

MPs on the committee are also keen to establish if small businesses are being 
starved of credit during the recession and could be told by RBS and Lloyds that 
they will miss the targets for lending they have been set by Treasury in return 
for taxpayer funds.

The banks insist they are willing to lend to businesses but that demand is low 
and more companies are repaying loans than taking out new ones. RBS has 
promised to lend £16bn in return for joining theasset protection scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/dec/07/royal-bank-of-scotland-asset-protection>
 which is insuring £280bn of its most troublesome assets, while Lloyds needs to 
lend £9bn.

The committee has summoned the bankers to appear in the past and wrongfooted 
some of them. In February last year, Daniels caused some controversy when he 
appeared to imply that his £1m salary was "relatively modest" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/feb/12/banking-executive-pay-bonuses>
.

The committee also extracted an apology from Hester's predecessor Sir Fred 
Goodwin for the crisis at RBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/feb/10/bankers-apologise-to-mps>, as 
well from the two figures, Lord Stevenson and Andy Hornby, who were at the helm 
of HBOS when it was rescued by Lloyds at the height of the banking crisis.
 