
Bankers to the two brewing giants SABMiller and Anheuser-Busch InBev, which 
have just agreed the third largest takeover deal in corporate history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/sabmiller-agrees-ab-inbev-takeover-68bn>
, are set to share in a fees bonanza of up to $235m (£152m), according to 
estimates from Freeman Consulting Services, a New York-based group.

SABMiller agrees AB Inbev takeover deal of £68bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/sabmiller-agrees-ab-inbev-takeover-68bn>
Freeman estimates that the advisers to SABMiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller>, which achieved a valuation of 
$104bn after rejecting four informal offers, will share up to $120m.

SABMiller’s advisers were led by Robey Warshaw, a boutique bank employing just 
nine bankers, whose discreet London office was used for some of the key 
meetings, including a final one between the chairmen of both companies on 
Monday.

Robey Warshaw’s Simon Robey, a former senior banker at Morgan Stanley, played 
the lead role in the discussions with the SABMiller board, which is chaired by 
Jan du Plessis. The two men had worked together at the mining giant Rio Tinto, 
which rebuffed a takeover attempt by Glencore.

The breakdown of fees has not yet been decided but bankers said they would not 
be surprised if Robey Warshaw received a fee of between £20m and £30m, a 
sizeable sum to share between its nine bankers. The firm earned £23.9m in the 
18 months to March 2015, a period in which it advised AstraZeneca to fight off 
a bid from the US pharmaceutical group Pfizer.

Robey Warshaw, which operates from a Georgian townhouse in St James’s, central 
London, is also set to share with Goldman Sachs fees of $90m for its role as an 
adviser to the gas company BG Group,which has agreed to a £47bn buyout by Shell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/08/shell-bg-group-47bn-takeover-oil-industry>
.

The other advisers included JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, law firm 
Linklaters and PR agency Finsbury. Those who were involved in the board 
discussions said that Finsbury’s founder, Roland Rudd, a veteran of takeover 
battles, played a major role in advising the SABMiller board, which was split 
on whether to accept earlier bids fromAB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> after major shareholder 
Altria agreed to to the deal.

Advisers to SABMiller risked not being paid at all if AB InBev had decided to 
walk away after any of the four rejections. However, banking experts said 
SABMiller would almost certainly have paid out significant fees even if the 
deal had not gone ahead.

The AB InBev team, which Freeman estimates could earn between $95m and $115m 
in fees, was led by Lazard and Deutsche, with Brunswick as the PR firm. 
Freshfields acted as legal advisers.

The bank advisers will also scoop up a further bonanza now the takeoever is 
agreed, with AB InBev needing to raise funds to pay for the deal. They will 
also work on plans to sell SABMiller’s US interests for between $10bn and $12bn 
to allay competition concerns, and to deal with any competition concerns the 
combined group has in China.
 