
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is to buy £10bn of 
bonds issued by private companies, including Apple and other overseas 
corporations, as it begins a dramatic expansion of its quantitative easing 
programme.

But the Bank has been accused of handing taxpayer cash to foreign corporations 
with little connection to the UK, which may simply hand the money back to 
shareholders.

Until now, QE, designed to boost the economy by lowering interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/05/quantitative-easing-explained>
, has focused on purchasing and, in effect, cancelling UK government bonds, 
known as gilts. The Bank said earlier this year, however, that it would expand 
its asset purchases to £10bn ofbonds issued by private companies 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/apf/corporatebond/default.aspx>, 
as long as they were UK based, or overseas corporations with a major UK 
presence which were benefiting the British economy.


When the list of eligible companies 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/apf/corporatebondpurchases/default.aspx>
 was published on Monday, one major bond dealer said he was astonished at the 
names included.

Verizon, a US cell phone network, is on the list, as is another big US 
telecoms company, AT&T, despite both firms arguably having minimal operations 
in the UK.

While most bonds are issued by companies so they can invest in their 
businesses, some US corporations have recently used the bond markets to raise 
cash simply to hand to shareholders as dividends, or to use it to buy shares in 
their own company, thus pushing up the share price artificially.

“A lot of US corporates have been issuing bonds to finance share buybacks and 
dividends to shareholders. There can be absolutely no guarantee that the funds 
raised will be used to invest in the UK,” one senior bond dealer said, on 
condition of anonymity.

The Bank has said it will only buy the bonds of companies “making a material 
contribution to the UK economy”.

It defines these companies as those with “significant employment in the UK 
<https://mail.google.com/_/scs/mail-static/_/js/k=gmail.main.en_GB.28wWdTBVf-U.O/m=m_i,t/am=OosHBvD_7_3BuIZRQFf6SoV53z9886nskAu8_jsREIWsCvi_2f8D-D3Qi7dYAQ/rt=h/d=1/rs=AHGWq9BLygcZ3DxeY8YOLIpiIcoovp8ZuQ>
 or with their headquarters in the UK ... but the Bank will also consider 
whether the company generates significant revenues in the UK, serves a large 
number of customers in the UK or has a number of operating sites in the UK.”

It said its asset purchase facility corporate bond purchase scheme (CBPS) 
would stimulate the economy by lowering the yields on corporate bonds, “thereby 
reducing the cost of borrowing for companies; by triggering portfolio 
rebalancing into riskier assets by sellers of assets; and by stimulating new 
issuance of corporate bonds”.

Bonds <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bonds> with a face value of about 
£110bn will be eligible for buying by the Bank, although the central bank is 
only planning to buy £10bn of these bonds.

However, the senior trader said: “I was incensed when I saw the list and how 
far it appears to deviate from the aim of the scheme. There are huge 
inconsistencies in the names included.Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> is on the list, as is Wal-Mart, 
but at least they own Asda. Manchester airport is on the list, but Gatwick 
airport is not.”

“If a company name is on that list, it will bring it substantial benefits when 
issuing new bonds and securing new funding,” he added.

The trader accused other investment banks of gaming the system to their own 
benefit. “My motivation in trying to expose this is that I am a British 
taxpayer and I am not happy about seeing the public purse being used to the 
advantage of certain investment banks.”

The Bank of England declined to comment. 

List of companies eligible for BoE bond-buying scheme 

Amgen

Anglian Water

AP Mollier-Maersk

Apple

AT&T

BAE Systems


BASF


BAT International

BG Energy Capital

Birmingham Airport

BMW

Bouygues

BP

BT

Cargill

Centrica

CIE De Saint-Gobain

Company Group

Daily Mail & General Trust

Daimler

Deutsche Bahn

Deutsche Telekom

Dong Energy

E.ON

Eastern Power

EE 

Electricite De France (EDF)

Electricity North West

Engie

Eversholt

Experian

FirstGroup

GE

GSK


Great Rolling Stock

Hammerson

Hutchison Whampoa

IBM

Imperial Brands

Intercontinental Hotels

Linde

London Power

LVMH

Manchester Airports Group

M&S

McDonald’s


Mondelez

Motability Operations

National Express

National Grid

Nestlé

Next

Northern Ireland Electricity

Northern Powergrid

Northumbrian Water

PACCAR

Pepsico 

Pfizer

P&G


Rio Tinto

Roche

Rolls-Royce

SGN

Scottish Power

Segro

Severn Trent Water

Shell

Siemens

Sky 

UK Power Networks

South East Water

SSE

Suez 

Tate & Lyle

Thames Water

Total

Toyota

Transport for London

Unilever

UPS

United Utilities

Vattenfall

Veolia

Verizon

Vodafone

Wales & West Utilities

Walmart

Wellcome Trust

Wessex Water

Western Power Distribution

Yorkshire Water
 