
President Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> will 
once again stop short of calling the 1915 massacre of Armenians a genocide, 
prompting anger and disappointment from those who have been pushing him to 
fulfill a campaign promise and use the politically fraught term on the 100th 
anniversary of the killings this week.

Officials decided against it after opposition from some at the State 
Department and the Pentagon.

After more than a week of internal debate, top administration officials 
discussed the final decision with Armenian-American leaders Tuesday before 
making it public.

The White House said the officials pledged that the US would use Friday’s 
centennial anniversary “to urge a full, frank and just acknowledgement of the 
facts”.

Turkey must end its 100 years of genocide denial | Peter Balakian
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/21/turkey-100-years-genocide-denial-armenia>
That language echoed the administration’s five previous statements on the 
anniversary, as well as those of previous administrations. But it did not use 
the word “genocide,” as many had hoped.

Historians estimate up to 1.5 million Armenians were killed by Ottoman Turks, 
an event widely viewed by scholars as genocide.Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, however, denies the deaths 
constituted genocide and says the death toll has been inflated.

As a senator and presidential candidate, Obama did describe the killings of 
Armenians as genocide and said the US government had a responsibility to 
recognise it as such.

As a candidate in January 2008, Obama had pledged to recognize the genocide 
and at least one of his campaign surrogates, the current US ambassador to the 
United Nations, Samantha Power, recorded a nearly five-minute video at the time 
imploring Armenian-Americans to vote for Obama precisely because he would keep 
his word on the issue.

But, Obama has never used that description since taking office, mainly out of 
deference to Turkey, a key US partner andNato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> ally, which is fiercely opposed to the 
genocide label.

Tuesday’s announcement, accompanied by word that the treasury secretary, Jacob 
Lew, will attend a ceremony in Armenia on Friday to mark the anniversary, was 
made shortly after the secretary of state, John Kerry, met with Turkey’s 
foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, in Washington.

In brief comments to reporters at the State Department, neither Kerry nor 
Cavusoglu mentioned Armenia or the upcoming 24 April anniversary.

The White House later said its national security adviser, Susan Rice, met with 
Cavusoglu and encouraged him to take “concrete steps to improve relations with 
Armenia and to facilitate an open and frank dialogue in Turkey about the 1915 
atrocities.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fbarack-obama-will-not-label-1915-massacre-of-armenians-a-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86193b3f96cb215b0a5af71478964868e8272e5d%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20will%20not%20label%201915%20massacre%20of%20Armenians%20a%20genocide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fbarack-obama-will-not-label-1915-massacre-of-armenians-a-genocide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20will%20not%20label%201915%20massacre%20of%20Armenians%20a%20genocide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fbarack-obama-will-not-label-1915-massacre-of-armenians-a-genocide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86193b3f96cb215b0a5af71478964868e8272e5d%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 People mourn at the Armenian Genocide Memorial Museum in Yerevan, Armenia on 
Tuesday. Photograph: David Mdzinarishvili/Reuters 
Several US officials said there had been a sharp internal debate over whether 
to use the 100-year anniversary to call the killings “genocide” and make good 
on the president’s campaign promise, particularly after Pope Francis used the 
term earlier this month.

That comment by the pope prompted an angry response from Turkey, which 
recalled its ambassador to the Vatican over the matter. Several European 
governments and parliaments are also expected to use the word in discussions of 
the events 100 years ago.

Some at the State Department, particularly those who deal directly with Turkey 
and its neighbours in the Middle East, as well as at the Pentagon, argued 
against using the word, according to the officials who spoke on condition of 
anonymity.

They said the damage it would cause to US relations with Turkey at a critical 
time, notably when Washington needs Ankara’s help in fighting the Islamic State 
group in Syria and Iraq, would far outweigh the immediate benefits. The safety 
of US diplomats and troops in Turkey was also a consideration, the officials 
said.

On the other side, officials at the White House and State Department who deal 
more directly with human rights issues, including Power, wanted the president 
to use the word genocide, the officials said. Asked if there was an internal 
rift on the issue, one senior official involved in the discussion simply said 
“yes”.

That official noted that alienating the Turks at this point in Obama’s 
presidency would mean accepting that the US investment in good relations with 
the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, had failed. That relationship has 
been fraught with difficulty in recent years over human rights concerns, among 
other issues.

Another senior US official acknowledged the decision would be a disappointment 
to some who were “hoping to hear different language this year” and said the 
administration understood that perspective. But, the official also said the 
administration believed its approach is right “both for acknowledging the past, 
and for our ability to work with regional partners to save lives in the 
present.”

Negative reaction to the announcement was intense from both the 
Armenian-American community and members of Congress who have championed the 
Armenian cause.
 