
Twenty six and counting. Barcelona’s exit from the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/13/atletico-madrid-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 on Wednesday night at the hands of Atlético Madrid means Milan’s victory over 
Benfica in May 1990, thanks to a solitary goal from Frank Rijkaard, was the 
last time the reigning European champions managed to retain the trophy 
affectionately known in some quarters as ‘Old Big Ears’.

Less than a month ago, it seemed unthinkable that Luis Enrique’s side would 
not at least be in contention to break the vicious cycle that has enveloped the 
holders since that balmy night in Vienna almost a quarter of a century ago. 
Arsenalhad just been dispatched 5-1 on aggregate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/16/barcelona-v-arsenal-champions-league-last-16-live>
 as Barça’s feted El Tridente forward line of Lionel Messi, Luis Suárez and 
Neymar each scored at the Camp Nou. Surely this was the year the curse would 
finally end?

Having thrashed the 1986 champions Steaua Bucharest the previous year (perhaps 
fittingly in a final held at Barcelona’s home stadium), Milan’s victory in 1990 
under Arrigo Sacchi was hardly a surprise. A team boasting the talents of the 
Dutch trio Rijkaard, Marco Van Basten and Ruud Gullit and a commanding defence 
comprising Mauro Tassotti, Franco Baresi, Alessandro Costacurta and Paolo 
Maldini were heavy favourites to join the long list of clubs to have won 
back-to-back European titles before then.

In the old days, it was a common occurrence. Real Madrid (five), Benfica 
(two), Internazionale (two), Ajax (three),Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> (three), Liverpool (two), 
Nottingham Forest (two) had all been there before Milan. But after Sacchi’s 
side, who were also beaten to the Serie A title the previous season by Diego 
Maradona’s Napoli, were eliminated in the quarter-finals 4-1 on aggregate by 
Marseille, the sequence was broken. The French side ended up reaching the 
final, only to lose on penalties against Red Star Belgrade in Bari.

Twelve months later, after the Yugoslavs were eliminated at the inaugural 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
quarter-final group stage, Barcelona claimed their first European title after 
beating Sampdoria at Wembley. But their attempts to retain the trophy the 
following season were ended in the second round against CSKA Moscow, meaning 
they didn’t even qualify for the group stage. Marseille went on to beat Milan 
in the final thanks to Basile Boli’s winning goal but were thrown out of the 
following season’s competition after president Bernard Tapie was found guilty 
of bribing the French club Valenciennes FC into throwing a league game.

Barcelona find little sympathy from world press after Atlético defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/barcelona-press-reaction-atletico-madrid-champions-league>
That left the way clear for Milan to claim a third title in just five seasons 
by thrashingBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> 4-0 in 
Athens. Fabio Capello’s side made it all the way to the final in Vienna the 
next year but were shocked by Patrick Kluivert’s winner for Louis van Gaal’s 
young Ajax team, thus beginning a run of near misses over the next three 
seasons that saw the previous year’s winners defeated at the final hurdle. 
First Ajax were unable to repeat their heroics, losing out on penalties against 
Juventus before Borussia Dortmund shocked the Italian giants with a 3-1 victory 
in the final in Munich.

Dortmund made it to the semi-final in 1998 but were beaten by Real Madrid, who 
went on to defeat Juve in the final, only to be dumped out of the 1999 edition 
by an Andrei Shevchenko-inspired Dynamo Kyiv. Manchester United’s attempts to 
retain the trophy in the first edition of the new century also fell flat, after
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> beat them in the 
quarter-finals on their way to recording their eighth title in 2000.

Real took over the mantle of champions after beating Valencia in the final but 
were eliminated by Bayern in the last four the next year. However, their hopes 
of emulating the 1974-76 winning teams were dashed by Real the following season 
in the quarter-finals. They went on to win another crown before a 4-3 defeat on 
aggregate against Juventus in the last four in 2003 set up an all-Italian 
final, withMilan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> eventually 
triumphing on penalties.

The holders then failed to get anywhere near retaining their title for the 
next five seasons as Milan (twice), Porto Liverpool, and Barcelona were 
eliminated at the quarter-final stage or worse. After their victory against 
Chelsea in the all-English final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/dec/30/manchester-united-chelsea-champions-league-moscow>
 in 2008, Manchester United were on the brink of making history when they met 
Barcelona in the final in Rome 12 months later. But the Catalans – beginning a 
spell of dominance under Pep Guardiola – won 2-0.

José Mourinho’s Internazionale stopped Barça in the semi-finals the following 
season yet the Portuguese’s departure to join Real Madrid saw the Italians 
beaten by Schalke in the last eight. Barcelona were again the main 
beneficiaries as they defeated United in the final once more but Chelsea’s 
shock victory in the 2012 semi-final ended hopes of consecutive titles. Within 
months, they had become the first team to leave the competition as title 
holders, with Bayern gaining revenge in 2013 for losing the final in their home 
stadium 12 months earlier by defeating Dortmund to claim the trophy. They were 
eliminated the following season in the semi-finals by the eventual winners Real 
Madrid and, incredibly, the cycle was repeated yet again 12 months later as 
Juventus made it to the final thanks to a 3-2 aggregate win, only to lose out 
in the final against Barcelona.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fbarcelona-elimination-champions-league-holders-curse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F312091bfc2e161e559856e9f1df3854070057580%2F0_26_2848_1708%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20elimination%20ensures%20holders%E2%80%99%20curse%20continues%20in%20Champions%20League%20%7C%20Ed%20Aarons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fbarcelona-elimination-champions-league-holders-curse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20elimination%20ensures%20holders%E2%80%99%20curse%20continues%20in%20Champions%20League%20%7C%20Ed%20Aarons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fbarcelona-elimination-champions-league-holders-curse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F312091bfc2e161e559856e9f1df3854070057580%2F0_26_2848_1708%2F2848.jpg>
 Milan’s victory over Benfica in May 1990 remains the last time a team has 
defended the European Cup. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
“I think it’s difficult to win the Champions League because it is more and 
more competitive compared to the past,” Carlo Ancelotti, who was a midfielder 
in the 1989 and 1990 Milan sides and has also won the competition three times 
as a manager,told Goal.com 
<http://www.goal.com/en-sg/news/3907/champions-league/2016/04/14/22349242/barcelona-fall-to-champions-league-curse-ancelotti-on-why>
 after Barcelona’s elimination on Wednesday.

“When we won it in 1989 and 1990 there were not a lot of games to reach the 
final and to win, and not a lot of teams. In the past, there was only one team 
for each country who could play in the Champions League and now there are three 
or four teams from each country. Because of this, it is more competitive and 
more difficult to win it.”

If even a side hailed by some as the greatest to grace a football pitch 
couldn’t do it, we may be waiting a long time.

European Cup holders – how they have fared since 1990

Finalists (4): Milan 1995, Ajax 1996, Juventus 1997, Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> 2009.

Semi-finalists (8): Borussia Dortmund 1998, Real Madrid 2001, Real Madrid 
2003, Milan 2004, Barcelona 2010, Barcelona 2012, Bayern Munich 2014, Real 
Madrid 2015.

Quarter-finalists (7): Milan 1991, Red Star 1992, Real Madrid 1999, Manchester 
United 2000, Bayern Munich 2002, Internazionale 2011, Barcelona 2016.

Last 16 (5): Barcelona 1993, Porto 2005, Liverpool 2006, Barcelona 2007, Milan 
2008.

Group stages (1): Chelsea 2013.

Disqualified (1): Marseille 1994.
 