
You better stop, better run away
You better listen to what I have to say
I’ll keep you hanging on the line
With just one kiss I will blow your mind

It seemed so innocent back then, fun – exciting. 

Long before we’d become heartily sick of the World’s Smuggest Man, Simon 
Cowell, long before a generation of girl groups began slavishly following the 
Girls Aloud template to chart success, there was Bardot.

It’s hard to believe now, but when the first series of Australian Popstars 
featuring Bardot exploded across our scenes in early 2000 – and brought with it 
all the attendant hyperbole and controversy (did Chantelle really get thrown 
off the series for stealing from her fellow housemates?) – even Big Brother 
didn’t exist.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnPnZ9SLb2EM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnPnZ9SLb2EM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnPnZ9SLb2EM&media=>
In many ways, Bardot – Chantelle Barry (soon replaced by Newcastle singer 
Tiffani Wood), Belinda Chapple, Sophie Monk, Sally Polihronas and Katie 
Underwood – were the start of the reality TV craze. If the Aussies hadn’t 
proven themselves so enthusiastic about the private lives of a bunch of women 
being moulded into future chart stars, then Idol, and X Factor, and Talent, and 
Kelly Clarkson, and all the rest of them might never have existed. Not bad for 
a one-off Channel Seven series aimed at under-12 girls (presumably the same 
girls who were considered the core Spice Girls audience).

The individual “personalities” were in place the moment the group had been 
formed. As Chapple told me at the time, Katie is “kooky”, Sally is “maternal”, 
Sophie is “very genuine”, Chantelle is “very quiet”, and “I’m hyper-active.” 
Kooky Bardot, Maternal Bardot, Genuine Bardot, Quiet Bardot and Hyper-Active 
Bardot. Hmm. Needs work, doesn’t it?

Yes, there had been one series of Popstars before: in New Zealand, where the 
charming multicultural TrueBliss <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-UsXJoiazZA> 
emerged winners – but it was the runaway success of Bardot here in Australia 
(where Popstars even trumped Friends to reach the coveted most watched TV 
program spot) that proved the franchise had staying power. As of date, the 
format has been sold to more than 50 countries.

The song that took Bardot to the top – Poison – is a cracker. Owing more than 
a little to the Spice Girls formula of a few years earlier (in particular, the 
sensual slide and give-and-take ofSay You’ll Be There 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ro0FW9Qt-4>), the mood of the lyrics is 
unapologetically assertive, warning off unfaithful suitors. There’s something 
about it too – maybe its sinuous grace, maybe the stutter and teasing hidden 
menace of the percussion – that somehow recalls INXS’s finer chart forays. 
Maybe it’s the women’s alluring confidence as they slink and sashay their way 
in and out of sight.

The members of Bardot sing their lines separately before joining together and 
intertwining on the chorus in true Spice Girls fashion. And they prove their 
vocal chops – at one point Underwood manages to fit in eight separate notes as 
she rolls her tongue around the word “blind”.


Then there’s the ironic framing of the video itself: Bardot, portrayed as 
manufactured plastic dolls, in their own tiny rooms, being manipulated by an 
outside producer (rather like ‘N Sync’sBye Bye Bye 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eo-KmOd3i7s>) – meanwhile in “real life” they 
were manufactured plastic singers, being manipulated by show producers.

(And did the producers really intend for Underwood to be pictured pissing on 
her robot dog in that infamous press shot?)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbardot-poison-idol-x-factor-popstars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410923108676%2Ff7340518-243d-4e35-aaf2-3da21246f455-717x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bardot%20%E2%80%93%20Poison%3A%20before%20Idol%20and%20X%20Factor%2C%20there%20was%20Popstars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbardot-poison-idol-x-factor-popstars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bardot%20%E2%80%93%20Poison%3A%20before%20Idol%20and%20X%20Factor%2C%20there%20was%20Popstars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F17%2Fbardot-poison-idol-x-factor-popstars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410923108676%2Ff7340518-243d-4e35-aaf2-3da21246f455-717x720.jpeg>
 Bardot: pity the robot dog. Photograph: Supplied 
Girls Aloud may well have influenced everyone that came after, but the 
creation of Bardot directly inspired the creation of Girls Aloud (series two 
winners, 2002, ITV’s Popstars: The Rivals).

Reportedly, Bardot generated $30m from merchandise, records and concerts 
during their first six months. Once the 13-part TV series finished, however – 
and Seven stopped promoting the group – the bubble soon deflated. Bardot’s 
self-titled album and Poison may have entered the ARIA charts at #1, but the 
second single (I Should’ve Never Let You Go 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZP5yPWyAWYc> – released in the final week of 
Popstars) andthird <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85bozG0aFck> failed to live 
up to expectations.

By 2002 – following a second album that may or may not have been killer: no 
one heard it so it’s a moot point – the group had split. After two-and-a-half 
years, everyone had already forgotten them.

Where are they now?

• Chantelle Barry is an actress and in 2008 played Naomi Clark’s mate in 90210 
<http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/tv/fallen-aussie-star-in-90210/story-e6frfmyi-1111117312459>
, Nina.

• Most recently, Belinda Chapple directed the short-lived Sydney After Dark 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/entertainment/sydney-confidential/curtain-falls-on-sydney-after-dark-las-vegas-stage-show-axed-after-just-one-month/story-fni0cvc9-1227043056132>
 – a glitzy celebration of Australian culture and nightlife – in Las Vegas.

• Katie Underwood went through the obligatory celeb “my drug hell 
<http://www.womansday.com.au/celebrity/celebrity-headlines/2009/2/katie-underwood-exclusive-my-drug-hell/>
” year, and formed acorporate events and wedding band 
<http://katieunderwood.tv/>.

• Sophie Monk is currently a co-host on 2DayFM’s Breakfast Show 
<http://www.2dayfm.com.au/shows/2dayfm-breakfast/>. 

• Until recently Sally Polihronas <http://www.linkedin.com/in/sallyp> worked 
at Freemantle Media as a director and producer.

• Tiffani Wood <http://www.tiffaniwood.com.au/> is a voice coach living on the 
Gold Coast.
 