
The career of the actor Barrie Ingham, who has died aged 82, was so varied 
that you might have thought he had several incarnations: as an associate artist 
with theRoyal Shakespeare Company <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>, in 
British and Broadway musicals, and as the voice of the sleuth rodent Basil in 
Disney’s animated mystery movie The Great Mouse Detective (1986), tracking his 
archenemy, voiced by Vincent Price.

No one looked more like a leading man: Ingham was tall, handsome, ramrod 
straight – he served as an officer in the Royal Artillery during his national 
service – with a fine singing voice. Naturally gifted, he was equally adept in 
farcical sitcom or stylish high comedy.

He was born in Halifax, West Yorkshire, the only son of Harold Ingham and his 
wife, Irene (nee Bolton), who owned a furniture store in the town, and was 
educated at Heath grammar school, which, during the second world war, hosted 
the local amateurs, the Halifax Thespians. Barrie joined them as a teenager and 
remembered seeing, across the road from his bedroom, the bust of Shakespeare 
outside the new Halifax Playhouse, converted from a Wesleyan chapel, which 
opened in 1949.

After national service, he worked in the family business before making his 
professional debut in 1956 at the Pier Pavilion, Llan- dudno, in Arnold 
Ridley’s Beggar My Neighbour. He met the actor Tarne Phillips at the St Helens
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Royal on Merseyside, where 
they played romantic leads in Johnny Belinda, Rebecca and Jane Eyre; they 
married in 1957.

Ingham went on to play a season at the Library theatre in Manchester. He 
joined the Old Vic at the end of 1957 and played Fortinbras toJohn Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/john-neville>’s Hamlet; this was 
followed by increasingly important roles. So he was an ideal Claudio whenJohn 
Gielgud <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/may/22/news.obituaries> was 
invited to open the 1959 Broadway season with a revival of his celebrated Much 
Ado About Nothing – in which Gielgud played Benedick opposite Margaret Leighton 
as Beatrice.

Back in Britain in 1960, Ingham toured with Maggie Smith, Michael Bates and 
Michael Blakemore in Strip the Willow byBeverley Cross 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1998/03/30/arts/beverley-cross-66-playwright-and-librettist.html>
 (“an odd play,” said Blakemore, “derived from drawing-room comedy and Peter 
Ustinov”) and appeared inJohn Arden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/30/john-arden>’s The Happy Haven at 
the Royal Court, a comedy set in an old people’s home where the actors wore 
masks. Neither play was a success, but they illustrated the theatre of the day, 
on a tipping point between old and new.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fbarrie-ingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423759326367%2F05a4f760-57a9-4379-a0ce-901666418614-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barrie%20Ingham%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fbarrie-ingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barrie%20Ingham%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fbarrie-ingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423759326367%2F05a4f760-57a9-4379-a0ce-901666418614-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Barrie Ingham, right, as Sejanus with André Morell as Tiberius in the 1968 
television series The Caesars. Photograph: Rex/ITV 
In that decade of convulsive change, Ingham steered a course through the 
middle (though he did play, rather daringly, both Stavrogin in Dostoevsky’s The 
Possessed and Dionysus in The Bacchae of Euripides at the Mermaid theatre), 
appearing withHarry Secombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/apr/12/guardianobituaries1> in the 
musical Pickwick (1964) at the Saville and, at the same theatre two years 
later, as Clancy Pettinger in On the Level, a charming but soon to be obsolete 
type of musical, byRonald Millar 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/sport/spl/aberdeen/sir-ronald-millar-1.346802> 
(the playwright who later became a speechwriter forMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
) and Ron Grainer.

He was prominent in two fine TV series of the late 1960s, The Caesars and The 
Power Game – ancient and modern versions of the same thing , perhaps – and made 
a mark in films such as Gordon Flemyng’sDr Who and the Daleks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82962/dr-who-and-the-daleks> (1965) and 
Hammer’s A Challenge for Robin Hood (1967), in which he played the title role. 
Then he refocused and joined the RSC for four years (1967-71) in 
Stratford-upon-Avon and London. He played Leontes opposite Judi Dench in Trevor 
Nunn’s nursery all-white The Winter’s Tale, Brutus in Julius Caesar and Lord 
Foppington in The Relapse. With Dench and Donald Sinden, he appeared in two of 
the greatest productions of that era,John Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/feb/07/theatre.rsc>’s Twelfth Night (as 
Aguecheek) and Dion Boucicault’s London Assurance.

His musical theatre skills served the 1973 London premiere of Gypsy, in which 
he played Herbie the manager opposite first Angela Lansbury and then Dolores 
Gray, both sensational, at the Piccadilly. He was Smith’s husband in a short 
run of a not very funny comedy about sexually transmitted disease, Snap (the 
title Clap was deemed unsuitable), by Charles Laurence, at the Vaudeville in 
1974.

When he rejoined the RSC later in the same year, as the Duke “of dark corners” 
in Measure for Measure, he was made an associate artist of the company, but he 
only returned to the fold once thereafter, stealing the notices as Beverley 
Carlton, a brilliant send-up of Noël Coward, in an otherwise misfired 1989 
revival at the Barbican of the Broadway classic The Man Who Came to Dinner.

Three years before, at the National Theatre, he had appeared in David Hare’s 
The Bay at Nice (oppositeIrene Worth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/mar/12/guardianobituaries>) and as the 
wise narrator ofArthur Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/12/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
’s episodic Depression play The American Clock. But he was increasingly 
peripatetic, touring a solo show to Australia, making sitcoms in Los Angeles 
and appearing on Broadway as King Pellinore in a revival of Camelot, as Sir 
George Dillingham in Andrew Lloyd Webber’s Aspects of Love, and then for four 
years (1997-2001) as Sir Danvers Crew in a musical Jekyll and Hyde by Frank 
Wildhorn and Leslie Bricusse.

We lost sight of him – he undertook big American tours of Me and My Girl, 
Aspects of Love and Camelot – but he returned to the West End in Trevor Nunn’s 
glorious 2003 resuscitation of Cole Porter and PG Wodehouse’sAnything Goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/oct/08/theatre1>, and as a fruity old 
boyfriend ofMaureen Lipman’s dotty diva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/nov/03/theatre3> Florence Foster 
Jenkins in Peter Quilter’s Glorious! directed by Alan Strachan at the 
Birmingham Rep and the Duchess (2005).

Ingham latterly settled in Palm Springs, Florida, where he performed and 
lectured on Shakespeare.

He is survived by Tarne, and their four daughters, Catrin, Liane, Francesca 
and Mali, and eight grandchildren.
 