
When celebrities turn to fiction, they often find themselves mirroring their 
own lives, whether it is the Kardashian sisters with their story of “a trio of 
sibling celebrities”, Dollhouse, or Naomi Campbell, with her disastrously 
received supermodel novel, Swan. Star basketball playerKareem Abdul-Jabbar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2014/apr/16/photography-basketball>
 is taking a different approach with his fictional debut. As a longtime fan of 
Sherlock Holmes, Abdul-Jabbar is set to tell the story of the British 
detective’s mysterious older brother Mycroft.

The NBA all-time leading point scorer’s 
<http://www.nba.com/history/players/abduljabbar_bio.html> Mycroft Holmes, 
co-written with screenwriter and script consultant Anna Whitehouse, sees 
Mycroft working for the British Secretary of State for War. When his new 
fiancee Georgiana, who was raised in Trinidad, hears news of odd disappearances 
there – “strange, backwards-facing footprints on the sand; spirits enticing 
children to their deaths” – she panics and leaves for home. Mycroft and his 
best friend Cyrus Douglas, also from the Caribbean island, follow her.


Abdul-Jabbar, who has penned children’s books and non-fiction for adults, and 
studied English and history at UCLA, said he first encountered Sherlock Holmes 
when watching oldBasil Rathbone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2014/jan/13/sherlock-holmes-picture-from-the-past>
 films. He fell for the character immediately, and even claimed that the 
deductive skills of Arthur Conan Doyle’s creation even improved his basketball 
game.

Mark Gatiss: Peter Mandelson inspired Sherlock character Mycroft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/17/mark-gatiss-peter-mandelson-inspired-my-sherlock-character-mycroft>
“As an NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> rookie for the Milwaukee 
Bucks, I was given a set of Sherlock Holmes stories for my first road trip, and 
I was hooked,” he said. “I’d even find myself using Holmes’s power of 
observation to enhance my own game and exploit weaknesses in my opponents ... I 
was fascinated by Holmes’s ability to see clues where other people saw nothing. 
Certainly there had to be a way to apply his skill in a practical way to help 
give me an edge.”

When Abdul-Jabbar read Michael P Hodel and Sean M Wright’s “posthumous memoir” 
of Mycroft – Enter the Lion – he said he “realised more could be done with this 
‘older, smarter’ character and his window on to the highest levels of British 
government – at a time when Britain was the most powerful country in the 
world”. Conan Doyle allows Mycroft’s past to remain mysterious, although 
Sherlock does admit to Dr Watson inThe Greek Interpreter 
<http://etc.usf.edu/lit2go/40/the-memoirs-of-sherlock-holmes/581/adventure-9-the-greek-interpreter/>
 that “my brother Mycroft possesses [the faculty of observation and the 
peculiar facility for deduction] in a larger degree than I do”.

Sherlock Holmes: examining the evidence – in charts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/jun/29/sherlock-holmes-examining-the-evidence-in-charts>
“When I say, therefore, that Mycroft has better powers of observation than I, 
you may take it that I am speaking the exact and literal truth,” Sherlock tells 
Watson. “You wonder ... why it is that Mycroft does not use his powers for 
detective work. He is incapable of it ... I said that he was my superior in 
observation and deduction. If the art of the detective began and ended in 
reasoning from an armchair, my brother would be the greatest criminal agent 
that ever lived. But he has no ambition and no energy. He would not even go out 
of his way to verify his own solutions, and would rather be considered wrong 
than take the trouble to prove himself right.”

Titan Books said the tragedies that Mycroft would encounter in Abdul-Jabbar’s 
novel “are the seeds that will eventually turn him into the reclusive genius 
‘power’ behind the British government, and the founder of the famous Diogenes 
Club”.

Sherlock, who is seven years younger than Mycroft, will appear in the novel as 
a student at King’s College, “along with enticing hints about the ‘true state’ 
of the Holmes family – and the painful legacy that the brothers endure,” said 
the publisher. “Kareem’s insights into Mycroft’s character, his focus on the 
historical aspects of the novel, and his passion for writing impressed me from 
the start,” said Titan editor Steve Saffel. “This will be a unique addition to 
the Holmes universe, surprising and engaging the readers.”

Abdul-Jabbar’s first novel is the latest in a slew of recent television and 
literary appearances for Sherlock Holmes, from Anthony Horowitz continuing his 
adventures in The House of Silk andMoriarty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/10/anthony-horowitz-new-sherlock-holmes-book-moriarty>
 to Benedict Cumberbatch’sSherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/09/benedict-cumberbatch-martin-freeman-and-sherlocks-case-of-victorian-identity>
 television series.
 