
“I’d rather be in Afghanistan” - Jibril Adukwu

Like me, you’ve probably got plenty of problems with Saving Private Ryan. 
First off, it’s annoying how you’re supposed to care about the characters. Then 
there’s the fact that none of the Nazis can fly spaceships. Third, and perhaps 
most importantly, it’s a constant source of frustration that Saving Private 
Ryan isn’t more like the final tedious hour of the final tedious Matrix film.


Fortunately, for anyone who shares these concerns, there’s Battle: Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140806/battle>; the film that came out 
three years ago and made hundreds of millions of dollars despite nobody 
thinking about it or remembering it at all since about a week after it was 
released. Some aliens are invading Los Angeles, and it’s almost literally down 
to just Aaron Eckhart to stop them. If you like loud noises, early-stage motion 
sickness and films that appear to go on for several hours longer than they 
actually do, Battle: Los Angeles is the answer to all your prayers.


“That was some new John Wayne shit” - William Martinez

That opening section might have come off as slightly meanspirited. If that’s 
the case, I apologise. In actual fact, Battle: Los Angeles is quite an 
innovative little film. Rewatching it for this article, it’s clear that it has 
completely abandoned the traditional Hollywood three-act method of storytelling 
in favour of a bit where everyone mumbles, a bit where everyone screams, a bit 
where everyone cries and a bit where everyone whoops. And then it ends. It’s 
very clever, really. In a way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fbattle-los-angeles-alien-invasion-film-on-tv-recap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F4%2F1412410812965%2Ff5aff559-8f1c-4587-a5f2-1b17ed6d258c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battle%3A%20Los%20Angeles%20%E2%80%93%20everyone%20screams%2C%20everyone%20cries%2C%20everyone%20whoops%3A%20film%20on%20TV%20recap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fbattle-los-angeles-alien-invasion-film-on-tv-recap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battle%3A%20Los%20Angeles%20%E2%80%93%20everyone%20screams%2C%20everyone%20cries%2C%20everyone%20whoops%3A%20film%20on%20TV%20recap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Foct%2F04%2Fbattle-los-angeles-alien-invasion-film-on-tv-recap%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F4%2F1412410812965%2Ff5aff559-8f1c-4587-a5f2-1b17ed6d258c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: PR 
Also, there’s an argument for lauding the film’s experimental approach to 
volume equalisation, too. Not once is Battle: Los Angeles comfortable to listen 
to. Not once. The whole thing lurches from inaudibly muffled mumbling to 
full-on, all-out exploding screams over and over again. One minute you’re 
leaning forward, trying to lipread Aaron Eckhart’s latest witless monologue 
about valour, the next you’re cowering with your hands over your ears because a 
skyscraper’s blown up and fallen over and landed on Michelle Rodriguez’s leg. 
This isn’t something you got with, say, Remains of the Day.

“It’s OK to cry” - Michael Nantz

Which isn’t to say that Battle: Los Angeles doesn’t have brilliant characters, 
either. In its first eight minutes, before the aliens attack and all the actors 
immediately dissolve into a homogeneous, impossible-to-differentiate uniformed 
mass, the film goes to great pains to lay out just who these heroes are.Aaron 
Eckhart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart>, for example, is 
essentially Murtaugh from Lethal Weapon, except with a greater ability to know 
exactly what an unknown alien force is about to do without having any real 
knowledge or experience of their motives or technology.


Elsewhere, we meet the soldier who’s conveniently about to get married, the 
soldier who’s conveniently been delivered some troubling medical news, the 
soldier who sits around all day delivering important pieces of exposition to 
tiny gravestones for reasons that genuinely elude me. And then there’s the poor 
sap who appears to have accidentally wandered in from a raunchy 1980s college 
comedy, and just wants to lose his virginity before he’s blown to smithereens 
by an inscrutable alien army. And that’s all we need to know about them. Which 
is good, because you’re not going to watch Battle: Los Angeles for the 
well-drawn characters. You watch it because there’s nothing else on, and the 
remote control is all the way over there.


Notes

• Films that should not be confused with Battle: Los Angeles – 1) Skyline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/138950/skyline> (an almost identical 
film released around the same time as Battle: Los Angeles directed by two of 
Battle: Los Angeles’s visual effects coordinators), and 2) Battle of Los 
Angeles (an almost identical cheapo Asylum rip-off released on DVD one day 
after Battle: Los Angeles. I know at least two people who claim this is the 
superior film).

• My advice to anyone watching this on TV tonight: surrender to the ridiculous 
volume lurches. If you try and modulate the volume so that it isn’t either 
impossibly quiet or legitimately deafening, all you’ll get out of it is a sore 
thumb. Trust me on this.

• Still, at least Battle: Los Angeles is better than I, Frankenstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/i-frankenstein>.
 