
A new Hollywood monster movie billed as “Godzilla meets Lost in Translation” 
is facing legal action from furious Japanese creators of the original 
metropolis-mashing giant lizard,according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/thr-esq/anne-hathaway-lizard-film-under-796883>
.

Anne Hathaway signs on for 'Godzilla meets Lost in Translation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/12/anne-hathaway-signs-on-for-godzilla-meets-lost-in-translation>
The famous Toho company, which has produced more than 20 Godzilla films since 
1954 and also licensed two blockbuster Hollywood productions, is suing Voltage 
Pictures over the movie Colossal,which was announced last week at Cannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/12/anne-hathaway-signs-on-for-godzilla-meets-lost-in-translation>
. The film is due to star Anne Hathaway as a woman who hears reports of a giant 
lizard attacking Tokyo, and comes to realise she has some kind of psychic 
connection with it.

The first ever Godzilla movie, Ishiro Honda’s Gojira, depicted the monster 
unleashing devastation on Tokyo after being mutated due to atomic radiation 
exposure. And Toho says it smells a rat. The company has filed a complaint in 
California federal court, claiming Hollywood producers are “brazenly producing, 
advertising, and selling an unauthorisedGodzilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/godzilla> film of their own”.


The suit alleges that Voltage referenced the giant lizard in an email sent to 
potential investors earlier this month which included a publicity shot from 
Gareth Edwards’s recent Hollywood Godzilla reboot and several further images 
from other Toho films about the monster. It also cites aFilm Divider interview 
with writer-director Nacho Vigalondo 
<http://www.filmdivider.com/4887/nacho-vigalondo-pitches-his-man-in-suit-kaiju-eiga-or-godzilla-movie/>
 from August last year in which the Spanish film-maker promised his project 
would be “the cheapest Godzilla movie ever”, adding: “It’s going to be a 
serious Godzilla movie, but I’ve got an idea that’s going to make it so cheap 
that you will feel betrayed.” Vigalondo is named as a co-defendant.

Finally, Toho alleges that a Cannes sales booklet for Colossal featured the 
tagline “Tokyo is under attack by Godzilla” and a poster with an image from 
Edwards’s film, a global $528m box office smash last year.

The complaint reads: “Toho is informed and believes, and based thereon 
alleges, that Defendants have knowingly used the Godzilla Character to attract 
interest and attention in their Colossal project so that it would stand out in 
a crowded field of competitors on the film sales circuit.”

Toho is suing for copyright and trademark infringements, trademark dilution, 
unfair competition and unjust enrichment. The company asks for Voltage to be 
prohibited from producing Colossal and claims unspecified damages.

Los Angeles-based Voltage, whose past films include Oscar-winning fare such as 
Dallas Buyers Club and The Hurt Locker, has not yet made any public comment on 
the legal action.
 