
BBC2 wildlife show Autumnwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/autumnwatch> debuted with an 
impressive 3.8 million viewers last night, matching the success of Springwatch 
earlier in the year.

The programme, hosted by Bill Oddie, had a 17% share of the audience between 
8pm and 9pm, putting it level with Tonight with Trevor McDonald on ITV1 in the 
first half of the hour.

Both programmes were up against BBC1's EastEnders, which attracted 8.5 million 
viewers, a 38% share, according to unofficial overnights.

In its second half-hour, Autumnwatch faced the second Monday instalment of 
Coronation Street, which took 9.1 million viewers and a 38% share.

Autumnwatch runs nightly at 8pm for the next two weeks, following Oddie and 
co-presenter Kate Humble as they look for animal activity from their base at 
the Martin Mere nature reserve in Lancashire.

Another successful return last night was Channel 4's Wife Swap, which began a 
new series with a one-off celebrity special featuring racing pundit John 
McCririck and former Conservative minister Edwina Currie.

Unsurprisingly, the combination proved disastrous - but not for ratings, which 
came in at a healthy 3.1 millions viewers, a 13% share between 9pm and 10pm, 
and ahead of Wife Swap's previous series average of 2.8 million.

The 9pm slot was otherwise dominated by the battle between BBC1's MI5 drama 
Spooks and ITV1's Life Begins.

Last night, Life Begins came out on top with 5.9 million viewers and a 25% 
share to Spooks' 5.5 million and a 23% share.

Meanwhile on BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2>, a docudrama about 
Hitler's right-hand man, Herman Goering, had 1.9 million viewers and an 8% 
share, marginally down on last week's instalment about Albert Speer.

Channel 4 followed up strongly on Wife Swap, scoring a 2.3 million audience 
and a 14% share for US drama Without a Trace at 10pm and then 1.5 million and a 
16% share for a repeat of documentary The World's Biggest Penis at 11pm.

Channel Five's highest-rating show of the night was Banged Up Abroad, which 
told the story of British backpacker Sandra Gregory, who was convicted of drug 
smuggling in Thailand.

Banged Up Abroad had an audience of 1.3 million viewers and an 8% share 
between 10pm and 11pm.

The night's biggest audience was for Coronation Street's first outing, watched 
by 10.3 million ITV1 viewers at 7.30pm, hot the heels of an 8.1 million 
audience for Emmerdale.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 