
The BBC has reversed its decision to close the Asian Network digital radio 
station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/06/stars-line-up-bbc-asian-network> 
– but will look to cut its budget in half.

The decision will be warmly welcomed by the station's staff and listeners, but 
the corporation's critics will view it as itssecond embarrassing U-turn, a year 
after the BBC Trust rebuffed management plans to close its sister digital 
station, 6 Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/05/bbc-6-music-saved>.

BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> executives are understood to have 
concluded that a national digital radio station remains the best way to reach 
Asian listeners, rather than a collection of medium-wave services that was 
mooted as one possible replacement.

The station's audience has already increased by about a third since the 
closure plan was announced in March 2010 and it had an average weekly reach of
477,000 listeners in the final three months of last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/03/rajars-talk-radio?INTCMP=SRCH>. 
Management is expected to demand a further increase in its audience, as well as 
cutting Asian Network's budget.

The decision, announced by Andy Parfitt, the BBC Radio 1 and Asian Network 
controller, in a conference call to staff on Monday,follows a last-ditch effort 
to save the station launched by its supporters last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/01/bbc-asian-network?INTCMP=SRCH>.

BBC Asian Network's future will now be rolled into the "Delivering Quality 
First" review, overseen by the director general, Mark Thompson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/aboutthebbc/therealstory/delivering_quality_first.shtml>, 
of the corporation's entire output and services, which seeks savings of more 
than £400m.

The Asian Network's budget is bigger than any of the BBC's other digital 
stations, with £8.9m spent on content out of a total of £12.1m last year.

At 8.5p per listener hour, it is more expensive than any other BBC radio 
station. The next most expensive, BBC Radio 3, costs 6.3p per user hour, while 
BBC Radio 2, at 0.5p per user hour, is the cheapest.

However, the plan to keep the station will need to be approved by the BBC 
Trust in the summer.

One member of staff on the Asian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> said there was a feeling of 
"jubilation and vindication" among presenters and production staff. "It is a 
pity it has taken them a year and they have had to spend all this money to come 
round to what we were saying all along," said the station insider.

"There's not a feeling of anger so much as vindication. We need to bring the 
cost base down and make sure the audience keeps going up. Nobody objects to 
that. There is a feeling of unbridled joy, but also a nagging sense that the 
really hard work is only just about to begin."

The decision to reprieve the Asian Network comes a year after Thompson 
announced plans to shut it, along with BBC 6 Music. In his review, Thompson 
proposed to replace the national digital service with a network of part-time 
local services in areas with large British-Asian communities.

But the cuts planned in March last year have since been subsumed by the much 
greater savings – more than £400m – required because of the licence fee freeze 
agreed with the coalition government in October.

Management is understood to have considered the alternatives to be ineffective 
or too expensive, or both.

The decision not to close the station is also a victory for more than 100 
prominent British Asians whosigned a letter to the Guardian calling for the 
network to be saved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/06/stars-line-up-bbc-asian-network>.

Actor and writer Meera Syal, Olympic medal-winning boxer Amir Khan and 
Bollywood star Shilpa Shetty were among entertainment stars, actors and peers 
who expressed their "profound shock" at the BBC's decision to shut a "key 
platform" for the national Asian community.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 