
BBC 6 Music DJ Adam Buxton answers your questions (from 11am) about the 
proposed closure 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/mar/12/bbc-complaints-close-6music> of 
the digital radio station and doubtless much else besides.

Many thanks for all your questions, which you have been posting in yesterday's 
preview blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2010/mar/15/adam-buxton-webchat-questions?showallcomments=true#end-of-comments>
 â€“ please do keep sending them in. His answers will appear in the comments 
section below.

Until then, a selection of your questions to date, which have so far covered 
the future of BBC 6 Music, his stand-up career, what he will be doing nextwith 
Radiohead <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UKrsBVFsfIQ>, when/if he will get to 
interview David Bowie, his BBC2 sitcom the Persuasionists (watch him read the 
reviews here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_tRXpkYLSIc>), Boggins the dog 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7hkw16T6eDc>, his music video sideline Bug 
<http://adam-buxton.co.uk/ad/category/bug/>, his BBC3 pilot Meebox 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lM6xbDX5iHU>, his challenge to "fight" Mark 
Thompson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/mediamonkeyblog/2010/mar/03/bbc-adam-buxton-mark-thompson>
, when/if his Saturday morning show with Joe Cornishwill return to 6 Music 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/dec/23/adam-joe-leave-6music-sabbatical>, 
and the chances of him and Cornish going it alone and launching their own 
podcast.

Captain Black: Do you feel that the closure of 6 Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music> is a done deal or does the BBC Trust 
actually have any power to reverse this baffling decision? Never mind inviting 
Thommo out for a fight, I'd just like to see him come out of hiding and explain 
it to the licence -payers.

Xtremeboat: If (and I really hope it doesn't) 6 Music were to close would you 
consider running your show on another radio station? My fear is it's too niche 
forRadio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 1 and 2 and they look like 
the only potential outlets at the BBC

Danibol: Are you actually going to come back to 6 Music after [Joe Cornish's 
film] Attack the Block is all finished, or are you just being polite?

Lady Puffin: I would like to know whether he's going to do any more stand-up. 
I know he does the occasional London date, but I'd love him to hit the North 
(not in the same way he wants to hit Mark Thompson....) Also, did he realise 
the Persuasionists was going to be a bit ropey when he was filming it? Maybe he 
doesn't mind the finished version. But I tried very hard to like it and failed!

Barnybran: If the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> axe 6 Music and 
don't offer you a new slot, would you ever consider going private? PODMAX! from 
Adam's shed! I would probably pay at least 50p per show I got to download if it 
meant I got to listen to you both chattering in my ears on my walk to work, 
making me chuckle...

SeamusB: Given that music video channels are more concerned with reality 
shows, do you think that Bug could be successfully transferred to TV, to 
showcase the best in music video? Your Bug shows are very good at displaying 
how innovative music video can be. Not since Beavis & Butthead has there been a 
TV show that shows music videos and comments upon them. Please tell me you are 
pitching this to various channels.

JPCrofton: Up until now you never come across as the campaigning sort. What 
made you step up to the front and demand the right to give your boss's, boss's, 
boss's... etc... boss a wedgie? You've worked at other stations but what is it 
(if anything) you think that is unique about 6 Music that you can't find 
elsewhere?

Bob Kennedy: Did you get a smacked bottom for challenging Mark Thompson to a 
fight? Figuratively speaking, obviously.

dirtycaah: How is our slobbery friend Boggins doing? Is he with you now? In 
all seriousness, can they get rid of BBC3 on TV or Radio 1. Why are the BBC 
competing with commercial stations when the reason people listen to them is 
because they are NOT commercial! Save BBC 6Music and BBC Asian Network!

Bumcivilian: Is there any chance of that BBC3 weird thing you did coming back 
in any form? I think it was just a pilot. Meebox or something? The Songs of 
Praise subtitling and especially the sign language overdubs were some of the 
funniest few minutes I've seen on telly recently. Also, do more stuff with 
Radiohead. Please.

MoogyC: Do you really think that 6 Music should be saved? That is, as opposed 
to taking the best content and consolidating it somewhere else. I listened to 
your show by specifically searching you out on iPlayer after being a long-term 
fan, but like most people I don't have a digital radio and wouldn't normally be 
able to listen to the station.

Tedmauldisturbs: If 6 Music gets a reprieve does that mean we can see a return 
of Boggins to celebrate?

LiamOG1984: Would you ever try and write a sitcom for British tv? A great 
sitcom (comedy show) has been sadly missed since the Mighty Boosh or Spaced.

willf12345: Give us a black squadron task! Now!
 