
We are writing to express our opposition to the latest plans to make cuts to 
the BBC. Losing services like6Music <http://www.bbc.co.uk/6music/> and the 
Asian Network <http://www.bbc.co.uk/asiannetwork/> (Flashmob campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/21/bbc-asian-network-closure-bhangra-flashmob>
, 22 May), which have brought thousands of new listeners to the BBC, would be a 
huge mistake. Our television and radio is seen as some of the best in the 
world. British music – from all communities living in the UK – has a global 
audience. The BBC helps to keep our standards high and we shouldn't be prepared 
to jeopardise them with cuts. The BBC has many enemies. Media moguls who make 
billions from undercutting public service broadcasting would love to see it 
crumble. But it's vital that we don't let that happen. Please don't go ahead 
with the current, proposed cuts to the BBC.

Emma Thompson (actress)

Bobby Friction (DJ, Radio presenter)

Simon Raymonde (Bella Union Records)

Mr Scruff (artist)

Peggy Seeger (Musician)

Mark Thomas (comedian)

Alison Wenham (Chairman and Chief Executive, AIM – Association of Independent 
Music)

Matt Black - Coldcut (artist)

Meera Syal (comedian and actor)

Sanjeev Bhaskar (comedian and actor)

Jonathan More – Coldcut (artist)

Ollie Teeba (The Herbaliser – artist)

Trevor McNamee (Managing Director, Jalapeno Records)

Pop Levi (musician)

The Boxer Rebellion (artist)

Peter Quicke (Chairman of Ninja tune)

Fleet Foxes (band)

Kevin Foakes (DJ Food, Strictly Kev – artist)

Greg Wise (actor)

Alan Rickman (actor)

Wayne Hemingway (fashion designer)

Bianca Jagger (social and human rights activist)

Caroline Lucas (leader of the Green party)

Lynn Roberts (For Folk's Sake)

Professor James Curran (Professor of Media and Communications, Goldsmiths, 
University of London)

Martin Goldschmidt (Managing Director, Cooking Vinyl)

Dr Daya Thussu (Professor of International Communication, University of 
Westminster)

Damian Rafferty (Editor of flyglobalmusic.com)

Steve Lowes (Backstreet International Merchandise Limited)

Frank Turner (musician)

Kirsten Winn (Mainstage Artists Ltd)

Calum MacColl (musician)

Max Bloom (Concept Music, suSU Music)

Sumit Bothra (music management) Fink (artist)

Jaga Jazzist (artist)

James Mountain (artist)

Simon Wills (Sales and Marketing Director of Absolute)

Iain McNay (Chairman of Cherry Red Records)

Alisdair Wright (musician/producer)

Edward Mason (Manager, Wild Beasts, Erland & The Carnival)

Hayden Thorpe (Wild Beasts)

Tom Fleming (Wild Beasts)

Chris Talbot (Wild Beasts) Ben Little (Wild Beasts)

Fraser MacColl (guitarist, Born Blonde)

Martin Mills, (Chairman, Beggars Group)

Natalie Judge (Matador Records Ltd)

Sylvia Harvey (Chair, Citizens' Coalition for Public Service Broadcasting)

• The letter above was amended on 25 April 2010. A name was removed at the 
request of the signatory, who had not agreed to appearing among those who 
signed.

• The BBC's digital radio system (DAB <http://www.uk-dab.info/new/ukd.asp>) is 
out of date and of poor quality (The digital switchover is folly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/may/23/digital-switchover-car-radio>
, 24 May). Were millions of people being urged to throw away their FM sets for 
sake of something better, a case could be made, but this is not true. The 
minimum technical standard (bit rate) on DAB for sound quality to match that of 
FM is 192 kbps. Only BBC Radio 3 meets that standard, and even then, only for 
some of the time. The more channels that are squeezed on to DAB, the lower the 
quality will be.

Ofcom's document The Future of Radio 
<http://www.ofcom.org.uk/consult/condocs/radio_future/> scathingly refers to 
"audiophiles", as if a concern for sound quality were the preserve of a tiny 
minority of technical enthusiasts. As listener, musician and BBC employee, I 
have seen the steady improvement in broadcast sound quality, from AM, through 
FM and on to the present superb standard of the best stereo broadcasts. It is 
surely unthinkable that this could now be reversed.

Colin Bradbury

London

• Julian Glover omits the lack of an environmental impact assessment. The 
lucrative sell-off of broadcasting spectrum for the next generation of mobile 
phones is what lies behind this initiative. In many cases, when people are not 
using a cheap and reliable FM portable radio, they are increasingly using 
listen-again via the internet . The Orwellian adverts on theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> are just rubbing salt into the wound by 
using "amnesty" to describe the trading in of old radios for a discount on 
energy inefficient new equipment.

David Nowell

New Barnet, Hertfordshire 

• I own a small device which when plugged in to my computer enables any sound 
that comes from that source to be heard on any FM radio in my house. If an 
enterprising manufacturer could produce a digital radio with a rebroadcaster 
built in, then a listener could obtain a DAB signal on their old FM radio.

Robert Smith

Merstham, Surrey 
 