
The BBC has confirmed plans to launch a new version of its iPlayer app for 
Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> devices which will use 
its own BBC Media Player technology to securely stream audio and video.

The technology, which was developed in-house at the BBC's Future Media 
division, is already being used for the mobile website version of iPlayer 
according to ablog post 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/bbcinternet/2012/09/media_player_android_phones_ta.html>
 by executive product manager Chris Yanda.

"Next week we plan to release a new version of BBC iPlayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> on Android which will use this 
player. Other applications and websites will follow," he writes, before telling 
Android owners that "I want to reassure you that Android is an important 
platform for us".

If that sounds slightly defensive, the reason is critical comments posted on 
another BBC blog post 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/bbcinternet/2012/09/iplayer_mobile_downloads.html> 
earlier in September, announcing an update to the iPlayer iOS app that included 
the ability to download shows to watch offline.

Despite a promise that the feature would be added for Android "soon", a number 
of commenters criticised theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> for not 
keeping the two versions of the iOS player app in sync for new features.

Yanda addresses the criticism directly in his post, pointing out that the BBC 
needs to "meet the security obligations we had agreed with our rights holders", 
while working on Android devices running the Froyo and Gingerbread OS versions, 
through to the newest Jelly Bean incarnation.

An added complication was Adobe's decision to stop supporting the Flash Player 
plug-in for Android earlier in 2012. "In the end, Flash was still the best 
choice of media format for us to use. And the only practical technology for us 
to play this format back on Android isAdobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> Air," writes Yanda.

He sounds several notes of caution in the post, perhaps in an attempt to set 
people's expectations of the new app appropriately.

"No technology is perfect. We've seen some of the challenges that other Adobe 
Air based apps have had in the marketplace and so we have worked hard, both 
internally and with our technology partners to build the best application we 
can," he writes.

The BBC isn't the only broadcaster that has faced challenges making TV 
services available across iOS and Android. BSkyB launched its original Sky Go 
app for Android in January 2012 for a selection of Android smartphones, seven 
months after the iOS app went live.

In March 2011, BSkyB's general manager for mobile David Gibbs explained why 
Android was proving problematic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/appsblog/2011/mar/08/sky-apps-iphone-android-blackberry-windows>
 at the time for broadcasters:

"The big sticking point at the moment is security around streams," he told a 
London conference. "We can't protect those streams to meet the obligations for 
our rightsholders. There will be a solution around September-time, but it's a 
challenge: we're optimising someone else's [DRM] solution and putting a wrapper 
around it."

Android has moved on since then, but the quote remains the best explanation 
why companies like the BBC and BSkyB sometimes appear to be prioritising iOS 
over Android: their rights obligations often lead to them having to build 
bespoke technology in-house when making their content available on Google's 
platform.

The important message, though, is that in 2012 Android is worth that effort 
and expense. In July 2012,Kantar Worldpanel ComTech claimed 
<http://www.kantarworldpanel.com/kwp_ftp/global/comtech/Kantar_Worldpanel_ComTech_Smartphone_OS_barometer_11_7_12.pdf>
 that in the 12 weeks to 10 June, Android accounted for 57.2% of smartphone 
sales in the UK, well ahead of iPhone's 25.6% share.

Mobile TV apps are very popular – the BBC's iPlayer received 30m requests for 
shows from mobile and tablets in July 2012, which was 20% of iPlayer's total on 
all platforms.

Enough of those new and existing Android users want to watch their favourite 
shows on their devices to make it a necessity for broadcasters to take the 
platform seriously – whether for public-service reasons in the BBC's case, or 
commercial reasons in BSkyB's.
 