
Supporters of the BBC's digital radio station the Asian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> are planning one last push to 
highlight the station's plight before a final decision on its future which is 
expected as early as this month.

The Asian Network was earmarked for closure by BBC director general Mark 
Thompson along with sister digital station 6 Musicin March last year 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8544150.stm>.

But while the BBC Trust rejected the plans to shut 6 Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/05/bbc-6-music-saved>, it said it 
would consider a formal proposal to close the Asian Network on the condition 
that it "include a proposition for meeting the needs of the station's audience 
in different ways".

Eleven months later and staff are still waiting to find out when – or if – the 
station will close and what exactly will replace it.

Listeners are being encouraged on Facebook  
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Save-The-BBC-Asian-Network/329496002302>and 
Twitter <http://twitter.com/#!/search/save%20asian%20network> to phone the 
BBC's complaints line to protest about its likely closure. A BBC spokesman said 
the corporation had nothing further to announce at this time.

There is growing frustration within the station about the continued 
uncertainty, particularly at a time when its audience has increased nearly 30% 
over the last 12 months. Its latest audience figures will be published on 
Thursday.

"The mood at the station is even worse over the last six months than when the 
closure was first mooted," said one station insider.

"The brand has taken a kicking, not just in the media establishment but inside 
the Asian community.

"People are sending their CVs out and expecting to be made redundant. All this 
at a time when its listening figures are going up."

Management has looked at a number of ways of replacing the Asian Network, 
which had an average weekly reach of 462,000 listeners in the third quarter of 
last year, up from 357,000 in the same period in 2009.

They include a network of five part-time local services on analogue and 
digital radio that broadcasts syndicated national Asian programmes, and an 
Asian programme unit making content for broadcast across the BBC's radio 
stations. TheBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is also thought to 
have looked at a shrunk-down national digital service.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 