
The BBC announced a series of major changes for the iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/> today, in what controller of future media and 
technology Anthony Rose calls the most significant release since the service 
went live last July. Here's a run-down of the main changes (full details in the
release. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/bbcinternet/2009/04/bbc_iplayer_goes_hd_adds_highe.html>
):



• Better video quality: Now improved to a new standard definition (SD), 
1500Kbps stream that's "pretty close to TV quality" according to Rose, "as good 
as most Freeview channels". The default quality for small-screen viewing is 
raised from 500Kbps to 800Kbps, a speed previously reserved for the HQ (high 
quality) mode.

• HD: Rose points out you will need not only a fast connections but fast 
computers—you'll need a modern computer and a decent graphics card. But if you 
can take the strain, he says this isgenuine HD, not just very high quality SD 
streaming posing as HD which Rose claims some sites have. It has a 1280x720 
pixel resolution and encoding bitrate 3.2Mbps.

• Adaptive Bitrate: While most people have forgotten about New Year's 
resolutions by now, Rose has achieved his: hetold us in December 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-new-media-resolutions-anthony-rose-controller-vision-online-bbc>
 he wanted to introduce an adaptive bitrate to the iPlayer, and sure enough the 
service now tests connection speeds to deliver the highest each user can 
handle. You can see that process happening in a newdiagnostics test 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/diagnostics> that shows how fast your connection 
actually is and what video quality you can watch. Rose says the service will 
lower video quality in response to changes in network speed while streaming and 
eventually the iPlayer will then be able to increase or decrease qualityduring 
the same programme if bandwidth increases.

• iPlayer desktop downloads: Rose and his team officially released the 
cross-platform desktop download manager. The Beeb launched a desktop download 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-bbc-debuts-cross-platform-iplayer-mac-concern-dissipates>
 client in December for Mac and Linux users signed up to theLabs testing 
programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/labs> who had previously complained the 
service excluded them. As with the test version, the desktop app uses Adobe (
NSDQ: ADBE <http://finance.paidcontent.org/paidcontent?Page=QUOTE&Ticker=ADBE>) 
AIR download technology.

• iPlayer via TV: Users with Windows Media Extender 
<http://www.microsoft.com/windows/products/winfamily/mediacenter/features/extender.mspx>
-enabled TVs can download iPlayer programmes and watch them on TV way instead. 
That uses good 'ol Windows Media DRM.

• Bigger window: Responding to user feedback, the iPlayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/iplayer> main screen now has a larger 
playback window that can be re-sized.

• The future: Expect a few more releases in the next two months, but Rose 
warns us his team is working on the "next generation" release for the summer.

From paidContent:UK: <http://www.paidcontent.co.uk>
• Euro-MPs voting on three-strikes piracy measure 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-euro-mps-voting-on-three-strikes-piracy-measure/>
• B2B media under pressure: Emap losses, RBI savings, Pearson shares 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-business-media-in-the-downturn-pearson-reed-elsevier-emap/>
• Mobile Content Bits: Flirtomatic/Miss World, AQA payments, Nokia mobile TV 
unit, Mfuse-Probability 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-mobile-content-bits-flirtomatic-miss-world-aqa-payments/>
• Amazon takes full control of German audible.de venture 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-amazon-takes-full-control-of-german-audible.de-venture/>
• Google's Woodside is bullish on Google TV ads; even display looks exciting 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-googles-woodside-is-bullish-on-google-tv-ads-even-display-looks-excitin/>
• Tributes for Future's digital commercial director Danny Ward-Lee 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-tributes-for-futures-digital-commercial-director-danny-ward-lee/>
• Spot Runner defends against WPP's share sale suit 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-spot-runner-defends-against-wpp-suit-danny-rimer-amongst-named/>
• Dailymotion gets a new chief executive, reportedly seeking new investment 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-dailymotion-gets-a-new-ceo-reportedly-seeking-new-investment/>
• Pirate Bay aftermath: Sunde thinks of Brazil as appeal goes in 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-pirate-bay-aftermath-appeal-confirmed-fans-protest-future-action-threat/>

From paidContent: <http://www.paidcontent.org>
• Yet another Microsoft search brand -  this time for phones? 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-yet-another-microsoft-search-brand-this-time-for-phones/>
• @ USA Today Chief Executive Forum: Barry Diller: IAC-AOL deal makes sense 
but too intricate 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-usa-today-ceo-forum-barry-diller-iac-aol-deal-makes-sense-but-too-intri/>
• Beleagured New York Times nabs five Pulitzers; no online-only winners 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-beleagured-new-york-times-nabs-five-pulitzers/>
• TiVo increases focus on audience data sales, adds local to the mix 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-tivo-increases-focus-on-data-sales-adds-local-to-the-mix/>
• Silicon Valley execs are in Baghdad to aid Iraq's new media industry 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-silicon-valley-executives-head-to-iraq/>
• Judge rules against Activision in Scratch DJ case 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-court-rules-against-activision/>
• Fortune 500: Media some of the biggest losers 
<http://www.paidcontent.org/entry/419-media-some-of-the-biggest-losers-on-fortune-500/>
 