


BBC Future Media & Technology (FM&T) director Erik Huggers (pictured right) 
and chief operating officerKerstin Mogull are shuffling some chairs, in what 
looks like further multimedia integration and a response toBBC.co.uk 
overspending.

The move will extend FM&T execs in to each of the BBC's other content units (
Vision, Audio & Music and Mobile Media), <http://www.paidcontent.co.uk> NMA said
 
<http://www.nma.co.uk/Articles/40381/Huggers+executes+major+reshuffle+at+BBC+Future+Media.html>
 - though a BBC spokesperson toldpaidContent:UK it's not quite the "major 
reshuffle" claimed, just a "realignment" to ensure every FM&T exec post now 
maps on to an equivalent in the other three units.

That means two FM&T execs get new responsibilities:

• Anthony Rose (pictured left), Huggers' right-hand man who was brought in from
KaZaA last year as head of media technology, becomes controller of the Vision & 
Online Media Group.

• User experience controller Richard Titus (middle) becomes controller of 
Audio & Music and Mobile Media, following previous mobile head'sMatthew Postgate
'srecent departure 
<http://www.paidcontent.co.uk/entry/419-industry-moves-bbcs-mobile-chief-moves-to-head-rd/>
 to lead R&D.

• Rahul Chakkara remains FM&T's TV controller (responsible for red button 
interactivity) andNic Newman remains journalism and digital distribution 
controller.

The BBC Trust had blamed the 2007/08 overspend on weak management that arose 
when the formerly centralisedBBC New Media unit was splintered across each of 
the BBC's content divisions in last year's corporation-wide restructure - that 
restructure meant execs in different silos could not see the extent of 
expenditure. FM&T appointed a chief operating officer as one response to the 
criticism; the latest tweaks appear designed to further join up Auntie's 
overall digital operations and also give Rose more power than he had - his 
proximity to Huggers beginning to mirror Huggers' earlier deputisation ofAshley 
Highfield.
 