
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio is to cut a further 65 posts 
and reorganise its stations around two “hubs” – pop music and classical music 
and speech – as part of the corporation’s ongoing Delivering Quality First 
cost-cutting drive.

The BBC said on Tuesday that the latest job losses were part of a target of 
cutting about 200 posts between 2012 and 2017 – roughly 15% of the division’s 
1,300 staff – under the DQF efficiency savings process.

Management of the BBC’s national stations is to be reorganised into two hubs 
that will share some management and support services. But each station will 
retain a dedicated controller, the BBC said.

The pop music hub will encompass Radio 1, Radio 2, 1Xtra, 6 Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/6music> and the Asian Network; classical 
music and speech will comprise Radio 3, Radio 4, 4 Extra, BBC Proms, orchestras 
and other performing groups.

Radio 1 and Radio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> will share 
commissioning, filming, live events and operations, but keep separate 
production, business management and music teams.

In classical music and speech, some station management, presentation and admin 
will be shared. ButRadio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> and 
Radio 4 will retain separate commissioning, scheduling and in the former’s 
case, music staff.

The BBC said the hubs were for internal management purposes and it had no 
plans to change the way the national stations are presented on air.

“BBC Radio is the envy of the world and our creativity is second to none,” 
Helen Boaden <https://www.theguardian.com/media/helenboaden>, BBC Radio 
director, said. “But we must also be as small as we can be to meet our savings 
challenges and increase our agility in the digital world without losing our 
distinctiveness or damaging relationships with our many audiences. Reducing the 
division’s headcount by 15% is challenging, but shows just how hard we are 
working to drive efficiency in everything we do.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 