
The threat of a Christmas strike at the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/28/bbc-strike-threat-grows-nuj-redeployment?INTCMP=SRCH>
 has been averted, after the successful resolution of a dispute about 
compulsory redundancies.

On Friday the National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> said it has 
settled its dispute with BBC management over job cuts at the Asian Network, 
which has lost half its staff, with several cases of journalists now being 
redeployed to other posts within the corporation.

Last month the National Union of Journalists opened a ballot for industrial 
action among its members at theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
after it emerged that the corporation has been hiring outside staff rather than 
redeploying those facing job losses.

The ballot resulted in 70.3% of BBC NUJ members who voted calling for strike 
action, while 84.1% also voted for industrial action short of a strike.

The BBC had previously signed up to an agreement offering those at risk of 
redundancy other posts within the corporation, but the NUJ claimed that some 
managers have not been implementing the deal.

"We do not want to see licence-fee payers' money being spent on redundancy pay 
for members when there are jobs in the corporation for them to go to," said Sue 
Harris, BBC national organiser for the NUJ. "It is vital that the BBC 
management makes sure that its deployment system works, so we do not lose 
experienced journalists and presenters because local-level managers are not 
making it work."

Harris warned that while this specific issue has been resolved there is a 
"clear mandate" for strike action over the issue of compulsory redundancies in 
other parts of the BBC.

Areas where staff remain under threat of compulsory redundancy include BBC 
News, the World Service and BBC Scotland.

"This [mandate] is crucial for the battle ahead as the BBC management's 
cost-cutting scheme, Delivering Quality First, rolls out," Harris said. "We 
have a number of potential redundancies in other departments across the BBC and 
we will be working to resolve them – or else we will be prepared to take 
action."

A BBC spokesman said: "The dispute over compulsory redundancies in Asian 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> has been resolved. We 
have met all our redeployment commitments in a timetable agreed with the unions 
and we are continuing with our considerable efforts to avoid compulsory 
redundancies in other areas of the BBC."

The BBC Scotland NUJ chapel is due to meet on Monday to consider plans for 
action if management fails to redeploy staff currently at risk of redundancy.

Michelle Stanistreet, the NUJ general secretary, called for a "moratorium" on 
all cuts until the BBC emerges from the Savile scandal.

"[The BBC] needs to take the opportunity to halt the assault on frontline 
journalism and put in place measures to shore up news and current affairs 
before it is too late," she said.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 