
Old Wozza on BBC1 proved more popular than new Wozza on ITV1 on Saturday.

Saturday Kitchen Second Helpings, a compilation of clips from Antony Worrall 
Thompson's old BBC1 cookery show, attracted 900,000 viewers and an 18% share 
between 10am and 11.30am.

Worrall Thompson's new ITV1 show, Saturday Cooks!, drew 600,000 viewers and a 
12% share between 9.25am and 10.50am.

Channel 4's decision to run Noel Edmonds' hit daytime gameshow Deal or No Deal 
in peak time for a week paid immediate dividends last night.

Deal or No Deal began its week long residency in the 8pm hour with 3.7 million 
viewers and an 18% audience share, according to unofficial overnights.

The Channel 4 show ran neck-and-neck during this period with a Judge John Deed 
repeat on BBC1.

Deal or No Deal also nearly quadrupled the network's audience in the slot - in 
the past month, Channel 4 has averaged 1 million viewers and a 5% share in the 
Sunday 8pm hour.

The Edmonds gameshow also seemed to give a boost to Big Brother, which 
followed on at 9pm with 4.7 million viewers and a 21% share - its best Sunday 
ratings of the current series.

ITV1's live World Cup coverage has proved popular over the weekend, but 
Christian O'Connell's ITV4 spin-off show, World Cuppa, has yet to find its feet 
ratings-wise.

World Cuppa's first outing on Friday at 10pm, after Ecuador v Poland on ITV1, 
attracted 62,000 viewers to ITV4 over 60 minutes.

The multichannel competition at that time included an EastEnders repeat on 
BBC3, which drew 355,000 viewers; BBC4's Van Morrison: Live at Ryman, watched 
by 111,000; and a repeat of the movie Stir Crazy on ITV3, which attracted 
234,000.

World Cuppa returned to ITV4 at 10pm last night, after live coverage of 
Portugal v Angola on ITV1 and was watched by 66,000 viewers.

O'Connell's show was up against multichannel competition from Carmel Morgan's 
new BBC3 drama Drop Dead Gorgeous, which launched with 491,000 viewers.

Over on E4 from 10pm, Big Brother's Little Brother attracted 523,000 viewers; 
while Sky One drama import Human Trafficking drew 329,000.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 