
The BBC director general has said he would not stop his managers working in 
senior positions at charities, despite the fallout from Alan Yentob’s
involvement with Kids Company 
<http://%20http//www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/yentob-wont-face-bbc-trust-probe-over-kids-company-as-he-has-quit>
.

Tony Hall made the comments while being quizzed by the BBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> at its meeting in October as the 
furore around the actions of the BBC’s creative director was growing.

Hall was asked if in light of the allegations that Yentob had attempted to 
influence coverage ofKids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>, where he held the post of 
chairman, the corporation’s policy and guidelines on handling potential 
conflicts of interest were “sufficiently clear”.

Hall, delivering his monthly report to the trust, said that “in his view, the 
policy and guidelines were fit for purpose,” according to the minutes of the 
meeting published on Wednesday.

Last week, Yentob announced he would stand down as creative director <http:// 
http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/yentob-wont-face-bbc-trust-probe-over-kids-company-as-he-has-quit>
, despite the BBC and the trust clearing him ofinfluencing news output 
<http://%20http//www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/yentob-wont-face-bbc-trust-probe-over-kids-company-as-he-has-quit>
 about Kids Company on Newsnight, the Today programme and World at One.

Hall added that it was “important that BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> staff participated in the wider 
community and in charitable work and he would not recommend preventing staff 
serving on charities.”.

Critics of the BBC argue that regardless of whether the news output was 
affected, there needs to be an investigation into the alleged attempts to 
influence the programmes.

The trust is not launching an investigation into Yentob’s actions but has 
instead asked David Jordan, the BBC’s director of editorial policy and 
standards, to file a report early next year giving his view on whether changes 
should be made to the “processes for managing conflicts affecting senior 
managers”.

Jordan has been asked to look at a number of areas, including whether there 
needs to be additional rules applied to external activities undertaken by 
senior managers.


And whether “any more specific measures should apply when an external activity 
becomes the focus of news coverage”.

The BBC Trust said it may look to take further action depending on the 
conclusions Jordan draws in his report.

 