
BBC creative director Alan Yentob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> has said he is “not remotely 
considering” resigning over allegations he tried to influence the corporation’s 
coverage of scandal-hit charity Kids Company, of which he is the chairman.

Yentob has been accused of a conflict of interest after making a phone call to 
Newsnight ahead of a report on Kids Company, as well as accompanying the 
charity’s chief executive Camila Batmanghelidjh to an interview on Radio 4’s 
Today programme.

“I don’t think there is [a conflict of interest],” said Yentob, speaking to 
Channel 4 News on Thursday 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/alan-yentob-kids-company-financial-mismanagement-rubbish>
. “I am the creative director, I have no control over the BBC’s news operation. 
It is quite evident I don’t because the amount of coverage the BBC has given us 
is significant and they are an independent body.”

Yentob said that he had not abused his position and would not entertain any 
thought of resigning.

“No, I’m not remotely considering my position at the BBC,” he said. “I don’t 
think in any way I have abused my position at the BBC. I have not appeared on 
anyBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> programmes, I’m appearing on 
Channel 4 now.

“The only contact I had with the news operation was on that day, the first 
time I heard [about Newsnight’s Kids Company probe]. If you are told that there 
are significant allegations against an organisation that you are the chairman 
of, and if the welfare of those children is at stake, the idea that you would 
not say ‘excuse me, what’s happening’ and then say ‘can you give us time to 
respond’ and then the answer is ‘no’, they do the programme anyway – that’s the 
last time I got in touch.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjESzCHdWoAU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjESzCHdWoAU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjESzCHdWoAU&media=>
 The BBC’s Alan Yentob responds to Kids Company allegations on Channel 4 News 
Yentob for the first time admitted that he did call Newsnight when he learned 
of the report on Kids Company; the corporation had initially dismissed reports 
he had done so as “gossip”.

He denied that he had asked Newsnight to pull its story, but said he suggested 
the report might be broadcast another night after he declined a last-minute 
request to appear because it was too late in the evening.

“I did call them up,” he said, speaking to Channel 4 News. “What I asked them 
is why no one had asked Kids Company whether or not they had any comments to 
make about this story. The first I heard about it was from a separate source. 
No one spoke to Kids Company, there was no question of a right to reply, no one 
even informed us this was happening ... As I didn’t know I rang up and said 
‘What’s going on and why has no one informed [me]?’”

Following the interview on Thursday, Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis 
challenged Yentob’s comments, tweeting:
emily m (@maitlis) 
Newsnight was in contact with kids company right the way through, actually. 
https://t.co/3Kt97702tR <https://t.co/3Kt97702tR>
 <https://twitter.com/maitlis/status/629358749879304192> August 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/maitlis/status/629358749879304192> 
Yentob said of his visit to the Today programme studios with Batmanghelidjh: 
“No one can tell Camila what to say, by the way. I stood outside and listened 
to Camila doing what she did. I am in the BBC, I am not far from that office, 
so I went there.

“So there is no way in any way that I interfered with the coverage of that 
programme.”

Yentob has also been accused by the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3187456/BBC-boss-rages-reporter-investigating-sexual-abuse-Kids-Company-Alan-Yentob-said-launched-tirade-heard-staff-lobby-corporation-s-London-HQ.html>
 of launching a “verbal attack” on the BBC’s special news correspondent Lucy 
Manning, who was compiling a report on sexual abuse allegations at the charity.

He admitted the incident to the Mail, but said it was “absolute nonsense” to 
suggest that it constituted inappropriate interference with the BBC’s coverage.

“I have apologised,” he told the Mail. “I didn’t have a go about her. I said 
to her, ‘This is about the kids.’”

Yentob used the Channel 4 News interview to defend the charity, which was shut 
down on Wednesday, arguing that it had acted responsibly.

“The idea of what I’ve heard some journalist call appalling financial 
mismanagement is complete rubbish,” he said. “All the allegations of financial 
mismanagement were tackled by the Charity Commission and an independent 
auditor. There is not financial mismanagement. There were audited accounts year 
after year.”

He said that the decision to shut down the charity was made following 
allegations of sexual abuse.

“No one reported this to us,” he said. “There is no evidence that we were 
informed about a sexual abuse case. I think this amount of rumour and 
allegation and counter-allegation … is disgraceful.”
 