
The BBC's Asian Network, the radio station which was only narrowly saved from 
the chop <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/14/bbc-asian-network> 
after it was earmarked for closure under Mark Thompson's sweeping cost-cutting 
plans, has been nominated for station of the year at the annual Sony radio 
awards.

The recognition marks quite a comeback for the national digital radio network, 
which will vie for the top prize at the awards with another BBC station,Radio 5 
Live <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-5-live>, and Classic FM.

The BBC announced it was closing the 11-year-old broadcaster three years ago, 
prompting an outcry from more than 100 prominent British Asians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/06/stars-line-up-bbc-asian-network> 
including actor and writer Meera Syal, Olympic medal-winning boxer Amir Khan 
and Bollywood star Shilpa Shetty.

A year later the BBC announced a U-turn, saying the Asian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> would be saved. It was a 
bittersweet moment for the station and its staff, however, who were told its 
budget would be halved.

The remarkable comeback from the dead echoes the history of another BBC 
station, 6 Music, which was also earmarked for closureonly to be saved 
following an unprecedented protest from listeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/05/bbc-6-music-saved>.

6 Music went on to be crowned station of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/14/richard-keys-andy-gray-sony-awards>
 at last year's Sony Radio Academy Awards, the industry's equivalent of the 
Oscars. It remains to be seen whether the Asian Network can repeat the feat.

The nominations for the Sony awards, which will take place on 13 May, were 
announced on Wednesday.

Absolute Radio breakfast presenter Christian O'Connell led the pack with a 
hat-trick of nominations, including one in the main breakfast show category. He 
is up against Radio 2 DJ Chris Evans, Radio 4's Today, the Radio 3 breakfast 
programme and the Kiss breakfast team of Rickie, Melvin and Charlie.

There were two nominations each for Radio 6 Music's Lauren Laverne and Danny 
Baker. The presenter, who launched a spectacular on-air tirade against 
management after hisBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> London 94.9 
show was dropped, is recognised for his Saturday morning show on Radio 5 Live.

Laverne is up for the best music programme award in a category that also 
includes her 6 Music colleague Jarvis Cocker, Radio 2's Dermot O'Leary, Radio 
1's Zane Lowe and The Ronnie Wood Show on Absolute Radio.

Baker is nominated for speech broadcaster of the year, along with fellow 5 
Live presenters Nicky Campbell and Victoria Derbyshire, Stephen Sackur on the 
BBC World Service and Radio 4's PM presenter Eddie Mair. Mair made headlines 
with his controversial interview with London mayor Boris Johnson on BBC1 last 
month.

Today presenter John Humphrys, whose interview with George Entwistle sealed 
the fate of the then director general after just 54 days, is nominated in the 
radio journalism of the year category, with Radio 4's Becky Milligan, Jon 
Donnison, for Radio 4 and the World Service, Key 103's Michelle Livesey and 
Capital FM's east midlands news team.

Former Big Brother contestant Kate Lawler is nominated in the entertainment 
programme category for her show on rock station Kerrang!. She is up against 
Radio 1's afternoon DJ Greg James, Danny Baker, Absolute Radio's Geoff Lloyd 
and Charlie Sloth on Radio 1Xtra.

5 Live is recognised for its coverage of the 2012 London games in the live 
event category, for the entirety of its Olympics and Paralympics coverage, and 
the best sports programme for the afternoon show presented by Peter Allen and 
Colin Murray.

Nick Ferrari, presenter of LBC's breakfast show, including the weekly Call 
Clegg programme with the deputy prime minister, is nominated for best news and 
current affairs programme, along with Radio 1's Newsbeat, Radio 4's File on 4, 
Newshour on the World Service and Stephen Nolan's show on Radio Ulster.

Ferrari's LBC colleague Iain Dale is also nominated, for best speech programme.

6 Music had a total of nine nominations, including Cerys Matthews and early 
afternoon presenters, Mark Radcliffe and Stuart Maconie. There were also a 
total of four nominations for National Prison Radio.

The best internet programme category has been dropped, but podcasts are not 
entirely free from this year's nominations, with Richard Herring's Leicester 
Square Theatre podcast nominated in the best comedy category.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 