
The BBC is poised to sign a multi-million pound TV rights deal to extend its 
18-year grip on screening liveNational Lottery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lottery> draws.

Camelot, the operator of the National Lottery, is expected to sign a new 
multi-year deal with theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> this week.

The BBC's current six-year deal is due to expire at the end of December. It is 
not clear how long the new multi-year contract is for, but it will almost 
certainly take the corporation's exclusive live coverage of the National 
Lottery past 20 years.

In 2006, the BBC saw off competition from ITV, which offered the temptation of 
running the draw around The X Factor. However, this time Camelot is not thought 
to be talking to rival broadcasters.

The BBC considers the National Lottery draws, which are broadcast on 
Wednesday, Friday and Saturday nights, to be a key weapon in its ratings battle 
with ITV.

In particular, the Saturday night draw, which regularly attracts audiences in 
excess of 5 million viewers, is considered a key plank in BBC1's weekend 
entertainment lineup.

Recent acts that have featured on the show, hosted by presenters including 
Myleene Klass and Scott Mills, including Susan Boyle and McFly.

The BBC has held the rights since the first draw in November 1994, hosted by 
Noel Edmonds, which attracted an average audience of just over 20 million 
viewers and was the second most-watched programme of the year.

"We are in discussions with Camelot about the future of shows on the BBC, but 
we will not be losing the National Lottery from BBC1," said a spokeswoman for 
the BBC.

Andy Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, the chief 
executive of Camelot, said: "We have had a long-term and very successful 
partnership for TV shows on the BBC, and we would expect that to continue."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 