 The BBC has hired Anthony Rose, the chief technology officer at music-sharing 
website Kazaa, to head up a team developing the next generation of the BBC 
iPlayer.
Mr Rose, who will become head of digital media technology, will take-on a part 
of the remit left vacant by Tom Loosemore, the former head of the BBC's web 2.0 
projects, wholeft the corporation 
<http://media.theguardian.com/bbc/story/0,,2112704,00.html.> in June to join 
Ofcom.

He has also been given responsibility for creating a "unified embedded media 
experience" across the BBC's online properties.

The appointment marks the final step in a reorganisation of the BBC's future 
media and technology arm, undertaken by the group controller, Erik Huggers, 
since joining the corporation from Microsoft in May.

Mr Huggers, who reports to the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
future media and technology director, Ashley Highfield, has restructured the 
department into six teams.

The internet group, under Tony Ageh, is responsible for bbc.co.uk; the TV 
platform group is headed by Rahul Chakkara; the mobile group is overseen by 
Matthew Postgate; digital distribution group is headed by Richard Cooper; and 
the user experience and design group run by Richard Titus.

Mr Rose spent six years at Kazaa, working in areas including digital rights 
management, social networking and peer-to-peer networks.

Kazaa was sold by Skype and Joost co-founders Niklas Zennstrom and Janus Friis 
in 2002 to Sydney-based Sharman Networks.

Mr Rose had previously worked as vice-president for technology at games maker 
Sega Australia.

· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 