
The BBC is planning to triple the number of radio hours open to competition 
from indie companies as part of “compete or compare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/10/tony-hall-bbc-compete-compare-speech>
” plans.

The proposals, negotiated with the Radio Independents Group, would see 27,000 
hours of programming opened up to competition within the next six years, with 
the rest benchmarked against private sector performance.

Indies would get the chance to compete to produce shows across Radios 1, 
1Xtra, 2, 3, 4, 4 Extra, 5 Live, 6 Music and theAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network>, with all of 6 Music’s 
programming opened up.

Shows such as Jo Whiley on Radio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2>
, Shaun Keaveny on 6 Music and Annie Mac’s weeknight show on Radio 1 would all 
be up for competition.

Programmes set for comparison with public sector performance but not 
competition include some “talent-led” music shows on Radio 1 and 2, as well as 
staples onRadio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> including The 
Archers, Woman’s Hour and Desert Island Discs.

Unveiling the proposals, BBC director of Radio Helen Boaden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/helenboaden> said they were “by some 
distance the greatest intervention in content production in the history of our 
sector”, presenting “an unprecedented opportunity” for the indie sector.

BBC Trust backs cut to in-house quotas, lifting restrictions on indie producers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/19/bbc-trust-backs-cut-in-house-quotas-lifting-restrictions-independent-producers>
“This will be genuine competition, not a promise that everything put out to 
competition will be won by an indie,” she said “Just like in-house, you may win 
some of the new commissions and lose others. In-house may win more than you. 
There are no guarantees, other than we will provide a robust and fair system 
for competition.”

Some areas, such as daily news, weather and coverage of state occasions, are 
not included in the eligible hours.

Currently, the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> runs a quota of 10% 
of programming made by indies, with another 10% open in a window of 
competition. The quota will be phased out over the six-year implementation 
period.

The BBC said the plans would require restructuring of the BBC’s commissioning 
process and could cost money in the short-term before delivering savings. The 
proposals are subject to approval from the BBC executive and BBC Trust.

Boaden added: “What we’re proposing is to create a more competitive radio 
production market in which the BBC commissions the best ideas, regardless of 
where they come from. The ultimate aim of what we’re doing is to give even 
greater creative and financial value to our audiences. But I also think our 
proposals will benefit the creative economy.”
 