
Anthony Rose <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-rose>, the BBC 
executive who gave the iPlayer a wholesale revamp that made it a hit with 
consumers, has been hired to do the same for proposed video-on-demand service 
Project Canvas.

Project Canvas, the BBC-backed venture to bring on-demand TV to Freeview and 
Freesat, has alsoannounced that Freeview marketing director Tim Hunt 
<http://www.projectcanvas.info/index.cfm/news/?mode=> is to join as director of 
marketing. According to the BBC, Project Canvaswill have a marketing budget of 
£48.4m in its first four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/04/project-canvas-115m-first-four-years>
.

Rose, who has effectively acted as right-hand man for the BBC director of 
future, media and technology, Erik Huggers, was brought into the corporation in
2007 from music download service Kazaa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/sep/17/digitalmedia.bbc> to overhaul 
the then technically less developed iPlayer.

Rose, the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> controller of vision and 
online media, oversaw innovations including moving the iPlayer to a streaming 
service and plotting a blueprint for an Amazon-esque series of recommendation 
tools.

Huggers said today that Rose, who will start at Project Canvas on 1 May, would 
now have the chance to "shape the future of television".

"Canvas is a strategic priority for the BBC and having Anthony in this post 
will help ensure that the Canvas product is a resounding success, pending [BBC] 
Trust approval," said Huggers in an internal announcement about a wider 
restructure of the FM&T division.

Huggers said that Rose would continue to contribute to BBC Online for one day 
a week for the next three months as head of technical architecture and product 
planning.

In an internal email to staff today Huggers explained the first stage of a 
restructure of BBC Online, which the corporation has pledged willbe narrowed in 
scope and have its budget cut by 25% by 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/08/bbc-online-erik-huggers>.

Key changes include the departure of veteran Nic Newman, the BBC's future 
media and technology controller of journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2009/oct/19/bbb-creates-social-media-editor>
, who has worked at the BBC for more than 20 years. He was part of the launch 
team of the BBC News website. BBC Online controller Seetha Kumar will also 
leave after helping shape a new three-year strategy for the department.

Huggers also intends to establish the new role of director of digital media.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 