
Alan Yentob <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> ran up a bill of 
almost £1,500 taking over 70 cabs in his role as BBC creative director, 
according to the corporation’s latest expenses filing for senior managers.

Yentob, who is paid £183,300 as creative director and a further six-figure 
salary as presenter of BBC1’s Imagine, notched up the bill in his expenses 
filing for the three months to the end of March.

The embattled executive, who has come under pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/16/bbc-alan-yentob-kids-company> 
following the fallout from the Kids Company scandal, took 75 taxis costing 
£1,491.99 according to the filing.

The overall BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> senior managers 
expenses report shows that more than 260 are paid in excess of £100,000 and the 
corporation has some salary heavy divisions.

A breakdown shows that well over half the senior managers in the television 
division – 46 of 81 (56.7%) – were paid more than £100,000.

That excludes the 29 top chiefs, such as BBC1 controller Charlotte Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/charlotte-moore> and controller of BBC2 and 
BBC4 Kim Shillinglaw, who are listed separately.

The next most top salary heavy division was finance and operations, which 
includes Yentob, where 46 of 90 senior managers (51%) are paid more than 
£100,000.

This excludes the 27 top chiefs, such as Yentob and director general Tony Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall>, who have their salaries and 
expenses listed separately.

“We have announced proposals to further tighten up rules around expenses 
claims as part of plans to create a simpler, more efficient, BBC,” said a 
spokesman for the BBC. “Since August 2009 we have reduced senior manager 
headcount and pay bill by over a third and have announced plans to reduce the 
number further, but there are essential costs incurred in running a major 
broadcasting organisation, and ensuring value for money is always our priority.”
 