
James Cridland, the former BBC radio head of future media and technology, 
<http://james.cridland.net/blog/> has joined UK sound-sharing website Audioboo 
<http://audioboo.fm/>. Cridland, who has previously given talks about Audioboo, 
will lead the thinking on the development of its Pro service.

"I've been a user of Audioboo since launch, <http://audioboo.fm/jamescridland> 
and am excited about how the technology behind Audioboo can change the sound of 
radio for the better," said Cridland. "Audioboo is a transformative step in 
allowing radio stations to become even closer to their listeners, and I look 
forward to working together with their inspirational team and the brightest 
brains in radio."

Cridland, who is also at home discussing beer <http://beertweet.com/>, left 
the BBC last September to travel and "explore the world's radio industries". 
Having worked on the BBC iPlayer for radio, he now brings his experience to 
Audioboo.

"James is understanding of both the present needs of the radio industry and 
where it needs to get to in the future is unparalleled in terms of depth and 
can do attitude," said theAudioboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audioboo> founder and CEO, Mark Rock. 
"We have a technology roadmap, part of which sees radio as a tremendous 
opportunity going forward. Working with James on this means we will be able to 
develop for the radio needs of the future, rather than just the present."

Launched in March 2009 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/may/26/audioboo-youtube-twitter>, Audioboo
has become an essential tool for mobile journalism 
<http://psmithjournalist.com/2010/02/mobile-journalism-tools-broadcast-yourself-with-audioboo/>
 allowing the creation of broadcast quality audio recordings including location 
data, image, title and tags. It provides a version for the mobile phone – 
iPhone and Google's Android – that makes it easy to record. The Guardian has 
used it to report from events such as the climate summit in Copenhagen.

Have you used Audioboo? What are your experiences? If you have any tips or 
questions for Cridland, please let us know below.

 