
BBC radio DJ Nihal has criticised the “silos” on the corporation’s music 
stations whereRadio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1> is “all 
white” and 1Xtra is “all black”.

Nihal said the BBC had a “problem on the eighth floor” of Broadcasting House 
where Radio 1, its sister digital station 1Xtra and theAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> are based.

The former Radio 1 DJ who now presents on the Asian Network and Radio 5 Live, 
welcomed last week’s appointment of Clara Amfo to replace Fearne Cotton on 
Radio 1’s morning weekday show, but questioned why it had taken until 2015 for 
the station to have its first black woman on its daytime schedule.

Nihal said “nothing had changed” and in fact had “got worse” since a former 
director general “blew hot air” about improving the make-up of theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> which Greg Dyke called “hideously 
white” in 2001.

Nihal, part of BBC director general Tony Hall’s working group to improve 
diversity at the corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/20/bbc-director-general-diversity-plan-minorities-on-air>
, praised Hall, who he said was committed to tackling the issue.

BBC diversity push to include work with director general
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/20/bbc-diversity-push-director-general-tony-hall>
But he said a problem that had been identified by members of the working 
group, which includes Tanni Grey-Thompson and Floella Benjamin, was a lack of 
sanctions if diversity targets were not met.

“The fact is on the eighth floor of the BBC there is a problem,” he told the 
Oxford Media Convention on Wednesday. “If you go and look at all the Asians are 
sitting in one corner, all the white people are on Radio 1 and all the black 
people are on 1Xtra.

“That is not diversity, that is silos.”

“One of the things is there are no sanctions,” said Nihal. “If you don’t 
achieve these targets, nothing happens … and they try again in five years when 
it becomes politically expedient again.

“At Channel 4 it is a lot easier to fire people than it is at the BBC. I’m not 
saying you fire people for not being diverse enough, but it is an issue with 
lots of public institutions. People get into a role and they stay there for a 
long time, they keep their head down and everything is fine.

“I spoke to someone senior at Channel 4 and they said if someone is not 
delivering at Channel 4, we can get rid of them.”

He said a cultural change was required, with “sanctions people are scared of. 
That’s the reason people are scared of quotas, because it forces them to do 
something”.

Nihal said he was optimistic that diversity would improve at the BBC, but said 
it was also a class issue, not just about colour.

“Class is at least as big a problem. If you just put Oxbridge brown people in 
positions, then what’s the point? They come from exactly the same mindset. 
That’s not diversity, it’s a fig leaf.”

“I am on this advisory board and I also work at the BBC, I have to have quite 
challenging conversations with people who are my bosses,” he added. “Tony Hall 
gets it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/20/bbc-diversity-push-director-general-tony-hall>
. He’s not just saying, ‘Yeah, brilliant. Next.’”

A BBC spokesperson said: “Radio 1 and 1Xtra are committed to reflecting the 
diversity of their young audiences and these sweeping generalisations are 
untrue. Both stations have exceeded the BBC’s diversity targets and we will 
continue to work hard to build on this progress.”
 