
Threaten it with closure. Slash the budget. Let some of its longest-serving 
stars leave without so much as flinching. As sinking ships go, BBCAsian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network> was taking the Titanic 
approach to a dignified exit: snap your lapels and keep the music playing – 
there are still standards to maintain. Plus, if you kept your head above water 
long enough, who knew what might happen? You might find a way to stay afloat.

Which, in a sense, is what BBC Asian Network has done in the last couple of 
years. While its fellow station, 6 Music, survived with the help of a
high-profile media campaign 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/jul/05/bbc-6-music-saved>, this less 
fashionable niche cause 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/03/asian-network-campaign-save>
 seems to have stemmed the tide through sheer bloodymindedness; 34% of the 
budget has gone. Five broadcasting bases have shrunk to two: Birmingham and 
London.Adil – AKA Citizen Khan – Ray 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2012/aug/22/citizen-khan-sitcom-star-born>
,Sonia Deol <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/feb/13/bbc.radio?INTCMP=SRCH> 
andNikki Beddi <http://www.bbc.co.uk/asiannetwork/nikki_bedi/>, all star 
talents who cemented their careers at the station, have moved on. For better or 
worse (and it depends on who you ask), Vijay Sharma – the driving force behind 
turning the Asian Network from five hours a week of programming on BBC Radio 
Leicester back in the 70s, to a 21st-century operation –also left the network 
this spring 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/jan/18/bbc-asian-network-vijay-sharma>.

And yet, the latest Rajar figures 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/oct/25/chris-moyles-radio-one-today> show 
584,000 listeners are tuning in each week, rising steadily each quarter and up 
from 507,000 last year. That's around a fifth of all British Indians, 
Pakistanis, Bangladeshis and Sri Lankans, comfortably making it the country's 
No 1 South Asian station (there are around a dozen). A new schedulewas launched 
on Monday 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2012/new-asian-network-schedule.html>
 because, this weekend, BBC Asian Network also celebrates its 10th birthday as 
a national, digital broadcaster.

Have things finally gone right?

Once, Asian Network was the preset of choice for first generation parents 
tuning in for a couple of hours offilmi hits and desi chatter every week. The 
station has since set itself the mammoth task of chasing second-, third- and 
fourth-generation British Asian audiences, too. This, plus an existing remit to 
appeal across socio-economic and religious divides puts it in a bizarre place 
in an industry defined by much narrower targets. Who, after all, enjoys 
listening to the same radio station as their parents? And since when did a 
nostalgic fondness for AR Rahman also extend to a taste for Punjabi R&B 
mash-ups? It's tricky territory.

And so, the new format bedding in this week has seen a slight reduction in 
specialist language programmes – the few shows broadcast in Punjabi, Hindi, 
Gujarati etc – which pull in a core of loyal listeners. DJs Tommy Sandhu, 
Nihal, Noreen Khan, Bobby Friction and Ray Khan are all still on air, but with 
longer slots to fill. And from midnight to 6am, Asian Network links up to aRadio
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 5 feed instead.

It makes a kind of sense, even if now the Asian Network seems a little less 
about housewives calling in to request an old Bollywood classic, or retired 
folks shooting the breeze. But just as the country's demographic has changed 
over the last 20 to 30 years, so has the station's MO.

The trick, says Nihal , is "never to patronise anyone". I sit in on his 
phone-in show on its very first day in the rejigged format. Conversation is 
lively – Sony judges described him as "quite simply brilliant" when he scooped 
gold ahead of shows on Radio 4 and the World Service. Topics include British 
trade talks with the controversial chief minister of Gujarat, NHS care for 
pregnant women, and the death of Indian film icon Yash Chopra. The chat is 
stapled around a playlist of Bollywood, bhangra and Brit-Asian fusion.

But Nihal, also a Radio 1 DJ, is a deft operator. Last year, he invited the 
EDL's Sikh spokesman, Guramit Singh, in for a debate. (According to the team,
that show provoked the year's second-highest number of complaints to Ofcom 
<http://www.sikhsangat.com/index.php?/topic/59014-bbc-asian-network-in-trouble-over-holy-prophet-comments/>
.) He has talked about everything from child abuse to integration and strip 
clubs.

Predictably, the station has been accused at one time or another of bias 
against each of the communities listening in – Muslims, Sikhs and Hindus. But 
just as it's true that no A-list star from the Indian subcontinent would dare 
make a promo trip to Britain without dropping in for a chat, so the internal 
reviews into neutrality help keep the station in check. The station has secured 
its future with theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust, but quite 
what that looks, or in fact sounds, like is continually developing – which is, 
I think, a good thing.

You might well argue that the station's very existence is a lesson in the 
failure of multiculturalism. But these shows are uniquely British, broadcasting 
to multiple generations of British listeners. It's nothing short of an 
integrated success.
 