
The BBC has played down concerns that users of its new Playlister online 
music-curation service 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/playlister/help#whatisplaylister> could encounter 
explicit video images and lyrics when they access content on partner websites.

Playlister will allow users to tag any music they hear on BBC radio or TV, 
compile personal playlists and export them to their accounts on partner digital 
services, including Spotify,YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> and Deezer, to listen to 
individual tracks or watch promo videos.

When a user with a Playlister account links to a partner service they must 
first tick a box to confirm they are at least 16 years old, and acknowledge 
that the content they are about to consume may not be compliant withBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> standards.

The message a user is delivered when the BBC redirects to Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> warns that they may come 
across "unedited versions" of tracks on their playlists.

Mark Friend, the controller of multiplatforms and interactive at the BBC, said 
that in testing, the warning has proved to be adequate.

"It is a very clear form of words," he said, speaking at Playlister press 
launch on Wednesday. "Simple, clear, we have tested it out. It works very well.

"We are going to join up your BBC experience with the music experiences you 
have on the rest of the internet. This is about connecting up what we do best 
as a curator with other services that allow the audience to play back that 
music in full."

A beta version of the service, allowing users to compile playlists from BBC 
radio stations, went live on Wednesday, with music from TV shows including The 
Voice and Strictly Come Dancing to be added in the coming months. Playlister 
can be accessed via computers and mobile devices such as smartphones and 
tablets.

Users can listen to 30-seconds of the music on the BBC site and have the 
option of exporting their playlist to a partner where they can listen to a 
music track or watch a video in full. The BBC has signed up Spotify, YouTube 
and Deezer as its first three partners.

Bob Shennan, the controller of Radio 2, Radio 6 and the Asian Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asian-network>, said the wall between 
editorial and commercial services is one the BBC is being very careful to 
maintain.

"It is not something we want to compromise," he said. "We are confident with 
the wall as it stands. It is very important there is clarity in the message 
that it is no longer the BBC when going to a partner service."

The BBC is in talks with a number of other potential music partners, however 
Shennan said there are no plans to make Playlister into some sort of Apple 
iTunes-style store by adding functionality, such as a "buy now" button.

"We are doing this for public service, not pseudo commercial reasons," he 
said. "We not offering a 'club-card' mentality."

 The BBC is nevertheless keen to have Playlister become a mainstream digital 
service, with users all over the world able to sign up for it.

Shennan said BBC DJs such as Zane Lowe have been "gagging for such an 
opportunity in the digital world" and will become "trusted curators" guiding 
Playlister users.

Lowe, who spoke at the launch event at Broadcasting House, said Playlister 
"will influence the way we make radio".

Chris Maples, the head of Spotify UK, said there had been a profound shift 
from searching for music to recommendations and Playlister was part of that 
trend.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>. 
 