
There is no standard career path to becoming an illustrator. To be honest, 
it's a bit of a weird career. I wake up every morning hugely grateful that 
drawing is my job; it's almost too good to be real. I can't tell you how to 
become a successful freelance illustrator, but I can tell you what I've learnt 
so far.

I started my blog <http://emmablock.wordpress.com/> when I was 16, and I'm 
quite proud that it is same blog that I'm writing today. I had always loved 
drawing, but for the first time outsiders could see my work and comment on it. 
The positive feedback encouraged me, and I continued to produce work and share 
it online.

I would say if you're thinking about setting up a blog for your artwork, do 
it. It's a wonderful way to get yourself out there. Find a blogging platform 
that suits you and try to update regularly (once a week is an adequate 
timescale to aim for at first).

I knew art was all I wanted to do, so instead of A-levels I did a BTEC 
National Diploma in art and design, and then a BA in illustration at Middlesex 
University. I got my first job as an illustrator forcard printer Moo's  
<http://uk.moo.com/>pre-designed packs in 2008 just before I started 
university. Moo contacted me after they saw my artwork on a pack of their cards 
I ordered for myself. My next job came whenthe greeting cards company 
Woodmansterne <http://www.woodmansterne.co.uk/> (a client I am still working 
with today) saw my work on Moo's website.

As well as my university work, I was busy producing work for myself and for 
online publications such asAmelia's Magazine <http://www.ameliasmagazine.com/> 
andCellar Door <http://blog.cellardoormagazine.co.uk/>. Free work has some 
value when you are establishing your career, but be picky about what you do.

I also got thoroughly emerged in the wonderful world of Twitter. Someone I 
followed on Twitter followed someone who worked forTime Out 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/>. Through reading a re-tweet, I got in contact 
with them and ended up doing some work for the magazine. Social media is a 
wonderful thing, and I know many illustrators who get most of their work 
through Twitter.

Not every job offer will turn into actual work, and as an illustrator you have 
to get used to the words "we decided to go in another direction". My personal 
near-miss jobs include a film poster forMichel Gondrey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/michel-gondry> and a fashion book for Chronicle 
Books. It was a disappointment not to get either, but a huge honour just to be 
asked, and I'd love the opportunity to work with those clients one day.

My next big job, and my biggest to date, was producing 58 illustrations for 
the recipe bookTea and Cake 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tea-Cake-Emma-Block/dp/1742701949>. It was the most 
wonderful job you can imagine but incredibly hard work as by this time I was in 
my final year at university. The publisher Hardie Grant contacted me after 
seeing my work online, and the company proved a joy to work with. The book has 
just been published: a fully illustrated hardback recipe book on the theme of 
afternoon tea.

Despite a somewhat disappointing response from my degree show, D&AD New Blood 
<http://www.dandad.org/talent/new-blood> and New Designers, I have been 
constantly in work since graduating. The illustration industry is both very 
popular and very tough. I think if I hadn't focused so much on my career before 
I left university, I wouldn't be in the position of working as an illustrator 
full time now. Since April this year, I have been represented by theBright 
Agency <http://brightartlicensing.com/artists/view/238>, who have been 
wonderful and worked hard to keep me in work.

What I've learnt so far: have a good online presence, be nice to people, know 
your industry, don't just do what's expected of you â€“ work harder and do more, 
learnt to accept rejection, value your work, be patient and love what you do.

Emma Block <http://emmablock.co.uk/> is an illustrator. Her recent work can be 
seen inTea and Cake <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tea-Cake-Emma-Block/dp/1742701949> 
published by Hardie Grant Books

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 