
You know a manager is losing his or her grip when the basic command "JFDI 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=JFDI>!" is uttered. (The J, D 
and I stand for Just Do It.) TheBeecroft proposals on removing employment 
protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/may/21/minister-answer-question-no-fault-dismissal?newsfeed=true>
 with the aim of boosting the economy are the Whitehall equivalent of a JFDI 
order. Really, all this nonsense about fair play, decency and dignity is just 
so 20th century, and deeply dull. Don't you read the papers? Haven't you seen 
what is happening in China, India and the rest of the emerging world? We must 
race to be as flexible and dynamic as them by cutting back our current rules 
and regulations. This needs to happen now. JFDI.

Some of the language – not sure it can be called analysis – in Adrian 
Beecroft's original paper is startling. "A proportion of employees, secure in 
the knowledge that their employer will be reluctant to dismiss them, work at a 
level well below their true capacity: they coast along," the paper states. In 
common with many of the assertions made in this document, no evidence is 
provided to back it up. (No wonder the government is now claiming the Beecroft 
paper was in fact a draft, and has issued a "call for evidence".) It would be 
interesting to know what proportion of the workforce genuinely feels secure 
that they will never be fired – a small number at the moment, I expect. But 
even if Beecroft's claim is true, it lets another significant person off the 
hook: the employer. What sort of manager allows people to coast, indefinitely? 
A bad one.

But then what sort of employer sits there thinking, "If only we had less 
employment protection in this country. I would then be able to hire more people 
and treat them badly"? It is a pretty grim view of humanity, and business, that 
argues that this is how employers calculate.

Beecroft, a Tory donor, seems to be ignoring the important example set by the 
prime minister himself in one of his best-known hiring decisions. When asked 
why he had taken onAndy Coulson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/21/andy-coulson-resigns> as his 
press spokesman and subsequently director of communications at No 10, in spite 
of Coulson's earlier resignation from the News of the World, Cameron explained:
"I believe in giving people a second chance." 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/08/david-cameron-andy-coulson-phone-hacking>
 The Beecroft paper offers no such leniency. It wants to introduce a "no fault 
dismissal" procedure, whereby employers would not have to give any reason for 
getting rid of someone, merely an envelope filled with a modest amount of cash.

This would be the ultimate "hire and fire" charter, freedom to sack people 
almost instantaneously and for no valid reason. For a workforce that is already 
experiencing job insecurity and is struggling to raise its productivity, the 
"no fault dismissal" could only make matters worse. If your face didn't fit, if 
it was the wrong colour, if you belonged to the wrong gender – none of these 
things would prevent the tap on the shoulder and the walk to the door. Coming 
at a time ofbudget cuts to the Equalities and Human Rights Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/may/15/equality-human-rights-commission-cuts>
, this move could really not be better designed to increase discrimination and 
inequality at work.

According to the government's own figures, excessive regulation is mentioned 
by only 6% of small and medium-sized businesses as a serious "barrier to 
growth". A real boost to job creation would be stronger demand in the economy 
and banks that lent more readily.

The low-road, low-protection route to a "wild west" economy will do little for 
business. It is amazing that Beecroft seems to believe that it would do the 
opposite. Only in one section of his paper, where he refers to the extension of 
an employee's probation period from one to two years, does he hit upon 
something interesting. "[This] deals with the case of a new employee who does 
not turn out to be up to the job: this often does not become clear during the 
first year of employment." You don't think he could possibly have the PM in 
mind, do you?

Luckily for the government, it has introduced a fixed-term parliament rule, so 
even if voters do want to dismiss it right now, they will probably have to wait 
another three years.

• Follow Comment is free on Twitter @commentisfree 
<http://twitter.com/#!/commentisfree>
 