
The setting for the British Beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> and Pub Association (BBPA) 
annual awards dinner last week could not have been less like a traditional 
British boozer. Leading industry figures headed instead to the Royal Garden 
Hotel next to London’s Kensington Palace, where each course was carefully 
paired with a suitable beer, including chocolate lager and plum porter.

The event reflected the changing culture of beer in Britain. The focus was 
clearly on local and craft brewers, whose dramatic growth has taken the 
industry by surprise. Award winners included Charles Dent, the chairman of 
Timothy Taylor’s, the traditional West Yorkshire brewer, and Hogs Back Brewery, 
which has built its own hop garden at its base in Surrey.

Yet that same week had seen the creation of “Megabrew”, the industry nickname 
for a company that will produce one in three of all beers around the world. As 
sales of established brands stall, SABMiller, the maker of Grolsch and Peroni, 
revealed on Tuesday that it hadaccepted a £68bn takeover by Anheuser-Busch InBev
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/sabmiller-agrees-ab-inbev-takeover-68bn>
, the brewer behind Budweiser and Stella Artois.

However, while Wall Street and the City have been won over by promises of 
cost-cutting and geographical diversity, it will take more than talks about 
concepts such as“deal synergies” to convince drinkers around the world to turn 
their backs on the array of craft beers that have appeared in the past few 
years.

Spiros Malandrakis, drinks analyst at Euromonitor International, said the deal 
did not address the key questions raised by the rise in popularity of craft 
beers: “First on the Wall Street side is the way these two companies complement 
each other with their geographical spread. The second part is the cost-cutting 
approach. Both of these will have positive effects in the medium term. But on 
the downside, on main street the big brands such as Budweiser have been 
haemorrhaging sales as the craft brewers have changed the playing field. Faced 
with these underlying trends, the creation of the biggest beer behemoth is not 
really the answer.”

Malandrakis says growing competition will force Megabrew to start buying craft 
brewers. Before they got together AB InBev and SAB had already begun doing 
this: the lattersnapped up London-based Meantime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/15/sab-miller-buys-meantime-to-enter-uk-craft-beer-market>
 earlier this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7366f12b29edb79279aff747ea78aa633299ddad%2F0_224_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beer%20titans%20opt%20to%20merge%20as%20trend%20for%20smaller%20craft%20brews%20comes%20to%20a%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beer%20titans%20opt%20to%20merge%20as%20trend%20for%20smaller%20craft%20brews%20comes%20to%20a%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7366f12b29edb79279aff747ea78aa633299ddad%2F0_224_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A brewer filters beer at the Meantime brewery in east London, which was 
recently purchased by SABMiller. Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
He added: “However, there was a backlash when smaller brewers were thinking 
about deals with one of the two beer giants. What will the backlash be against 
going into business with this mega-monstrosity, which is the antithesis of the 
craft brewer?”

According to Euromonitor, sales of craft beer have grown by between 14% and 
17% every year for the past five years. In the US, such beers already account 
for 10% of sales. US trade body the Brewers Association claims its market share 
will hit 20% by 2020 – a claim considered realistic by many. In the UK, craft 
beers make up an estimated 5% of sales, but brands such as BrewDog, Meantime 
and Camden Town are growing rapidly.

“You will find a craft brewery in every neighbourhood in London,” says 
Malandrakis.”

For struggling British pubs, the popularity of craft beer has come as a 
relief. Sales of beer grew last year for the first time in a decade, according 
to the BBPA. Roughly half of the beer drunk in Britain is sold in pubs, and 
seven out of every 10 drinks served in pub are beer.

“Beer has become trendy and interesting, and more people are trying it,” says 
BBPA chief executive Brigid Simmonds. She adds that sales of beer to women and 
to young adults are also growing, with people attracted by the variety of 
flavours in beer, and its low alcohol content compared with other drinks, such 
as wine. I would not say there has been a trend towards craft, but to new 
styles and innovation.”

The BBPA is attempting to capitalise on this demand with a new £5m ad 
campaign, using the tagline “There’s a beer for that” to promote the variety of 
beers available in Britain. There are now a record 1,700 brewers across the UK, 
up more than half in just five years.

Simmonds says a key driver of the growth in the number of breweries is the tax 
breaks available to small companies. Brewers producing less than 5,000 
hectolitres of beer a year – roughly 880,000 pints – are eligible for a 50% 
discount on beer duty under a scheme introduced by Gordon Brown in 2002. Nine 
out of 10 British breweries never go above that.

“It’s a disincentive to grow in one sense, but it has also led to innovation 
and an enormous divergence in styles of beer,” Simmonds said.

And Debbie Parker, who tracks consumer trends at Marketing Sciences Unlimited 
in Winchester, believes this variety has helped to make beer drinkers more 
discerning. “The number of small independent breweries exploded after the tax 
breaks came in for small brewers in 2002,” said Parker, one of only eight women 
in the world to have joined the growing profession of beer sommelier. “And this 
led to an increase in innovative beers as they experimented with beers from 
other countries – in particular Belgian ales, including stronger abbey styles 
and spicy, cloudy wheat beers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e767b19b359159d5e44eec66283718b66e95694%2F0_0_3403_2042%2F3403.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beer%20titans%20opt%20to%20merge%20as%20trend%20for%20smaller%20craft%20brews%20comes%20to%20a%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beer%20titans%20opt%20to%20merge%20as%20trend%20for%20smaller%20craft%20brews%20comes%20to%20a%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e767b19b359159d5e44eec66283718b66e95694%2F0_0_3403_2042%2F3403.jpg>
 A bottle of Punk IPA, made by British craft brewer BrewDog. Photograph: Andrew 
Matthews/PA 
“Intensely aromatic American and New Zealand hops have also been used widely 
in the UK to brew golden ales and to give craft lagers more distinctive 
flavours. Consumers of craft beers are themselves more discerning and more 
educated in beer styles, and they’re willing to try different or extreme 
flavours.”

New breweries are opening at a rapid rate. This week, James Yeomans and his 
fiancée Emma Wheatley will open a new pub and restaurant at the site of their 
brewery in Woolwich, south London.

The couple founded Hop Stuff Brewery in 2013 despite having no experience of 
running a commercial brewery; Yeomans had been enjoying a promising career in 
banking with Lloyds. They crowdfunded the money for the venture and their beer 
is now available in pubs owned by Taylor Walker, Mitchells and Butlers, Young’s 
and the Metropolitan Pub Company across the country.

“We’re in a great position because there’s a huge amount of support and 
interest in locally focused businesses,” Yeomans says. “The Woolwich and 
south-east London community really got behind our beers, helping to drive our 
expansion into more mainstream pubs.

“Pub-goers have become much more interested in brewing and confident in 
recognising a decent product. Often they’re the ones educating the pub managers 
and helping to get local names like Hop Stuff out there. It’s the same story as 
you see in the food industry – people are taking more notice of what’s in their 
products and want to support neighbourhood suppliers. Local breweries make it 
easy to do that.”

For the likes for Hop Stuff, the benchmark is BrewDog, the biggest-selling 
craft beer brand in Britain, beating US rivals such as Samuel Adams and Sierra 
Nevada.

Last year, sales of BrewDog’s Punk IPA in supermarkets and off-licences grew 
by 94%, according to market researcher Nielsen. The Aderdeenshire brand’s 
biggest concern is keeping up with demand. Founder James Watt said: “BrewDog 
was born of a desire to change the beer scene in the UK. In 2007, the landscape 
was dominated by stuffy ales and boring, bland lagers. We wanted to challenge 
the status quo, set fire to the scene, and reinvigorate UK brewing.”

Watt insisted that BrewDog can compete with the major brewers despite the 
threat posed by SAB andAB InBev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anheuser-busch> joining forces and 
potentially encroaching further on to the craft scene.

“We set ourselves apart from mainstream breweries, as they are focused heavily 
on making money. We just wanted to make the beers we wanted to drink. We don’t 
compromise on price: great beer is not cheap to make. We don’t cut corners, we 
don’t use additives, or filter or pasteurise the beer, as these things all 
affect its flavour. We wanted to give people a powerful, exciting, flavourful 
alternative to the pedestrian beers peddled by multinational conglomerates.”

They may well peddle “pedestrian beers”, but those conglomerates will continue 
to wield immense power with pubs and retailers. And the rationale behind the 
creation of MegaBrew is global – it is more about Latin America and 
fast-growing African markets than the average British local. And accounting as 
it will for one in three beers drunk worldwide, it will be impossible to avoid.

Nonetheless, if British pubs are a sign of the way the industry is moving, 
Fosters, Stella Artois and Budweiser will have a fight on their hands to remain 
the beer of choice for many.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e75d925ddc19ccb330fdbabb36e16d18bade7be%2F564_1095_3093_1856%2F3093.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beer%20titans%20opt%20to%20merge%20as%20trend%20for%20smaller%20craft%20brews%20comes%20to%20a%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beer%20titans%20opt%20to%20merge%20as%20trend%20for%20smaller%20craft%20brews%20comes%20to%20a%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsabmiller-ab-inbev-megabrew-craft-beer-ale-pubs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e75d925ddc19ccb330fdbabb36e16d18bade7be%2F564_1095_3093_1856%2F3093.jpg>
 Snow beer, China’s biggest brand, and Budweiser: heading for a closer 
relationship? Photograph: Mark Schiefelbein/AP 
MEGABREW: WORLD DOMINATION?

Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sabmiller> together accounted for 30.5% 
of beer sales around the world in 2014, according to data from Euromonitor 
International. The combined company will control a collection of the world’s 
best known brands, including Budweiser, Stella Artois, Corona, Grolsch, Peroni 
and Fosters. The biggest MegaBrew brand is Bud Light, the third most popular 
beer in the world.

However, MegaBrew does not reach everywhere. The UK, for instance, is 
dominated by Carling, Carlsberg and Heineken, none of which is owned by AB 
InBev or SAB. The biggest UK brewer by market share is Carling owner Molson 
Coors, accounting for 18.4% of sales last year. AB InBev’s brands gave it 17.8% 
of the UK market; Heineken claimed 17.1% and Carlsberg 14.8%. Diageo, the owner 
of Guinness, came in third with 4.8%, ahead of SAB, which had just 3.1%.

SAB’s biggest markets were Eastern Europe and Australasia. In the Czech 
Republic, SAB controls 43.5% of the market thanks to Gambrinus and Pilsner 
Urquell, while Fosters brings the company 37.8% ofsales down under.

AB InBev’s biggest markets are in Asia. It controlled 55.7% of sales in South 
Korea and 14% in China. But China highlights the limitations of MegaBrew. 
Although AB InBev and SAB are the biggest companies, they don’t own all of the 
top beer brands. While the world’s biggest is Snow, jointly owned by Chinese 
Resources Enterprise and SABMiller, and controlling 5.4% of global sales, 
second is Chinese brand, Tsingtao, owned by Tsingtao Brewery, with 2.8% of the 
market.
 