
Before I did a workshop with Little Miss Geek at my school, St Saviours and St 
Olaves in Elephant and Castle, I didn't really know anything about IT.

In the workshop, Little Miss Geek <http://littlemissgeek.com/> bought 
Francesca Rosella <http://cutecircuit.com/about/> to speak to us and show us 
some of her work. She is a successful fashion designer who uses technology to 
create unique and exciting clothes. We had a go using coding to create cool 
patterns on sunglasses and also put circuits onto t-shirts.

This was really what got me excited about technology because it showed me that 
you don't have to be sitting at a computer screen all day typing really fast, 
you can be creative with it and do anything you want.

Soon after this workshop I was completely inspired and my IT teacher Mr 
Talbert introduced us to a competition calledApps For Good 
<http://www.appsforgood.org/>. I was ready and raring to go and me and my 
friend Jordan Stirbu designed an app called Jazzy Recycling.

The aim was to create an app that solved a problem and straight away we 
thought of recycling and how to make it fun and rewarding. As Mary Poppins 
says: "You find the fun and it becomes a game," and that is exactly what our 
app does.

Jazzy Recycling helps you find places to recycle, what you can recycle and 
then lets you scan, share and get rewards for what you've recycled. We believe 
a social incentive using Facebook, Twitter and Instagram can really help young 
people like me recycle more.

After the competition Raj Dhonota, who was on the Apprentice and is now a 
business consultant and an angel investor, approached us to help build the app 
and mentor us through our journey. We are very excited about what is to come 
and hope to launch it in early 2014. To have people actually using our app and 
to know we have made a difference would be incredible, so fingers crossed it 
all goes to plan.

I used to think technology was just fixing computers and saying thing like: 
"have you tried turning it on and off again?" like inThe IT Crowd 
<http://www.theitcrowd.co.uk/>. But I have discovered another side to it and 
that you can make tech your own.

Technology is in everything now, you can do whatever you like with it. I am 
typing this on a computer and will send it via the internet.

So to all the girls who think tech is for boys in their bedrooms who can't get 
girlfriends, we are the new generation and we can use technology as a tool to 
do all sorts of different things. So thank you Little Miss Geek, I've realised 
being a geek is cool!

Zea Tongeman took part in one of the Little Miss Geek 
<http://littlemissgeek.com/> school sessions, she is a year 10 student at St 
Saviours and St Olaves school. You can watch Zea and Belinda Parmarin action 
here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=htqLT6k7qP8>

Sign up to become a member of the Women in Leadership community here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> for more comment, 
analysis and best practice direct to your inbox
 