
Ask any successful leader how they achieve their goals while battling a diary 
full of commitments, a deluge of emails and requests for their time, and most 
will say they couldn't do it without their personal assistant.

PAs and executive assistants (EAs) are at the heart of organisations, working 
side-by-side with chief executives and leaders, playing a key role in 
supporting decisions.

Technology has replaced the typing pool, releasing PAs from routine clerical 
tasks and creating opportunities to take on new responsibilities. Some of the 
duties traditionally belonging to middle management have also been taken up by 
PAs during the recession. So while a PA will still be expected to book meetings 
and juggle diaries, they might also be running their own team or conducting 
meetings on their boss's behalf.

In a recent survey of more than 1,700 PAs and secretaries, 16% said their boss 
regularly takes their recommendations on business decisions. Where PAs might 
once have held a small budget, this could now be a seven-figure sum, and PAs 
will negotiate directly with suppliers.

In the survey, 17% of respondents said that they stand in for their manager at 
meetings at least monthly and 29% undertake projects for the wider organisation 
at least weekly. PAs might be co-ordinating big events with thousands of 
guests, organising office moves or supporting other departments with projects.

With these wide range of skills, it's not uncommon for PAs to use their role 
as a route to another profession; 12% of PAs in the survey said they became a 
PA as a route into an organisation or industry. For example, I know of a PA who 
organised a multimillion-pound tender submission at short notice because their 
boss was away and the opportunity was too good to miss. They went on to a 
career in sales and marketing after winning the contract.

But PAs can also lead fulfilling and varied careers by staying put; a third of 
respondents said they had always wanted to be a PA and a similar number plan to 
progress into a more senior PA or EA role in their organisation.

Judy Willett, PA to Lord Harris of Peckham 
<http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/lords/lord-harris-of-peckham/2669>, 
chairman ofCarpetright <http://www.carpetright.co.uk/>, was named PA of the 
year in theExecutive PA Magazine Hays Awards 2012 
<http://www.executivepa.com/news/2012/March/Executive-PA-Magazine-Hays-Awards-2012_352/>
. Willett agrees that there's much more to the role than providing help behind 
the scenes. "I hope I can show that the role of the PA is not just a support 
role," she says. "It's a career that can be moulded and shaped with hard work 
and commitment to your boss and the company you work for."

For Willett it's the variety of the job that makes it rewarding. "I've worked 
for Lord Harris and Carpetright for over 20 years and I love the variety of the 
work that I am involved with. I'm involved with every facet of Lord Harris's 
life, including Carpetright,Arsenal Football Club <http://www.arsenal.com/home>
, and the 19Harris Federation <http://www.harrisfederation.org.uk/> academies. 
Most recently this has included his interest in showjumping â€”his horse won a 
gold medal in the Olympics 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/olympics/olympics-sport/london-2012-olympics-lord-harris-of-peckham-thrilled-his-horse-wins-and-hopes-gold-medal-inspires-children-8015148.html>
."

Where a PA or secretary used to have a purely reactive role, they are now 
proactively finding new ways to improve processes and contribute to the goals 
of the organisation. Having acquired these new skills, I hope we'll see more 
PAs being acknowledged for the important role they play, and more people 
aspiring to become one.

Geoff Sims is managing director of Hays PA & Secretarial 
<http://www.hays.co.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 