
Sir Ben Ainslie <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ainslie> said the staging 
of two America’s Cup buildup races in Portsmouth will have a “huge” impact on 
the local economy, with Formula One companies ready to invest in the Olympic 
champion’s ambitious plans for the city.

Ben Ainslie Racing are hoping to become the first British boat to win the 
America’s Cup in 2017, with the event to be held in either Bermuda or San 
Diego. Before then,Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/portsmouth> 
will host two America’s Cup world series races in July 2015 and July 2016.

A sailing hub being built in Portsmouth at a cost of £12m will become the home 
of BAR when it is completed by May next year. The government has already 
committed £7.5m to the Portsmouth project at Camber Docks, while a total £80m 
of private investment will be spent on Ainslie’s team.

Discussions with Adrian Newey, the F1 engineer and Red Bull technical 
director, are continuing, and Ainslie is confident of securing partnerships 
with F1-related companies. “If we were to bring the America’s Cup itself to 
Portsmouth it would create thousands of jobs and hundreds of millions in 
revenue,” Ainslie said.

“There is huge potential but even just having the America’s Cup world series 
and the team being based in Portsmouth will create hundreds of jobs directly 
and indirectly. That will have a big impact on the area.”

Ainslie, the most decorated Olympic sailor in history, is working alongside 
Sir Keith Mills and other financial backers whose goal is to bring the 
America’s Cup to Portsmouth after 2017.Ainslie secured the title with Oracle 
USA in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/27/memorable-moments-2013-ben-ainslie>
, triumphing in remarkable style aftercoming back from 8-1 down to win 9-8 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/25/americas-cup-victory-team-usa-comeback>
 against Team New Zealand.

Mills said: “We have a big plan to use the America’s Cup in Portsmouth in the 
same way we used the Olympic Games in east London, as a means of regenerating a 
city that has had a tough time in recent years.

“The public money isn’t going into the team itself, it’s going into the base 
which will be a visitors centre, somewhere to bring school kids in and for 
education and apprenticeships. What we’d like to see the America’s Cup do is 
what Formula One has done in the Thames Valley, and there are literally 
hundreds of companies involved in supplying the F1 industry.”
 