
David Nicholls  <http://davidnichollswriter.com/>

Novelist and screenwriter 

Elizabeth Strout’s Olive Kitteridge 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/olive-kitteridge.html> (Simon & Schuster 
£7.99) is the best novel I’ve read for some time, a series of 13 interlocking 
short stories that combine to create an extraordinarily rich and detailed 
portrait of both a marriage and a community. Olive is an extraordinary creation 
– stubborn, rude, insensitive, irascible but also principled, well-meaning, 
full of thwarted love. Frances McDormand is wonderful in the role in theTV 
version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZTHtPIilE6c> which, for once, is just 
as good as the novel. There’s another troubled family at the centre of Anne 
Enright’s exceptional novel,The Green Road 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/381856/s/the-green-road/>
 (Vintage £8.99) and I also enjoyed Jonathan Lee’sHigh Dive 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293722/s/high-dive/> 
(William Heinemann £16.99), an ingenious and original mixture of the domestic 
and the political, set in the days leading up to the Brighton bombing of 1984. 
At its heart is a father-and-daughter relationship that feels uncannily real 
and wonderfully touching . Last summer, in France, I swore that I would finally 
readMiddlemarch <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/middlemarch-19.html> 
(available in Vintage, £6.99). This summer, in Sardinia, I’m going to read
Middlemarch.

Curtis Sittenfeld <http://www.curtissittenfeld.com/>

Writer 

I suspect in about 15 years, the young American novelist Tony Tulathimutte 
<http://tonytula.com/> will start winning huge literary awards, but in the 
meantime, I recommend readingPrivate Citizens 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/422179/> (Oneworld 
Publications £12.99), his bracingly smart first novel about messed-up 
millennials. As for me, this summer I’ll spend some time in Rhode Island, where 
I’ll treat myself to an advance copy of the memoirWhen in French 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/430981/> 
(HarperCollins £12.99, out in September), by Lauren Collins, who’s a staff 
writer at theNew Yorker living in Switzerland and married to a Frenchman – and 
apparently linguistic high jinks have ensued.




Geoff Dyer  <http://geoffdyer.com/>

Writer 

I’d warmly recommend At the Existentialist Café 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378256/s/at-the-existentialist-cafe/>
 (Vintage £16.99), Sarah Bakewell’s study of Sartre, Heidegger, Camus, De 
Beauvoir et al (as they say in French – or is it Latin?). She is always very 
readable without succumbing to what seems to be established as a despicable 
ideal in nonfiction publishing: to write about complex subjects in a jaunty 
tone. Speaking of Heidegger (seriously), Kerry Howley’s account of her 
immersion in the world of mixed martial arts,Thrown 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/328478/> (Hamish 
Hamilton £14.99), deserves a much wider audience. Not exactly holiday reading, 
but Matthew Desmond’sEvicted 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408904/s/evicted/> 
(Allen Lane £20) is an essential piece of reportage about poverty and profit in 
urban America. I’ll be in London for most of the summer where I’ll be making 
yet another attempt – my fourth – at Robert Musil’sThe Man Without Qualities 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/man-without-qualities.html> (Picador £16.99).

Helen Dunmore  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/helen-dunmore>

Poet and novelist 

I heard Margo Jefferson speak at the Bristol festival of ideas 
<http://www.ideasfestival.co.uk/> and loved her blend of wit, intellect and 
feeling. Her memoirNegroland 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406152/> (Granta 
£12.99) is set in Chicago during the 1950s and 60s, where she grew up as a 
privileged child of the African American upper middle class. But as her mother 
drily observed, to white America the highly educated, professional and 
aspirational Jeffersons were “just more Negroes”. Jefferson writes with 
piercing clarity of a childhood which was full of love and opportunity at home 
but also saturated by contradictions, confusions and a racism which corrodes, 
like rust, to the heart’s core.

I’ll be going to Cornwall this summer and so I’m packing Melissa Harrison’s 
Rain: Four Walks in English Weather 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/376352/s/rain-four-walks-in-english-weather/>
 (Faber £12.99).

Ann Patchett  <http://annpatchett.com/>

Author 

Ben H Winters’s new novel Underground Airlines 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/414191/> (Century 
£12.99) makes the word “thrilling” seem inadequate. Not only could I not stop 
reading it, it changed the way I looked at everything around me once I was 
finished. I also thought Yaa Gyasi’sHomegoing (Viking £16.99) was terrific. She 
takes on so many characters, so much history, and such a vast sweep of time 
without a single unnecessary word. I’m on my way to Colorado next week to 
interviewLucy Kalanithi <http:> about her husband Paul’s book When Breath 
Becomes Air 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/373297/s/when-breath-becomes-air/>
 (Vintage £12.99). That’s still the best book I’ve read this year.

Pack a collection of fairytales from the region you’re visiting. They remind 
us how similar we all are.
Cornelia Funke 
Anthony Doerr  <http://www.anthonydoerr.com/>

Novelist and short-story writer 

William Finnegan’s absorbing surfing memoir, Barbarian Days 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/368045/s/barbarian-days/>
 (Little, Brown £9.99), will have you studying the ocean with new eyes, and 
Annie Proulx’s deforestation epic,Barkskins 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404255/s/barkskins/> 
(4th Estate £18.99), will have you pondering the provenance of every piece of 
wood you come across. I highly recommend both. As for my own summer holiday, 
we’re moving into an old house on a hill, one with bookshelves built into the 
bedroom walls, and I’m sorting through our thousands of books. Each seems to 
unlock a dozen memories: Where was I when I bought this David Malouf, when I 
read this Marilynne Robinson, when I scribbled “amazing” on to page 99 of Denis 
Johnson’sTrain Dreams <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/train-dreams.html> 
(Granta £12.99)? My companion in this labour of love isThe Library at Night 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/library-at-night.html> (Yale University Press 
£10.99) by the Argentinian-Canadian Alberto Manguel, a series of beautiful, 
erudite essays about the histories, shapes, hidden lives and meanings of 
libraries, both public and personal.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e6db4f64efc7544a350cc57fef59e64a67ac026%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e6db4f64efc7544a350cc57fef59e64a67ac026%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Elizabeth Strout: ‘Her prose is like words doing jazz.’ Photograph: Valerio 
Pennicino/Getty Images 
Rachel Joyce  <http://www.rachel-joyce.co.uk/> 

Novelist and playwright 

Two novels that stand out for me are Elizabeth Strout’s exquisite My Name Is 
Lucy Barton <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/366394/> 
(Viking £12.99) andOur Souls at Midnight 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400480/s/our-souls-at-night/>
 (Picador £7.99) by Kent Haruf. Both are small – they will fit into your jacket 
pocket – and both speak, in the most pared language, of such complex things. 
Elizabeth Strout’s prose is like words doing jazz. As for nonfiction,Dadland 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/414258/> (Chatto & 
Windus £18.99) by Keggie Carew is a rare new memoir. I finished it knowing more 
about history, dementia, men, daughters, sheds, diaries, an inquisitive mind 
and peeing in plastic bottles. This summer we will be spending time in a small 
village at the foot of Mont Ventoux, so I might just pack all those books and 
read them again, along with the Icelandic classic,Independent People 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/independent-people.html> (Vintage £9.99) by 
Halldór Laxness.




Mark Haddon  <http://markhaddon.com/>

Novelist 

I will, I’m sure, be only one person in a long queue of people recommending 
that you read Emma Cline’sThe Girls 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/403944/s/the-girls/> 
(Vintage £12.99) andThe Gene 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404018/s/the-gene/> 
(Vintage £25) by Siddhartha Mukherjee. The first is shockingly assured for a 
first novel. The second takes a monumental and complex subject which is woven 
into every part of our lives and makes it both gripping and accessible. I’ve 
been driving a lot recently andBleak House on audiobook has proved such good 
company that when I’m finished I’m going to revisit another old and trusted 
friend and have Harriet Walter readMiddlemarch to me over the summer. though 
probably not on the plane to and from San Francisco where I shall, I hope, be 
dozing peacefully in the arms of Mrs Merlot and Mr Diazepam.

Lucy Hughes-Hallett  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/lucy-hughes-hallett>

Historian and biographer 

Ann Wroe’s Six Facets of Light 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385355/s/six-facets-of-light/>
(Vintage £25) is dazzlingly original. Poets and artists, from Dante to Eric 
Ravilious, are among the stars orbiting Wroe’s mind as she walks over Sussex’s 
chalk downs. Frances Wilson’sGuilty Thing: A Life of Thomas de Quincey 
(Bloomsbury £25) is an ingeniously structured biography of a brilliant, 
ridiculously self-destructive man, and a beautifully written cultural history 
full of arresting insights into celebrity and hero-worship and the public’s 
prurient fascination with violence. And for those who, unlike me (I’ll be in 
Suffolk), need a treat for the flight – a collection of fizzingly funny short 
stories by Katherine Heiny –Single, Carefree, Mellow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/single-carefree-mellow.html> (4th Estate 
£12.99).

Rohan Silva 

Co-founder, Second Home,  <http://secondhome.io/about-us>entrepreneur 

I haven’t been able to plan a holiday yet, but I’m desperate for one! 
Fortunately, I know exactly what I’ll be reading when I finally get time off, 
starting with Tahmima Anam’s latest novelThe Bones of Grace 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/397018/s/the-bones-of-grace/>
 (Canongate £14.99), which she finished writing at [my workspace and cultural 
venue]Second Home <http://secondhome.io/about-us> last autumn. I’ve also become 
obsessed with the brilliant Irish writer Kevin Barry – you simply have to read 
his novelsCity of Bohane <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/city-of-bohane.html> 
(Vintage £7.99) andBeatlebone 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/347708/s/beatlebone/> 
(Canongate £12.99), and I’ve been saving his first short story collectionThere 
Are Little Kingdoms 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/there-are-little-kingdoms.html> (Stinging Fly 
Press £9) for my long-awaited break. I should really get around to reading
Middlemarch <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/middlemarch-19.html>, The Red and 
the Black <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/red-and-the-black.html> (available 
in Penguin Classics, £9.99) andTo the Lighthouse 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/to-the-lighthouse-10.html> (available in 
Vintage, £6.99), which have been on my to-do pile for years now. So, if I 
manage to have more than a couple of days away, I’ll add them to my suitcase 
too. Can’t bloody wait.

Blake Morrison  <http://www.blakemorrison.net/>

Poet and author 

Graham Swift’s novella Mothering Sunday 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/366889/s/mothering-sunday/>
 (Scribner 12.99), set in a country house in 1924, can be read in a couple of 
hours – but you have to reread it to appreciate its subtle dissection of love, 
loss and social class. I’ve been slow coming toFrederick Seidel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/06/frederick-seidel-interview-widening-income-inequality>
’s poetry but better late than never: his latest collection,Widening Income 
Inequality (Faber £14.99), is a characteristic blend of transgressive ideas and 
provocative rhymes. To mark this year’s two big literary anniversaries, I’m 
going to have a staycation rereading Charlotte Brontë’sVillette 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Villette&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 (available in Vintage, £6.99) and catch up on James Shapiro’s acclaimed study
1606: William Shakespeare and the Year of Lear 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337193/s/1606/> (Faber 
£9.99).




Craig Taylor  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/craigtaylor>

Journalist and playwright 

Why go light and frothy when you can go heavy and dark with your summer 
reading? I’d recommend taking on holiday all those beautiful, rereleased 
editions ofAnita Brookner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/15/anita-brookner-obituary>’s 
tender and cruel and sad novels.Lewis Percy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/419193/> (Penguin 
£8.99) is especially good. I’m also going to read – seriously – Svetlana 
Alexievich’sChernobyl Prayer  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/393442/>(Penguin 
£9.99) and the great new edition of herSecond-Hand Time 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/398112/>, put out by 
Fitzcarraldo Editions (£14.99). To stick with an emerging theme of collapse and 
despair (with a few shoots of hope), I’ve also got this fat edition ofAusterity 
Measures: The New Greek Poetry 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/412296/s/austerity-measures/>
(edited by Karen Van Dyck, Penguin £10.99). Before we know it, grim winter will 
be back to envelop us all. I’m not actually going on holiday this summer. 
Perhaps that’s what’s influencing my choices. I’ll be in New York throughout 
the hot months.


 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/maggie-gee>



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a3a9d9bb6e5380afc97b11a83ace79808ef7f2c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a3a9d9bb6e5380afc97b11a83ace79808ef7f2c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Anna Raverat: ‘Lover tells the story of an affair with unflinching 
truthfulness.’ Photograph: Jeremy Sutton-Hibbert/Getty Images 
Maggie Gee  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/maggie-gee>

Author 

Real, delicious summer reading, one for your suitcase, but with the bite of 
truthfulness – Anna Raverat’s second novel,Lover 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/380818/> (Picador 
£12.99), manages the difficult feat of telling the story of a husband’s 
adulterous affair with unflinching truthfulness but also wit and generosity of 
spirit. A wise novel with values – honesty in love and business, loyalty – that 
is also elegantly written and a gripping read. I will be taking in my suitcase 
Colin Grant’s wonderfulA Smell of Burning 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/419090/> (Vintage 
£16.99, out in August), which I am reading in proof – a brilliant and touching 
story about brotherly love and the mystery of even those people we know best. 
Grant interweaves the story of epilepsy with the story of his own 
Jamaican-origin birth family and in particular his brother Christopher. I’ll be 
rereading that one as well. And my classic? The Bible, actually, for bedtime. 
My holiday will be in Kent, but then I’ll be off to work in Gibraltar, writing 
about Neanderthals.




John Lanchester  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-lanchester> 

Journalist and novelist 

I loved two newish novels which mix realistic elements with fantasy, have a 
strong undertow of elegy, and which also, weirdly, both have “eleven” in the 
title: Emily St John Mandel’sStation Eleven 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/station-eleven.html> (Picador £12.99) and 
Jonathan Coe’sNumber 11 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/344991/s/number-11/> 
(Viking £16.99). In terms of what’s next, my summer reading is more fixed than 
the rest of my holiday plans: I’m very much looking forward to Francis 
Spufford’sGolden Hill 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406003/> (Faber 
£16.99), Lucia Berlin’sA Manual for Cleaning Women 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/322586/s/a-manual-for-cleaning-women/>
 (Picador £16.99) and – fixing a gap in my education –John E Woods’s translation
 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/buddenbrooks.html> of Thomas Mann’s 
Buddenbrooks (Everyman’s Library £12.99).

Helen Simpson  <http://helensimpsonwriter.com/> 

Writer 

I recommend squeezing in: 100 Years of the Best American Short Stories (40 
stories, 723 pages, Houghton Mifflin), edited by Lorrie Moore and Heidi Pitlor;
Everywhere I Look (Text Publishing £12.99), compulsively readable essays from 
Australia by Helen Garner;Chernobyl Prayer 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/393442/> by Svetlana 
Alexievich, one of the most humane and terrifying books I’ve ever read. I have 
saved for my own suitcase Rachel Cusk’s latest novel,Transit 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/429132/> (Vintage 
£16.99), guaranteed to be worryingly addictive, along withGuilty Thing 
(Bloomsbury £25), Frances Wilson’s biography of literature’s most famous 
addict, Thomas De Quincey. I will also be packing a cagoule as I’m off to the 
Black Isle via Glasgow and Edinburgh.

David Kynaston  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-kynaston> 

Historian and writer 

Rowan Moore’s Slow Burn City: London in the Twenty-First Century 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/380817/s/slow-burn-city/>
 (Picador £20) is an architectural study in the noble tradition ofIan Nairn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/16/ian-nairns-london-buildings-funny-acerbic-50th-birthday-architecture-critic-shelflife>
: a vivid, knowledgable, argumentative tour of a city changing perhaps faster 
than at any time in its history. Complementary and equally stimulating is 
Barnabas Calder’sRaw Concrete: The Beauty of Brutalism 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/raw-concrete.html> (Cornerstone £25). That 
particular “ism” is undeniably having a moment, however misguided, and Calder 
makes as persuasive a case as any advocate could. For myself, with a book to 
finish, no summer holiday, but I hope to plug on withRichard Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/richard-ford>’s Frank Bascombe novels: 
emotional depth combined with the consoling pleasures of the quotidian.

Justin Cartwright  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/justin-cartwright>

Novelist 

Preparation for the Next Life 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283092/s/preparation-for-the-next-life/>
 by Atticus Lish (Oneworld £14.99) is a superb novel to pack in any suitcase, 
as is Ferdinand Mount’s nonfiction work,English Voices: Lives, Landscapes, 
Laments <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/380235/> 
(Simon & Schuster £25): a wonderful, intelligent, sly, informed book about a 
collection of writers and divines and old masters, including Thomas Hardy and 
Charles Dickens, Bagehot, Rosebery, Arthur Balfour and more. Mount is 
particularly good in his chapter On Statesmen, which looks at figures such as 
Margot Asquith, Oswald Mosley and Roy Jenkins. He has a wonderful talent for 
getting at the essence of people and comes at it with a wide literary 
knowledge. I am planning to go to Sicily in July and the book I most want to 
read on my holidays isA Doubter’s Almanac 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/424803/> by Ethan 
Canin (Bloomsbury £18.99).




Joanna Walsh’s Grow a Pair: 9½ Fairytales About Sex is surreal, bawdy and 
inventive – wickedly so…
Marina Warner 
Louise Doughty  <http://www.louisedoughty.com/>

Author and journalist 

I’m currently enjoying two very different nonfiction books: Release the Bats 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/413558/> by DBC 
Pierre, a characteristically entertaining and eccentric how-to-write book by 
the author ofVernon God Little, and Between the World and Me 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/380654/> by Ta-Nehisi 
Coates <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ta-nehisi-coates> (Random House US 
£18.99), a must-read for insight on race and America. In their own ways, both 
books use autobiographical anecdote to illuminate the complex subject of what 
we are, why we do what we do. It’s been a sparkling year for debut novels so 
far and the ones I am keenest to catch up on while I’m on the sun lounger areMy 
Name Is Leon <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407115/> 
by Kit de Waal (Viking £12.99),Owl Song at Dawn 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/owlsong-at-dawn.html> by Emma Claire Sweeney 
(Legend Press £8.99) andThe Words in My Hand 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/359181/> by Guinevere 
Glasfurd (Hodder & Stoughton £16.99). I will have to take an e-reader, though: 
I’m appearing at theByron Bay festival <http://byronwritersfestival.com/> in 
Australia followed by a trip to theKakadu National Park 
<http://www.parksaustralia.gov.au/kakadu/index.html> and Uluru, so no room for 
hardbacks this year.

Katie Roiphe 

Author and journalist 

I just got back from my wedding in Jamaica, for which I packed an optimistic 
number of books: Alexander Maksik’s riveting and disturbing novelShelter in 
Place(Europa), which is a totally original exploration of mental illness, 
sexual politics, family and violence; Ann Patchett’s beautiful novelCommonwealth
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/428496/> (Bloomsbury 
£12.99, out in September), about love and family and tragedy, and Emma Straub’s
Modern Lovers <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407160/>
(Michael Joseph £12.99), about middle-aged former musicians living in Brooklyn, 
which was a perfect lounge chair and piña colada book. I never got to my last 
books, which were Simone de Beauvoir’sLetters to Sartre (Vintage) and Mary 
Wollstonecraft’sA Vindication of the Rights of Woman 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mary-wollstonecraft-s-a-vindication-of-the-rights-of-woman.html>
(Taylor & Francis £16.99), but am planning to bring them to another beach later 
in the summer.




Joe Dunthorne  <http://joedunthorne.com/> 

Novelist and poet 

It’s not new but I recently read The End of Alice 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/end-of-alice.html> by AM Homes (Granta £8.99) 
and thought it was incredible. Given that many of the terrifying moments in the 
book take place on holiday, this is a guaranteed way to make any summer break 
profoundly sinister, if that’s your thing. I also loved Luke Kennard’s 
brilliantly inventive new poetry collection,Cain 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404648/> (Penned in 
the Margins £12.99), and Jenny Offill’s debut novel,Last Things 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406870/> (Bloomsbury 
£8.99), which is now back in print.

For my part, I’m going to Corsica with Don DeLillo’s latest, Zero K 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400538/s/zero-k/> 
(Picador £16.99), and the new collection of poems by Denise Riley,Say Something 
Back <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400466/> 
(Picador £9.99).

Kirsty Wark  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/2PYGyXFlBfFtYXJc4N3zwyk/kirsty-wark>

Journalist 

This is a summer of short sojourns – to Arran, Copenhagen and Mallorca with 
joyous hours on flights (did I really write that?) undisturbed by the tyranny 
of mobile technology – the perfect time to read. I will be rereading Simon 
Mawer’sTightrope 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/383820/s/tightrope/> 
(Abacus £8.99), his second novel featuring his brave and flawed wartime heroine 
Marian Sutro. I find it fascinating that both he and William Boyd have written 
such rounded, buccaneering female characters this year and dealt with their old 
age so poignantly. They are two women who lived through the second world war in 
such different ways. I’ll also tuck into Neil Gunn’sThe Silver Darlings 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/silver-darlings-2.html> (Faber £9.99), 
something to connect me to Scotland when I am away, and because he was a 
favourite of my father’s.

Anthony Mortimer’s translation of The Flowers of Evil is marvellous. Poetry is 
perfect for la plage.
John Banville 
Lionel Shriver  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lionelshriver>

Journalist and author 

You couldn’t go wrong packing Mark Haddon’s luminous story collection The Pier 
Falls 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385354/s/the-pier-falls/>
 (Vintage £16.99), Deborah Levy’s memorably strangeHot Milk 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378094/> (Hamish 
Hamilton £12.99), or Hannah Kohler’s improbably accomplished first novel,The 
Outside Lands <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/362886/> 
(Picador £12.99). Me, I may continue to revisit Richard Yates –Disturbing the 
Peace, The Easter Parade <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/easter-parade.html>, 
Cold Spring Harbor 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/328929/> (all Vintage, 
£8.99). Although I’ve read these books, one of the joys of encroaching senility 
is returning to favourite novels and failing to recognise a word of them. 
Paperbacks in tow, I’ll hit Brooklyn for plenty of tennis and Iowa to help 
harvest my brother’s peach orchard, then ruin a fortnight in Australia with a 
book tour.

Rana Dasgupta  <http://www.ranadasgupta.com/>

Novelist 

I can’t recommend enough Nicholas Shaxson’s Treasure Islands 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/treasure-islands-2.html> (Vintage £10.99), 
which I finished just before the Panama Papers revelations – it’s an account 
everyone should read, not only of the offshore system, but also of the dark 
genius that has built it. Another recent marvel:Nothing Is True and Everything 
Is Possible 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/362409/s/nothing-is-true-and-everything-is-possible/>
by Peter Pomerantsev (Faber £8.99), whose style and prose reach the heights 
without which it is not possible to do justice to what he calls “the surreal 
heart of the new Russia”. For those who like their holidays particularly 
tortured:A Higher Form of Killing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/395050/> by Diana 
Preston (Bloomsbury, £9.99) is a wonderful reflection on three excesses of the 
first world war. I have to admit that my own holiday in rural Sicily will be 
devoted to slightly more peaceful pleasures.The Gene 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404018/s/the-gene/>, 
first of all, by the brilliant Siddhartha Mukherjee (Vintage £25), andZero K 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400538/s/zero-k/>, 
the latest work by that most stupendous of contemporary novelists, Don DeLillo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3398ae1a1a1c6a26fad48c8bb3fa7c1dc86b0fe2%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3398ae1a1a1c6a26fad48c8bb3fa7c1dc86b0fe2%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Jane Mayer: ‘ Dark Money is political journalism at its best.’ Photograph: PR 
AM Homes  <http://www.amhomesbooks.com/>

Novelist 

Given the state of the world, I’ve been consuming nonfiction in an effort to 
make sense of things. Jane Mayer’sDark Money: The Hidden History of the 
Billionaires Behind the Rise of the Radical Right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/17/dark-money-review-nazi-oil-the-koch-brothers-and-a-rightwing-revolution>
(Scribe £9.99) is political journalism at its best, an epic and terrifying 
story that grips the reader like a Stephen King thriller. AndThe Brothers: John 
Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, And Their Secret World War 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/brothers-4.html> by Stephen Kinzer (St 
Martin’s Press £12.99), an illuminating portrait of the cold war secretary of 
state and his equally influential brother, the director of the CIA. I’m 
spending the summer in New York, and very much looking forward to Rose Tremain’s
Gustav Sonata 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385242/s/the-gustav-sonata/>
 (Vintage £16.99) and Joyce Carol Oates’s recent memoir The Lost Landscape 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323815/> (4th Estate 
£14.99), which describes how her early years formed her as a writer. Also
Homegoing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/14/books/review-homegoing-by-yaa-gyasi.html?_r=0>
 by Yaa Gyasi (Viking £16.99, out in January 2017).

Cornelia Funke  <http://www.corneliafunke.com/>

Author 

My first suggestion is: pack a collection of fairytales from the region you’re 
heading for. Fairytales are time machines. They tell us about forgotten cities, 
landscapes, creatures, gods. They remind us of how similar and different at the 
same time we all are. My next suggestion isGermany: Memories of a Nation 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/germany-4.html> by the wonderful Neil 
MacGregor (Allen Lane £30). I owe him so many insights into my home country and 
the culture I grew up with. What will get into my bag, which I’ll be taking to 
the North Island of New Zealand with my daughter Anna, and then to Sydney? I am 
currently researching Japanese fairytales, so there will beTales of Old Japan 
by AB Mitford (Dover Publications), plusThe Cabaret of Plants  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337837/s/the-cabaret-of-plants/>
by Richard Mabey (Profile £20) andThe Little Red Chairs 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/419599/> by Edna 
O’Brien (Faber £7.99).

Marina Warner  <http://www.marinawarner.com/index.html>

Novelist and historian

Joanna Walsh’s Grow a Pair: 9½ Fairytales about Sex (Readux Books) is surreal, 
bawdy and inventive (wickedly so); Mary Jacobus, inReading Cy Twombly: Poetry 
in Paint(Princeton), carries us on a marvellous voyage through the artist’s 
mind and beyond. On a darker note, I hugely admireSecond-Hand Time 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/398112/> by Svetlana 
Alexievich (Fitzcarraldo Editions 14.99), where she builds a Greek tragic 
chorus of memories about the Soviet Union. I’m hoping to join my two-year-old 
grandchild in Portofino for a few days and I want to read Francis Spufford’s
Golden Hill <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406003/> 
(Faber £16.99), andUnholy Land 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/418172/> (Skyscraper 
£16.99), a most strange, ambitious rap romance set in Israel/Palestine, 
composed byAidan Andrew Dunn <http://aidanandrewdun.com/press.html>, a poet and 
musician known as the William Blake of King’s Cross.




Attica Locke  <http://www.atticalocke.com/>

Author 

Underground Airlines 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/361654/> by Ben H 
Winters (Random House £12.99) is one of the most thoughtful and inventive books 
I’ve read. Part alternative history and part detective novel, the book takes 
place in an America where slavery never ended.Eligible 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385472/> by Curtis 
Sittenfeld (HarperCollins £14.99)is a pitch-perfect adaptation of Austen’sPride 
and Prejudice and was pure joy from the very first page. This is Darcy and Liz 
for our age (complete with booty calls and endless deciphering of texts). It’s 
a beautifully written satire that is never cynical when it comes to romance. I 
didn’t want it to end. I will spend my summer between Los Angeles and theEmpire 
set in Chicago, where I am a screenwriter and have been known to read between 
takes.

Mariella Frostrup 

Journalist and presenter 

Ayelet Gundar-Goshen’s Waking Lions 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/379375/> (Pushkin 
£12.99) is a tense thriller set among Israel’s illegal immigrant community.My 
Name Is Leon by Kit de Waal (Viking £12.99) is a poignant and life-affirming 
account of two young brothers in care.Reputations 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/395039/s/reputations/>
 by Juan Gabriel Vásquez (Bloomsbury £13.99) is a troubling story of a 
political cartoonist who finds his convictions tested when a traumatic past 
event returns to haunt him. Even if you’re not travelling this summer, these 
novels will take you far away into different and secret worlds, which is what I 
love a good book to do. As for me, I’m lugging Lawrence Durrell’sThe Alexandria 
Quartet <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/alexandria-quartet.html> (Faber 
£16.99) with me again, though this time as an ebook to save space in my 
luggage. I’m hoping after three previous attempts to be seduced that this last 
Herculean effort will pay off and I’ll be transported by Justine et al. I’m off 
to Greece to retrace the route ofThe Odyssey on a sailing boat with my husband 
and kids.


 <http://www.harikunzru.com/>

Hari Kunzru  <http://www.harikunzru.com/>

Novelist 

This summer I won’t be travelling because there’s a new baby in the house, and 
I’m mainly reading short things intently on the subway. I admired Anne Boyer’s 
collectionGarments Against Women (Ahsahta Press) and I’d never read Robert 
Lowell’sLife Studies <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-studies-2.html> 
(Faber £11.99). Next up I have two recent novels – Álvaro Enrigue’sSudden Death 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385322/s/sudden-death/>
 (Vintage £14.99) and Han Kang’sThe Vegetarian 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/357559/s/the-vegetarian/>
(Granta £7.99). Summer holidays are usually for long books, books to dwell 
inside, like the John E Woods translation of Thomas Mann’sThe Magic Mountain 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/magic-mountain.html> (Everyman’s Library 
£12.99). 

Salley Vickers  <http://www.salleyvickers.com>

Novelist 

I highly recommend The Exchange of Princesses 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/307418/> by Chantal 
Thomas (Other Press £12.99). Based on a real historical event, it relates how 
Philippe d’Orléans, the regent of France, arranges the marriage of the 
11-year-old Louis XV to the infanta, daughter of the king of Spain, who is only 
four – and likewise for his own 12-year-old daughter to marryied the heir to 
the Spanish throne. I loved James Shapiro’s1599: A Year in the Life of William 
Shakespeare <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/1599.html> (Faber £9.99) and in 
the 400th year of Shakespeare’s death his1606 … The Year of Lear 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337193/s/1606/> (Faber 
£9.99) is a brilliant successor – rich in scholarly detail yet always engaging 
and enlightening. I shall be taking to my annual retreat in Corfu Peter 
Parker’s inviting new book,Housman Country: Into the Heart of England 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405694/> (Little, 
Brown £25), which has theShropshire Lad poems helpfully appended. Housman, to 
whom I was introduced aged nine at my state primary school, remains one of my 
favourite poets. Nicky Morgan take note.


 <http://www.larafeigel.com/about-lara/>




Lara Feigel  <http://www.larafeigel.com/about-lara/>

Critic and historian 

For those holidaying in an urban setting, I’d recommend Olivia Laing’s 
brilliantThe Lonely City 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377447/s/the-lonely-city/>
(Canongate £16.99), which is a joyful celebration of lost, radical art that 
also has the benefit of making you less lonely if holidaying alone. If you’re 
heading to the beach, Deborah Levy’sHot Milk 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378094/> (Hamish 
Hamilton £12.99) is a wonderfully dreamlike tale of the strange, dangerous 
pleasure possible by the sun-infused sea. I’m going to be spending much of the 
summer in the Suffolk countryside, where I’ll start by reading Simone de 
Beauvoir’sThe Second Sex <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/second-sex-4.html> 
(Vintage £12.99) and Doris Lessing’s The Summer Before the Dark (HarperCollins 
£11.99).

Sara Wheeler  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sara-wheeler>

Travel author and biographer 

On Reading, Writing and Living With Books 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/438348/s/on-reading-writing-and-living-with-books/>
 (Pushkin £4.99) consists of 100 pages of pleasure culled from the shelves of 
theLondon Library <http://www.londonlibrary.co.uk/>, which celebrates its 175th 
anniversary this year. Authors extracted range from Dickens to Woolf. Other 
titles in this heavenly little series includeOn Corpulence: Feeding the Body and
Feeding the Mind 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/438346/s/on-corpulence/>
, by the undertaker William Banting (Pushkin £4.99) – most suitable for 
assuaging holiday indulgence. I shall be quietly broiling in Mexico this summer 
so am packing Ed O’Loughlin’s new novelMinds of Winter (Quercus £16.99). As it 
is set in the polar regions it might cool me down.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F996a0c38b588883877340564bcca5efc6f08f9f7%2F0_29_5827_3497%2F5827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F996a0c38b588883877340564bcca5efc6f08f9f7%2F0_29_5827_3497%2F5827.jpg>
 Illustration: Øivind Hovland 
Alexander McCall Smith <http://www.alexandermccallsmith.co.uk/>

Novelist 

This summer I’ll be taking with me to the western Highlands Karl Sabbagh’s 
account of botanical fraud,A Rum Affair 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/409791/> (Birlinn 
£9.99) and Hugh Aldersey-Williams’sTide 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407107/s/tide/> 
(Viking £18.99), which is all about… well, tides. Those who would like an 
engaging summer read should pack James Runcie’s latest tale of clerical 
detection,Sydney Chambers and the Dangers of Temptation 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406868/> (Bloomsbury 
£14.99). Also consider Darryl Bullock’s timely biography,Florence Foster Jenkins
 (Duckworth £7.99) – delightfully cheering.


 <http://www.john-banville.com/>

John Banville  <http://www.john-banville.com/>

Writer 

Sarah Bakewell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/04/ten-reasons-to-be-an-existentialist>
’sAt the Existentialist Café: Freedom, Being and Apricot Cocktails 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378256/s/at-the-existentialist-cafe/>
(Chatto & Windus £16.99) is an unexpectedly jolly work. She takes her subject – 
existentialism – seriously but not solemnly, and is a master of the irreverent 
one-liner.The Flowers of Evil 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/371386/s/the-flowers-of-evil/>
(£9.99), Baudelaire’s masterpiece, is marvellously translated by Anthony 
Mortimer in a new edition from Alma Classics; be not afraid, poetry is perfect 
forla plage. I will be holidaying in Westport, the loveliest town in the west 
of Ireland, where I’ll be reading David Rieff’sIn Praise of Forgetting: 
Historical Memory and Its Ironies 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/380463/> (Yale 
£14.99), a controversial but timely work, and rereading the timelessly timely
The Reckless Mind: Intellectuals in Politics (NYRB £9.99), by Mark Lilla. Even 
on its hols, the brain needs feeding.


 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/juliemyerson>

Julie Myerson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/juliemyerson>

Author and critic 

The books that have impressed me so far this year are slender yet powerful 
volumes that won’t weigh your suitcase down. Julia Leigh’s devastating memoir
Avalanche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/07/ivf-i-had-the-dread-feeling-that-i-was-part-of-some-greater-experiment>
 (Faber £12.99) is a brutal and graphic account of her increasingly desperate 
attempts to make a baby. And Elizabeth Strout’sMy Name Is Lucy Barton 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/366394/> (Viking 
£12.99) and Tommy Wieringa’sA Beautiful Young Wife 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/422670/> (Scribe 
£7.99) are quite simply fiction at its most precise and potent. Meanwhile, I’m 
going to be lazing on a sea-view terrace in East Sussex with the brilliant 
Natasha Walter’sA Quiet Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404293/s/a-quiet-life/>
 (HarperCollins £14.99) – it’s so nice when someone you always thought should 
write a novel writes one. And even though I wasn’t mad about John Williams’s
Stoner, I’m going to try his Butcher’s Crossing 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/butcher-s-crossing.html> (Vintage £8.99). It 
comes highly recommended by Rachel Cusk whose taste I rate – and whose new 
novel,Transit <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/429132/>
 (Vintage £16.99, out in September), I can’t wait to read.

Charlotte Mendelson  <http://charlottemendelson.com/>

Novelist and editor 

I’ve planned my summer reading but not my holidays: a sad reflection. Wherever 
I am, I will read Han Kang’s intriguingThe Vegetarian 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/357559/s/the-vegetarian/>
 (Granta £7.99); Miriam Toews’sAll My Puny Sorrows 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/275157/s/all-my-puny-sorrows/>
(Faber £7.99), because dark family stories are what fiction is for; Angela 
Carter’s short stories and as much twisty murder as I can get my hands on. Nell 
Zink’sMislaid <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378902/>
 (4th Estate £8.99) is funny, sexy and daring; if only I still had it to 
discover. Only Sally Wainwright’s collected television scripts could console 
me. I hope she reads this.


 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomiwolf>

Naomi Wolf <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomiwolf>

Author and journalist 

In my suitcase I have Jonathan Bates’s Ted Hughes: The Unauthorised Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/336470/s/ted-hughes-the-unauthorised-life/>
(Harper Collins £10.99); having read so many outraged feminist biographies of 
Sylvia Plath, I felt I should read the parallel narrative. I also plan to 
reread the classicClass 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/361137/> (Ingram 
International £14.99) by Paul Fussell – a scathing exploration of the American 
status system, still fresh and funny; and the across-the-pond iteration of a 
similar subject, Owen Jones’sThe Establishment and How They Get Away With It 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/establishment-265216.html> (Penguin £9.99). I 
have already arrived at my summer destination – Rhodes House in Oxford, where I 
am teaching Rhodes scholars and other students op-ed writing and also speaking 
about feminism. In between, I’m taking peaceful walks by the canals near Port 
Meadow, heading eventually to the old pub by the river, the Trout; and perfect 
if shameful cream teas at the Rose on High Street.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b94e80ed83827be6076983c104cb9c5cda56f2a%2F0_335_8062_4837%2F8062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b94e80ed83827be6076983c104cb9c5cda56f2a%2F0_335_8062_4837%2F8062.jpg>
 Andrew Michael Hurley: ‘The Loney is a chilling exploration of faith, 
misplaced and otherwise.’ Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Damian Barr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/31/damian-barr-maggie-and-me-going-home>

Writer, columnist and playwright 

As one of the judges for this year’s Wellcome prize I overdosed, happily, on 
books exploring our relationship with illness and medicine. Our winner was the 
controversial but utterly compassionate memoirIt’s All in Your Head 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385171/s/it-s-all-in-your-head/>
(Vintage £9.99) by Suzanne O’Sullivan, who describes patients suffering fits, 
blindness, amnesia – crippling conditions that cannot be physically explained 
but feel real to them.The Loney 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316194/s/the-loney/> 
(John Murray £14.99) by Andrew Michael Hurley is a chilling exploration of 
faith, misplaced and otherwise. A family arrive in a marshy Lancashire hamlet 
seeking divine intervention for their disabled son. God isn’t listening but the 
devil might be; it contains a scene so horrifying I almost wish I’d never read 
it. Garth Greenwell’s lyrical and semi-autobiographical debutWhat Belongs to You
 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/387069/s/what-belongs-to-you/>
 (Picador £12.99) explores the thrilling, sexy, dirty world of cruising via the 
American-in-Europe trope as an academic picks up a hustler in the toilets of a 
museum in Sofia, Bulgaria. I’m packingThe Essex Serpent 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406133/s/the-essex-serpent/>
 (Serpent’s Tail £14.99) by Sarah Perryct for a weekend in Budapest.


 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie>

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie>

Author 

I’d like to recommend two gorgeous books that I have recently read and loved: 
a novel,The Past 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/428149/> by Tessa 
Hadley (Vintage £8.99); and a poetry collection,Bastards of the Reagan Era 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/336273/> by Reginald 
Dwayne Betts (Oxbow £12). I’ll be in Lagos this summer and plan to reread two 
books I admire very much: John Gregory Brown’sDecorations in a Ruined Cemetery, 
andPassbook Number F47927: Women and Mau Mau in Kenya by the remarkable writer 
Muthoni Likimani.


 <http://alexhmpreston.com/>

Alex Preston  <http://alexhmpreston.com/>

Author and journalist 

Mary James of the Aldeburgh Bookshop – one of my favourite places on Earth – 
pressed upon me Thomas Savage’sThe Power of the Dog 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/373183/> (Vintage 
£8.99), first published in 1967. I’ll pack it along with another forgotten gem, 
AE Ellis’sThe Rack <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rack.html> (Ashgrove 
£14.99). I read the latter a few years ago and it moved and thrilled me as much 
asThe Magic Mountain, to which it owes a debt. Also accompanying me on a 
leisurely fortnight driving down to my mother’s house near Collioure [in 
south-west France] will be Jessie Burton’sThe Muse 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407456/s/the-muse/> 
(Picador £12.99), about which I’m terribly excited; Dan Richards’s sublime
Climbing Days 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406011/s/climbing-days/>
(Faber £16.99); and Brian Catling’sThe Vorrh 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/281998/s/vorrh/> 
(Coronet £20), which I’ve been told is Mervyn Peake meets Alasdair Gray.


 <http://stevenpinker.com/>

Steven Pinker  <http://stevenpinker.com/>

Scientist and author 

Sean Carroll’s lucid The Big Picture 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/432585/> (Random 
House £28) reveals how the universe works and our place in it. Carroll, a 
philosophically sophisticated physicist, discusses consciousness without 
gimmicks, and deftly shows how current physics is so solid that it rules out 
ESP for ever. InProgress: Ten Reasons to Look Forward to the Future 
<https://oneworld-publications.com/progress-hb.html> (Oneworld £16.99), the 
Swedish journalist Johan Norberg entertainingly presents the case for something 
every expert knows but most newsreaders will find hard to believe: the world is 
getting richer, healthier, freer, and more peaceful. Blame our psychology: we 
are overly impressed by news stories about misery and mayhem. I’m writing a 
book of my own, alternating with biking and kayaking with the other author in 
the house, Rebecca Goldstein, in Truro, Massachusetts, near the tip of Cape Cod.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea1583041ce85d9236d91b2702d0d7057e324794%2F0_3_1354_812%2F1354.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea1583041ce85d9236d91b2702d0d7057e324794%2F0_3_1354_812%2F1354.jpg>
 Sarah Crossan: ‘Her young adult verse novel One is funny, touching, sensitive 
and daring, and expertly tore me into confetti.’ 



Frances Hardinge  <http://www.franceshardinge.com/>

Children’s writer 

I thoroughly recommend two children’s books – Sarah Crossan’s One 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/409003/> (Bloomsbury 
£7.99), and Sally Nicholls’sAn Island of Our Own 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/273627/s/an-island-of-our-own/>
(Scholastic £6.99).One is a young adult verse novel about conjoined twins. It 
is funny, touching, humane, sensitive and daring, and expertly tore me into 
confetti. Warning: you may find yourself sniffling on the train, and trying to 
pretend you have hay fever.An Island of Our Own is an incredibly charming but 
down-to-earth treasure hunt romp. It handles some serious situations with 
pragmatic directness, but also a huge helping of wit and positivity. My holiday 
won’t be until the autumn, and will probably be somewhere that allows for 
diving or volcano-chasing. I’m planning to pack Marcus Sedgwick’sThe Ghosts of 
Heaven <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ghosts-of-heaven.html> (Indigo £10.99) 
and Claire North’sThe First Fifteen Lives of Harry August 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/first-fifteen-lives-of-harry-august-4.html> 
(Orbit £8.99).




Jon Ronson  <http://www.jonronson.com/>

Journalist, author and film-maker 

I’m taking an early summer holiday right now, driving from Los Angeles to 
Scottsdale, Arizona via Palm Springs and Joshua Tree. As it’s a driving holiday 
all my books are audiobooks:The First Bad Man 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306624/s/the-first-bad-man/>
 (Canongate £6.99)by Miranda July;Trump: The Art of the Deal 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/419428/> by Donald 
Trump (Random House £16.99); andYou Could Do Something Amazing With Your Life 
[You Are Raoul Moat] 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/274132/s/you-could-do-something-amazing-with-your-life-you-are-raoul-moat/>
(Scribe £12.99) by Andrew Hankinson. I feel confident about all my choices, 
although I wish Trump had taken a few days off campaigning to voice the 
audiobook himself. The chapter about how much he loves his father is making me 
suspect he hates his father.


 <http://www.uktouring.org.uk/andrewmotion/index.html>

Andrew Motion  <http://www.uktouring.org.uk/andrewmotion/index.html>

Poet, novelist and biographer 

Last summer my wife and I moved to America, so there wasn’t much time for 
reading. This summer we’re heading south for the first time, and among old 
favourites I’ll take with me is Henry James’s coiling and compulsive travel book
The American Scene(Penguin £6.99). And my new recommendations? Denise Riley’s 
long-awaited collection of poemsSay Something Back 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400466/> (Picador 
£9.99), Frances Wilson’s brilliantly possessedGuilty Thing: A Life of Thomas de 
Quincey <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/389925/> 
(Bloomsbury £25), and David Szalay’s boldly sad-funny and clear-eyed new novel,
All That Man Is 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385183/s/all-that-man-is/>
(Vintage £14.99).



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12a2f77c1c476c20adf075ec212fb4eaa21d262b%2F33_0_2162_1297%2F2162.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20holiday%20reads%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fbest-holiday-reads-2016-summer-reading-writers-holiday-books-curtis-sittenfeld-geoff-dyer-lionel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12a2f77c1c476c20adf075ec212fb4eaa21d262b%2F33_0_2162_1297%2F2162.jpg>
 Abir Mukherjee: ‘A Rising Man, a whodunnit set in 1919 Calcutta, is a 
thought-provoking rollercoaster.’ Photograph: Nick Tucker 
Ian Rankin  <http://www.ianrankin.net/>

Crime writer 

Abir Mukherjee’s A Rising Man 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385323/s/a-rising-man/>
 (Vintage £12.99) is a whodunnit set in the social and political tinderbox of 
1919 Calcutta – a thought-provoking rollercoaster. Steve Cavanagh’sThe Plea 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/375139/> (Orion 
£12.99) is a rip-roaring legal thriller set in the US. Twisty, bloody, and 
convincing. Lucy Ribchester’sThe Amber Shadows 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/384942/> (Simon & 
Schuster £7.99) is a spooky and complex psychological thriller set in Bletchley 
Park during the second world war. Atmospheric and engaging. This summer I’ll be 
in Greece, New York, and Cromarty rereading one of my favourite novels,Bleak 
House <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bleak-house-11.html> (Penguin £8.99). I 
also plan to have a go at my teetering to-be-read pile, including Sarah Hilary’s
Tastes Like Fear 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/412851/> (Headline 
£7.99), Louise Doughty’sBlack Water 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/406018/> (Faber 
£12.99) and Oliver Harris’sThe House of Fame 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/293301/s/the-house-of-fame/>
 (Vintage £12.99) – three tremendous and reliable novelists.

Summer reading with Mark Lawson and Lisa McInerney – books podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2016/jul/08/summer-reading-with-mark-lawson-and-lisa-mcinerney-books-podcast>
Lady Antonia Fraser  <http://www.antoniafraser.com/antonia_fraser.aspx>

Historian, biographer and novelist

I will be in Cornwall where the waves of Porthgwarra are eagerly awaiting my 
annual appearance. The most enjoyable book to take on holiday would undoubtedly 
be Juliet Nicolson’sA House Full of Daughters 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378257/s/a-house-full-of-daughters/>
(Vintage £16.99). It combines history with memoir in a way that both historians 
and memoirists should envy. Juliet Nicolson is the latest in a long female line 
stretching down through the Sackvilles, including Vita Sackville-West, who was 
her father’s mother. There are stately homes enough for a television series and 
although the narrative is at times painful, it is ideal holiday reading. John 
Preston’sA Very English Scandal: Sex, Lies and a Murder Plot at the Heart of 
the Establishment 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/419142/s/a-very-english-scandal/>
(Penguin £16.99) is more for night-time reading perhaps than the beach, given 
its (accurate) subtitle. Where classics are concerned, I shall be taking 
Tolstoy’sThe Cossacks 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/392575/> (Penguin 
£6.99) on my Kindle – the holiday saviour of those who can no longer read the 
very small print of classic paperbacks, because you can enlarge the font.

To save up to 20% on the books in the Guardian and Observer Summer reading 
lists, visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/category/view/s/guardian-and-observer-summer-reading-list/id/509/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99
 