
Thirteen years separate the previous official Aphex Twin album, 2001’s Drukqs, 
and Syro. But Richard D James never really left us. In these years, the 
enigmatic Cornishman dropped 11 volumes of rampant analogue acid via his 
Analord series, not to mention Rushup Edge, an album of squelchy countryside 
rave snuck out as the Tuss. He’s been a frequent live presence, too, DJing at 
festivals across Europe, orperforming a specially commissioned remix of work by 
the Polish composer Krzysztof Penderecki 
<http://www.dummymag.com/videos/aphex-twin-performing-with-full-orchestra>.


So why did Syro feel like such an event? It wasn’t merely the brightly 
coloured blimp 
<http://hypetrak.com/images/2014/08/there-was-a-aphex-twin-blimp-flying-over-london-today.png>
 afloat one morning over the canals of east London, but more to do with 
history: Syro found James back on Warp, the label behind his best-known albums, 
and came packaged – like many Aphex releases before it – in a sleeve by the 
Sheffield graphic studio the Designer’s Republic. Styled to look like a 
receipt, it fastidiously itemised the album’s production budget, right down to 
“outdoor postering in Brussels/Antwerp and Ghent”. In its mischievous 
self-sabotage, its contempt for convention, the whole affair felt 
quintessentially Aphex.

The contents were just as special. Some would grouse that Syro didn’t reinvent 
music – a rather high bar that you had to regard as a compliment of sorts. But 
if we don’t get Aphex the innovator here, we get something just as good: Aphex 
the virtuoso. Much of Syro was rooted in an athletic 80s electro funk, typified 
by the inhumanly fast keytar runs of syro u473t8+e (piezoluminescence mix). But 
the album’s real hallmark was its generosity of melody. From the delicate tonal 
shifts and syrupy vocal ooze of minipops 67 (source field mix) to the wistful, 
cloudy synths that swirl beneath the pneumatic junglist breaks of PAPAT4 
(pineal mix), Syro felt designed to delight and beguile.

The interviews conducted when Syro was released were as bizarre as ever, 
touching on drum-playing robots and 9/11 conspiracy theories. But on the album, 
perhaps, we hear a rather grownup, homely Richard D James. The extensive 
synthesizer list gave visions of James cocooned contentedly in his home studio, 
while if you listened close, you might hear the voices of his children, aged 
five and nine. The album’s moving solo piano closer went by the name of 
aisatsana: his wife’s Christian name, reversed.

And for all Aphex’s prankster reputation, Syro is a record that’s almost 
old-fashioned in its craftsmanship: see XMAS_EveT10 (thanaton3 mix), 10 minutes 
of misty yearning that even towards its close is still tossing in fresh sounds 
and little hand-programmed mutations. It’s often said, when a mysterious 
electronic producer lays out their wares, that perhaps this isAphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin> in disguise. But you’re 
reminded, on Syro, how nobody else on earth does it quite like him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRUAJ8KLGqis&media=>
Which album has topped your own list this year? Tell us in the form below, and 
we’ll round up your picks in a readers’ choice top 10.

Please sign in, or create a Guardian site account, to nominate your choice
Click here to open the form. 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/form/embed/1881812-obZxGXHL5s>  