
Workmen are re-cobbling Maria Straat, sweeping grit between the stones. They 
wear roller-blader's kneepads and thick wooden clogs, the toe-points scuffed 
flat and rough. The faint tick of our back wheels follows us across Utrecht to 
the canal. It is a small university city, like a pretty miniature Amsterdam 
without the red light tourism. The counter-culture is high street: a few 
innocuous coffee shops politely selling pre-rolled joints, their heavy-headed 
customers sedately watching the World Cup. A goal. A silent goal. Beware the 
White Widow.

We lock our bikes with a hundred others above the Oudegracht - the old canal 
that runs north to south through the city which is lined with cafes and 
restaurants, and walk down the wooden steps to De Oude Muntkelder Pannen Kuiken 
Huis: The Old Coin Cellar Pancake House.

We sit on the edge of the brown-green water, sunlight dappling gently through 
the soft-leaved trees, dancing in the wake of a putting barge. Fallen pollen 
films the surface like stubble in a lukewarm sink, scattered by a splashing 
family of mallards. Graceful dreads of matted weed drift by. Bob says he wants 
to live here. "I could get a flat by the water. Paddle to the pub."

The waitress presents each of us with a 12-inch gold disc. The pillowy soft 
batter tapers to a crisp, crunchy edge.

I could not decide whether I wanted bacon and apple or bacon and cheese. Each 
sounded good, so I ordered all three fillings. It is a crowded pancake. The 
streaks of bacon and slivers of apple are contrasting characters, but couple 
well. His salty directness is offset by her sweet, forgiving nature, making 
their relationship complex and complementary. Bacon gets on well with cheese 
too. They're so similar - vigorous and rude, wrapped together in sweaty 
excitement. But cheese and apple are vile to each other. Bacon brings out their 
sickly bitching contradictions, their flavours fighting for his attention, 
spoiling each other and awkward in the cake like a mistress and wife sharing a 
train carriage with their boorish lover. I love the drama. I tear off a piece 
and toss it to a drake. He beats the water and snaps his bill. He loves it too.

What am I thinking? Apple as bacon's wife? Cheese as a mistress? It's just 
food. Beware the White Widow.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 