
I am not old enough to have lived through a yellow or black, dirty and 
suffocating London fog, but like many others I feel I have experienced it, 
especially through TV adaptations of the classics, with their inevitable use of 
fog as a backdrop to tales of mystery and evildoing set in 19th-century London. 
No representation ofSherlock Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jun/09/review-sherlock-holmes-series-arthur-conan-doyle>
 orJack the Ripper  <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jack-the-ripper>would 
be complete without it. Switch on the fog machine and light a dim gas lamp in 
the street and you have immediately told viewers what to expect.

But for many writers London fog was much more than a simple scene-setting 
device.Charles Dickens <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> first 
conjured the image of foggy Victorian London in fiction. You can almost feel 
the clammy, tactile greasiness of the vapour as you read the opening passage of
Bleak House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/23/charles-dickens-favourite-bleak-house>
 (1853), with its evocation of fog coming “down the river, where it rolls 
defiled among the tiers of shipping, and the waterside pollutions of a great 
(and dirty) city”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446137291061%2Fc521e1a6-9688-4740-9402-69745cd6c99f-2060x1581.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20pall%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20London%20fog%20seeped%20into%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20the%20pall%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20London%20fog%20seeped%20into%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446137291061%2Fc521e1a6-9688-4740-9402-69745cd6c99f-2060x1581.jpeg>
 Fog at Ludgate Circus, London in 1922 Photograph: Getty Images 
Of course, in Bleak House Dickens uses fog to symbolise the mystification 
caused by the endless obduracy and complexity of the law. But he employs it in 
many different ways in his other works, too. In his last finished novel,Our 
Mutual Friend (1865), he defines the city by its fog. The surrounding 
countryside may be foggy, but there it is “grey, whereas in London it was at 
about the boundary line, dark yellow, and a little within it brown, and then 
browner, and then browner, until at the heart of the City … it was 
rusty-black.” Fog is employed here as a metaphor for the moral corruption 
caused by a lust for money. Yet contemporary newspaper reports indicate that 
this description, fantastic though it may seem, is far from inaccurate: London 
fog really was yellow, coloured by the sulphurous fumes emitted by millions of 
domestic coal fires, and in places it was indeed black, filled with countless 
tiny fragments of soot that were fatal to those with weak lungs, the elderly or 
babies.

Dickens’s gloomy view was taken up by other writers. In 1880 William Delisle 
Hay, a pioneer of science fiction, published a novella entitledThe Doom of the 
Great City; Being the Narrative of a Survivor, Written AD 1942. In this a black 
fog that has lasted from Christmas until February 1882 destroys all life in the 
capital. “The murky atmosphere, the dingy gloom” of London hides “the odious 
colours of the evil that lies hidden behind the awful pall”. Fog brings moral 
retribution to the city’s inhabitants for their sins. London has become “a 
black obscurity” and the dead are everywhere. When the narrator arrives home, 
he finds a picture of domestic normality, with the cat on a chair, his mother 
and sister seated next to each other, but all are dead.

Hay’s story was the first of many in which anxiety about London’s future was 
probed through fiction. Other writers explored the potential dangers London fog 
could pose to lone women.HG Wells <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hgwells>’s 
novelLove and Mr Lewisham may have been written in 1899 but the author chose to 
set it in the 1880s to accentuate the dangers: “Thick fogs … the horses looming 
up suddenly out of the dark … the street lamps, blurred smoky orange at one’s 
nearest, and vanishing at twenty yards into dim haze, seemed to accentuate the 
infinite need of protection on the part of a delicate young lady who had 
already traversed three winters of fogs, thornily alone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446136641326%2F9541b936-363b-42be-a6e8-17ae066c9261-2060x1301.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20pall%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20London%20fog%20seeped%20into%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20the%20pall%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20London%20fog%20seeped%20into%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446136641326%2F9541b936-363b-42be-a6e8-17ae066c9261-2060x1301.jpeg>
 Anna Maxwell Martin in Bleak House Photograph: BBC 
Henry James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/henryjames> employs London fog 
as a metaphor to explore the state of mind of his heroine, Isabel Archer, inThe 
Portrait of a Lady (1881). Her courage has been questioned by her sister and, 
as if in answer to the criticism, Isabel walks back to her hotel in the fog 
unchaperoned. James lists the reasons why this is an act of “absolute boldness” 
in a mock-romantic style: “The early dusk of a November afternoon had already 
closed in; the street lamps, in the thick, brown air, looked weak and red; our 
heroine was unattended and Euston Square was a long way from Piccadilly.” She 
wishes to choose her own fate, and plunges in.

The 1880s proved to be a high point not only of fog’s density and frequency in 
the capital, but also of social and political anxiety. On 8 February 1886 
a protest meeting of the unemployed in Trafalgar Square turned nasty when 
“roughs” began to overturn carriages and throw stones through the windows of 
gentlemen’s clubs in Pall Mall. The following day a dense fog descended 
on London. The fog thickened on 10 February and “the disorderly classes” 
gathered again. A mass panic broke out in the West End, with rumours flying 
that 10,000 dockers were marching on Trafalgar Square, destroying property as 
they went.

The 1880s also experienced the panic created by Jack the Ripper, a figure 
indelibly associated with London fog. One of the first fictional accounts of 
the Ripper murders was written by Marie Belloc Lowndes, who had worked withWT 
Stead <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/27/memory-of-w-t-stead-review>
 on the Pall Mall Gazette, which had extensively covered the crimes. Her book,
The Lodger (1913), turned into a film by Alfred Hitchcock in 1927, revolves 
around a similar series of murders of women by “The Avenger”. Like the Ripper, 
the murderer is never revealed, though a landlady strongly suspects that her 
lodger may be responsible. London fog sets the scene for many of the murders. 
This theme recurs in subsequent retellings of the story. Decades later, an 
episode ofStar Trek entitled “Wolf in the Fold” (1967) features a homicidal 
alien that comes from the foggy side of its planet. The TV seriesThe Avengers 
also has a Ripper-type villain, known as the “Gaslight Ghoul”, in an episode 
entitled “Fog” (1969).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446136313705%2F2a0399ac-4aad-49ab-bd9b-9147b810012d-2060x1636.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20the%20pall%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20London%20fog%20seeped%20into%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20the%20pall%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20London%20fog%20seeped%20into%20fiction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fbeyond-pall-how-london-fog-seeped-into-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F29%2F1446136313705%2F2a0399ac-4aad-49ab-bd9b-9147b810012d-2060x1636.jpeg>
 Ivor Novello in Alfred Hitchcock’s The Lodger, 1927 Photograph: PR 
As the Ripperologists Gary Coville and Patrick Lucanio note, “a writer or 
director merely needs to add a soupcon of fog, a dram of yellow gaslight … The 
result screams Jack the Ripper.” Despite such associations, however, 
contemporary meteorological reports reveal that the real Ripper actually 
committed his crimes on clear nights. There was no fog around to conceal his 
dark deeds.

In a similar way, Sherlock Holmes is now closely associated with fog. Yet 
there is very little of it in theConan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle> tales, almost all of which 
are set under clear skies. “The Bruce-Partington Plans” is almost the only 
Holmes story in which London fog is employed as a plot device, concealing the 
criminal as he hides the body of his victim on the roof of an underground train.

Fogs persisted in the capital all the way up to the 1960s, but they have 
become associated only with a brief few years in the late 19th century, reduced 
from a metaphor to a cliche.

• London Fog: The Biography by Christine L Corton is published by Harvard 
(£22.95). To order a copy go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/351893/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 