
It feels a very long time since Ed Miliband (remember him?) was talking about 
freezing energy bills, an idea that proved so politically dangerous that it led 
indirectly to an inquiry by theCompetition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/competition-commission>. At the time, 
even the big energy companies, feeling battered by “rip off” headlines, 
reluctantly conceded that an investigation would be the best way to clear the 
air.

Storm of big six lobbying put the dampeners on energy supply reform
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/big-six-lobbying-dampeners-energy-supply-reform>
Now the CMA has spoken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/watchdog-proposes-capping-gas-and-electricity-prices-for-4m-homes-on-pre-paid-meters>
 and the big six will be delighted. The air has been cleared in their favour in 
a manner that seemed unlikely when the competition watchdog offered its first 
thoughts last July.

Back then, the CMA had been gung-ho for a default tariff that would act as a 
safeguard against unfair pricing. It was akin to a Miliband-lite solution. It 
was cuter in design because it recognised that wholesale energy prices can move 
(in both directions, as the former Labour leader tended to forget) and it still 
allowed room for price competition. Most importantly, it would have covered 70% 
of households on standard variable rates.

Such radicalism has now been forgotten. Price caps will be confined to the 4m 
households on prepaid meters. That’s only about 16% of the market. For other 
households, the CMA thinks it can succeed where others have failed in awakening 
the interest of those too lazy or too baffled to save themselves £160 a year on 
average by switching supplier. A big database of “disengaged” customers will be 
established and suppliers will be invited to try to grab their attention.

UK watchdog accused of bowing to pressure from 'big six' energy suppliers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/watchdog-proposes-capping-gas-and-electricity-prices-for-4m-homes-on-pre-paid-meters>
This plan looks a triumph of hope over experience. What will happen if most 
people decide the best place for a marketing missive from an energy company is 
the bin? The CMA doesn’t say, despite endorsing the statistic that customers 
have been paying £1.7bn a year more than they would in a competitive market.

No wonder the City saw little for the big six suppliers to fear – “no great 
shakes,” concluded Investec. Yes, the energy industry’s lobbyists have won – 
again. The debate will rumble on until the next competition inquiry, due in 
about five years’ time at a rough guess.

Aviva’s Friends deal looking better by the day

Aviva hasn’t entirely shaken the perception that last year’s £6bn takeover of 
Friends Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/19/aviva-1500-job-losses-friends-life-merger>
 was a rights issue in disguise, but chief executive Mark Wilson is gamely 
trying to move the debate along.

He thinks Aviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> has 
“busted the myth” that insurance companies can’t be integrated in the UK, which 
is quite a boast from a company that spent a decade lost in the maze created by 
the mash-up of Norwich Union, Commercial Union and General Accident.

Up to a point, it’s a reasonable claim. Wilson had already been ripping costs 
out of Aviva for two years before he alighted on Friends, so he’d had some 
practice. Without the arrival, Aviva’s figures for 2015 would have been fair to 
middling in tricky conditions for all financial companies. With Friends, Aviva 
can boast £1.2bn of capital benefits and a solvency ratio that looks excellent 
by the sector’s standards. It also expects to meet its post-Friends cost-saving 
target of £225m a year early. The dividend was raised 15%.

So far, so good. The trickier part is improving the fund management business, 
Aviva Investors, so that it becomes a serious rival to the likes of M&G round 
at the Prudential. The “on-boarding” (yuk) of assets from Friends is designed 
to aid the process but it will be another year, at least, before proper 
judgments can be made. But, as matters stand, the Friends deal looks a far 
smarter piece of business for Aviva than it did on day one.

Barclays Africa-Bob Diamond story a gem, but not going anywhere

Is Bob Diamond, ousted as boss of Barclays in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/03/bob-diamond-resigns-barclays>
, about to pull off an audacious coup by buying his former employer’s African 
assets? Here’s Jes Staley, Barclays’ current chief executive: “I don’t think 
Bob has got the financing capability,”he told Bloomberg on Thursday 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-03-10/barclays-seeing-strong-interest-in-africa-unit-staley-says>
.

It was a polite put-down – and surely an accurate assessment. Atlas Mara, 
Diamond’s investment vehicle, is a stock market tiddler worth £245m. By 
contrast, Barclays is looking to raise close to £2bn by selling down a large 
chunk of its 62.3% stake in BarclaysAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. Nor does Barclays seem inclined to 
dismember the unit, which has stakes in 12 banks across the continent, into 
bite-sized chunks. The Diamond storyline makes good copy, but it is odds-on it 
goes precisely nowhere.
 