
John Bird, the founder of the Big Issue, is to join the House of Lords as one 
of four new non-party-political peers. The homelessness campaigner was among 
those selected by theHouse of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>
 Appointments Commission to sit crossbench.

Joining him in the upper chamber are the engineer and academic Julia King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/women-leadership-blog/2014/oct/20/women-science-engineering-under-representation>
, who is currently vice-chancellor of Aston University, the world-renowned 
civil engineer and infrastructure expertRobert Mair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/29/shale-gas-fracking-expanded-regulated>
, andMary Watkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2012/nov/02/academy-governors-manage-budgets>
, emeritus professor of healthcare leadership at Plymouth University.

Bird, who set up the street magazine in 1991 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/founder-big-issue-john-bird-what-makes-social-business>
 as a way for the homeless to earn money, said he hoped to inject some new 
ideas into policymaking.

“Mine will be a voice in the legislative process for the thousands of people 
the Big Issue has helped over the past 24 years and continues to help today 
through our philosophy of social entrepreneurialism based on self-help,” he 
said.

“I believe that one of the complexities of modern policy is that sometimes the 
best thinkers, like the Big Issue, are left outside the box. Yet if we are to 
have social opportunity and social justice for all, the thinking within the box 
needs to change.”

John Bird interview: 'Politicians – they're all failures'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/09/interview-john-bird-big-issue-at-21>
The magazine initiative – said to have earned sellers more than £100m – was 
followed in 1995 by the Big Issue Foundation, a charity supporting the 
homeless, and in 2001 by a social investment arm. Bird continues to serve on 
the board.

Nigel Kershaw, the chair of the Big Issue, said: “At a time when there is a 
certain amount of controversy around some appointments to the House of Lords, I 
believe that John is a lord we can all applaud.

“It is a testament to his character and vision – and to the changing world we 
live in – that John becomes probably the first peer ever appointed on a 
lifetime of experience which includes being raised as an orphan in a slum, 
illiteracy, sleeping rough and being jailed as a young offender.

“In spectacularly turning around his own life by becoming a trailblazing 
social entrepreneur, John has inspired millions with the Big Issue’s mission to 
provide a hand up to thousands of people too often forgotten by society.”

The commission is tasked with identifying “people of distinction who will 
bring authority and expertise to the House of Lords” and the latest additions, 
the first since February 2013, bring to 67 the number of non-party-political 
peerages chosen from more than 5,000 nominations since 2000.


This much I know: John Bird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/aug/27/pressandpublishing.observermagazine>
It has been asked by David Cameron not to appoint more than two per year. 
Pressure for action to cut the size of the upper chamber swelled in August 
when the prime minister used the dissolution honours list tosend another 26 
Tories to the red benches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/27/the-guardian-view-on-david-camerons-new-peers-government-of-the-club-by-the-club-for-the-club>
 – sparking claims of cronyism.


The Liberal Democrats got 11 more places despite being routed at the general 
election, and Labour eight.


The Electoral Reform Society estimated that the summer’s influx of new party 
peers – which took the active membership to more than 820 – will cost the 
taxpayer at least an extra £1.2m a year. The Lords is the second largest 
legislative chamber in the world, behind only the National People’s Congress of 
China.

Mair has been closely involved with a number of high-profile projects at home 
and abroad, including the London Underground Jubilee line extension and the 
Channel tunnel rail link and is a member of the engineering expert panel on
Crossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/22/celebrities-join-fight-to-save-sohos-curzon-cinema-from-crossrail-2-london>
.

He also chaired the joint Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering 
report on shale gas extraction, commissioned by the government’s chief 
scientific adviser.

 