
The richest man in Russia and a major shareholder in Arsenal football club has 
come forward as the buyer of James Watson’s Nobel medal – declaring that he now 
plans to give the piece back.

Alisher Usmanov, the Russian entrepreneur, paid $4.1m (£2.6m) for the medal at 
an auction at Christie’s in New York city last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/dec/05/james-watson-sells-nobel-prize-medal>
, but said he will return it to Watson, who with Francis Crick and Maurice 
Wilkins, shared the 1962 Nobel prize in medicine for discovering the double 
helical structure of DNA.

Usmanov, whose steel, mining and other assets are worth $15bn according to 
Forbes, said he wanted the medal to remain with its rightful owner and for the 
money he spent on the item to be donated to scientific research.

“In my opinion, a situation in which an outstanding scientist has to sell a 
medal recognising his achievements is unacceptable,” Usmanov said in a 
statement.

“James Watson is one of the greatest biologists in the history of mankind and 
his award for the discovery of DNA structure must belong to him,” he added.

Watson became the first living laureate to auction his Nobel medal in a sale 
that earned far more than the $3m that some experts had predicted. Last year, 
the family of Francis Crick, who died in 2004, sold his medal for $2.27m.

Before the auction, Watson said he was selling the medal to raise money for 
the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Long Island, from where he was suspended 
as chancellor after heclaimed that black people were not as intelligent as 
whites <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/oct/21/race.research>.

Watson has been widely condemned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/01/dna-james-watson-scientist-selling-nobel-prize-medal>
 for making sexist remarks too. He also raised the possibility of using the 
funds to buy a Hockney painting.

Crick and Watson’s discovery of the double helix structure of DNA drew heavily 
on the crystallography work of Rosalind Franklin at Kings College London. 
Franklin died of cancer in 1958, four years before the Nobel prize was awarded.

After the unusual intervention, Usmanov said that Watson could now keep the 
medal but donate the proceeds of the sale to the research institutions that had 
“nurtured him”, including the universities of Cambridge, Chicago and Indiana.

“Dr Watson’s work contributed to cancer research, the illness from which my 
father died. It is important for me that the money that I spent on this medal 
will go to supporting scientific research, and the medal will stay with the 
person who deserved it. I wouldn’t like the medal of the distinguished 
scientist to be an object on sale,” Usmanov’s statement said.
 