
Bill Sirs, who has died aged 95, was the general secretary of the Iron and 
Steel Trades Confederation during the turbulent years of 1975 to 1985. He was 
the epitome of a moderate trade union leader in the days when trades unions 
were at the height of their influence. He led a union which traditionally had 
been co-operative with management and in the 1980s he was part of the “St 
Ermin’s” group of trade union leaders, named after their Westminster hotel 
meeting place, who sought to resist what they saw as leftwing domination of the 
Labour party. But his moderate views did not prevent him leading his 
steelworkers into a13-week national strike in 1980 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/january/2/newsid_2478000/2478393.stm>
 which was at the time the longest since the general strike of 1926.

Together with his friends Joe Gormley 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-lord-gormley-2325660.html> 
of the National Union of Mineworkers andSid Weighell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/feb/15/guardianobituaries.keithharper> 
of the National Union of Railwaymen, he resurrected the historic triple 
alliance of the three industrial unions, but it fell bitterly apart during the 
1984-85 coal strike when miners attempted to block coal and iron ore supplies 
to the steel industry, something that Sirs believed would bring about the 
physical collapse of steelworks. There was particular antipathy between Sirs 
and Arthur Scargill. Scargill, anxious to close down steel production to bring 
pressure in his own dispute, accused Sirs of a deplorable attitude “in 
violation of every basic principle accepted by the trade union and labour 
movement”. Sirs, in turn, commented that the NUM’s unilateral withdrawal from 
honourable agreements (to provide essential coal supplies) with a brother trade 
union was perhaps “the beginning of the end for the miners”.

Bill was born to Frederick and Margaret (nee Powell) in Middleton, near 
Hartlepool, Co Durham, one of 10 children who slept five in a bed in the two 
groundfloor rooms of a terraced house. He scavenged for sea coal and firewood 
and at ten years old took on a paper round and a lunchtime job in a butcher’s 
shop. An enthusiast for sport, including swimming and cricket and later squash, 
he left school at 14, working as an errand boy and in a timber yard before 
becoming a shift worker in the steel industry at 17. He eventually became an 
overhead crane driver, choosing to access his cab by a rope rather than a 
ladder.

In 1958 he was appointed secretary of his large union branch and a full-time 
officer in Middlesbrough in 1963. In 1970 he moved to Manchester, where he had 
to deal with the closure of the Irlam Mill and in 1973 became an assistant 
general secretary. While general secretary designate, he was confronted by a 
demand from the British Steel Corporation (BSC) for 20,000 redundancies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbill-sirs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F22%2F1434990301757%2F1ca1634a-afbd-4fa9-9993-a89e015b5839-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Sirs%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbill-sirs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Sirs%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjun%2F22%2Fbill-sirs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F22%2F1434990301757%2F1ca1634a-afbd-4fa9-9993-a89e015b5839-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bills Sirs, second right, marching next to his wife, Joan, on a TUC rally in 
Cardiff in 1980. Photograph: ANL/Rex Shutterstock 
His subsequent career as general secretary was shaped by the battle to 
transform the BSC, created in 1967 from 14 companies, into a globally 
competitive business based in five major centres, with consequential closure of 
smaller operations. Sirs was thin-skinned and not always a great negotiator, 
and he took personally against some of the notably macho BSC leadership, 
includingBob Scholey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/24/sir-robert-scholey>, the 
chief executive, and laterIan MacGregor 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/ian-macgregor-scourge-of-miners-dies-1156189.html>
. By 1979 the corporation was losing £1m a day and major restructuring loomed.

Its own figures showed it taking twice as many man hours to produce steel as 
its international competitors.Later in the same year, with inflation at more 
than 17%, the steel unions were offered a derisory 2% wage settlement at 
national level, though with more on offer locally. A tape of the meeting handed 
to me at the BBC recorded the uproar in the room. It was an extraordinary 
misjudgment, encouraged, it later turned out, byMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
’s Conservative government. In January 1980 the union went out on strike.

It had not been inevitable and Sirs’ colleagues were incredulous that it had 
happened at all. Seasoned observers in the civil service criticised a catalogue 
of errors on all sides unmatched in comparable negotiations, with Sirs and his 
union jumping into action before properly digesting what was on offer while 
putting hopelessly optimistic interpretations on other pronouncements.

Union members stayed gallantly loyal with no strike pay during an increasingly 
bitter dispute in which Sirs eventually called out his private-sector members 
with only partial success, leading to ugly picketline confrontations. These 
fuelled demands for tougher government regulation. But steel continued to be 
imported as the union’s organisation was inadequate – taking weeks to get a 
second telephone line into its headquarters and more than a fortnight before 
pickets appeared at south coast ports.

In the end an inquiry board awarded the steelworkers 15.5% 
<http://nvdatabase.swarthmore.edu/content/british-steel-workers-defend-wages-against-threatened-decrease-1980>
, but the membership was exhausted and more redundancies followed. In the 
aftermath, however, there was a swing in the industry’s fortunes led by 
initiatives at local level. Union members at local level, particularly at the 
two big Welsh plants at Llanwern and Port Talbot, initially against Sirs’ 
instructions, negotiated productivity agreements involving flexibility between 
trades, which resulted in dramatic improvements, and BSC eventually became 
profitable in 1986.

Sirs’ personal popularity was enhanced by his exposure in the steel strike, in 
which his modest manner was appealing. Sympathy for the union was encouraged by 
its willingness to explain itself and talk frankly to the media, Sirs himself 
visiting newspaper offices. His complaint that medium-sized unions such as his 
were not sufficiently appreciated by the TUC was answered by a place on its 
senior committee.

But in 1984 he was plunged back into controversy when the striking miners, 
with whom he sympathised, attempted to use closure of the steel industry as a 
weapon to win their own cause. Initially local steel works negotiated reduced 
deliveries of coal which were sufficient to keep their furnaces safe. But when 
the agreements were withdrawn and a major furnace suffered a collapse, 
relations broke down and the miners mounted a major, ultimately unsuccessful, 
attempt to close down steel production, including the blockade of the Orgreave 
cokeworks in South Yorkshire.

Sirs retired in January 1985, just before the end of the strike. His wife, 
Joan (nee Clark), whom he married in 1941, died in 2010. He is survived by his 
children, Margaret and John.
Martin Adeney


Denis MacShane writes: I worked with Bill Sirs in the International 
Metalworkers’ Federation from 1979. When he embarked on the first great strike 
against Margaret Thatcher’s government in 1980, we found 173 ports in Britain 
through which iron ore and steel bars could arrive, a pointer as to how 
globalisation could lead to a loss of unionised steel jobs to lower-cost 
producers.

British workers found that their trade union organisation, based on craft and 
sectoral unions such as boilermakers and blast-furnace men rather than the 
industrial unionism of Germany or Scandinavia, left them exposed. Nonetheless, 
Sirs was strong in supporting international solidarity, routing his own union’s 
money to support the wave of strike movements that transformed politics in 
countries including Poland, Brazil and South Africa in the early 80s.

• William Sirs, trade union leader, born 6 January 1920; died 16 June 2015
 