
Billy Name, the in-house photographer at Andy Warhol’s studio the Factory in 
its 60s heyday, has died aged 76.

The news was confirmed by the Milk gallery in New York, who mounted an 
exhibition of Name’s pictures in 2014 
<http://www.themilkgallery.com/exhibition/30>. The photographer, who had been 
in poor health for some time due to recurring illnesses including diabetes, 
died on Monday.

Born William Linich Jr in 1940, Name fled Poughkeepsie to New York’s avant 
garde downtown art scene, where he worked with the likes of LaMonte Young and 
the Fluxus group, then including Yoko Ono. He met Warhol in 1959 while working 
a second job as a waiter at the restaurantSerendipity 3 
<http://www.serendipity3.com/> in New York. The pair became lovers, and soon 
Linich, whom Warhol renamed Billy Name, was working as the pop artist’s 
right-hand man.

From Andy Warhol to Nico and beyond: Billy Name’s Factory photographs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/nov/09/andy-warhol-nico-beyond-billy-names-factory-photographs>
Name redecorated the former hat factory on East 47th Street by covering the 
walls in silver spray paint and aluminum foil, turning it into the Factory, 
Warhol’s studio and a magnet for New York’s demimonde. While the decor seemed 
to evoke the speed-fuelled futurism of Warhol’s work, last yearName told the 
Guardian’s Sean O’Hagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/27/billy-name-andy-warhol-factory-photographer-pop-art>
 that he had been inspired by the repainting of the Mid-Hudson Bridge in 
Poughkeepsie when he was a child.

Name became the self-described foreman of the Factory, his duties including 
working as an archivist, secretary, security guard and electrician. “Billy was 
the one Andy counted on,” journalist Glenn O’Brien wrote in the foreword to the 
retrospective bookBilly Name: The Silver Age 
<http://www.reelartpress.com/catalog/edition/72/billy-name-the-silver-age>. 

One day, Warhol handed Name a camera and said: “Here, Billy, you do the stills 
photography.” Name went on to take thousands of photographs of the comings and 
going at the Factory, including Warhol’s coterie of “superstars” who starred in 
his films, including Edie Sedgwick, Candy Darling,Baby Jane Holzer 
<http://graphics8.nytimes.com/images/2014/11/06/t-magazine/06name-mcvey-slide-XIX0/06name-mcvey-slide-XIX0-jumbo.jpg>
 and Joe Dallesandro.

He also captured other visitors including Bob Dylan and the Velvet 
Underground. Name’s photographs are included on the sleeves of The Velvet 
Underground and Nico, their first, Warhol-produced album, and their self-titled 
third record. He is mentioned in their songThat’s the Story of My Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9N6rvkc7yQM>. 

I shot Andy Warhol: photographer Billy Name on drugs and shootings at the 
Factory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/27/billy-name-andy-warhol-factory-photographer-pop-art>
The Factory relocated to Union Square in early 1968, whereupon Name, then 
addicted to amphetamines, took up residence there in his darkroom, often not 
emerging for months at a time. He finally left the Factory in 1970 and headed 
to California, where he became a performance poet. Before long his photographs 
were recognised both as a record of a hugely significant cultural moment, and 
as artworks in their own right.

Name’s death follows that of Holly Woodlawn last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/07/holly-woodlawn-dies-at-69-andy-warhol-superstar-lou-reed-walk-on-the-wild-side>
, another pivotal member of Warhol’s pantheon of superstars, immortalised in 
Lou Reed’s Walk on the Wild Side. Many others including Nico and Candy Darling 
died young;Warhol himself died in 1987 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/feb/22/andy-warhol-legacy-lives-on>
, while Reed died in October 2013.

One of the few surviving Factory stalwarts, Dallesandro, paid tribute to Name 
on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/joe.dallesandro.12>, writing: “Billy was 
the one who made the silver Factory silver, working with Gerard Malanga and was 
every bit an artist as anyone else at the Factory. Soon all of us will be gone 
but because of Billy most of the history is recorded on film. May his journey 
home be peaceful.”

A statement from Milk gallery said: “It is with tremendous sadness that we 
would like to announce that our dear friend and iconic artist Billy Name has 
begun his next great adventure. We mourn the loss of this important cultural 
figure and are thankful to have had the opportunity to work with him. We 
express our deepest condolences to his family and loved ones.”
 