
Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> says he 
has a “comprehensive plan” to help unemployed Australians find a job, which 
includes cracking down on the 457 temporary visa program.


The Labor leader said his party would introduce more rigorous requirements for 
labour market testing to ensure business owners looked harder for Australians 
to fill vacant positions before trying to hire workers from overseas.

“The government’s first priority must be ensuring workers in Australia can 
find good local jobs and ensuring businesses are training and employing local 
workers,” Shorten said.

Bill Shorten says temporary overseas workers 'taking the jobs' of Australians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/bill-shorten-says-temporary-overseas-workers-taking-the-jobs-of-australians>
“Labor will toughen the rules to make sure that where there are local workers 
ready and willing to work, employers will have to advertise and genuinely try 
to fill jobs locally before recruiting from overseas.

“Labor will also make sure businesses using significant numbers of temporary 
workers have a plan for training local workers.”

Shorten said over the weekend  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/bill-shorten-says-temporary-overseas-workers-taking-the-jobs-of-australians>
he did not want the Labor party losing support from its blue collar worker base 
in the same way the Democrats in the United States had done in the recent 
election.

He flagged a crackdown on the 457 visa program, saying he was concerned it was 
being exploited.

Shorten’s tougher rules for the 457 program include:

 * A mandatory requirement for all jobs to be advertised as part of labour 
market testing obligations

 * A requirement that jobs be advertised for a minimum of four weeks

 * A requirement for labour market testing to have been conducted no more than 
four months before the nomination of a 457 visa worker

 * A ban on job advertisements that target only overseas workers or specified 
visa class workers to the exclusion of Australian citizens and permanent 
residents

 * A crackdown on job ads that set unrealistic and unwarranted skills and 
experience requirements for vacant positions, with the effect of excluding 
otherwise suitable Australian applicants

Democrats once represented the working class. Not any more | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/democrats-working-class-americans-us-election>
He said business sponsors in specified sectors who had more than a set 
proportion of their total workforce made up of 457 visa holders should be 
required to employ guest workers under a labour agreement instead of being a 
standard business sponsor.

In the first instance, that rule should apply to sponsors in the construction 
sector that had more than 15% of their workforce made up of 457 visa holders, 
and those with five or more 457 visa holders, he said.

Labor also wanted to review the process for developing and maintaining the 
list of skills shortages that allow 457 visas to be granted, he said.

On Sunday, Shorten said the loss of local jobs and inequality needed to be 
challenged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/bill-shorten-says-temporary-overseas-workers-taking-the-jobs-of-australians>
.

He questioned whether the immigration system and guest worker schemes had led 
to foreign workers being exploited and locals missing out on jobs.

“What’s happening is we’ve got people coming to work in Australia, nearly 1 
million people [or more] with temporary work rights and, in some cases, they’re 
getting ripped off and exploited, lowering wage outcomes and taking the jobs of 
nurses, motor mechanics, carpenters, auto-electricians,” he said on Sunday.

On Tuesday, Shorten said a Labor government would also like to strengthen the 
enforcement of licensing requirements and the skills assessment of 457 visa 
workers in occupations where it was mandatory to hold a licence, registration 
or membership.
 