
The federal opposition leader, Bill Shorten, has congratulated Michael Gunner 
and Northern Territory Labor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/28/the-partys-over-for-the-country-liberals-as-volatility-takes-hold-in-northern-territory>
 on what he says is “an extraordinary victory”.

 Shorten says Saturday’s landslide election win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/27/its-a-thumping-labor-wins-northern-territory-election>
 is an outstanding result for the people of the Northern Territory after four 
years of scandal and controversy. He says it also sends a clear follow-up 
message after Labor members were elected to three of the NT’s four federal 
representative positions.

“I visited the territory twice during the NT election campaign and it was 
clear locals were ready for change,” Shorten said. “Territorians have rejected 
a government that focused on itself and voted for a government that will 
prioritise jobs, healthcare and education.”

The party's over for the Country Liberals as volatility takes hold in Northern 
Territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/28/the-partys-over-for-the-country-liberals-as-volatility-takes-hold-in-northern-territory>
Speaking on Sky News about the Northern Territory election, the federal 
defence industry minister, Christopher Pyne, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/08/christopher-pyne-declares-coalition-victory-as-count-nears-possible-majority>
 denied the disastrous result had federal implications.

“The only lesson for all governments is that the public expects you to get on 
with the job and not get involved in hyper-partisan politics, which doesn’t 
work, and also, to be united,” he said.

Pyne said the CLP government had “suffered a lot of disunity over the last 
four years”, including the replacement of the former chief minister Terry Mills 
and a number of defections from the CLP by members who became independents.

He said the result was sad for Giles and also singled out the NT education 
minister, Peter Chandler, for praise.

Pyne warned that Labor’s 18 MPs were “very untried and untested”.

“They won’t have the luxury of simply being triumphant, they’ll have to get on 
with the job or suffer the same fate.”

Pyne lamented that because of the 24-hour news cycle voters expected “new 
tricks from governments, new ideas and solutions to every problem ... [but] the 
reality is the government can’t solve every problem”.

Despite its loss, the Country Liberal party has promised to come back bigger 
and better after being thumped by Labor. With its leader battling to hold onto 
his seat, the party could win just two electorates.


The outgoing chief minister, Adam Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/aug/27/northern-territory-election-labor-country-liberal-party-results-live>
, described Saturday’s result as a landslide and a lesson for the CLP.

The CLP leader blamed the near-obliteration on politician’s self-interest, 
declaring the result a lesson that “disunity is death in politics.”

But he promised the message had been heard and the CLP would rebuild.

“Territorians, one day in the future, will call on us to take leadership,” he 
said.

The CLP won the 2012 election with 16 of 25 seats but a series of scandals and 
five defections left it heading to Saturday’s poll with a minority government.

With just over half the votes counted, Labor had achieved an 18% swing against 
the one-term government with Gunner claiming 15 seats and hopeful of another 
three.

The CLP only had one declared win, with another two seats possible. Three went 
to independents and a fourth was expected to.

 Giles had edged ahead of Labor for his seat of Braitling late on Saturday 
night but it remains to be officially called one way or the other.

 