
Billy Name, who has died aged 76, was a self-taught photographer who 
chronicled the early years of Andy Warhol’s New York City studio, the Factory. 
Warhol, who gave Name his first camera and encouraged him to shoot snatched 
portraits and fly-on-the-wall shots of such Factory luminaries asEdie Sedgwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2005/mar/18/fashion>, Viva, Nico and 
Candy Darling, later said: “Billy’s photos were the only thing that ever came 
close to capturing the feel of the 1960s … Factory.”

When I interviewed Name last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/27/billy-name-andy-warhol-factory-photographer-pop-art>
, he said: “I didn’t consider myself a photographer until much later when 
people started appreciating the work. I wasn’t influenced by any photographer 
and I hadn’t looked at any books or museum shows. I just took the camera when 
Andy handed it to me and said: ‘Here, Billy, you do the stills photography.’ I 
went to the store soon afterwards and got the manual for the camera.”

The two had first met in 1959 in Serendipity 3 
<http://www.serendipity3.com/history.htm>, a cafe in Manhattan staffed by gay 
men, where Billy Linich (as Name was then known) was working as a waiter. 
Trained as a set designer, Linich had begun hosting “hairdressing parties” in 
his loft, which he had decorated with silver foil instead of wallpaper. When 
Warhol turned up to one and saw the results, he asked Linich to do the same in 
his new art space on East 47th Street. Soon, they were lovers and Linich was 
overseeing the everyday running of the Factory. “I was the foreman and I made 
things operate. I took photographs and I kept my eye on Andy.” Linich happened 
on his Warholian pseudonym while filling out the first line of an official form 
and simply reversing the instruction “Name: Billy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fbilly-name-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9704a0c1d8a9a33ecfd797612543ede728be16%2F0_0_2372_3477%2F2372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Billy%20Name%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fbilly-name-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Billy%20Name%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fbilly-name-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b9704a0c1d8a9a33ecfd797612543ede728be16%2F0_0_2372_3477%2F2372.jpg>
 Andy Warhol pictured by Billy Name carrying one of his Brillo Box sculptures 
and accompanied by Billy Name’s cat at the Factory in New York. Photograph: 
Billy Name/© The Billy Name Estate / Dagon James / Courtesy of Reel Art Press 
When Warhol embraced film-making in 1963, it fell to Name to take over as 
in-house photographer, which he did with an instinctive flair for lighting and 
composition. As an insider at the Factory, he went about almost unnoticed with 
his camera, producing often intimate images that capture the bustle of creative 
activity, but also the peculiar ennui of the Factory. His portraits of the 
immaculately stylish, stick-thin socialite Sedgwick, the icily beautiful Nico 
and the young, black-leather-cladLou Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/28/lou-reed>, as well as 
“superstars” such as Baby Jane Holzer, Viva, Darling and Ondine, have become 
iconic. He also photographed famous visitors, including Bob Dylan, who was 
sitting, bored and impenetrable, for a Warholscreen test 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M--oHOn4a0U>. Printed in high contrast black 
and white – and silver – Name’s images evoke a time and place that have since 
become mythic in pop cultural terms.

Before he met Warhol, Name had embraced the New York avant garde scene of the 
early 1960s, having fled a middle-class upbringing in Poughkeepsie, upstate New 
York, for the bohemian environs of Greenwich Village. There, he met the composer
La Monte Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/30/la-monte-young-dia-chelsea-exhibit>
, who employed him as “a human drone” for a performance which comprised 
“standing on stage holding a note with your voice for a very long time”. He 
also wrote concrete poetry and performed it as part of theFluxus 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/learn/online-resources/glossary/f/fluxus> art group 
alongsideJohn Cage <http://johncage.org/> and Yoko Ono 
<http://imaginepeace.com/>. “It was a looser, freer time,” he told me. “You’d 
just run into people on the corner and go to their loft.”

Name’s life took a strange turn when Warhol moved to a bigger, much more 
commercially oriented space on Union Square in 1968. Having acquired an 
amphetamine habit, Name seldom emerged from his darkroom, eating and 
occasionally receiving select guests there. “I didn’t relate to the 
socio-structure of the Factory any more,” he said. In the words of the musician
John Cale <https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-cale>, Name became “the 
pimpernel of the silver ballroom – sleeping there as a wide-eyed guard, then 
much later disappearing into his room for months at a time only to emerge, to 
take pictures, then retreat back into silent oblivion”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fbilly-name-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe798846c4f242c6b0e2415fad469ccefaf961924%2F137_97_3614_5462%2F3614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Billy%20Name%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fbilly-name-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Billy%20Name%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fbilly-name-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe798846c4f242c6b0e2415fad469ccefaf961924%2F137_97_3614_5462%2F3614.jpg>
 Andy Warhol, top, with the Velvet Underground, Nico’s son Ari Delon, Mary 
Woronov and Gerard Malanga, photographed by Billy Name in 1966. Photograph: 
Billy Name/© The Billy Name Estate / Dagon James / Courtesy of Reel Art Press 
On 3 June 1968, he emerged from the darkroom after hearing what sounded like 
gunfire. He found Warhol lying in a pool of blood, having just been shot at 
close range byValerie Solanas 
<http://time.com/3901488/andy-warhol-valerie-solanas/>, an angry playwright who 
claimed Warhol had been stealing her ideas. “I went to him and took him up in 
my arms, and I started crying,” he recalled last year, still sounding 
emotional. Warhol survived, but two years later Name disappeared from his life, 
leaving a note on the darkroom door that read: “Dear Andy, I am not here 
anymore, but I am fine really. With love, Billy.”

He had, he said, become “saturated by the Factory”, and escaped first to New 
Orleans, then California, surviving by performing his poetry and living a 
determinedly frugal life as a Buddhist. He returned to Poughkeepsie a few years 
ago as his health began to deteriorate. “I’ve become more of a master of my own 
destiny. I’m content to let the whole culture go right past me,” he told me 
last year from his hospital bed.

A definitive book of his photographs, entitled Billy Name: The Silver Age, was 
published to considerable acclaim in 2014.

Despite the often dramatic arc of his life and his central part in the shaping 
of one of the great postwar pop cultural moments, he seemed remarkably humble 
and devoid of any regrets. “I think of myself and all individuals as seeds from 
a tree,” he said. “We are planted on the earth, go through the evolutionary 
stages of growing. So, it’s all within me – the Factory years and everything 
else. It’s in my nature. I am like a tree.”

• Billy Name (William Linich), photographer, born 22 February 1940; died 18 
July 2016
 