
Sunday night’s Oscars saw Alejandro González Iñárritu’s Hollywood satire 
Birdman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/birdman> win big with four awards, 
including best picture. But the victory has provoked unexpected controversy in 
Italy, where the film was first seen.

The star-studded tale of a former A-lister trying to stage a comeback was 
originally launched on the opening night of the Venice film festival last 
August, where it won great acclaim and was seen as a frontrunner for top prize 
the Golden Lion. But Swedish director Roy Andersson’s surrealist comedyA Pigeon 
Sat on a Branch Reflecting Existence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/02/a-pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence-review-roy-andersson-venice-film-festival>
 ended up bagging the Lion; a decision that has now caused some ire in the 
Italian press.

“We are left with a bitter taste in our mouth for that film, about which we 
could have said that it won the Golden Lion before the Oscars,” reada story in 
Turin paper La Stampa 
<http://www.lastampa.it/2015/02/23/spettacoli/loccasione-perduta-di-venezia-jKctYGNQXPVIfCU271hcfL/pagina.html>
, whileentertainment site Dagospia sought to remind 
<http://www.dagospia.com/rubrica-2/media_e_tv/zero-premi-birdman-venezia-avvisate-giurie-trinariciute-95087.htm>
 the “otherworldly” jury that “Hollywood movies aren’t shit”.

But officials from Venice have used Birdman’s win to highlight the festival’s 
continued relevance on the world stage.

“If the finest and most dynamic film industry in the world entrusts the world 
premiere of films aspiring to the Oscars to theVenice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, this seems to me an 
important sign of the international prestige that our Festival enjoys today,” 
read a statement from Paolo Baratta, president of the Biennale.

Birdman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/birdman> was the opening night film 
at Venice last year; in 2013 that spot went to Gravity, which went on to win 
seven Oscars, including best director for Alfonso Cuarón. But while that spot 
in the schedule is likely to become ever more coveted, the winner of the Golden 
Lion has rarely been seen as a bellwether of awards glory. Recent winners 
including Alexander Sokurov’s Faust and the Italian documentary Sacro GRA.
 