
In the light of subsequent events, it is amusing to learn that in 1948 the 
Argentinian football association imported eight British referees to help them 
raise the standard of officiating. Each was provided with an interpreter, a 
facility sadly lacking at Wembley 18 years later when the captain ofArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> wanted to communicate with the 
German referee of the World Cup quarter-final against England in order to 
establish precisely why he was being sent off.

That famous confrontation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2010/jul/02/joy-six-world-cup-refereeing-controversies>
 between Antonio Rattín and Rudolf Kreitlein – which held up the match for 
several minutes, depriving one team of their charismatic leader while giving 
their opponents a helping hand towards a moment of destiny – was among the most 
prominent of several incidents that have shaped the footballing relationship 
between England and Argentina.

Why not everyone remembers the 1966 World Cup as fondly as England | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/24/1966-world-cup-final-conspiracy-refereeing-50-years>
“Rattín was, without question, one of the great moaners of the 60s, forever 
pleading with referees,” Jonathan Wilson writes inAngels with Dirty Faces 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/angels-with-dirty-faces.html>, his new 
history of Argentinian football. “On this occasion he seems to have been 
relatively restrained.” But those English fans who were watching, either in the 
stadium or on television, will remember the sense of disbelief that a sportsman 
could bring a match to a standstill by refusing to accept the rule of authority.

It was the beginning of a long mutual misunderstanding, confirmed in the minds 
of the average English fan two years later when Manchester United met 
Estudiantes de la Plata in the two-leg final of the Intercontinental Cup. There 
had been a warning a year earlier when Celtic faced another Argentinian team, 
Racing Club, in the same competition.

Ronnie Simpson, the Scottish goalkeeper, was hit by a missile and put out of 
the second leg in Buenos Aires before it had even started.A bloodbath of a 
play-off in Montevideo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=95jKohSPSDo> saw six 
players dismissed, four of them Scots. Bobby Lennox left the pitch only when 
ordered to do so by a policeman with a drawn sword while Bertie Auld somehow 
managed to stay on and complete the match, which the South Americans won by the 
only goal.

In Wilson’s words, Manchester United’s two meetings with Estudiantes “picked 
up where Racing’s clash with Celtic had left off”. Nobby Stiles was dismissed 
in Buenos Aires after committing 10 of United’s 17 fouls (against 35 by the 
Argentinians) during the match, eight of them on Carlos Bilardo, his opposite 
number, and having suffered a wound from a head-butt as the home team won 1-0. 
In the second legGeorge Best and José Hugo Medina were sent off 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ClYEYok-ftU> for fighting.

Between an early goal by Juan Ramón Verón – father of Juan Sebastián, later to 
play for both clubs – and the unavailing late equaliser by Willie Morgan, many 
other brutalities went unpunished. Estudiantes’ attempt at a lap of honour was 
thwarted when objects rained down from the Old Trafford terraces.

Ten years later there was a truce when Osvaldo Ardiles and Ricardo Villa, two 
members of the squad who had just won the World Cup on home ground, arrived in 
London. Tempted by Keith Burkinshaw to join Tottenham Hotspur, they proved an 
adornment to the English game and are fondly remembered. Thetragic absurdity of 
the Falklands war <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/feb/25/falklands.world1> 
in 1982 prompted Ardiles to take a judicious sabbatical with Paris 
Saint-Germain, but he returned once the hostilities were over and his farewell 
match in front of a full house at White Hart Lane, on the eve of the 1986 World 
Cup, was distinguished by the presence of Diego Maradona, whose partnership 
with Glenn Hoddle – giving up his No 10 shirt for the night – against 
Internazionale was a joy to behold.

Within a month, however, Maradona would be raising his hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/dec/10/diego-maradona-hand-of-god-referees-feud>
 above Peter Shilton to score a goal that reopened all the old wounds. To one 
side it represented a gleeful revenge for a hoard of slights going back way 
beyond the Falklands to the looting of Buenos Aires in 1806 by British warships 
under the command of Sir Home Popham. To the other it reinforced a belief that 
all South Americans were, essentially, cheats. Thecontretemps between Diego 
Simeone and David Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/1998/jul/01/worldcup2006.sport> in 
Saint-Étienne in 1998 seemed just one more example of an eternal conflict 
between Argentinian wiles and English naivety.

Wilson, as you would expect from the author of several important books on 
football history and tactics, goes far deeper than the stereotype. In terms of 
fine-grained and often original research, he is the football writer most likely 
to tell you that, back in 1905, River Plate’s first-ever opponents included a 
man who would go on to win a Nobel prize for discovering the role of pituitary 
hormones in regulating blood sugar in mammals. Equally, however, as a writer 
who knows and appreciates Argentina, he is prepared to take on the more 
demanding task of telling the story in parallel with that of the country’s 
turbulent political and social evolution.

Against the constant rat‑tat‑tat of coups, counter-coups and assassinations, 
through the eras of Eva Perón’sdescamisados and General Videla’s desaparecidos, 
football provided a sense of continuity, but it could not avoid being tainted 
by the violence and corruption of the society in which it grew. A wilful 
insularity, emphasised when Juan Perón kept them out of the World Cups of 1950 
and 1954 in order to avoid the risk of demoralising failure, leads Wilson to 
this intriguing conclusion: “Essentially Argentinian football grew in 
isolation, without natural predators, which led to the development of an 
idiosyncratic but vulnerable style of play, one based on individual technique 
and attacking, and followed with a devotion that arguably no country has 
matched before or since.”

Periods of economic chaos forced players to accept offers from abroad, 
wreaking devastation on the always chaotically administered domestic game. When
England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> met Argentina in Sapporo 
in the 2002 World Cup, British journalists swapped players’ quotes with their 
South American counterparts, as is customary; this time, however, we broke the 
usual quid-pro-quo custom by giving them money, because back home the peso had 
crashed, the banks were boarded up and they were suddenly penniless.

Mostly, though, in his densely detailed but absorbing book, Wilson reminds us 
of the better things: those we can only regret having missed, like the five-man 
River Plate forward line of the 1940s, known as La Máquina, and their equally 
devastating successors of the 50s, whose popular nickname gives his book its 
title, and those, from Ardiles to Agüero, we may have been lucky enough to 
witness at first hand, all the beautiful fruit of a bittersweet history.

Angels with Dirty Faces 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/angels-with-dirty-faces.html> is published by 
Orion on 11 August. Available atbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=angels+with+dirty+faces&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 