
Adam Curtis’s long dive into the troubled and troubling history of Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/26/bitter-lake-review-adam-curtis-afghanistan>
 is a brilliant summary of a lesson drummed into me over four years living in 
Kabul – how devastating naivety and good intentions can be when untempered by 
humility, knowledge or at least a desire to learn.

Bitter Lake, which is available on iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p02gyz6b/adam-curtis-bitter-lake>, begins 
with the dam projects of the 1950s that sought to remake southern Afghanistan 
in America’s image, looks at ill-fated Soviet efforts to transform the country, 
then returns to castigate Washington’s second attempt at social and economic 
engineering.

The earliest footage seems to be mostly a mixture of propaganda films and home 
videos fromAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. The 
surprising images from a country normally framed as violent or exotic capture 
poignantly the wilful blindness of engineers, doctors and their families; 
children tumble into a swimming pool as the political storm grows outside.

Bitter Lake – review: Adam Curtis’s beautiful, gripping film unravels a story 
of violence, bloodshed and bitter ironies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/26/bitter-lake-review-adam-curtis-afghanistan>
They are cut through with short moments of violence, which convey the cost of 
all this optimistic meddling more powerfully than lengthy battle scenes or 
lists of casualties. In one brief scene, a battered young girl who has lost her 
eye shies away from a hospital interview, psychological pain piling on her 
physical wounds. In another, a gaping wound in the thigh of a cameraman seen 
only from behind pumps fresh, red blood into the street for what seems like an 
eternity, before his body is suddenly and ignominiously dragged out of shot.

Curtis’s documentary style also does a powerful job of conveying the sheer 
physical incongruity of Nato’s heavy military presence in impoverished 
Afghanistan. The first time I flew into Kandahar airbase, it was a sprawling 
complex housing upwards of 30,000 people, bristling with high-tech war 
machines, from drones and attack helicopters to MRAP armoured trucks, and 
dotted with restaurants such as TGI Friday’s.

On the base, it was almost impossible to understand how an alliance that could 
deploy all these well-toned, highly equipped young men and women was losing. 
But in rural Afghanistan, a world of of adobe houses and fields worked largely 
by hand, they were vulnerable aliens.

Curtis captures the strangeness of these heavily armoured soldiers wandering 
through superficially tranquil villages and pomegranate orchards, hunting an 
invisible enemy, and with it a deeper truth about how mismatched the soldiers 
were to their mission. They were told they were going to fight evil on its home 
ground, but instead many were dragged into historic turf wars, battling for a 
distant government riddled with corruption, often feeding the problems they 
thought they were tackling.

Curtis can be accused of doing what he criticises politicians for: creating 
oversimplified stories to make sense of a complex world, and losing sight of 
the truth in the process. Some moments in the film do jar. He briefly presents 
anti-Taliban commander Ahmad Shah Masoud, who was assassinated by al-Qaida on 
the eve of 9/11, as Afghanistan’s great lost hope. But he was a divisive figure 
who could be as opportunistic as Afghanistan’s other mujahideen leaders, and is 
also implicated in serious human rights abuses,including a massacre in Kabul 
<http://www.hrw.org/reports/2005/afghanistan0605/4.htm>. 

Curtis suggests the Soviet military came as enthusiastic adventurers, when 
most historians agree they were reluctantly dragged in. There is no mentionof 
the thousands killed in terrifying purges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/20/names-afghans-killed-purges-published>
, while attributing disputes over land, which sometimes date back centuries, to 
communist-era land reform is oversimplistic.

Nor were the billions the US poured into Afghanistan over the last decade 
meant as an alternative to failing efforts to build democracy; those spending 
the cash saw it as part of the same project, a way to bolster “fragile, 
reversible” gains.

But those are small quibbles. Overall, Bitter Lake catches the west’s terrible 
arrogance, the casual projection of foreign dreams and ideals on to a distant 
country and the readiness to walk away when it all starts going wrong – leaving 
the people our governments were experimenting with to fight their way out of 
the mess.

Emma Graham-Harrison first reported from Afghanistan in 2009, and in 2010 
moved to Kabul. The Afghan capital was her home for four years.

 