
Every autumn, for the past four years, I’ve seen black grouse 
<http://seewww.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/b/blackgrouse/index.aspx>
 (Tetrao tetrix) here. Always single birds, most likely wanderers from the lek 
atLangdon Beck in Teesdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/the-northerner/2014/apr/27/langdon-beck-upper-teesdale-cronkley-scar>
, just a few miles south.

This morning there were six – four males and two females, in a sheltered 
hollow in rough pasture, halfway down the fellside. In the distance they could 
have been mistaken for large free-range chickens, but just a glance through 
binoculars revealed the distinctive profile and plumage of the male black 
grouse, striking even in autumn.

In spring their feathers are magnificent – glossy black with indigo 
iridescence, white wing bars – and they have a rakish red wattle over each eye. 
Theircommunal courtship <http://www.oiseaux-birds.com/card-black-grouse.html>, 
in alek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/pishing-messages-at-the-black-grouse-lek>
, is one of the most memorable sights in the whole of British ornithology. With 
heads lowered, wings drooped, feathers fluffed, wattles inflated and tail 
raised to reveal washday-white tail coverts, they advance on one another. The 
most intimidating claims the centre of the lekking ground and has first pick of 
females.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fblack-grouse-chapel-fell-weardale-tetrao-tetrix-lek-courtship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa314e0421ecea06a189eeafbdc8085d50adf2bb8%2F162_328_3539_2123%2F3539.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20grouse%20wander%20on%20the%20fell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fblack-grouse-chapel-fell-weardale-tetrao-tetrix-lek-courtship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20grouse%20wander%20on%20the%20fell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fblack-grouse-chapel-fell-weardale-tetrao-tetrix-lek-courtship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa314e0421ecea06a189eeafbdc8085d50adf2bb8%2F162_328_3539_2123%2F3539.jpg>
 Male black grouse in combat at a lek. Photograph: Alamy 
There was nothing combative about them this morning, sun basking and amicably 
feeding in their rushy hollow. But when I leaned over the wall, 10 metres away, 
a long neck rose and a head with gunmetal-grey beak and unblinking eye 
swivelled to meet my gaze: a young greyhen, the female of the species, closer 
than I have ever seen before.

Pishing messages at the black grouse lek
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/pishing-messages-at-the-black-grouse-lek>
The cock birds, with their extravagant feathers and aggressive courtship, are 
always the focus of attention but at close range a greyhen is captivatingly 
beautiful.

We stared at each other for minutes, me not daring to move, before she rose 
from the shelter of the rushes and walked on to open ground with fastidious 
steps, as if testing the ground under each foot, and began to feed. The barring 
of her plumage, in shades of brown and black, flecked with white, lent fluidity 
to the movements of such a portly bird.

In spring, snipes, curlews, golden plovers and lapwings breed here. I can only 
hope that one day black grouse might lek in this spot too, on the flanks of a 
fell that provides magnificent, unbroken, views over much of the upper dale.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 