
They say that what starts in the US inevitably comes to the UK (burger joints, 
crazy clowns and syphilis are oft-cited examples). But we don’t always embrace 
these gifts as enthusiastically as the Americans.

Take Black Friday <https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>, the US 
equivalent to our Boxing Day sales, which takes place the day after 
Thanksgiving and is with us again this week. Desperate retailers have tried to 
introduce something similar here – only with limited success.

Granted, Brits have always seemed just as keen as Americans to be seduced by 
huge discounts into buying stuff they have never actually wanted. But much of 
that is being done online here – meaning far fewer fights on the shopfloor.

In the US, where they do these things properly, Black Friday not only produces 
huge sales for retailers, but also some serious fisticuffs. You know the sort 
of thing: middle-aged women rolling around in the aisles as they snatch the 
last games console from each other’s grasp; overweight men, dressed in sports 
gear, throwing jabs while simultaneously trying to retain hold of three 
widescreen televisions (and some dignity).

It is such a good product that, every year, we get hours of YouTube 
compilations featuring the highlights. And, as ever, these videos will be the 
best thing to consume on Black Friday.

A forecast worth banking on?

Many of us have grown tired of being told what will happen next in our 
post-Brexit vote/Trump victory world – especially by those geniuses whose 
certainty that neither event would happen has yet to dent their self-belief.

So when you see that some financier will speak on “economic developments, 
prospects and the role of central banks” at a New City Agenda event on 
Wednesday morning – the percentage play is to roll your eyes and sit it out.

However, this one might be different. That House of Commons talk on Wednesday 
is to be delivered by Mohamed El-Erian, Allianz’s chief economic advisor and 
the former boss of bond giant Pimco, who takes a far more nuanced approach to 
the guessing game that is economic forecasting. In fact, he doesn’t really try 
to predict at all.

El-Erian previously talked about the possibility of wins for both the Leave 
camp and a Trump win – while there is a nice anecdote about Pimco diligently 
preparing for potential doom scenarios before Lehman Brothers’ demise – no 
matter how unlikely some seemed. That quickly looked sage. They had thought a 
disorderly Lehman collapse had a 5% chance.

Rewards for failure still going strong

“In some respects it seems to ignore all the codes, rules and understandings 
developed in the past few years as the business world has sought to ensure that 
exceptional pay is available only for exceptional performance.”

So wrote Roger Cowe and Simon Beavis in the Guardian, and while the sentiments 
seem fresh, the passage was actually penned 20 years ago about the pay being 
trousered by GEC’s then managing director, George Simpson.

We’ll be reminded of the glacial pace with which business moves on such issues 
again this week, when CBI president Paul Drechsler addresses the lobby group’s 
annual conference. There, he will trot out the same line, saying: “We need to 
acknowledge that there have been unacceptable transgressions, which have made 
people question the value of what we do. And our right to do it.

“And we need to send out a strong message that rewarding failure is not an 
option. Exceptional pay can only be justified by exceptional performance.”

Business may be slow – but don’t accuse it of having no sense of humour. 
Drechsler will sign off: “I wonder, when people look back at this period of 
change, in 10 or 20 years’ time, what will they say about British business? 
That we surrendered to the ‘wait and see’ mentality?”. Surely not.
 