
I wouldn’t always say this about Alastair Campbell, whose performance can 
vary, politically and journalistically, as much as anyone’s. But the former No 
10 communications chiefhas written an important article for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/alastair-campbell-labour-manchester-united-how-two-winning-machines-broke-down>
, admitting two crucial failures of the New Labour era – to secure either its 
legacy or its succession.

 You could say this has been obvious for a long time. You could already be 
kicking the cat and screaming “Iraq, you moron” at these few words. That’s what 
the news headline “Fallout from Iraq war to blame for rise of ‘unelectable’ 
Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/alistair-campbell-iraq-war-corbyn>
” invites you to think, though it’s far from the whole story. It’s the economy, 
moron. And it usually dominates the wider security agenda.

Alastair Campbell: fallout from Iraq war to blame for rise of 'unelectable' 
Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/alistair-campbell-iraq-war-corbyn>
 But legacy and succession are vital to explaining what happened next, why 
Labour lost in 2010 and again in 2015, why all –see Margaret Beckett here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/19/labour-huge-challenges-2020-election-margaret-beckett>
 – but Jeremy Corbyn’s most upbeat supporters are already close to writing off 
2020. In Campbell’s memorable phrase the party now has a leader who is not only 
“unelectable, but unassailable”.

I agree with that verdict and have done from day one of the House of Corbyn. 
Only Jeremy himself or the wider electorate can get rid of him. And, unlike the 
disconsolateLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP with whom I 
shared a train journey home last night, I don’t think bad results in May’s 
local and mayoral elections will be enough to bring down his house yet.

It comes easily to a football fanatic like Campbell to use the Manchester 
United/ New Labour analogy in which two all-conquering leaders,Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> and Alex Ferguson (I’m tempted 
to add “both Scots”), enjoyed great success, but make a mess of the succession, 
so that both institutions quickly collapse into abject failure. The big 
difference is that Ferguson’s statue outside Old Trafford is in no danger of 
being pulled down by “Ferguson Must Go” students. His legacy is secure, as 
Blair’s is not, Campbell’s article concedes.

 Well, you may say, Ferguson didn’t help George W Bush invade Iraq with such 
damaging consequences. True, though those who blame the invaders of 2003 for 
the resumption of the age-old Shia/Sunni/secular conflicts in the Middle East 
must consider the even worse consequences of the civil war in Syria which the 
anti-invader lobby ensured the west steered clear of.

 Let’s not go there today but stick to our own relatively boring politics in a 
country that people with more exciting politics often flee to as refugees.

In a rehash of largely familiar history Campbell reveals that he and the late 
Philip Gould, Labour’s pollster, decided that they would need to put the 
economy centre stage in their attempt for a third term in 2005. That meant 
keepingGordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> – 
Labour’s “on-form Wayne Rooney”, he says – on board and secure in Blair’s 
support as his successor, rather than sacking their disruptive and disloyal 
colleague.

Labour and Manchester United – how two winning machines broke down | Alastair 
Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/alastair-campbell-labour-manchester-united-how-two-winning-machines-broke-down>
 That meant that cabinet colleagues and would-be challengers were “cowed”, 
sidelined or driven out. The Blairites suppressed their doubts about Brown’s 
suitability (an off-form Rooney?) for the top job and helped ensure a 
coronation when Blair finally quit in 2007. I well remember a hustings in 2010 
when the left’s wannabe candidate, John McDonnell (he didn’t qualify), told 
audiences Brown “has a brain the size of a planet”.

 Campbell, Peter Mandelson (whose career Brown had helped derail) and others 
later saw off attempts to replace Brown with David Miliband before 2010. We 
sort of know this. Brown (like Al Gore handling Bill Clinton’s legacy) “defined 
himself against Blair, not David Cameron”, leaving the Conservatives, the Tory 
media and the left to exploit the vacuum. They rubbished Blair’s failures, 
ignoring his many successes until the Tories later undid them, as they are 
still doing. AmbitiousEd Miliband took the process further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/19/polls-labour-party-polling-election>
, played a difficult hand badly – as Caroline Flint is now saying, too – and 
paved the way for Corbynism. Not even Leicester winning the premiership would 
be such an upset, says Burnley fan Campbell.

 Why? Many things, including the Iraq legacy. But the surviving Blair/Brown 
lieutenants who stood against Corbyn in 2015 were not up to the task. They 
lacked either their own authority or his authenticity as Britain’s Bernie 
Sanders (whose brother, Larry, lives here by the way, and got 4.5% as a Green 
candidate on 7 May).

 So contrary to the current rules of youth-focused British politics, the older 
candidate won. It does happen. By chance last night I listened to the Welsh 
Labour historian Ken Morgan talking about Jim Callaghan, who succeeded Harold 
Wilson in a talent-packed leadership contest in 1976. Jim was 64, Harold just 
60. Michael Foot succeeded Callaghan in 1980 when he was 67.

 That turned out not to be such a good idea, though Foot, too, was loved by 
many activists: loved but unelectable. Yet Morgan rates Callaghan as a fine 
prime minister in hard times, one of the party’s three great architects, along 
with “Uncle Arthur” Henderson and (never party leader) Herbert Morrison. A man 
raised in poverty, Callaghan deeply understood the Labour movement and the 
importance of the unions to it. A youthful rebel, he was later Wilson’s rival, 
wrong in his union reform battle (1969) with Barbara Castle. But his steady 
handling of the emerging Northern Ireland crisis and EU renegotiations 
persuaded Wilson that Callaghan would be “his natural successor”. He helped 
swing the 1976 contest for him.

 Blair, who puzzled Callaghan, did consult him a bit in old age but did not 
take much notice, I suspect. It would have been foolish and wrong to sack Brown 
whose reputation as chancellor stood high before the flighty bankers let down 
him and everyone else. But he should have protected colleagues better from 
Brown’s enmity and Damian McBride’s subversion.

 I agree with Campbell that New Labour’s failure to defend its achievements 
from its enemies in Fleet Street and the Tories and from its “friends” on the 
left after 2007 was a serious one. As he writes, Margaret Thatcher was also 
brought down by her own side but is still revered as a triple election winner, 
her costly mistakes glossed over by her acolytes, though not bywarts-and-all 
biographer, Charles Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/19/margaret-thatcher-authorized-biography-volume-two-everything-she-wants-review>
.

 As Campbell does not say, Blair’s behaviour since leaving office is a vital 
component of that failure. I am happy to accept that he is not simply 
money-grubbing, that he maintains a large payroll and seeks to do good, 
sometimes with shady people in shady places. The Times once grudgingly reported 
that he had made a £10m fortune but spent another £10m on his assorted 
foundations.

 The trouble is that all Blair’s financial affairs are very opaque and, I 
fear, deliberately so. He looks greedy, a taint which won’t now wash off unless 
he gives it all away.

 I thought Blair was right to warn publicly against a Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/29/tony-blair-labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn>
 leadership last summer but came to realise his intervention was 
counter-productive. Labour activists were keener to stay in the comfort zone of 
Corbyn’s authenticity than listen to the triple election winner so many of them 
found hard to love as time passed.

Labour faces huge challenges to win 2020 election, says Margaret Beckett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/19/labour-huge-challenges-2020-election-margaret-beckett>
 That’s their choice, as it will be the voters’ choice when the time comes. By 
and large Campbell has been discreet and loyal to his party in the post-Blair 
years. It can’t always have been easy, knowing what he must know. Brown is also 
mostly quiet, though one is never quite sure why.

 Brown to the rescue? I don’t think so. David Miliband then? Campbell doesn’t 
think so, and nor do I. Labour will have to grow a new generation of leaders 
from both wings of the party, as usual. But when Campbell talks to lay 
audiences and asks who they think will be the next PM, George Osborne and Boris 
Johnson currently get most votes, JC very few.

 At Morgan’s Westminster talk last night in Speaker’s House, I bumped into a 
Labour peer and moderate who went through the Foot/Benn/Kinnock trauma that 
followed Callaghan’s defeat to Thatcher in 1979. By chance he had attended a 
recent weekly meeting of the parliamentary Labour party (PLP) and thought the 
mood far more demoralised than it had been then.

 I agree. The balance of forces in the late 70s and 80s was far better, the 
unions more level-headed too, ballast against bright-eyed folly by the 
activists.

 In a smart column in Wednesday’s Guardian, Rafael Behr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/19/jeremy-corbyn-race-control-labour-party>
 says the Corbynites – McDonnell being the driving force – have taken control 
of the party and it will take time to wrestle it back, electoral defeat or no. 
He calls an unhappy or rebellious PLP a useful excuse, “a kind of vaccination 
for many Corbynites against evidence”.

 Ouch! This drama has a long way to go. And Manchester United, fifth in the 
premiership, is still better placed to claw its way back than Labour. Sacked 
managers don’t stay on the touchline.
 