
After three bestselling albums, four top 10 singles and a Mercury Prize 
nomination, Bloc Party's Russell Lissack will finally achieve his childhood 
dream: playing back-up forAsh <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ash>. The 
English guitarist will join the Northern Irish trio on their upcoming tour of 
the UK.

"As soon as they called me I was really excited," Lissack said this week. 
According to the NME, theBloc Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blocparty> co-founder was approached by 
Ash's Tim Wheeler as soon as he heard the guitarist was free. "I guess the only 
weird part would be spending so much time with people I don't really know," 
Lissack said. "I'm not sure how that will work out, but we seem to have got on 
well so far."

Lissack was 11 in 1992, the year Ash were formed, and his affection for them 
led to a teenage stint in an Ash covers band. Lissack will now be the real 
group's second guitarist, fulfilling a role once occupied by, Charlotte 
Hatherley.

With Bloc Party on hiatus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/19/bloc-party>, Lissack's main 
project has been Pin Me Down, an "apocalyptic electro" project with singer 
Milena Mepris. Unfortunately, this hasn't seemed half as interesting as the 
reported solo project of Kele Okereke, Bloc Party's front-man.

Okereke has now booked his first solo gig, at the Ibiza Rocks on 31 July. A 
new album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/05/bloc-party-kele-okereke-solo>, 
allegedly recorded with Spank Rock's Armani XXXchange, is expected later this 
year.

Ash are mid-way through their A-Z Series project, releasing a single every 
fortnight until the end of September. Earlier this week, they made it to the 
letter L.
 