
What is it with all the estranged dads coming good in this year’s 
blockbusters? It seems no recent tentpole movie is complete without a 
middle-aged man kicking ass to earn the approval of his kids.

 In Ant-Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man>, cat burglar Scott Lang 
is driven to the become the eponymous micro-hero by the desire to be able to 
afford child support; in San Andreas Dwayne Johnson’s air-rescue pilot puts his 
argument with his ex aside to rescue his daughter from an earthquake; at the 
end ofFurious 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/05/fast-furious-7-observer-review>, 
Paul Walker’s character finds peace when he decides to quit street racing and 
settle down with his wife and son; and inTaken 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/06/taken-3-review-a-very-exhausted-set-of-skills>
, sequel to the film that arguably started this trend, Liam Neeson comes, yet 
again, to his daughter’s rescue.

But among all these stories about men grappling with the difficulties of 
fatherhood, there’s a notable lack of any mother protagonists in this year’s 
most prominent hits. The closest comparable character is probably Claire (Bryce 
Dallas Howard) fromJurassic World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jurassic-world>, the operations manager of 
the dinosaur theme park who is tasked with looking after her two nephews, and 
helping save them when all hell breaks loose.

Her treatment in the film is strikingly harsher than that of the 
aforementioned fathers. Whereas we’re immediately invited to route for the dads 
who are presented as all-round good guys (regardless of whatever past misdeeds 
led their wives to divorce them), the early scenes in Jurassic World prompt us 
to judge Claire for her shortcomings as a maternal figure. She’s blamed for 
being neglectful when her nephews go missing, she’s tacitly deplored for not 
having children herself by her sister, and is lectured by a rugged Chris Pratt 
for being too uptight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fblockbusters-superdads-and-super-unrealistic-mums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438792762340%2F72229d80-38f2-4864-9249-22a949ed1918-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blockbusters%2C%20bad%20dads%20and%20super-unrealistic%20mums&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fblockbusters-superdads-and-super-unrealistic-mums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blockbusters%2C%20bad%20dads%20and%20super-unrealistic%20mums&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F05%2Fblockbusters-superdads-and-super-unrealistic-mums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438792762340%2F72229d80-38f2-4864-9249-22a949ed1918-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Harsh treatment … Bryce Dallas Howard as Claire in Jurassic World. Photograph: 
Allstar/Universal Pictures 
Generally speaking, in Hollywood fatherhood is seen as a difficult, virtuous 
challenge for decent men to pursue, whereas motherhood is considered a default 
setting for women. From The Sound of Music and Mary Poppins to Mrs Doubtfire 
and Kramer vs Kramer, the figure of the flawed male character who makes up for 
past mistakes by becoming a good dad is a firmly established cinematic trope. 
The path to redemption is always open for him, and we forgive his flaws and 
will him to do right for the children - hell, even Darth Vader gets to earn his 
son’s love in one final act of absolution.

But the female equivalent is far less common. Mothers tend to be divided into 
dependable pillars of all-consuming selfless love and those who are psychotic, 
with little in between. Maternity is supposed to occur naturally to these 
women, and so when such instincts are absent – as with Claire in Jurassic World 
– sympathy is not so easily felt for them as for their male counterpoints, and 
sympathetic arcs seldom written.

When film-makers do challenge this polarised orthodoxy of motherhood it 
results in far more complex and believable female characters. Last year’s 
critical hit Boyhood wrong foots the viewer towards the end whenPatricia 
Arquette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/patricia-arquette-oscars-speech-equal-pay-women>
’s character (who had hitherto displayed unwavering support in a manner more 
typical of most movie mums) suddenly lets out her private, self-pitying 
feelings when her son leaves her to go to college. Better yet, the brilliant 
horror The Babadook, which dared to suggest that a loving mother can 
simultaneously harbour subconscious feelings of hate towards her child.

That the latter is one of those rare films to be directed by a woman (Jennifer 
Kent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/18/the-babadook-jennifer-kent>) 
is telling. Perhaps for more authentic and sympathetic portrayals of motherhood 
in blockbusters, we’ll need to see more women handed the directorial reins.

Both the cliche of the bad-dad-come-good and the perfect-terrible mother 
dichotomy are the product of lazy writing. Here’s hoping that future 
blockbusters give us more interesting parents to watch.
 