
Each time you walk through your front door, go to your office, or meet a 
friend at your local, you walk into a construction of memories as well as one 
of bricks and mortar. Memories create places every bit as much as places create 
memories.

One day a flower shop is just a flower shop. While it might not change on the 
map, the next day, and forever after, it is where I first kissed my wife.

Perhaps, as an expat, I’m more aware than most of how we each create our own 
spaces.

A Nation's Theatre: explore the UK's dramatic landscape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/24/a-nations-theatre-battersea-arts-centre-bac>
I was raised in small-town Pennsylvania – roughly speaking, America’s 
Lancashire – and I moved around a lot post-education. A long-distance romance 
brought me across the Atlantic and I’ve been here for 14 years. We have a 
not-so-young-anymore daughter and England feels like home … as much as anywhere 
does.

This is why, I think, I find myself drawn to explorations of place. I have 
always liked games so, with no formal theatre training, that is where I look 
when thinking about creating a live experience. The performances I make aren’t 
really games, as no one can win (or lose!), but they feel like games. And the 
audience feel like the friends I’m playing with.

For the past five years, under the name The Unbuilt Room 
<http://www.unbuiltroom.com/>, I’ve been making performance-games based on 
places. I describe a place to small group of audience-players and ask what they 
want to do. They say “go through the door” or “pick up the key” and I describe 
the consequence of their action. It is very much based on the text-adventure 
computer games of the early 80s I grew up with … but completely lo-tech.

How the nation's theatre reinvented itself | Lyn Gardner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/mar/09/nations-theatre-reinvented-bac>
The places I describe are based on the real building the audience and I are 
sitting in … but I have the freedom to rewrite reality. Where a door might 
simply be a closet, in the game it might hide a staircase to a secret passage.

It is basically an interactive form of storytelling: I describe, they explore 
and we make the place together. Afterwards, when the players walk back out 
through the real building, their experiences in the game are overlaid on the 
real space. I’ve had people tell me they have vivid memories of being in rooms 
that don’t exist.

To create the games I research the building’s history, talk to people who use 
the space in different ways, and spend time just poking around. I look at 
original plans and current blueprints and try to wrestle a building’s actual 
geography into a form I can use.

Battersea Arts Centre: the show goes on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/mar/15/battersea-arts-centre-fire-show-goes-on>
During the performance, the audience is in control and can take any route they 
wish … if I don’t know the map inside out I might accidentally rearrange the 
building mid-game. As the players explore, they create their own mental maps 
and, together, we bring to life a version of a place that never existed and 
never will. My next challenge is to open up the creation of the building to the 
audience, to expand their role from explorers to builders, something I’m 
attempting with the new, larger-scale gameA House Repeated 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/39510/whats_on/whats_on/shows/a_house_repeated>.

It’s based on Battersea Arts Centre, with the fabric of the building (the old 
town hall) forming the bones of the show. But the spirit of the place has been 
every bit as influential. BAC is extremely supportive of new theatre, nurturing 
productions from the initial idea through to the stage.After their recent fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/13/major-fire-at-battersea-arts-centre>
, in which the grand hall burned down, the organisation faces the task of 
rebuilding. They are undertaking this in typical fashion, with a spirit of 
generosity and collaboration. Their challenge led me to the idea of A House 
Repeated.

I haven’t moved house in a long time and I find the buildings in my 
neighbourhood layered with more and more memories. I’m putting down roots, but 
still playing games and inventing new places … that closet door will always 
hide a staircase to a secret passage.

 * A House Repeated is at Battersea Arts Centre 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/39510/whats_on/whats_on/shows/a_house_repeated>
, London, as part of A Nation’s Theatre, 7-24 October  