
In early 1963, an east coast guitar player and fan of the blues called Tom 
Hoskins found himself poring over an old road atlas, looking for a place called 
Avalon somewhere in Mississippi. Hoskins was on the trail of a figure called 
Mississippi John Hurt, known to him through two tracks on Harry Smith's 
Anthology of American Folk Music and a bootleg tape that another avid blues 
collector, Dick Spottswood, had in turn acquired from an Australian collector. 
On that recording, Hurt could be heard singing: "Avalon's my hometown, always 
on my mind/ Pretty mamas in Avalon, want me there all the time."

It was enough of a clue: even though the recordings (originally issued on the 
Okeh label) dated from 1928, Hoskins had a hunch that Hurt might still be 
alive, and headed to Mississippi.

Finally he heard that a blues singer fitting his description was living down 
the end of a nearby gravel track. Sure enough, a frail, 72-year-old who 
answered the door of the shack proved to be their man. He had quit playing 
music years earlier, but once furnished with a guitar, he got over his fear 
that this was the FBI come for him and showed them how little he'd forgotten. 
"I know how Howard Carter felt when he opened Tutankhamun's tomb and looked 
in," Hoskins later recalled. "He was alive and he still had it."

Nor was Hurt the only figure to re-emerge from the thick haze of history – 
from a time and a place that postwar collectors of the country blues, such as 
James McKune and Harry Smith, had assumed was lost to them. Nick Perls, another 
fan, found the great Son House living in Rochester, New York, completely 
oblivious to a newfound interest in his earliest recordings. Sleepy John Estes 
turned up in Brownsville, Tennessee, and Bukka White turned out to be living in 
Memphis. Even Skip James was alive and he, too, was rediscovered – in Bentonia, 
Mississippi.

James, the author of songs such as Devil Got My Woman, was the son of a former 
bootlegger turned preacher from Mississippi who had recorded a series of tracks 
for Paramount in 1931. In the decades since, he'd quit music and led an 
itinerant life, but by the summer of 1964 was working as a tractor driver in 
Mississippi. There it was that three college students from California – 
including guitarist John Fahey, who'd fallen in love with the blues after Dick 
Spottswood played him a Blind Willie Johnson 78 – found him.

"In what seemed like an instant," the blues historian Marybeth Hamilton has 
written, "the Delta blues acquired living, breathing embodiments." Better than 
that, these arcane figures were coaxed into performing again: Son House played 
at the Newport Folk festival in 1964 (on the same bill as Bob Dylan and Joan 
Baez), the New York Folk festival in July 1965, and the October 1967 European 
tour of the American Folk festival along with Skip James and Bukka White. 
Mississippi John Hurt also played that Newport gig, and made extensive tours of 
colleges, concert halls and coffee houses, and appeared on the Tonight Show 
with Johnny Carson.

But nothing was straightforward: at its worst, in Hamilton's description, the 
blues revival took on the aura of a circus sideshow, while the affable Hurt's 
success was a source of resentment for the more taciturn Skip James, who 
loathed the folkie scene – the differences in their personalities reflecting 
their respective styles as musicians. The former died (from a heart attack) in 
November 1966, the latter after suffering from cancer in October 1969.

Son House, however, lived on until his 80s, dying in 1988. It still seems 
extraordinary that anyone alive then should have once played alongside Charlie 
Patton; in fact, it was House who spread the legend in the 60s that Robert 
Johnson had sold his soul to the devil at that Mississippi crossroads.

Living links to that period remain, too: for instance, Eric Clapton helped pay 
the ailing Skip James's hospital bills in the late 60s, after Cream covered I'm 
So Glad on their debut album.

And the influence lives on – Jack White of the White Stripes claims Son 
House's Grinnin' in Your Face as his favourite song ever, for example. So much 
of the history of roots music is reflected in dynamics such as these: the hunt 
for the authentic and its subsequent recasting into something else, but also 
something powerful. 
 