
1. Young at Heart

Writers: Johnny Richards (music) and Carolyn Leigh (lyrics)

When: 1953

Classic version: Frank Sinatra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-sinatra> was the first to record Young 
at Heart, and his version sold a million copies. It was such a hit that the 
movie Sinatra was working on at the time had its title changed to Young at 
Heart to capitalise on its popularity, and the Sinatra recording was slapped 
over the opening and closing credits. But can we be honest? This is a waft of a 
song, barely more than a novelty, and hardly worthy of Sinatra’s talent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYT--YHYbwjs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYT--YHYbwjs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYT--YHYbwjs&media=>
2. Maybe You’ll Be There

Writers: Rube Bloom (music) and Sammy Gallop (lyrics)

When: 1947

Classic version: We’re returning to Sinatra, who recorded it in 1957, for his 
album Where Are You? It was the second of the four “misery” albums he recorded 
for Capitol, alongside In the Wee Small Hours, Frank Sinatra Sings for Only the 
Lonely and No One Cares. The brassy, swinging Sinatra often overshadows the 
lachrymose balladeer, but it was just as important a part of his career, 
especially in the 50s. No one ever conveyed heartbreak like Sinatra.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHNtw7NpHu1w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHNtw7NpHu1w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHNtw7NpHu1w&media=>
3. Polka Dots and Moonbeams

Writers: Jimmy van Heusen (music) and Johnny Burke (lyrics)

When: 1940

Classic version: It’s another song associated with Sinatra – his first hit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xGV3MGGIYyo> when he joined Tommy Dorsey’s 
orchestra. But we’ll steer away from him for this one, and offer you the 1954 
recording by Sarah Vaughan. She’s in complete control on this version – laid 
down during the sessions for her album with the trumpeter Clifford Brown – 
vibrato perfectly calibrated, diction impeccable, her tone conveying just the 
right amounts of nostalgia and regret. It’s perfect, almost a cliche of how a 
jazz ballad should sound.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAzQ_2vpMbMg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAzQ_2vpMbMg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAzQ_2vpMbMg&media=>
4. All the Way

Writers: Jimmy van Heusen (music) and Sammy Cahn (lyrics)

When: 1957

Classic version: Sinatra was the first to sing All the Way 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4LiAfyQ0TE>, in the film The Joker is Wild. 
At this point, Jimmy van Heusen and Sammy Cahn were pretty much Sinatra’s 
personal writers, so attuned were they to his rhythms, and so often did he call 
on them to supply him with material. But, again, we’re eschewing Sinatra, and 
going for a recording from Billie Holiday’s final sessions before her death in 
1959. She had been in poor health well before this, and it seemed her gift had 
been lost. By 1959, her voice no longer had the soft warmth of her earlier 
recordings, but there’s a cracked, poignant dignity and wisdom to this reading, 
from a session that had her back to somewhere near top form.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmcQYBFdgssM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmcQYBFdgssM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmcQYBFdgssM&media=>
5. Skylark

Writers: Hoagy Carmichael (music) and Johnny Mercer (lyrics)

When: 1941

Classic version: Before signing to Atlantic and being reinvented to become one 
of the greatest of all soul singers,Aretha Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin> had a rather different 
career. At 21, for her fifth album, Laughing on the Outside, she recorded a set 
of standards from the golden age of American songwriting (with one of her own 
compositions thrown in). You can hear pop changing here: the backing is as you 
would expect on a major label album of soft and jazzy songs, but Aretha’s 
delivery points the way forward into soul: hear the way she delivers the word 
of the song’s title at 1:58.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjHYDafTrpMU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjHYDafTrpMU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjHYDafTrpMU&media=>
6. Nevertheless (I’m in Love with You)

Writers: Harry Ruby (music) and Bert Kalmar (lyrics)

When: 1931

Classic version: This is one of those songs everyone decides to have a go at, 
from Rudy Vallée in 1931, throughSinatra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bsfnCOt6pEA>, Olivia Newton John, Hank Snow 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9gQmpliK5w0> and Barry Manilow. The version 
we’re going for is the one that might be most familiar to Dylan fans: the 1973 
recording by Harry Nilsson for his album A Little Touch of Schmilsson in the 
Night. It might not be the jazziest, but Nilsson’s voice is still in great 
shape here, aided by an arrangement from Sinatra collaborator Gordon Jenkins, 
and able to leap into the upper registers in a way Sinatra’s never could. 
Nilsson had the great gift of charm, and he brings it all to bear here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DieobEr3TnKg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DieobEr3TnKg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DieobEr3TnKg&media=>
7. All or Nothing at All

Writers: Arthur Altman (music) and Jack Lawrence (lyrics)

When: 1939

Classic version: This was a song Sinatra returned to again and again, even 
venturing into adisco version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R7RK_imEjGY> in 
1977. His attachment might have been because it was one of the first songs he 
recorded professionally,with Harry James in 1939 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u7klm1GS3v8>. It was also the song, he once 
said, that got him and James thrown out the Victor Hugo Cafe in Los Angeles for 
the incompetence of their performance. The rendition we’re going for is the 
1966 recording for the Strangers in the Night album. Truth be told, this is the 
rare Nelson Riddle arrangement we’re not mad about (the organ is a horrible 
attempt at being contemporary), but Sinatra’s performance is magical: resigned 
and understated at the song’s start, gradually stirring to life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTfeBAo-08c0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTfeBAo-08c0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTfeBAo-08c0&media=>
8. On a Little Street in Singapore

Writers: Peter DeRose (music) and Billy Hill (lyrics)

When: 1936 (we think)

Classic version: On a Little Street in Singapore is one of those songs that 
crops up every now and then – Manhattan Transfer took it into the charts andon 
to Top of the Pops <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NaO93JXJook> in 1978. It’s 
a throwaway number, without the romantic profundity of some of the songs on 
this list, and its strength is all in the melody. So our preferred version is 
one where the instrumental parts are emphasised, by Glenn Miller and his 
Orchestra. None more smooth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDhDaOdGZbF4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDhDaOdGZbF4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDhDaOdGZbF4&media=>
9. It Had to Be You

Writers: Isham Jones (music) and Gus Jones (lyrics)

When: 1924

Classic version: It’s 92 years old, but It Had to Be You remains a peerless 
piece of pop music, with a lyric that still resonates: “I wandered around, 
finally found somebody who / Could make be true / Could make me be blue.” It’s 
also inextricably associated with cinema, cropping up in film after film, 
including being performed byDooley Wilson in Casablanca 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bRoFG4GnDDo>. And it’s cinema that supplies 
our chosen version, the one recorded in 1988 by Harry Connick Jr – that year’s 
“new Sinatra” – for When Harry Met Sally. It’s a melody that, for me at least, 
now always invokes Central Park in the autumn and the love lives of New 
Yorkers. That’s the power of music and cinema together.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2pN8OccsbPA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2pN8OccsbPA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2pN8OccsbPA&media=>
10. Melancholy Mood

Writers: Walter Schumann (music) and Vick R Knight Sr (lyrics)

When: 1930s

Classic version: This one’s an obscurity, certainly by the standards of these 
songs. There’s no long list of covers, and even the Sinatra version was just a 
B-side to a single he recorded with Harry James in 1939. That Sinatra was very 
much second place to James is evident from the intro – it’s more than a minute, 
and a trumpet solo from James, before Sinatra gets to sing. This is the young 
Sinatra, the one who was a sex symbol and sang like some doe-eyed young lover 
rather than the gravelly, world-weary man of the classic Capitol years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR_kcc25rSe0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR_kcc25rSe0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR_kcc25rSe0&media=>
11. That Old Black Magic

Writers: Harold Arlen (music) and Johnny Mercer (lyrics)

When: 1942

Classic version: It’s back to a song that’s been recorded by pretty much 
everyone who ever picked up a microphone. But, then, the combination of Harold 
Arlen and Johnny Mercer pretty much guarantees songwriting perfection. Mercer, 
incidentally, was partly inspired byCole Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/cole-porter>’s use of the word “voodoo” in 
You Do Something to Me, feeling the conjunction of magic and love was too 
strong an idea to be wasted on a single word. It’s also been suggested the song 
was about his affair with Judy Garland. Whatever the truth, we’ve had nothing 
yet from that other great interpreter of the American songbook, so here’s Ella 
Fitzgerald.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQCaeE1hwY1w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQCaeE1hwY1w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQCaeE1hwY1w&media=>
12. Come Rain or Come Shine

Writers: Harold Arlen (music) and Johnny Mercer (lyrics)

When: 1946

Classic version: Another of the great standards, so let’s step outside the 
comfort zone and turn to a version that reconfigures it from something 
tasteful, something for the background, into a song where the agony of 
obsessional love is place front and centre.James Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/james-brown> recorded it on his 1964 album 
Out of Sight, an odd record that was packed with standards. Arlen and Mercer 
almost certainly never imagined their song could or would be delivered like 
this, but Brown – not yet the king of funk – turns Come Rain or Come Shine into 
a desperate shriek of a ballad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0dOCPcn1VNw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0dOCPcn1VNw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0dOCPcn1VNw&media=> 