
Bob Hoskins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/30/bob-hoskins-family-film-industry-tribute>
 was a godsend for those TV shows that would feature footage of the work 
now-famous performers took early on to pay the bills. Shows such asBefore They 
Were Famous <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0118267/>. Because before he was on 
the big screen in films such asMona Lisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/30/bob-hoskins-dies-felicitys-journey-mona-lisa>
, Who Framed Roger Rabbit? and The Cotton Club, Hoskins had played a removals 
man who sought help for his illiteracy inOn the Move 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ufVe521quok>, a Sunday afternoon series of 
10-minute dramas (screened in 1975 as part of the BBC's adult education remit).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FufVe521quok%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FufVe521quok%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FufVe521quok%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This was the start of his TV career. And while audiences - especially in 
America - may have been amused to see these small beginnings of a subsequently 
huge career, Hoskins always spoke fondly of Alf, the character who learned to 
write late in life, in interviews.

There were two reasons for this. First, Hoskins was never one of those actors 
- of whom his close friendMichael Caine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/30/bob-hoskins-death-helen-mirren-tribute-actor>
 is an example – who, after making it in movies, later appeared on British TV 
only as a chatshow guest. Grateful to the medium for his early breaks and 
training in acting to a camera, Hoskins returned to television throughout his 
career and, although the obituaries inevitably emphasise his cinematic credits, 
made a succession of significant small-screen appearances over almost 40 years. 
It was fitting that one of his last major roles, before retiring after the 
diagnosis ofParkinson's disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/08/bob-hoskins-retire-parkinsons> in 
2012, had been as a pub-owner - the main character in one episode, a background 
presence in another – inJimmy McGovern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/05/this-much-i-know-jimmy-mcgovern>
's anthology seriesThe Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-street>.

The other reason, though, that Hoskins never disowned his TV work is that On 
the Move shared the qualities of his best stuff. Whereas most footage in Before 
They Were Famous type shows is calculated to be bathetic or embarrassing – the
Oscar-winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/30/bob-hoskins-career-in-movie-clips>
 actor who once advertised stubborn-stain remover – the characterisation of a 
proud man who has desperately disguised his learning difficulties helps to 
explain, when watched now, why Hoskins went on to become the star he did.

Handed a working-class stereotype (not for the last time in his career), 
Hoskins gave Alf a vulnerability and poignancy far beyond the requirements of a 
public information short. Apart from its intended audience of adults struggling 
with reading and writing, On the Move gained a large secondary following among 
literate viewers because, even then, Hoskins' expressive face and growly voice 
made you want to watch and listen.

As a kind and generous man, Hoskins also appreciated the ideological aspect of 
the project and treasured letters and comments from people who had sought 
belated education as a result of On the Move. He may have been thankful as 
well, at that stage of his TV career, to be playing a man who wasn't on his way 
to or from jail. As a short stocky bloke with a wheezer-geezer North London 
accent, Hoskins was, according to the class-driven stereotyping of the day, 
frequently cast on the wrong side of the law, as the titles of two early telly 
jobs – the 1972 dramaVillains <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0169507/> and the 
1974 sitcomThick as Thieves <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0071066/> – vividly 
illustrate.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fq31Y-TQe0Ak%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fq31Y-TQe0Ak%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fq31Y-TQe0Ak%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
A classier early part was in Dennis Potter's Schmoedipus 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0072121/> (1974), one of the writer's many 
spiritual-psychiatric fables and not the best of them, but significant because 
it gave the Potter team a familiarity with Hoskins that paid off when he was 
chosen as the co-star of the six-part masterpiecePennies from Heaven 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0082894/> (BBC1, 1978). Although the role was yet 
another criminal – homicidal song-sheet salesman Arthur Parker – this one was 
original rather than stereotypical, as the show featured Potter's daring device 
of actors miming to popular songs on the soundtrack: a premonition of the later 
karaoke craze, although intended by the writer as a metaphor for lying and 
hidden inner lives.

Part of the joke on first viewing seemed to be that Hoskins was a particularly 
unlikely bloke to be singing and dancing but, characteristically, Hoskins soon 
wrong-footed this assumption by hoofing and crooning for real in one of his 
stand-out stage appearances: as Nathan Detroit in Richard Eyre's 1982National 
Theatre production of Guys and Dolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/30/bob-hoskins>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTexG2p_JWGc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTexG2p_JWGc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTexG2p_JWGc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Hoskins's theatrical credentials also led to two of his strongest TV 
performances, playing two of the standout classical baddies: Iago in Jonathan 
Miller's BBC production ofOthello 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2014/04/30/bob_hoskins_died_english_actor_could_do_shakespeare_as_well_as_spielberg.html>
 (1981) and the scheming thug De Flores in Simon Curtis's version of Middleton's
The Changeling <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0109397/> (1993). Both parts demand 
the paradox of making evil plausible and even attractive and so were perfect 
for the actor's unusual combination of likability and menace. Curtis later cast 
Hoskins as an enjoyable Micawber in 1999's David Copperfield, a BBC adaptation 
that was also notable for introducingDaniel Radcliffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/daniel-radcliffe> in the title role.

Rather less of a credit to Hoskins' credits were (presumably lucrative) turns 
in American mini-series as various short and burly historical figures - Pope 
John XXIII and General Noreiga. But, as he showed by returning to TV for The 
Street, Hoskins always retained an affection for the box and the feeling was 
reciprocated.

Most actors would like to be regarded as all-rounders, which is why so many 
movie stars - such asTom Hanks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/22/steven-spielberg-tom-hanks-u2-cold-war-movie-thriller>
 orBilly Bob Thornton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/15/billy-bob-thornton-tv-movies-fargo>
 - occasionally dip into theatre or TV. But Bob Hoskins, who would have reacted 
to this compliment with a typically self-deprecating comment about also having 
been "all round", truly was an all-rounder: from adult illiteracy campaigns 
through Broadway musicals to Hollywood movies, he could do it all, and always 
watchably.
 