
Not a great PR week for Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, as a slew of books on the 
failings – or perhaps, more chillingly, successes – of his regime hit the 
shelves. Of these,Red Notice: How I Became Putin’s No 1 Enemy, the pacy memoir 
by the American multimillionaire and former Putin allyBill Browder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/25/-sp-bill-browder-kremlin-threatened-to-kill-me-vladimir-putin>
, attracted the most attention.Peter Conradi, reviewing in the Sunday Times, 
called it a “financial thriller ... complete with dialogue”, though thanks to 
Browder’s apparently total recall of conversations from years ago, 
it occasionally “verges on the implausible”. In the Times,Giles Whittell agreed 
that it was “one heck of a read”, and destined to be “a major motion picture”, 
even if the book conveniently glossed over the ethics of “making a vast fortune 
from undervalued Soviet assets”. Browder’s likability, or the lack of it, was 
also an issue forSonia Purnell in the Independent on Sunday, but she came round 
to the idea that “heroism sometimes lies in unlikely places”, and that he 
“deserves our respect”.

A disquieting addendum was provided by John Thornhill, who reviewed the book 
for the Financial Times, alongside a more “scholarly” work by Karen Dawisha,
Putin’s Kleptocracy: Who Owns Russia? Dawisha’s book, which makes the case that 
Russian law is “being wielded as a sword for the state”, was originally to be 
published by Cambridge University Press, but Cambridge backed out, fearing it 
would not be adequately protected by British libel laws. The book has since 
been published in the US, where laws are less friendly to litigious oligarchs, 
by Simon and Schuster.

On a warmer note, Anne Tyler’s 20th and (possibly) final novel A Spool of Blue 
Thread was greeted with a chorus of critical acclaim. Craig Brown in the Mail 
on Sunday was desperate to know Tyler’s secret: “How does she do it? ... Her 
books are full of families talking about humdrum things like doing the washing 
up, or going shopping or what’s for lunch, yet they are somehow more gripping 
than the paciest transcontinental thriller.” Equally empassioned wasJames Walton
 in the Telegraph, for whom the novel provided a definitive riposte to all 
those who doubted Tyler’s place at the “literary top table”. Her forgiving view 
of human nature is “not some sort of regrettable disability that she can’t 
shake off ... it’s a deliberate and defensible artistic choice about how to 
express the reality of human life”.

In the Sunday Times, Peter Kemp found Tyler’s characters “all but elbow their 
way off the page with lifelikeness”, and concluded that “if A Spool of Blue 
Thread is indeed her final work, it is a magnificent veteran’s farewell”.

Reviewers revelled in Sam Delaney’s gossipy Mad Men and Bad Men: What Happened 
When British Politics Met Advertising – the answer to which, as John McDermott 
wryly noted in the Financial Times, could be summed up as: “they had a good 
time on expenses”. They certainly didn’t manage to change the views of the 
electorate, arguedDominic Sandbrook in the Sunday Times, for whom the 
“extremely amusing” book served only to show that any grand claims about the 
importance of advertising are overblown. “The truth ... is that advertising 
only works to reinforce what voters already believe”.
 