
We love a good anecdote – especially one that starts with “Summer, 1974”. So 
readerconedison <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10021252> caught our 
attention in our recentTips, Links and Suggestions blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/jul/06/tips-links-and-suggestions-margaret-atwood-laline-paull#comment-55153372>
 with an encounter in Golden Gate Park. This story started chat of its own 
about the real-life conversations sparked by books. We’ve rounded up some of 
them below, but there must be more to say. Which books do you turn to when 
you’re searching for something to talk about, and which books have you found 
yourself unable to resist discussing with strangers? Let us know in the 
comments.

Lord of the Flies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/16/lord-of-the-flies-100-greatest-novels-william-golding-mccrum>
 by William Golding

Summer, 1974. I was sitting, reading in Shakespeare’s Garden, a tiny jewel 
inside San Francisco’s Golden Gate Park. An elderly woman with a cane slowly 
walked by, then stopped and said, ‘Excuse me. I couldn’t help noticing your 
book’s cover. It’s special, isn’t it – Lord of the Flies?’ I looked up and 
said, ‘Yes. It is.’ ‘The unhappy truth,’ she smiled sadly. ‘Do you mind if I 
share your bench with you? It’s so lovely here. I have a book of my own. We can 
read together.’ ‘Have a seat,’ I said. She let herself carefully down and 
removed a book from her bag – Zorba the Greek. My eyes lit up.” –conedison 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10021252>

Anything by Albert Camus <https://www.theguardian.com/books/albertcamus>

I have to confess that I tend to strike up conversations with anyone who is 
reading a book that I loved. I just can’t help myself because I’m always 
desperate to discuss books with someone. Thank goodness my partner is a reader. 
[…] But if someone were reading anything by Albert Camus I would not only talk 
to them, I would invite myself to sit with them until they looked up to talk to 
me. I’d be obnoxious about it, in hopes that once they started talking to me, 
they wouldn’t be too annoyed. But in real life, I do respect the right to read 
in silence.” –fingerlakeswanderer 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3690773>

An Unnecessary Woman by Rabih Alameddine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/28/an-unnecessary-woman-rabih-alameddine-review-novel>

I have spoken to somebody about a book they were reading, it was on the tube 
in London and the book was The Reluctant Fundamentalist by Mohsin Hamid. The 
person wasn’t very receptive to my enthusiasm though … That said, I would 
always approach somebody reading anything byToni Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison>, Jhumpa Lahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jhumpa-lahiri>, or Yiyun Li 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/30/yiyun-li-my-generation-kinder-than-solitude-tiananmen-square>
. Or maybe if they were readingAn Unnecessary Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/28/an-unnecessary-woman-rabih-alameddine-review-novel>
 by Rabih Alameddine, which is also one of my favourite novels from the past 
few years.” –koochacoo <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14742927>

Some readers took part on Twitter: 

The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/05/rereading-howard-brenton-robert-tressell>
 by Robert Tressell
Jayne White (@ElethaWhite) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> The Ragged Trousered 
Philanthropists. It lets me know if I'm wasted on them.
 <https://twitter.com/ElethaWhite/status/621707919424417793> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ElethaWhite/status/621707919424417793> 
American Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/books/american-psycho> by Bret 
Easton Ellis
Adam Will (@JohnAdamjwill) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> American Psycho: amazing 
how many people smile and laugh when asked if they read it before telling their 
own interpretations
 <https://twitter.com/JohnAdamjwill/status/621734149523685376> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JohnAdamjwill/status/621734149523685376> Laura Horton 
(@LauraRosaHorton) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> American Psycho 😈
 <https://twitter.com/LauraRosaHorton/status/621785219876659201> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/LauraRosaHorton/status/621785219876659201> 
Fifty Shades of Grey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fifty-shades-of-grey> 
by EL James
Lindsay Seddon (@LindsaySeddon1) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> 50 Shades of Grey - 
everyone has an opinion and can't wait to express it.
 <https://twitter.com/LindsaySeddon1/status/621707349095501824> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/LindsaySeddon1/status/621707349095501824> 
1984 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/19/100-best-novels-1984-george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four-robert-mccrum>
 by George Orwell
Silje Kr. Andersen (@SiljeKristine_) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> Ideal I don't know, but 
1984 is a good one these days
 <https://twitter.com/SiljeKristine_/status/621706734680305665> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/SiljeKristine_/status/621706734680305665> Silje Kr. 
Andersen (@SiljeKristine_) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> I always recommend it to 
friends who are not into reading hoping it will change their view on both the 
world and literature
 <https://twitter.com/SiljeKristine_/status/621707782589431808> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/SiljeKristine_/status/621707782589431808> 
The Idiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jun/26/highereducation.classics> by 
Fyodor Dostoevsky
Sha (@sei_saye) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> Usually the book I am 
reading at that time, or if I see someone reading some book and ask them about 
it.
 <https://twitter.com/sei_saye/status/621707145453514752> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/sei_saye/status/621707145453514752> Sha (@sei_saye) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> But "The Idiot" by 
Dostoevsky has always been a source of great discussion especially when I am 
getting to know someone!
 <https://twitter.com/sei_saye/status/621708402436079616> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/sei_saye/status/621708402436079616> 
The Shipping News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/22/the-shipping-news-proulx-newfoundland>
 by Annie Proulx
Rose Hope (@RoseHopefully) 
I once made a #friend <https://twitter.com/hashtag/friend?src=hash> on a bus 
going from London to Glasgow over a dogeared copy of "The Shipping News."
@guardian <https://twitter.com/guardian> @martabausells 
<https://twitter.com/martabausells> #book 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/book?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/RoseHopefully/status/622055706842267648> July 17, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/RoseHopefully/status/622055706842267648> Rose Hope 
(@RoseHopefully) 
Long but the company was excellent. :) I swapped "Shipping News" for "Last 
Orders" by Swift and carried on.#reader 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/reader?src=hash> @martabausells 
<https://twitter.com/martabausells> @guardian <https://twitter.com/guardian>
 <https://twitter.com/RoseHopefully/status/622058038724304896> July 17, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/RoseHopefully/status/622058038724304896> 
Friday Night Lights: A Town, a Team, and a Dream 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/friday-night-lights.html> by Buzz Bissinger
？？？？ (@R042) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> that's a huge question. I 
guess I have had interesting chats about Friday Night Lights, the Aeneid and 
The Pillow Book
 <https://twitter.com/R042/status/621707724133416960> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/R042/status/621707724133416960> 
@R042 emailed to explain further: 

I’ve found a couple of times when I mention to an American that I’ve read 
Friday Night Lights and that it really moved me, they seem quite surprised 
someone from the UK would take an interest in a piece of very niche non-fiction 
about school sport in a small post-industrial town. It’s a book about what are 
very specifically American problems – the failure of racial integration, the 
failure of the education system, the utter despondency that follows the 
post-boom industrial decline – but they’re problems that invite the reader to 
both have some empathy for the problems of another culture and consider their 
own culture in that light. The conversations I’ve had about the book […] have 
made me rethink my initial dismissal of Chomsky et al’s criticism of sporting 
culture as something which can be harmful to society and have made me 
reconsider the decline of British industry and the state of British education.”

Albertine67 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10098507> made an 
interesting point about Kindles:

Fond as I am of my Kindle, I realise that if I see people using that to read, 
I’m far less likely to wonder about what they’re reading or, indeed, get into 
conversation with them about their reading. There’s something about covers or 
recognising a title or author’s name that draws me, which I don’t think a 
Kindle could do for me. Or am I being too close minded?”

MildGloster <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15040504> advocated for 
just chatting about the book that’s on your mind:

I would perhaps be most likely to strike up a conversation with somebody who 
was reading a book I hadjust read myself, or read very recently, and harboured 
deep and strong opinions on — it being all fresh in my mind. My thoughts, 
feelings —odes, grievances! — ready to come tumbling out at the slightest of 
nudges.

“It wouldn’t matter if I had utterly scorned or utterly adored the book in 
question; I would simply want to debate it.”

And finally, we do get the irony:

Wigan Libraries (@WiganLibraries) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> Well, at the moment, "Have 
you read Go Set a Watchman?"!!
 <https://twitter.com/WiganLibraries/status/621707147529875456> July 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/WiganLibraries/status/621707147529875456> 
Share yours in the comments, and we’ll add a selection to the piece.

 