
A blind man with wrap-arounds, pinched cheeks and a beanie hat hooks his stick 
over the crook of his arm and grips the granite wall on the corner of High 
Vennel and High Street, as if the icicle stings of rain will wash him into the 
iron murk of the Solway Firth. Wigtown is Scotland's "book town". The Box of 
Frogs sells kids' books. The Cauldron is culinary. The window of Tide Line is 
lined with titles such as So You Want To Go Shooting?, The Gun Punt Adventure 
and The Complete Gundog.

I'm hunting for a book about a Galloway character with nasty eating habits. In 
the 16th century, Sawney Bean and his incestuous clan feasted on the flesh of 
travellers they abducted on the west coast road to Glasgow. Limbs, like 
sickening hams, hung from the roof of their cave. I don't know how much is 
legend and how much is fact, but I have a vivid memory of a zealous guide on a 
primary school trip around Edinburgh Old Town describing their capture and 
execution in the Tolbooth - particularly the bit where, before absolute 
amputation, the men's "privy members" were cut off and flung into the flames of 
the fires where the women were being burned alive.

I feel hungry. Every bookseller I chat to about Sawney recommends that I have 
a snack in the pink-painted Reading Lasses, the fantastically named women's 
studies bookshop and cafe. It is homely and welcoming. I am brought a thick 
plank of wood stacked with Galloway cheeses, chutneys and home-made bread dense 
with seeds. I open my book and flick through it, comforted by the reassuring 
flavours. A bowl of good soup can make you almost glad it is raining outside. 
The other customers are all reading, too.

They are mild and grey-haired, wearing warm ramblers' fleeces. The dichotomy 
of good bookshops makes them a powerful environment: gentle, dusty places 
containing the extremes of human thought. I am reading about incestuous 
cannibals. I wonder what the ramblers are reading. It could be tragedy, 
violence, passion or needlecraft. Nothing in their expression gives it away. 
They quietly sip their coffee without raising their eyes from the page. Their 
faces are so . . . "What's the word that describes a face that is unreadable or 
gives nothing away?"

The woman with the inscrutable face next to me glances up from her page.

"Inscrutable."

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 