
Early in The Faraway Nearby, a book about memory, loss and storytelling, 
Rebecca Solnit writes of one August when she found herself the recipient of 
100lb of apricots. She spread the fruit on the floor of her bedroom to slow its 
decay. “I had expected them to look like abundance itself,” she writes, “and 
they looked instead like anxiety, because every time I came back there was 
another rotten one or two or three or dozen to cull.”


The fruit required immediate action, but also prompted reflection: “The 
reasons I came to have a heap of apricots on my bedroom floor are complicated. 
They came from my mother’s tree, from the home she no longer lived in, in the 
summer when a new round of trouble began.” That trouble was her mother’s 
advancing Alzheimer’s disease, and what follows is not so much a memoir as a 
meditation about stories – how we tell them, why we need them, what they mean.


The Faraway Nearby by Rebecca Solnit – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/07/faraway-nearby-rebecca-solnit-review>
The apricots prompted Solnit to reread fairytales, with their heaps of 
abundance, and she came to believe that each one was a riddle to decipher, “a 
tale whose meaning I had to make over the course of the next 12 months as 
almost everything went wrong”. She revisits the stories of Cinderella, 
Scheherazade, Frankenstein and the turbulent life of its creator, Mary Shelley, 
thinking about how these tales change with each retelling – and what each 
version reveals about the storyteller. She compares the bitter, difficult 
relationship between herself and her mother to that of Snow White and the 
Queen, and in an early chapter describes herself as the mirror into which her 
mother peered, dissatisfied with the image reflected back at her.


For more than 200 pages, Solnit writes about, around and through the meaning 
of stories. This is narrative as jazz improv, each refrain exploring a new 
melody or theme. Yet familiar strains recur again and again. Metaphors abound, 
and Solnit seems to believe that all of life could be looked at as an allegory 
to be deciphered.

Stories are, Solnit notes, not only quests for meaning, they are also vehicles 
for empathy

Amid the chaos of her mother’s decline, Solnit faces her own health scare. The 
night before an operation, she takes a walk by the sea and notices the 
footprints in the sand: “I like to see the long line we each leave behind, and 
I sometimes imagine my whole life that way, as though each step was a stitch, 
as though I was a needle leaving a trail of thread that sewed together the 
world as I went by, crisscrossing others’ paths, quilting it all together in 
some way that matters even though it can hardly be traced.”

Solnit is an intrepid explorer of ideas, and she is not afraid to wander off 
the narrative path (her best-known book, after all, isA Field Guide to Getting 
Lost <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/26/biography.features2>). This 
can make the digressions in her work frustrating. Eventually, though, she 
circles back to her central obsession: the power of storytelling. A false story 
can harm, a truthful one can illuminate. A story told well can help us 
understand ourselves and the world. Stories are, she notes, not only quests for 
meaning, they are also vehicles for empathy. “Not to know yourself is 
dangerous, to that self and to others,” she writes. “You see it in the small 
acts of everyday life, of the person who feels perfectly justified, of the 
person who doesn’t know he’s just committed harm … of the person we’ve all been 
at one time or another.”

‘Hope is a​n embrace of the unknown​’: Rebecca Solnit on living in dark times
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/15/rebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown>
Revisiting her 2004 book Hope in the Dark 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hope-in-the-dark.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
,Solnit recently wrote in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/15/rebecca-solnit-hope-in-the-dark-new-essay-embrace-unknown>
 that “it is not the belief that everything was, is or will be fine … Hope is 
an embrace of the unknown.” Stories, then, are a way to understand what does 
happen. We need hope – and stories – when we don’t know how to make sense of 
our lives or of the world. And so her ode to a well-told tale may sit on the 
bookshelf for ages, held in reserve for the right moment to be read. She seems 
to admit as much: “Pared back, [this] is a history of an emergency and the 
stories that kept me company then.”

The Faraway Nearby is, inevitably, bookended by pain and grief. Alzheimer’s 
arrives on the doorstep and turns into the visitor who won’t go away. “Time 
itself is a tragedy, and most of us are fighting a war against it,” Solnit 
writes. “Our victories are only delays…” The apricots on the floor of her 
bedroom will not be ripe forever. Everything is changing, always, forever.
 