
The time is surely ripe for a ripping satire of contemporary Britain, and 
hopes were high for Jonathan Coe’sNumber 11 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/344991/s/number-11/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, which the author has called a “slippery sequel” to his classic send-up of the 
Thatcher era,What a Carve Up!. Most critics agreed, however, that the novel 
narrowly missed its target. ForRobert Epstein 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/jonathan-coe-number-11-slating-the-obvious-a6733681.html>
 in the Independent on Sunday, “Food banks, the vacuousness of modern 
celebrity, the skewed reality of reality TV, tabloid columnists’ dyspeptic 
rants, library closures, basement conversions, social media bullying – all are 
present, yet paraded in such a well-worn, obvious manner that they come across 
as banal.” In the Evening Standard,Andrew Neather 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/books/number-11-by-jonathan-coe-review-a3113146.html>
 also found the book “laboured”, and although “first-class entertainment ... it 
never quite draws blood as truly dangerous satire should”.Nick Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/08/number-11-jonathan-coe-review>, 
writing in the Observer, argued that while “no modern novelist is better at 
charting the precariousness of middle-class life”, Coe was “trying to have it 
both ways” by writing a political comedy rather than a true satire. OnlyJohn 
Sutherland, in the Sunday Times, found in favour. “Paradoxically, What a Carve 
Up! is even better after reading this sequel. Let’s hope that Coe goes for a 
slippery trilogy.”

There was a more generous reception for Pour Me 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/346206/s/pour-me-a-life/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, AA Gill’s account of his descent into alcoholism. It was perhaps unsurprising 
that the Sunday Times, for which Gill is a restaurant reviewer and TV critic, 
gave the book a rave. “As readers of Gill’s journalism will expect,Pour Me is 
alert, emphatic, mordant, unforgiving. It is often moving, but never tries to 
be likable,” wroteRichard Davenport-Hines. “His gallows comedy gives a hefty 
kick, many sections are beautifully droll, and some scenes are hilarious.” In 
the ObserverTim Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/15/pour-me-a-life-aa-gill-review> 
praised it as “often a triumph of that familiar voice; fluent, cocky and dense 
with gags ... he can rarely resist a fussy allusion – but when he is in his 
stride he is a brilliant raconteur, and a gifted satirist of place and person.” 
ButMatthew Adams 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/pour-me-a-life-by-aa-gill-book-review-a-blurry-and-bleary-eyed-addicts-tale-a6732091.html>
, writing in the Independent, was less keen. “Occasionally, as in his 
description of his arrival at rehab, Gill’s prose is direct and affecting ... 
But often it is hopelessly overwritten, full of cliches, and punctuated by 
attempts at wit and aphorism that repeatedly misfire.”

The Penguin Book of the British Short Story 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/344745/s/the-penguin-book-of-the-british-short-story-i/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, a two-volume collection edited by Philip Hensher, was generally acknowledged 
to be a Very Good Thing, although inevitably reviewers took issue with some of 
his choices. “Had I been compiling my Book of the British Short Story, I could 
not have left out AL Kennedy, a unique user of language and surely one of the 
best short story writers of her generation,” wroteKaty Guest 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/the-penguin-book-of-the-british-short-story-short-fiction-authors-stand-tall-in-a-surprising-a6733366.html>
 in the Independent on Sunday. “This, however, is not my collection, and it is 
a delight to be introduced to some unjustly neglected authors, and reminded 
of some that I already admire.” In the Sunday Times,John Carey singled out 
stories by Zadie Smith and Tessa Hadley for particular praise, but warned that, 
“If you are looking for a collection of what are generally acknowledged to be 
the greatest British short stories, this is certainly not for you ... the 
familiar names have been left out to make room for new.”Boyd Tonkin 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/the-penguin-book-of-the-british-short-story-volumes-1-2-edited-by-philip-hensher-book-review-a6732161.html>
in the Independent agreed that “One could protest against the exclusion, by 
nationality, of first-rank figures who wrote extensively in and about Britain … 
So enjoy the feast – and there is so much to enjoy – but spare a thought for 
all those disinvited guests.”
 