
Reviewers were struck by the characterisation in London Lies Beneath, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/20/london-lies-beneath-stella-duffy-review>
 a novel based on a real event in 1912. “Stella Duffy’s masterly novel tells 
the tale of a group of boy scouts who drown on a camping expedition down the 
River Thames,” wroteMax Davidson in the Mail on Sunday. “Duffy, without 
over-egging the pudding, wrings every ounce of pathos from their story. Her 
feeling for working-class London at its most resourceful … shines through the 
book.”Francesca Angelini in the Sunday Times was less convinced, arguing that 
“Duffy does little to distinguish the individuals who, never complaining but 
always striving, morph into flat caricatures … Her characters feel secondary to 
the backdrop, but even the city struggles to come to life through the thick tar 
of romanticised ideology overlaying it.” But other reviewers were fans, with 
the Sunday Mirror’sDeirdre O’Brien impressed by “hauntingly beautiful prose” 
and the Financial Times’sLaura Garmeson 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c95ec1c4-9079-11e6-a72e-b428cb934b78> finding the 
writing “as dense and vivid as the city itself … Sprawling and unruly, but full 
of heart, Duffy’s new novel is a fitting hymn to the city that inspired it.”

Powerful prose is celebrated in Edmund Gordon’s The Invention of Angela Carter
, published 24 years after Carter’s death and making full use of her journals 
and correspondence. Reviewers praised it as a thorough and sensitive job. 
Gordon is “attuned to Carter’s wit”, foundGaby Wood 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/books/what-to-read/the-invention-of-angela-carter-is-an-exemplary-biography-of-a-we/>
 in the Daily Telegraph, and “the details he picks out suggest he has learnt 
how to see the world her way”. Some found the structure disappointingly 
conventional, with the Observer’sRachel Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/09/invention-of-angela-carter-a-biography-edmund-gordon-review>
 saying it left “little room for its subject’s iconoclasm, for the intellectual 
wildness that colours every line she ever wrote”, and the Literary Review’s 
Lucy Hughes-Hallett <https://literaryreview.co.uk/author-of-herself> calling it 
“just one damn thing after another … Its substance, though, glints with 
well-placed detail and witty aperçus, and it pays proper attention to what 
matters most, Angela Carter’s writing.” She summarised that it is “the most 
valuable kind of literary biography – the kind that sends you back to the 
subject’s work”.

Gordon was able to get into his subject’s head, but Susan Greenfield attempts 
to get into consciousness itself in her new book,A Day in the Life of the Brain
. “Thankfully, after a number of books in which Greenfield claimed – without 
any convincing evidence – that our technologies were changing human brains for 
the worse, she is back in the realm of normal, empirical science,” wroteAnil 
Ananthaswamy 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg23230971-400-a-day-in-the-life-of-the-brain-hunts-consciousness/>
 in the New Scientist. “Her new book, while flawed, is a definite improvement 
on its predecessors … Her writing is clear, sharp, devoid of difficult jargon 
and chatty. The brain’s complexity comes across vividly, and its achievements 
are a marvel.”Barbara Kiser 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v537/n7622/full/537615a.html> in Nature 
magazine explained: “Neuroscientist Susan Greenfield investigates consciousness 
from waking to sleeping, drawing on her own research … and that of myriad other 
scientists”, and called the result “an illuminating, engrossing journey into 
(and beyond) the biology of time, the synergism of walking and cognition, and 
the phylogeny of dreams”. As the intelligent layman on the case, the Sunday 
Times’sJohn Carey advised: “Greenfield aims her book at the ‘general reader’, 
but hers is a tough subject and this is a tough read. Persevere and you will be 
rewarded with a vivid glimpse into the brainstretching difficulty of making 
advances in brain research.”
 