
Is it the future of publishing, or a hyped-up distraction? Critics were 
generally (mildly) positive aboutArcadia, by Iain Pears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/novel-use-for-app-iain-pears-arcadia>
, a book trumpeted by its publisher Faber as “the first of its kind”, when it 
was launched alongside an app that allows readers to navigate their own way 
through the story. In the Spectator,Andrew Taylor 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/9621102/this-way-to-a-parallel-universe-via-north-oxford/>
 praised an “elegantly designed app for iPad and iPhone” but wished he had had 
easier access to information about the backstory. He focused his review, 
however, very much on the traditional bound book, which “may have its 
shortcomings, but it is also ambitious, amusing and very readable. Embrace the 
confusion and enjoy”.Iona McLaren, in the Daily Telegraph, found that the novel 
worked better as an app than on the page. She initially didn’t take to the 
story, but concluded that in app form “Pears lets the reader feel like an 
author, which is a pleasure of a different sort, and rarer”. ForStephanie Cross 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3229947/LITERARY-FICTION.html> 
in the Daily Mail, however, “It all somehow fails to enchant: the Anterworld 
sections are oddly prosaic, and Pears’s at times cliched prose tends somewhat 
towards the functional.”

Alexandra Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alexandra-harris>, the 
winner of the Guardian first book award for her debut,Romantic Moderns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/25/romantic-moderns-alexandra-harris>
, received almost universally rave reviews for her follow-up,Weatherland, which 
looks at literary responses to the English climate throughout history. “Harris 
offers literary scholarship at its life-enhancing best,” wroteLucasta Miller 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/weatherland-writers--artists-under-english-skies-by-alexandra-harris-book-review-10484834.html>
 in the Independent. “This scholarly yet accessible book offers a literary 
historical education in itself,” she continued. “A highly original and 
beautifully crafted book,” enthusedJames McConnachie in the Sunday Times. For 
the Spectator’sFrances Wilson 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/9626432/rain-shine-and-the-human-imagination-from-adam-and-eve-to-david-hockney/>
, “what holds the material together is Harris’s fluent and unfaltering prose; 
she could be read for style alone”.Laura Freeman 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3229850/We-ve-moaning-weather-1-300-years-book-writers-artists-obsessed-British-skies.html>
, in the Daily Mail, advised readers that “Weatherland should be as essential 
a part of any walker’s kit as a balaclava, sun hat and pac-a-mac”.

Richard Dawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins>’s second memoir, 
Brief Candle in the Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/26/brief-candle-in-the-dark-richard-dawkins-science-review>
, on the other hand, was greeted with critical sneering so intense it was 
almost audible.Oliver Moody 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/arts/books/non-fiction/article4549826.ece>, in 
the Times, called the eminent scientist “a surprisingly ungainly and disorderly 
autobiographer”, and described his work as being like “the sillier passages 
from one ofCraig Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/02/craig-brown-lost-diaries-parody>
’s satirical diaries in Private Eye”, before concluding that this was “a 
rambling, unenlightening and largely unnecessary book from a great thinker and 
writer who would really have done better to rest on his laurels”. In the Sunday 
Times,McConnachie wrote that “without the rapier-play of his actual arguments, 
we are left here with a particular, strangely defensive version of the man 
himself”.Nathaniel Comfort 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v525/n7568/full/525184a.html>, in Nature 
magazine, took issue not only with Dawkins’s reminiscences but also with his 
science. Apparently, genes are not actually that selfish after all – in fact, 
more recent research suggests that they cooperate, but “Dawkins’s synopsis 
shows that he has not adapted to this view.” Cuttingly, he concluded that: “for 
a time, Dawkins was a rebellious scientific rock star. Now, his critique of 
religion seems cranky, and his immovably genocentric universe is parochial.
Brief Candle is about as edgy as Sir Mick and the Rolling Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/therollingstones> cranking out the 3,578th 
rendition of ‘Brown Sugar’.”
 