 Axon, an e-commerce company based in Surrey, was yesterday celebrating a 
potential £1m gain from the Budget after the chancellor promised action to 
remove a catch-22 problem which has left start-up companies creaking under huge 
national insurance liabilities.
Until yesterday Axon <https://www.theguardian.com/business/axongroup> was 
facing a £1m bill to pay for employers NI when its staff exercise share 
options. Last year its NI liability was just £200,000, but as Axons share 
price has jumped 500% over the past year, the liability in the next tax year 
would be £1m, making a huge dent in its profits of £4.5m.

 The company, which started in 1995 and now employs 200 people, designs B2B 
solutions for blue chip clients such as Orange and BP Amoco. The issue has hit 
thousands of small net start-ups which have used share options to incentivise 
staff and have seen their share prices soar.

 Accountants have warned that many are effectively insolvent as a result of 
having to put aside reserves for future NI payments on options when they are 
exercised. But the chancellor said yesterday that he will begin an urgent 
consultation exercise to reduce the NI burden.

 Early indications are that employers will be allowed to transfer their NI 
liability on to employees. An employee exercising an option is likely in future 
to have to pay not just the marginal tax rate but also their employers NI bill 
of 11.7%, producing a maximum tax bill of 51.7%.

 Axon finance director Robin Halliday said: It sounds like very positive news 
for employers, but the devil is in the detail. NI has been a huge issue for us; 
its been like a tax on success. Were excited about what hes promising, but 
you often find with Budgets that when you look at the fine print, what you 
originally expected is not there.

 But the extra tax burden on staff means that employers are likely to be 
forced to grant extra options to compensate, warned tax specialist Rose Edmunds 
of accountants Grant Thornton. Ernst & Young also warned that some companies 
could still be bankrupted if employees exercise their share schemes before any 
new rules come into force. The NI problem is going to go through a lingering 
death. If employees sell their shares tomorrow, some companies are still going 
to face enormous bills.
 