
A quick burst of 8 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Flash for Android dies today, long live the 'full web experience' >> The Verge 
<http://www.theverge.com/2012/8/14/3241727/flash-for-android-dies>

In November of last year, Adobe made a surprising about-face on its popular 
Flash plugin, announcing that it would stop development of Flash for mobile 
devices. Today, Adobe will disable new installs of Flash on Android, 
effectively cutting it off from the future of the mobile web -- despite the 
company's historical assertion that Flash would enable the "full web 
experience" on mobile devices. Instead, Adobe surrendered the major mobile 
battlegrounds and pledged allegiance toHTML5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/html5>.

 Remember when having Flash was the selling point for Android?

Solving for 7: How Apple could implement the iPad mini interface >> iMore.com 
<http://m.imore.com/solving-7-ipad-mini-interface>

If Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> does unveil a smaller 
iPad, it will have been analysed to death before the first one is unwrapped. 
Yet it's also an interesting exercise in crowdsourcing.

Windows 8 vs. Windows 7: Benchmarked >> ZDNet 
<http://www.zdnet.com/windows-8-vs-windows-7-benchmarked_p2-7000002671/>

Spoiler: it's faster.

Qwerty keyboard wins the battle of the input methods >> Nokia Conversations : 
the official Nokia blog 
<http://conversations.nokia.com/2012/08/10/qwerty-keyboard-wins-the-battle-of-the-input-methods/>

Yes, that's the headline which has been bouncing around the net and written up 
as "OMG PEOPLE REALLY LOVE KEYBOARDS WTF TOUCHSCREENS". Now let's dig back to 
the source of the data:

Last week we ran a poll asking you to choose your favourite input method on a 
mobile phone. The choices were...

 So it's an online poll, on the website of a company whose remaining customers 
haven't embraced touchscreens to any large extent. The number in the sample 
isn't given, so we can't estimate its reliability. But it's another lesson in 
distrusting self-selecting samples.

Nearly 3,000 Chinese 'group buy' sites have closed so far in 2012 >> Tech In 
Asia <http://www.techinasia.com/3000-chinese-group-buy-sites-closed-2012/>

A couple weeks ago we looked at some data from Tuan 800 that suggested things 
were pretty bad for China's group buy industry, with more than 2,000 sites 
closing in the past nine months. But this morning, the Chinese E-Commerce 
Research Center has released a report with numbers that are even more grim: 
2,859 sites have closed in just the past six months. That leaves just over 
3,200 still in operation; apparently, the numbers haven't been that low since 
2010.

 The report also says that the group buy industry did 14.6 billion RMB ($2.3 
billion) in business over the first half of this year; that's up 126 percent 
over the first half last year. But most of that money is going to the top 
players; other sites are dying off.

Acer's JT Wang is part of the problem >> Hal's (Im)Perfect Vision 
<http://hal2020.com/2012/08/13/acers-jt-wang-is-part-of-the-problem/>

Hal Berenson: 

I find it hysterical that Acer chairman JT Wang is the most vocal critic of 
Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> getting into the 
hardware business with the Surface. You see, I still haven't experienced 
Windows 8 in Portrait mode and it is his company's fault.

Samsung Galaxy Note 10.1 Review: This Tablet's Mightier with a Pen >> TIME.com 
<http://techland.time.com/2012/08/15/samsung-galaxy-note-10-1-review-this-tablets-mightier-with-a-pen/>

If the Note 10.1 sells well, it won't be on the strength of the bang it 
delivers for your buck. It'll be because it's one of the relatively few Android 
tablets with a snappy answer to the bottom-line question "Why should somebody 
buy this instead of an iPad?"

 The iPad doesn't come with a pen and may never do so, given Steve Jobs' 
famous declaration that "if you see a stylus, they blew it." Scads of companies 
have stepped in to fill the gap -- my favorite iPad stylus is Adonit's Jot Flip 
-- but all of their designs suffer from the fact that they're designed to work 
with a tablet that was engineered for fingertips.

 Samsung, however, built the Galaxy Note 10.1 from the ground up for pen use. 
And when it decided to add pens to some of its devices, it made the eminently 
sensible decision to work with Wacom, the company which dominates the market 
for graphics tablets used by artists.

Inside Facebook's Push to Woo Big Advertisers >> WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10000872396390444246904577575351814047494.html?mod=wsj_share_tweet>

As the ad types peppered the young chief executive officer with questions, a 
theme emerged. If they committed to spending big bucks with Facebook, how could 
they be assured a return on their investment? Mr. Zuckerberg's response, 
according to one of the attendees: "That's a great question and we should 
probably have an answer to that, shouldn't we?"

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service;
 