
A burst of 10 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Acer's Aspire S3 ultrabook hits US shelves October 16th for $900 >> This is my 
next... 
<http://thisismynext.com/2011/10/10/acers-aspire-s3-ultrabook-pricing-release-date/>

"And Acer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> is the first out of 
the ultrabook gate — the 0.51-inch thick, 2.89-pound Aspire S3 that we were 
quite impressed with back at IFA will be touching down on [the US] side of the 
Atlantic on October 16th for just $899.99. The price is in line with Intel's 
sub-$1,000 ultrabook target, but Acer's getting there with the always-clever 
flash and hard drive combo trick. While the 13.3-inch laptop (or MacBook Air 
replica) boasts a Core i5-2467M processor, Intel's integrated HD graphics, and 
4GB of RAM, Acer's gone with a 20GB SSD to house its Windows 7 Home Premium OS 
and a 320GB, 5400RPM hard drive for files and less frequently used application 
storage."

Hmm, Flash and spinning hard drive? But it will be interesting to see how this 
sells.

First Nokia 800 Windows Phone adverts emerge | WinRumors 
<http://www.winrumors.com/first-nokia-800-windows-phone-adverts-emerge/>

"Nokia's first Windows Phone has broken its cover thanks to some leaked 
marketing materials.

"The Nokia "Sea Ray" device looks like it will be marketed as the Nokia 800 in 
some markets. Pocketnow managed to secure some details on the device along with 
two leaked adverts. The first advert comes with the tag line "today the sun 
will rise and set. The rest is up for grabs." The second advert features the 
tag line "take, tag, sort and share. All in a flash." Both adverts demonstrate 
the social sharing aspects of Windows Phone 7.5.

"Nokia appears to be preparing at least two Windows Phone devices."

The photos make them look very like the N8. To be unveiled at Nokia World at 
the end of the month. But not necessarily on sale then. Did we predict that 
there wouldn't be 'Nokindows' phones until after October? Yes, we did.

Mozilla relies on search deals for 98% of revenues >> Computerworld 
<http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9220695/Mozilla_relies_on_search_deals_for_98_of_revenues>

"Mozilla today said that income from its search partners, including rival 
browser maker Google, increased by 19% last year.

"Royalties, almost all of which come from search services like Google, 
Microsoft, Yahoo and others, were $121.1m, up 19.3% from 2009's $101.5m.

"The vast bulk of the Mozilla Foundation's revenues came from search 
providers, which paid the organization for leading Firefox users to their 
websites. In 2010, royalty payments accounted for 98% of the year's revenues, a 
percentage point higher than the share of Mozilla's income attributed to search 
in the two years before."

Contract with Google runs out in November. What are the chances of a tough 
renegotiation? Or will Steve Ballmer turn on the charm and get Bing adopted?

Five Siri alternatives that give your older iPhone a voice >> Macworld 
<http://www.macworld.com/article/162924/2011/10/five_siri_alternatives_that_give_your_older_iphone_a_voice.html#lsrc.twt_macworld>

"After last week's iPhone 4S unveiling, Siri was one of the most talked-about 
features. With Siri, the iPhone 4S will be able to answer just about anything 
you ask it, from the weather report to nearby points of interest. It can also 
read messages and notifications aloud and even let you dictate messages of your 
own instead of relying on the phone's on-screen keyboard."

Includes Google Search, natch. Also Vlingo.

Ninth unique aspect of mobile (as a mass media), discovered by Russell Buckley 
>> Tomi Ahonen 
<http://communities-dominate.blogs.com/brands/2011/10/9th-unique-aspect-of-mobile-as-a-mass-media-has-been-discovered-by-russell-buckley-mobile-is-the-dig.html>

Ahonen is a former Nokia executive who now ranges over the mobile world. The 
first eight are worth bearing in mind too.

Why Silk won't be silky smooth for Amazon >> GigaOm 
<http://gigaom.com/2011/10/10/why-silk-wont-be-silky-smooth-for-amazon/>

Matthew Prince of proxy service CloudFlare: "I predict that Amazon is likely 
to face technical, legal, and privacy concerns with Silk. Technically, the 
biggest challenge will likely be cache invalidation. If I visit my bank website 
and my account page is cached, Amazon needs to be 100 percent certain that when 
someone else visits the same bank they never see my account information. From 
the technical specifications, it appears that Amazon is only caching static 
resources such as images. While that will solve many of the cases, there will 
still be places that Silk could end up leaking private data (e.g., a stock 
photo or porn site that charges for access to its photos)."

Basically, that proxying and cacheing everything has a lot of implications. 
One suspects Amazon hasn't gone into this eyes-closed, though.

Apple's 1987 Knowledge Navigator, only one month late >> Waxy.org 
<http://waxy.org/2011/10/apples_1987_knowledge_navigator_only_one_month_late/>

"Based on the dates mentioned in the Knowledge Navigator video, it takes place 
on September 16, 2011. The date on the professor's calendar is September 16, 
and he's looking for a 2006 paper written "about five years ago," setting the 
year as 2011.

"And this morning, at the iPhone keynote, Apple announced Siri, a natural 
language-based voice assistant, would be built into iOS 5 and a core part of 
the new iPhone 4S.

"So, 24 years ago, Apple predicted a complex natural-language voice assistant 
built into a touchscreen Apple device, and was less than a month off."

Actually, put like that, it's rather scary. We await the time-travel iPhone.

For mobile in-app sharing, Twitter tops Facebook 3-1 >> GigaOM 
<http://gigaom.com/2011/10/10/for-mobile-in-app-sharing-twitter-tops-facebook-3-1/>

"Compared to Twitter, Facebook overall generated twice as many events, which 
Localytics counts as sharing, liking or following by a person from an app. But 
on a pound for pound basis, Twitter won out handily when it came to driving 
user engagement. The average Twitter user shared three times as many events 
than the average Facebook user, Localytics found. When you examine the active 
user base of each network, Twitter generated 50 events per 1,000 users compared 
to 11 events per 1,000 Facebook users, said Localytics."

Because tweets are shorter than statuses?

Anonymous Takes Down NYSE.com - For A Minute >> KCRA Sacramento 
<http://www.kcra.com/money/29443061/detail.html>

Trading not affected. "At least a few people claiming to be part of Anonymous 
didn't think the attack on NYSE.com was a risk worth taking. One site used to 
coordinate Anonymous operations, AnonNews.org, posted a statement saying that 
it was 'sincerely worried' about the plan, due to the bad press it could give 
to the Occupy Wall Street movement.

"A back-and-forth debate raged across Twitter Monday afternoon, with various 
factions of Anonymous alternately cheering and decrying the planned attack.

"But in the end, the chatter drew more attention than the actual effects of 
the cyberprotest. NYSE.com barely blipped, and the markets finished the day 
with a rally: The Dow Jones industrial average finished Monday up nearly 3%."

All of a Twitter about mapping >> Ordnance Survey blog 
<http://blog.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/2011/10/all-of-a-twitter-about-mapping/>

"From today, a selection of our surveyors, field staff and technical experts 
will be tweeting live as the update the nation's mapping.

"We make around 5000 changes a day to the digital mastermap of Great Britain, 
so there's a lot going on – from the farthest reaches of Scotland and the Welsh 
peaks, to inner city London."

Good stuff.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>

To suggest links, tag articles on delicious.com with "guardiantech"
 