
A quick burst of 13 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology 
team

With time running short, Steve Jobs managed his farewells >> NYTimes.com 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/07/technology/with-time-running-short-steve-jobs-managed-his-farewells.html>


"In February, Steven P. Jobs had learned that, after years of fighting cancer, 
his time was becoming shorter. He quietly told a few acquaintances, and they, 
in turn, whispered to others. And so a pilgrimage began. "The calls trickled in 
at first. Just a few, then dozens, and in recent weeks, a nearly endless stream 
of people who wanted a few moments to say goodbye, according to people close to 
Mr. Jobs. Most were intercepted by his wife, Laurene. She would apologetically 
explain that he was too tired to receive many visitors. In his final weeks, he 
became so weak that it was hard for him to walk up the stairs of his own home 
anymore, she confided to one caller." "Some asked if they might try again 
tomorrow. Sorry, she replied. He had only so much energy for farewells." In the 
end, none of us will ever have the chance to properly say the goodbyes we might 
truly wish to.

Meltemi is real - Nokia's skunkworks Linux >> The Register 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/10/05/nokia_meltemi_for_s40/>


"Sources tell us that Nokia is developing a Linux-based replacement for its 
S40 phones, called Meltemi. The news was leaked, accurately, by the Wall Street 
Journal last week. Now we can confirm it. "The codename turned up in an 
internal communication we saw in April, referring to opportunities for 
redundant Meego staff "in the Meltemi organisation". We inferred that was a 
Windows project. It isn't. "The thinking is that a Linux-based replacement for 
S40 will allow developers to tap into proven development tools - and Qt." 
Targeting the installed base, apparently, rather than its future. Meanwhile, 
smartphones make more than 25% of sales worldwide and the figure is rising 
every quarter.

Acer plans 15-inch ultrabooks using fibreglass cases >> Digitimes 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20111006PD225.html>


"Acer plans to launch a 15-inch ultrabook model in early 2012 built using 
fibreglass cases supplied by Mitac Precision Technology. Asustek Computer is 
expected to follow suit, also adopting fiber glass cases from MPT, according to 
industry sources. "Acer originally planned to release the 15-inch model in the 
fourth quarter but decided to delay the launch to 2012 due to unfavourable 
market conditions, noted the sources, noting that the fibreglass cases will 
help bring down unit costs. "The price of fibreglass cases will be US$5-10 less 
than those made of aluminum alloy and US$20 cheaper for a whole ultrabook, the 
sources estimated." Sounds like they're expecting slim margins.

Open Source Projects >> Twitter Developers 
<https://dev.twitter.com/opensource/projects>


Interesting list, and plenty more on GitHub.

RIM, maker of BlackBerry, debates its target market for PlayBook tablet >> 
WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204422404576597061591715344.html?mod=WSJ_Tech_Europe_LeftTopNews>


"As Research In Motion Ltd. executives prepared early this year for the launch 
of their first tablet, thePlayBook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playbook>, one big question loomed: Who 
was the device for? "Some executives, like RIM's technical visionary and 
co-chief executive Mike Lazaridis, saw the gadget as an extension of the 
BlackBerry, long favored by corporations and business people. Others were 
pushing for more focus on ordinary consumers, people eager for games, music and 
movies, according to executives close to the company. "'There's an internal war 
going on around the marketing message. Even the guys at the top don't agree,' 
one executive close to the company said at the time." The first ad agency' tag 
line was "Go Pro". They got fired. (Link may require subscription.)

Sony Ericsson's Strategy: Get Smart - WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203405504576602762590246534.html>


The m00p malware investigation - was justice done? >> Naked Security 
<http://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2011/10/05/the-m00p-malware-investigation-was-justice-done/>


"Detective Constable Bob Burls of the UK's Police Central e-Crime Unit (PCeU) 
and F-Secure's Mikko HyppÃ¶nen took centre stage at the Virus Bulletin 
conference in Barcelona to describe how the computer-crime fighting authorities 
and anti-virus industry worked together on one such investigation. "'Operation 
Kennet' was the UK police's codename for a probe into the m00p virus-writing 
group - a cybercrime gang that operated from 2004 until 2006, recruiting 
compromised computers into an IRC-controlled botnet." Fascinating case, as much 
as anything for how the people involved were discovered logged into the 
relevant servers when the police arrested them.

Steve Jobs: Arab-American, Buddhist, Psychedelic Drug User, and Capitalist 
World-Changer >> Informed Comment 
<http://www.juancole.com/2011/10/steve-jobs-arab-american-buddhist-psychedelic-drug-user-and-capitalist-world-changer.html>


"Like Barack Obama, Jobs was the son of a Muslim. "[His mother] Simpson, young 
and unmarried, gave Jobs up for adoption, but she and Jandali later wed and 
gave Jobs a sister. He never appears to have met his father a political 
scientist who later went into the casino business, but he did get to know his 
biological sister Mona. That is, Jobs's childhood was wrought up with a) Muslim 
immigration to the United States and b) the sexual revolution, both phenomena 
of the 1950s that accelerated in subsequent decades. Of course, these two parts 
of his heritage had only an indirect impact on him. "His adoptive parents were 
Paul Jobs and Clara Hagopian Jobs (his adoptive mother would therefore be of 
Armenian heritage.)" Classic American story, basically.

Steve Jobs: Photo Booth 2005 >> Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.10150344003354357.371772.500729356&l=c6edf34df0&type=1>


Hilarious set of photos from 2005 when Jobs was testing out a set of photo 
filters in Mike Matas's office at Apple.

Consultation on the Public Data Corporation >> Ernestmarples.com 
<http://pdcconsult.ernestmarples.com/>


Another consultation on data from Ordnance Survey, Met Office and Land 
Registry. Soooo.. Q Didn't this already happen? "This is much more important 
than the postcode consultation that Ernest Marples asked you to respond to last 
time. Because as well as postcode data, it includes maps, gazettes, boundaries, 
weather observations and predictions, land ownership records, and more 
besides." "With the exception of postcode data and a few other watered-down 
Ordnance Survey products, all of this data is currently only available for a 
fee, despite being collected by these organisations as part of their public 
task." Q So what *should* be happening? "Ernest thinks that the raw data held 
by the Public Data Corporation and its constituents is public data, and should 
be made available to all, for free, for any purpose." As they put it: "Please 
respond now! Time runs out on 27th October 2011. It's just like the Mayan 
apocalypse, but for open data."

Call routing scam costs telcos $150m a year >> The Register 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/10/06/termination_bypass/>


"Fraudulent call termination is costing operators huge amounts of money, 
though the victims are often unaware they've been tricked. The elaborate scam 
involves routing international calls onto local numbers, then using promotional 
offers offered by local telcos to connect the call without handing over the 
termination fee. UK outfit Revector, which has detected this swindle in 50 
countries over the past two years, puts the revenue loss at $150m annually and 
points to one European operator who was losing more than a million dollars a 
month." Very complex, but valuable.

two minutes with steve >> sippey.com 
<http://www.sippey.com/2011/10/two-minutes-with-steve.html>


On the Wednesday afternoon before the Monday keynote we were to present in the 
theater on Apple's campus to Steve, Scott Forstall and Phil Schiller; they'd 
have the final word on whether we'd make it to the big stage at Moscone. The 
wait outside the theater was torture, the walk down the aisle was nerve 
wracking, and the two minute demo we gave went by in a blur. I'm pretty sure I 
rushed it. "But Steve smiled. He said he liked it, that we had done a great 
job. And then gave us advice. Move a line up, emphasize this particular point, 
fix that button on the app. Coming from him it was all obvious stuff -- we felt 
foolish for not seeing those flaws earlier. ... And on that Monday the whole 
thing went off without a hitch." See it:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtRunIKuxfw 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LtRunIKuxfw>. How would you have done?

Steve Jobs didn't... >> Asymco 
<http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/Asymco/~3/ggIxN1mWdds/>


Interesting analysis of what Steve Jobs did and didn't do in running 
businesses.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>
 