
A quick burst of 13 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology 
team

iPad 2: Out of stock by Saturday >> Fortune Tech 
<http://tech.fortune.cnn.com/2011/03/27/ipad-2-out-of-stock-by-saturday/>

"Reports are still drifting in, but it seems likely that most of the 25 
countries where Apple (AAPL) launched the iPad 2 on Friday had run out of 
product by Saturday afternoon."

iPad 2 Users Report FaceTime Issue >> Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/03/24/ipad-2-problems-facetime-_n_840043.html>

"Several customers on the Apple forums have been reporting that the FaceTime 
application, which supports video chat via the iPad's front-facing camera, has 
been freezing while in use."

Newzbin2 Uses TOR To Kill Domain Blocking Before It Even Happens >> 
TorrentFreak 
<http://torrentfreak.com/newzbin-uses-tor-to-stop-domain-blocking-before-it-even-happens-110327/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+Torrentfreak+%28Torrentfreak%29>

Someone, somewhere in the Thamesside bowels of communications regulator Ofcom, 
there is a harassed researcher trying hurriedly to see whether Tor can be 
combated. They may wish to consult the Egyptian government.

Color Keeps Digging >> Daring Fireball Linked List 
<http://daringfireball.net/linked/2011/03/25/color-digging>

"So it's a data mining trojan horse. Well, that changes everything. Who 
wouldn't love that?" I think John Gruber just set fire to the $14m that venture 
capitalists gave Color. Um.

Apple Wins U.S. Trade Ruling in Patent Fight Brought by Nokia Over Phones >> 
Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-03-25/apple-wins-u-s-trade-ruling-in-patent-fight-brought-by-nokia-over-phones.html>

Hugely important for Apple. "Nokia had claimed Apple was infringing patents 
that the Finnish company described as 'pioneering innovations' related to 
cameras, battery life, touch-screens, speakers and messaging. It sought an 
order barring imports of the iPhone. "The two mobile-phone makers have been 
embroiled in litigation since October 2009, when Nokia filed a lawsuit accusing 
Apple of infringing 10 patents and demanding royalties on the millions of 
iPhones sold since the device's introduction in 2007. Each company has since 
accused the other of infringing an increasing number of patents." Apple's 
lawsuit against Nokia is still outstanding, but this is a key win for the US 
company: it means it doesn't have to pay a slice of each sale to Nokia. 
Disadvantage Finland.

Is Samsung's New Galaxy Tab Fibbing About Its Figure? And About Those Galaxy 
Tab Fans 
<http://technologizer.com/2011/03/25/is-samsungs-new-galaxy-tab-fibbing-about-its-figure-and-about-those-galaxy-tab-fans/>

"Me, I was confused about a different aspect of Samsung's event (which you can 
watch here). Much of it was devoted to video clips from the 'Samsung Galaxy Tab 
Interview Project,' which the opening titles said took place on March 3rd in 
New York, and which was shown to involve inviting busy, successful New Yorkers 
to try the Galaxy Tab of their choice and share their opinions. The New Yorkers 
in question were identified as freelance travel writer Joan Hess, independent 
filmmaker Karl Shefelman, and leading real estate CEO Joseph Kolinksi." 
McCracken then commits an act of journalism and discovers that they are in fact 
actors. We're starting to get a bad feeling about Samsung's Galaxy Tab.

Acer warns first quarter sales to fall short >> Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/5f1c89d2-56e0-11e0-9c5c-00144feab49a.html?ftcamp=rss#axzz1HcmQP5j6>

"Acer, the Taiwanese PC maker, on Friday warned sales in the first quarter 
would fall short of expectations, highlighting the continued weakness in demand 
in Europe and the US and the growing popularity of new mobile devices like 
tablets. "With just a week to go before the end of the quarter, the company 
said its PC revenues were 10% less than in the fourth quarter, during whichAcer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> had already suffered an 11% 
year-on-year fall in revenues." Don't worry - tablets are a fad. But: "Acer is 
likely not alone in having a disappointing first quarter. February revenue 
numbers from the top contract PC manufacturers in Taiwan, who account for 90% 
of global production, were all down roughly a fifth from January. Even Hon Hai, 
which makes Apple products and desktops for Dell, saw an 18% decline."

Introducing Spanner: From Documents to Linked Data Apps – Clark & Parsia: 
Thinking Clearly <http://weblog.clarkparsia.com/2010/12/14/introducing-spanner/>

"TLDR? Spanner is a new product that automagically turns documents (of any 
kind) into a full-featured semantic web – or, if you prefer, 'Linked 
Data' – application that is easily customized or extended via JavaScript." 
There must be black magic or the sacrifice of goats involved here.

The iPad is 99% more open than any other computer >> JP Teti 
<http://jpteti.com/post/4072771125/the-ipad-is-99-more-open-than-any-other-computer>

The blog tagline: "A 14 year old web designer & developer's blog." A 
14-year-old who is better at enunciating an argument (even if you disagree with 
it) than 99% of those we've seen discussing computing. In fact, we may have to 
do some age verification on this.

F**K CAPTCHA >> 90 Per Cent 
<http://www.90percentofeverything.com/2011/03/25/fk-captcha/>

You want to stop spam, you need a captcha, right? No. Elegant explanation of 
why the spam problem shouldn't be foisted on users, and can be overcome without 
the use of captchas.

Acer locates 'missing' tablet strategy >> The Register 
<http://www.reghardware.com/2011/03/25/acer_iconia_w500_a500_tablets/>

"The W500 will be available in Wi-Fi and Wi-Fi + 3G versions, and will be sold 
either separately or with a docking keyboard. It's this keyboard that rather 
captures the imagination as the W500 looks every inch a netbook when attached 
to it. However, it doesn't close up in the way you would expect: the tablet 
needs to be removed, and the hinged docking latch and interface folded away. 
Then the keyboard can function as a protective lid, held in place with a 
combination of a latch and magnetism. "Clumsy and inelegant? Yes, and heavy 
too." Hang on - a latch *and* magnets? How tightly do they need the lid shut?

Steal This E-Book >> Forbes.com 
<http://www.forbes.com/forbes/2011/0411/focus-tim-oreilly-media-e-book-antipiracy-steal-this.html>

"Jon Bruner: On all your titles you've dropped digital-rights management 
(DRM), which limits file sharing and copying. Aren't you worried about piracy? 
"Tim O'Reilly: No. And so what? Let's say my goal is to sell 10,000 copies of 
something. And let's say that if by putting DRM in it I sell 10,000 copies and 
I make my money, and if by having no DRM 100,000 copies go into circulation and 
I still sell 10,000 copies. Which of those is the better outcome?" True - 
though what if you only sell 100, and there are 100,000 out there? Does the 
author or the publisher bear the brunt?

What is this mystery icon? >> Nelson's Weblog 
<http://www.somebits.com/weblog/tech/bad/what-is-this-mystery-icon.html>

Interesting: the younger the idea on which a piece of iconography is based, 
the more quickly it becomes outdated.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>
 