
A quick burst of 8 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

The secrets Apple keeps >> Fortune Tech 
<http://tech.fortune.cnn.com/2012/01/18/inside-apple-adam-lashinsky/>

An extract from Adam Lashinsky's book on the culture inside Apple. Basically, 
it sounds like the most secretive society you can imagine; the modern ideas of 
management, such as transparency and close attention within divisions to 
profit/loss accounts, simply don't apply.

Ultrabooks to account for 25-35% of Acer notebook shipments in 2012, says 
chairman >> Digitimes <http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20120118PD215.html>

Acer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> plans to launch its 
second-generation ultrabook models in the second quarter of 2012 and more new 
models in the third, with ultrabooks to account for 25-35% of its total 
notebook shipments for the year, according to company chairman JT Wang.

Sales of Acer's first ultrabook, the Aspire S3, totaled about 250,000-300,000 
units in the first quarter after launch, and the company expects sales for its 
new Aspire S5 tablet PC will be even better.

 That sounds like a Windows 8 tablet PC, rather than an Android one. US and 
Europe are expected to see slow sales.

Really? Research firm predicts Windows Phone will climb past iPhone by 2015 >> 
GeekWire 
<http://www.geekwire.com/2012/prediction-research-firm-windows-phone-top-ios-market-share-2015>

Microsoft's Windows Phone sales are so small right now that the company 
doesn't feel compelled to report them as part of its quarterly financial 
results. But a new report from IHS iSuppli predicts that Microsoft will take 
the No. 2 slot in smartphone market share in 2015, edging out longtime rival 
Apple and its iPhone.

It's not the first time an analyst has made this type of prediction. Both 
Gartner and IDC have made similar projections in the past. But the optimism 
from iSuppli is notable because it's based on recent developments -- 
particularly Microsoft's partnership with Nokia.

 Essentially, it suggests you'll have two manufacturers each with just under 
20% of the market, while Android from multiple makers will have 60%.

MPs want changes to ePetitions system and website >> eDemocracyBlog.com 
<http://www.edemocracyblog.com/political-blog/mps-want-changes-to-epetitions-system/>

Basically, to water it down and have debates that arise from them shoved out 
of the Commons chamber.

Whoa, Google Plus Has 54m Daily Users? Not Quite. >> Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffbercovici/2012/01/19/whoa-google-plus-has-54m-daily-users-not-quite/>

Here's what Page said, according to the transcript of his remarks he posted on 
Google Plus:

"I'm also pleased to announce that there are over 90M Google+ users -- well 
over double what I announced just a quarter ago on our earnings call. 
Engagement on + is also growing tremendously. I have some amazing data to share 
there for the first time: +users are very engaged with our products -- over 60% 
of them engage daily, and over 80% weekly."

Note that Page said users are "very engaged with our products" -- "products," 
plural. So 60% of the 90 million people who have created Google Plus profiles 
engage with some Google product every day, but that product could be Gmail, 
Google Documents, Google Calendar or even just Google Search. Google just isn't 
breaking out how many of those 90 million users are actually visiting G+ pages 
every day, week or month.

 The more you examine his quote, in fact, the less it seems to mean about 
Google+.

MegaUpload Indictment in full >> Scribd 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/78786408/Mega-Indictment>

All 72 pages. If you found you couldn't get it from the US Department of 
Justice site for some reason...

Building Classrooms of the 21st Century with Motorola >> The Official Motorola 
Blog 
<http://www.motorola.com/blog/2012/01/19/building-classrooms-of-the-21st-century-with-motorola/>

Our world is always changing, and the way that children are being taught is 
also evolving everyday. Motorola Mobility believes in empowering students with 
innovative technology to help them not only learn better, but have more fun 
doing it. So earlier this year, we gave students at one San Diego high school
Motorola <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/motorola> XOOM tablets to see 
what would happen.

Why Guru3D probably never will review Ubisoft titles anymore >> Anno 2070 
<http://www.guru3d.com/news/why-guru3d-probably-never-will-review-ubisoft-titles-anymore/>

Here's what Ubisofts DRM is doing these days, they don't just verify the 
number of PCs you work on, nope .. they monitor hardware changes. So once we 
inserted that GeForce GTX 590 the hardware id # hash changed rendering our 
activation invalid.

What a bunch of rubbish ....This means that if we'd like to make a VGA 
performance review on Anno 2070 we'd need to purchase the game seven times. 
Ubisoft claims that you can send an email towards their support so that the 
activations are reset, we did so .. yet are still awaiting reaction.

When contacting Ubisoft marketing here in the Netherlands, their reply goes 
like this: 'Sorry to disappoint you - the game is indeed restricted to 3 
hardware changes and there simply is no way to bypass that. We also do not have 
7 copies of the game for you'.

I'm sorry, but I am not about to purchase the title seven times to make a 
review that by default benefits Ubisoft sales.

 Looks like the reviewing torch has passed to sites that don't specialise in 
that way. How many VGA users do we have out there?

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>
 