
Boots the Chemist has bucked the high street gloom to report strong first-half 
sales as consumers bought low-cost "treats" such as lipsticks and face creams 
as well as bacterial gels, amid worries over swine flu.

Like-for-like sales at Boots' UK stores climbed 3.4% in the six months to 30 
September. George Fairweather, finance director at parent companyAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>, said it was selling more 
own-brand products as consumers sought to cut spending with its No 7 cosmetics, 
Protect & Perfect face creams as well as Boots branded medicines all selling 
well. "Swine flu is making people a lot more health aware," he said. "But they 
are also looking for value." Fairweather said the retail and pharmacy divisions 
were growing at an equal rate once currency effects were taken into account 
with the retailer outperforming the market.

Alliance Boots was acquired by private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and 
its deputy chairman Stefano Pessina two years ago. The £11.1bn deal was the 
first time a FTSE 100 company firm had been bought by private equity and there 
were concerns about the financing structure which loaded the company with £9bn 
of debt.

The buyout was the last mega deal before the credit markets seized up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/apr/25/privateequity.retail> in the 
summer of 2007 and its new owners initially struggled to find buyers for the 
debt, which ended up trading at below face value. Alliance Boots has taken 
advantage of the situation over the last 18 months and to date has bought back 
£558m of debt for £324m. Fairweather said the company was benefiting from low 
interest rates and was on track to meet its financial targets for the current 
year. "We were able to take advantage of a highly disconnected banking market 
when our debt was being traded on a distressed basis - the market is much more 
settled now," he said.

Since April, Alliance Boots has been operating its manufacturing business 
Boots Contract Manufacturing (BCM) as a standalone division so as to assess its 
viability. BCM – which has factories in Nottingham as well as France, Germany 
and an assembly plant in Poland – makes own-brand products such as Soltan and 
Protect & Perfect. Sales at the division rose £75m to £124m during the period 
as intra-group sales were included for the first time, with Pessina said to be 
pleased with the division's progress.

This summer Alliance Boots hired disgraced bank boss Andy Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jun/14/andy-hornby-alliance-boots-bos-crash>
 – who was in charge of HBOS in the period leading up its near-collapse – as 
group chief executive. The City was surprised at the speed of Hornby's 
rehabilitation and he did not handle today's trading update. Fairweather said 
it was a "quick update" and he had handled press surrounding the event last 
year which seeks to satisfy the company's obligations under theWalker review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/nov/20/economy.uk> which set out 
best practice for the private equity industry.
 