
A quick burst of 10 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology 
team

Acer's AcerCloud unveil is a blatant iCloud ripoff | The Verge 
<http://www.theverge.com/2012/1/8/2692245/acers-acercloud-unveil-looks-a-little-familiar>


"Which is which? Acer just showed off its AcerCloud service, something that 
already sounded suspiciously like Apple's iCloud. Even the "PicStream" element 
sounds a lot like Photo Stream. Still not convinced?Acer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> basically ripped off Apple's 
slide wholesale, outside of the font, which is a simulacrum of Apple's font of 
yore. Check out both slides below." The slides are indeed a ripoff, though it's 
hard to argue that the idea of having a cloud storage system is unique to 
Apple. Although the key point here is that this isn't connected to Google, and 
it's like Apple's iCloud in that it abstracts the file system away - you have 
photos and you have documents.

Microsoft, defying image, has a design gem in Windows Phone >> NYTimes.com 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/08/technology/microsoft-defying-image-has-a-design-gem-in-windows-phone.html>


Microsoft's team draw an interesting analogy with the plight of the hiker who 
got his arm trapped under the boulder and had to cut it off.

The Restart Page - Free unlimited rebooting experience from vintage operating 
systems <http://www.therestartpage.com/#>


Does what it says. Amazing. This is what the web was made for. Or something.

Real QR Statistics from TfL >> Terence Eden 
<http://shkspr.mobi/blog/index.php/2012/01/real-qr-statistics-from-tfl/>


People have been scanning the QR code to get live bus updates. Helpfully, TfL 
has used a public shortener, which means the platform (haha) and other 
statistics are available.

Steve Yegge: how to present to Jeff Bezos (without dying) >> Google+ 
<https://plus.google.com/110981030061712822816/posts/AaygmbzVeRq>


Entertaining description of what it's like to present to Bezos (ie very 
scary). He is one of the least-profiled people around.

Yahoo seeking new board members >> WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article_email/SB10001424052970203513604577145130908913886-lMyQjAxMTAyMDAwNjEwNDYyWj.html>


"Yahoo Inc. is searching for several new board candidates to replace possible 
outgoing directors and has hired executive search firm Heidrick & Struggles 
International Inc. to assist in that effort, people familiar with the matter 
said. "The search for board candidates is aimed at possibly replacing directors 
who have been on the board for a long time, the people said." Just go back and 
check whether the first letter of each paragraph spells out R-O-Y-B-O-S-T-O-C-K 
and J-E-R-R-Y-Y-A-N-G.

Motorola Mobility says Holiday quarter wasn't so jolly >> AllThingsD 
<http://allthingsd.com/20120106/motorola-mobility-warns-on-q4-earnings/?mod=tweet>


"Motorola Mobility on Friday warned that fourth-quarter sales won't be what 
many were expecting. "The cellphone maker said it estimates its sales totaled 
$3.4bn, and that it will post 'modest profitability', excluding various items. 
Motorola said it shipped about 10.5m mobile devices in the quarter, just over 
half of which were smartphones. "WhileMotorola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/motorola> itself hadn't given a 
forecast for the quarter, analysts were expecting sales to be a lot closer to 
$3.9bn." Its last of four quarters as an independent company? (And: giving out 
mobile phone figures? How declasse.)

Windows 8 Storage Spaces: pooling redundant disk space for all >> Ars Technica 
<http://arstechnica.com/microsoft/news/2012/01/windows-8-storage-spaces-detailed-pooling-redundant-disk-space-for-all.ars>


"When Microsoft killed Windows Home Server's "Drive Extender" technology, we 
mourned its loss but held up hope that the company would persevere with the 
concept. The company has done just that with a new Windows 8 feature called 
Storage Spaces, described in a lengthy post to its Building Windows 8 blog. 
"With Storage Spaces, physical disks are grouped together into pools, and pools 
are then carved up into spaces, which are formatted with a regular filesystem 
and are used day-to-day just like regular disks. "Unlike RAID systems of old, 
but in common with other modern storage technologies such as Solaris' ZFS and 
Linux's btrfs, pools can use disks of different interface technologies--USB, 
SATA, Serial Attached SCSI--and different, mismatched sizes. New disks can be 
added to a pool at any time. Pools can also include one or more hot spares: 
drives allocated to a pool but kept in standby until another disk in the pool 
fails, at which point they spring into life." That's very cool.

Join the fight against phishing >> Phishtak 
<http://www.phishtank.com/index.php>


Worthy, but one feels that it needs a bigger, more automated effort to make it 
effective.

The Nielsen Company & Billboard's 2011 Music Industry Report >> Yahoo! Finance 
<http://finance.yahoo.com/news/The-Nielsen-Company-Billboard-bw-3137090198.html>


"Total [US] Album sales were up for the first time since 2004 (1.3%) with 
sales totaling 330.6 million, compared to 326.2 million in 2010." You have 
Adele and the internet to thank for that.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>
 