
A burst of 8 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Unofficial: Samsung GS4 unit sales hit 20 million, press release due to come 
out soon >> Android Beat <http://www.androidbeat.com/2013/07/gs4-20million/>

Stefan Constantinescu: 

The Korean website iNews24 is reporting that Samsung will soon be holding a 
press conference to announce that GS4 unit sales have surpassed 20m unit sales. 
Considering that the device started shipping in late April, that would mean 
it's taken roughly two months to hit this milestone. For the sake of 
comparison, it took the GS3 100 days to hit the same figure.

I predicted that Samsung would announce 20 million GS4 sales in mid-June 
<https://twitter.com/WhatTheBit/statuses/337620133499502592>. That didn't 
happen. Then I thought they'd announce the 20m sales figures on their event in 
London on June 20th, but that didn't happen either.

When the GS4 hit 10 million units sold, it was at a growth rate of 2x the GS3. 
With this new figure, it's more like 1.6x, which is still impressive, but not 
as impressive as analysts are expecting.

See also The Next Web report 
<http://thenextweb.com/mobile/2013/07/03/the-samsung-galaxy-s4-has-now-passed-20-million-shipments-according-to-reports-in-korea/>
 on the same topic for more figures.

9 Mind-Blowing Canvas Demos >> David Walsh 
<http://davidwalsh.name/canvas-demos>

The /canvas/ element has been a revelation for the visual experts among our 
ranks.  Canvas provides the means for incredible and efficient animations with 
the added bonus of no Flash; these developers can flash their awesome 
JavaScript skills instead.  Here are nine unbelievable canvas demos that will 
make your jaw drop!

Unless you're using a smartphone, in which case results may vary.

Falcon Pro updates to v2.0.4 outside of the Play Store, now supports a way to 
blatantly skirt Twitter's token limit >> Android Police 
<http://www.androidpolice.com/2013/07/03/falcon-pro-updates-to-v2-0-4-outside-of-the-play-store-now-supports-a-way-to-blatantly-skirt-twitters-token-limit/>

The saga continues: 

updates will now launch through the website getfalcon.pro, starting with 
v2.0.4. Also in the post was a hint about an "experiment" that would allow 
users who haven't acquired a valid token to still use the app with all of their 
accounts. A short time later, instructions to unlock the new feature were 
posted by Fernando González. As one might expect, the workaround allows users 
to create their own API key with Twitter and insert it into Falcon Pro. If you 
find yourself limited by the notorious token count, update your copy of the app 
and follow these steps:

...which shows that Twitter's process to let anyone be a developer might get 
screwed too. This probably won't be viable for anyone involved - Twitter, 
Falcon Pro, or users. Someone's going to lose out, and it's Twitter which 
controls the API.

In smartphones and tablets, multicore is not necessarily the way to go >> 
Smartbear 
<http://blog.smartbear.com/mobile/in-smartphones-and-tablets-multicore-is-not-necessarily-the-way-to-go/>

The scalability that worked well in the PC 
<http://blog.smartbear.com/sqc/what-intel-and-amds-latest-multicore-development-moves-mean-to-you/>
 (mostly) and better in the server market doesn&#8217;t work so great in a 
smartphone, because the nature of the development environment is completely 
different animal.

This was originally pointed out in a white paper 
<http://www.stericsson.com/technologies/FD-SOI-eQuad-white-paper.pdf> (PDF) by 
ST-Ericsson, which notes that on the PC multicore never really caught on for a 
variety of reasons, and they apply even less on the smartphone.

The reason why software developers don't parallelize their code, wrote the 
paper's authors, is that "For most of the PC applications it is simply not 
necessary or not economical to do so, with the exception of some niche markets 
for which performance is a compelling differentiating feature, such as for some 
multimedia applications, CAD and some specific professional areas."

…"Two cores make sense, four is experimental, eight is loony," said Cameron 
Laird, vice president of boutique Web consultancy Phase It and frequent author 
on HTML5 development (including several articles here at SmartBear). He expects 
that smartphones will eventually be able to utilize two cores.

Doug Engelbart, visionary >> I, Cringely 
<http://www.cringely.com/2013/07/03/doug-engelbart-visionary/>

To most people who recognize his name Doug Engelbart was the inventor of the 
computer mouse but he was much, much more than that. In addition to the mouse 
and the accompanying chord keyboard, Doug invented computer time sharing, 
network computing, graphical computing, the graphical user interface and (with 
apologies to Ted Nelson) hypertext links. And he invented all these things — if 
by inventing we mean envisioning how they would work and work together to 
create the computing environments we know today — while driving to work one day 
in 1950.

Doug had a vision of modern computing back in the day when many computers were 
still mechanical and user interfaces did not even exist. He saw in a flash not 
only the way we do things today but also the long list of tasks that had to be 
completed to get from there to here. Now that's vision.

Links to lots of great video. (Thanks @Sputnikkers for the link.)

Apple of discord >> Securelist 
<http://www.securelist.com/en/blog/8108/Apple_of_discord>

Nadezhda Demidova: 

cybercriminals are aiming to steal Apple ID data which provides access to 
users' personal information stored iniCloud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/icloud> (e.g., photographs, contacts, 
documents, email, etc.) as well as to the purchases made in the company's 
iTunes Store. Many malicious users go further and try to the steal bank card 
details used to pay for those purchases.

The scammers make use of phishing sites that imitate the official apple.com 
site. Since the beginning of 2012 until the present time this has resulted in a 
significant increase in the number of web antivirus detections triggered by 
users of our products attempting to visit such sites. During that period we 
have seen on average around 200,000 detections per day. By contrast, in 2011 
the figure stood at around 1,000 detections per day.

The opening of iTunes Stores in 52 countries including Russia led to a 
colossal spike - 939,000 detections per day.

Spain telecoms regulator sees more pain for operators in 2013 >> Reuters 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/07/03/us-spain-telecoms-watchdog-idUKBRE9620PZ20130703>

Mobile is set for another tough year, with Orange, Yoigo (owned by 
TeliaSonera) and virtual operators, which rent network capacity from 
established operators, catching up with market leaders Telefonica and Vodafone 
who are losing clients.

Mobile revenue dropped 16% in 2012 to 9.5bn euros as consumers cut spending, 
switched to cheaper deals or ditched their mobiles altogether. Last year was 
the first time that the number of cellphone lines in Spain shrank, dropping by 
1.9m connections.

Internet-based instant messaging services like WhatsApp, which are free after 
a small initial payment, are proving even more of a challenge for operators 
this year, Lorenzo said, as clients shun more expensive text messages.

It's quite shocking if the number of mobile connections fell. No clue whether 
that's people dumping a second (business?) mobile, or their primary mobile. One 
suspects the former, but more data welcomed.

Acer Iconia W3 review >> PC Pro 
<http://www.pcpro.co.uk/reviews/tablets/382807/acer-iconia-w3>

Barry Collins: 

Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> distributed 
thousands of Iconia W3s to developers at its recent Build conference to 
showcase Windows 8.1's compact tablet credentials. If the Iconia W3 is the best 
it can do, it really is time to reach for the white flag.

The Iconia is a lumpen slab of cheap-feeling plastic and glass. At 500g, it's 
significantly heavier than all of the compact tablets in this month's Lab, bar 
the ruggedised Panasonic Toughpad JT-B1. It's larger than all of them, too, 
thanks to a needlessly thick bezel and an extra plastic lip at the bottom, used 
to house the Windows button.

All that could have been forgiven – perhaps – if the screen was scintillating, 
but it's far from it. The 800 x 1,280 display has that old-school, mottled 
touchscreen effect that makes it look as if it's been sprayed with a fine mist. 
Colours are washed out, largely because the screen doesn't span the entire SRGB 
gamut, although the maximum brightness of 329cd/m2 is acceptable.

Yours for £330 for the basic 64GB model with an 8.1in screen. (The equivalent 
spec iPad mini is £429, 1024x768, weighing 308g. But would you need a 64GB iPad 
as you might a Windows device?)

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>

To suggest a link, either add it below or tag it with @gdntech on the free 
Delicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service.
 