
A burst of 10 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Branded notebook vendors cutting orders by 5-10% for 4Q11 >> Digitimes 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20111013PD217.html>

"With the exception of Apple and Lenovo, other branded notebook vendors are 
reportedly cutting their orders to ODMs [Original Device Manufacturers, who 
build the notebooks] by 5-10% for the fourth quarter of 2011 after combined 
shipments from ODMs posted a 6% sequential growth in the third quarter, 
according to industry sources.

"Previously, most ODMs enjoyed an over 20% sequential growth in notebook 
shipments in the third quarter, the sources noted."

No reason given. Lenovo and Apple both saw very large growth in notebook 
shipments in the third quarter.

A fall sweep >> Official Google Blog 
<http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/10/fall-sweep.html>

"We aspire to build great products that really change people's lives, products 
they use two or three times a day. To succeed you need real focus and 
thought—thought about what you work on and, just as important, what you don't 
work on. It's why we recently decided to shut down some products, and turn 
others into features of existing products."

Goodbye unlamented Google Buzz, slightly lamented Jaiku (the Twitter that 
never was), the lamented Code Search and the unknown University Research 
Program for Google Search (API access for a small number of university 
researchers).

Steve Jobs: visionary, inventor, and very challenging photo subject >> PDNPulse
 
<http://pdnpulse.com/2011/10/steve-jobs-visionary-inventor-and-very-challenging-photo-subject.html>

He won't be mourned by those who had to photograph him. "'In all those years, 
Steve only screamed at me at the top of his lungs once,' Menuez recalls. It was 
in 1988, when Fortune hired Menuez to shoot a portrait of Jobs for the cover of 
the magazine. Menuez wanted to photograph him in the NeXT offices, on a 
staircase that Jobs had commissioned architect I.M Pei to design. Jobs arrived 
for the shoot, looked at what Menuez had in mind, 'then [he] leaned in and 
says, 'This is the stupidest fucking idea that I've ever seen.' Right in my 
face, like 5 or 6 inches away," Menuez says. "I felt like I was 10 years old. 
He went off on a tirade. He said, 'You just want to sell magazines. 'And I 
said, 'And you want to sell computers.' And at that he said, 'OK,' and sat down.

"Menuez concludes, 'I've been in war zones, but I like to say that I became a 
man learning how to stand my ground with Steve.'"

Intel CEO talks up Windows 8, claims the "evolution of the PC has been 
retarded" >> WinRumors 
<http://www.winrumors.com/intel-ceo-talks-up-windows-8-claims-the-evolution-of-the-pc-has-been-retarded/>

"Speaking at Dell World 2011, Otellini told an audience of industry executives 
that Intel loves PCs. 'I suspect Steve Ballmer said the same thing this morning 
and I know that our partner Dell absolutely loves PCs,' said Otellini. He 
continued to say that Intel and Microsoft have built a "wonderful industry" and 
that he believes PCs are now being taken for granted because they're so useful. 
'To some extent the evolution of the PC has been retarded I think in the last 
few years so as we look forward in terms of where the PC has to continue to 
grow…it has to get more and more consumer friendly.' Intel plans to solve the 
problem with Ultrabooks. 'We want to make sure that these devices are portable, 
user friendly, but also have the capability to do the high capacity creative 
work that all of our workers do day in day out,' said Otellini."

Ultrabooks, eh?

Word clouds considered harmful >> Nieman Journalism Lab 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/2011/10/word-clouds-considered-harmful/>

Jacob Harris of the New York Times doesn't like word clouds: "When looking at 
the word cloud of the War Logs, does the equal sizing of the words "car" and 
"blast" indicate a large number of reports about car bombs or just many reports 
about cars or explosions? How do I compare the relative frequency of 
lesser-used words? Also, doesn't focusing on the occurrence of specific words 
instead of concepts or themes miss the fact that different reports about truck 
bombs might be use the words "truck," "vehicle," or even "bongo" (since the Kia 
Bongo is very popular in Iraq)?

"Of course, the biggest problem with word clouds is that they are often 
applied to situations where textual analysis is not appropriate. One could 
argue that word clouds make sense when the point is to specifically analyze 
word usage (though I'd still suggest alternatives), but it's ludicrous to make 
sense of a complex topic like the Iraq War by looking only at the words used to 
describe the events."

Steve Jobs and the actually usable computer >> W3C Blog 
<http://www.w3.org/QA/2011/10/steve_jobs.html>

"At a sad time at which the world has just lost Steve Jobs, it is well to 
reflect on some of the things which he, his passion, and his creations have 
given us, as now the technical community should take many of these upon its 
collective shoulders.

"A big thing Steve Jobs did for the world was to insist that computers could 
be usable rather than totally infuriating!

"The NeXT was brilliant. The NeXT had (arguably too) many things introduced at 
once -- removable optical storage, Objective C, DSP for sound and movies, Mach 
kernel, unix for a PC, display Postscript, InterfaceBuilder and so on. Yes, 
they never got the price down and the optical disks proved unreliable. But 
Steve and NeXTStep ended up saving Apple, and there must be a lesson that it is 
worth hanging on to cool things: you never know when they will in fact become 
mainstream."

Acer Aspire S3 Ultrabook review >> This is my next... 
<http://thisismynext.com/2011/10/14/acer-aspire-s3-ultrabook-review/>

Fascinating review, because the only part where it is complimentary is on the 
boot and resume times. On everything else - keyboard quality, build quality, 
performance, battery life (they couldn't get it above three and a half hours) - 
it's not as good as rivals, especially Samsung.

Notice how Samsung is the name that keeps getting complimentary comments: it 
is beginning to look like the only company that can properly challenge Apple in 
both PCs and phones. It even has its own mobile OS.

WikipediaVision (beta) <http://www.lkozma.net/wpv/>

See people anonymously editing Wikipedia entries almost in real time. (Via 
@realouisewener who is.. the real Louise Wener).

How much does an Apple store cost? >> Asymco 
<http://feedproxy.google.com/~r/Asymco/~3/Lm27wLyVyiY/>

"Over the time period illustrated, Apple opened 220 stores and spent $1.9 
billion in fitting them out. That's about $8.5 million per store. It's been 
increasing so it's probably closer to $10 million lately.

"That's an interesting figure by itself, evidence of how profitable they must 
be. But I turn the question again to competitiveness and the lack of response 
in kind.

"The data shows that if a company wanted to duplicate this effort they would 
need to commit to spending at least $2 billion. And that's just for "fixing up" 
the sites. This figure does not include the lease itself, the cost to operate 
(including the tens of thousands of employees) or the inventory within. It also 
does not include the value of choosing the right locations (though maybe a 
follower could simply choose to locate in the near proximity to an Apple 
store.)"

Microsoft used to be obsessed a few years ago about matching Apple's retail 
presence. Less so now.

siri-big.jpg (960×540) 
<http://cache.gawkerassets.com/assets/images/4/2011/10/siri-big.jpg>

Ha, ha, ha. Remind us of the "Format C colon!" shoutouts that used to go on at 
speech recognition demonstrations.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>

To suggest links, tag articles on delicious.com with "guardiantech"
 