
A quick burst of 7 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

So a bar walks into an app... >> Twitter blog 
<http://blog.twitter.com/2011/03/so-bar-walks-into-app.html>

"The QuickBar was originally conceived to help users discover what's happening 
in the broader world beyond people they already follow. The bar was also seen 
as a potential means of in-app notifications for new @mentions, DMs, and other 
important activity."

Instead it turned into the focus of hate over what was seen as the taducing of 
user-focussed design. And so it's been taken out the back and shot.

Acer Should Overhaul Its Operation: Stan Shih >> The Taiwan Economic News 
<http://www.cens.com/cens/html/en/news/news_inner_35793.html>

"In view of the impact of smart phones and tablet PCs on the PC market, Acer 
Inc., Taiwan's leading PC supplier, should overhaul its operation to seek 
higher profit margin, rather than seeking the championship in the global PC 
market, said Stan Shih, founder ofAcer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> Group yesterday (March 29).

"...In recent years, Acer has been striving to become the world's largest PC 
vendor, in the belief that the goal can help it achieve economy of scale and 
garner higher margin. Shih remarked that the success of Apple underscores the 
traditional industrial mode is undertaking a major change, as volume may not 
have an absolute relationship with profit margin. Therefore, the honor of the 
world's largest PC vendor may be achieved at the expense of profit margin"

Which pretty much answers the question of why the chief executive was booted 
out: he didn't agree with Shih.

Do Not Anger the Alpha Android >> BusinessWeek 
<http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/11_15/b4223041200216.htm>

"Playtime is over in Android Land. Over the last couple of months Google has 
reached out to the major carriers and device makers backing its mobile 
operating system with a message: There will be no more willy-nilly tweaks to 
the software. No more partnerships formed outside of Google's purview. From now 
on, companies hoping to receive early access to Google's most up-to-date 
software will need approval of their plans. And they will seek that approval 
from Andy Rubin, the head of Google's Android group."

Three thoughts: (1) game most definitely ON. Google is getting deadly serious 
about Android's future here; (2) you can ignore the PR about Android being 
"open" in contrast to other mobile operating systems now; (3) since being taken 
over by Bloomberg, BusinessWeek has produced cracking stories at a remarkable 
rate.

Confirmed: Samsung is Not Shipping Keyloggers >> F-Secure 
<http://www.f-secure.com/weblog/archives/00002133.html>

"The whole saga was caused by a false alarm of the VIPRE Antivirus product. 
Apparently VIPRE detects the StarLogger keylogger by searching for the 
existance existence of a directory called 'SL' in the root of the Windows 
directory. This is a bad idea."

Where by "bad" F-Secure means "reputation-destroying leading to potentially 
actionable outcomes".

Samsung notebooks are in fact secure >> Samsung blog 
<http://www.samsungtomorrow.com/1071>

"The statements that Samsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> 
installs keylogger on R525 and R540 laptop computers are false. After 
investigating into this matter, it was found that the software installed WAS in 
Fact VIPRE, not StarLogger called The Commercial Keylogger. The confusion arose 
because Microsoft's Live Application multi-language support folder, "SL" 
folder, was mistaken for StarLogger."

This seems plausible.

Samsung Series 9 Laptop Shows No Signs Of Spyware >> PCWorld 
<http://www.pcworld.com/article/223823/samsung_series_9_laptop_shows_no_signs_of_spyware.html>

"Rootkit" plot thickens.

TMI: Fear, Fukushima and Facts >> Anil Dash 
<http://dashes.com/anil/2011/03/tmi-fear-fukushima-and-facts.html>

Builds on the XKCD radiation chart (which you must know already) and then gets 
an expert to comment on it. In fact, even XKCD has it overblown. Prepare to 
revise your figures for fatalities caused by Chernobyl downward by a couple of 
orders of magnitude, for example.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>
 