
Some of Australia’s wildest terrain can only be appreciated fully on foot. 
Multi-day hikes allow you to become immersed in the scenery, from the rugged 
beauty of the desert to serene, sunny beaches. The following hikes are well 
marked and safe, with plenty of campsites and accommodation along the way.

Larapinta trail – Northern Territory

The Larapinta trail <http://www.larapintatrail.com.au/> stretches more than 
200km from near Alice Springs to Mount Sonder in the Northern Territory. It’s 
split into 12 individual sections with 41 campsites along the way, so hikers 
can decide how long they want to trek each day. The trail passes through high 
mountains and across multiple gorges and dry creek beds. It’s a chance to 
discover the beauty of the country’s north and visit many historical and sacred 
Indigenous sites. The medium difficulty rating means it’s not for beginners, 
and it passes across some very rugged and hard surfaces. Highlights along the 
way include the Finke river and abundant wildlife in Simpson’s Gap. It’s best 
to undertake the journey in winter, unless you want to contend with 
temperatures above 45C. Water is available along the whole trail, and no 
booking fees for campsites or permits are required.

Thorsborne trail – Queensland

Running across Hinchinbrook Island 
<http://www.nprsr.qld.gov.au/parks/hinchinbrook-thorsborne/>, eight kilometres 
off Cardwell Coast, this trail is isolated and serene – hiker numbers are 
limited to just 40 a day. There is a wide range of terrain and unique wildlife, 
including endangered butterflies and orchids. It’s been a protected area since 
1932 as part of the Great Barrier Reef world heritage area and is one of 
Australia’s largest island national parks.


The Thorsborne trail is 32km long from Nina Bay in the north to George Point 
in the south, and can be completed in either direction. There are some 
challenging areas, but it can be completed by casual hikers. The highlights 
include stunning beaches, soaring waterfalls and lush rainforests.


There are seven campsites on the trail, which is a 40 minute boat ride from 
Cardwell, halfway between Cairns and Townsville. It’s for those looking for an 
exclusive, isolated island getaway with spectacular views. Hinchinbrook 
Wilderness Safaris operates boat transfers from Cardwell to the trek daily for 
$70 return, and permits for the trail cost $5.15 per day. Hikers need to be 
self-sufficient, but water can obtained on the trail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fboots-on-five-of-the-best-multi-day-hiking-trails-across-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48adadf8aca8cf92f7893b3f742c89620a35f397%2F0_59_2638_1583%2F2638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boots%20on!%20Five%20of%20the%20best%20multi-day%20hiking%20trails%20across%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fboots-on-five-of-the-best-multi-day-hiking-trails-across-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boots%20on%21%20Five%20of%20the%20best%20multi-day%20hiking%20trails%20across%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fboots-on-five-of-the-best-multi-day-hiking-trails-across-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48adadf8aca8cf92f7893b3f742c89620a35f397%2F0_59_2638_1583%2F2638.jpg>
 A lagoon at Little Ramsay Bay on Hinchinbrook Island, Queensland. Photograph: 
Tatters/Flickr 
Bay of Fires – Tasmania

This is for those looking for a more luxurious, laid-back hike along the 
southern state’s picturesque beaches. The four-day trek is split into stretches 
of about about 10km each day. It travels across the bay on the north-east coast 
of Tasmania from Mount William national park to Launceston. It’s a fully-guided 
walk, graded low difficulty – meant for beginners. Beaches and isolated coves 
dot the trail, plus there is decent accommodation and the option of kayaking 
part of the way. It’s a posh hike – there are no tents in sight and meals are 
sourced from local produce. TheBay of Fires <http://www.bayoffires.com.au/> 
hike is not cheap though, with four-day walks starting from $2,300 for two 
sharing, including transfers from the city, accommodation, food and drinks.

Wilderness Coast walk – Victoria

The 100km Wilderness Coast walk 
<http://parkweb.vic.gov.au/explore/parks/croajingolong-national-park/things-to-do/walking-the-wilderness-coast>
 through the Croajingolong national park in Gippsland has been largely 
unaltered by humans, and there is no well-defined track. Walkers should be 
experienced and well-equipped to navigate the way, and need to book campsites 
well in advance. The hike is divided into three sections, and a $10 booking is 
required for camping in each separate section.

The walk runs along the coast with remote beaches and views of the ocean along 
the way. Wildlife is a major attraction of the walk The national park is home 
to a huge range of plants, mammals, reptiles, and birds, including many 
threatened species. Hikers can attempt the walk any time of the year, but 
should be well prepared.

Sights along the way include a lighthouse where guests can stay the night and 
what’s known as the Sandpatch Zone – a section of coastline from Wingan Inlet 
to Shipwreck Creek that has been virtually undisturbed and includes high 
coastal cliffs and vegetated dunes.

Bibbulmun track – Western Australia

The Bibbulmun track <https://www.bibbulmuntrack.org.au/> is a world-renowned 
walking trail that begins at Kalamunda in the Perth Hills and runs 1,000km to 
Albany on the south coast. It winds through Australia’s south-west, traversing 
forests, valleys, and national parks. With 49 campsites peppered along the 
track, it can be a gentle walk for a couple of days if you only want to do some 
of it, or an epic 6-8 week adventure if you want to go the whole way.


Only serious hikers should attempt the full distance, and those who do it 
successfully earn the title of an “end-to-ender”. If tents aren’t your thing, 
there are also towns that offer accommodation along the way. The only season 
you should avoid is summer because of very high temperatures along the track 
and the danger of bushfires. It’s an entirely free track and no bookings are 
needed for the campsites, which are also free.



 