
A quick burst of 8 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

RIM slashes PlayBook price >> Loop Insight 
<http://www.loopinsight.com/2011/11/17/rim-slashes-playbook-price/>


"The 16GB, 32GB and 64GB models of the device will sell for $199, $299 and 
$399". It's deja vu all over again. That's a $200 price cut against the initial 
base price at which thePlayBook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playbook> was introduced. These cuts 
must be costing RIM hundreds of dollars.

'Occupy Flash' movement wants Adobe's plug-in dead >> Computerworld 
<http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9221963/_Occupy_Flash_movement_wants_Adobe_s_plug_in_dead>


"A small group of website and mobile app developers have kicked off an 'Occupy 
Flash' campaign to put a stake in the heart of Adobe's popular browser 
plug-in." Hang on, isn't it the 99% who are meant to complain about the 1%? 
This is the wrong way round.

Banks bung hard-up Acer £315m loan on Channel Register 
<http://www.channelregister.co.uk/2011/11/17/acer_financing/>


"Troubled Acer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> has penned a new 
financing deal to cover working capital requirements and pay off a previous 
loan it took out to acquire Gateway. "The firm has gone through a major 
reshuffle of management following a loss-making year in which sluggish consumer 
demand caught it by surprise and resulted in an inventory pile-up." Just to 
point out that the Gateway acquisition cost £350m and completed in October 
2007. Four years later it has to take a loan out to finish that? Sounds like an 
unsuccessful acquisition that hasn't generated as much cash as expected.

The vision behind Klout: measuring online influence >> The Official Klout Blog 
<http://corp.klout.com/blog/2011/11/the-vision-behind-klout/#comment-363848159>


Tom Coates comments on the soothing words from Klout's chief: "While 
superficially that seems reasonable, pretty much any of us who have been on the 
web a long time know what these scores result in. One way or another they'll 
make us targets for marketing and advertising companies to try and sell their 
products through us. "And while you talk about the ways in which you try to 
give people a better platform to be recognized for their passions, what you're 
actually doing (or at least this is how it seems) is to estimate which of us is 
financially worth the most, and then you're selling access to us to 
advertisers." That's the real vision behind it, he thinks.

Walt Mossberg reviews Kindle Fire, Amazon's colour tablet >> WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204190504577040110511886588.html?mod=e2tw>


"To be clear, the Kindle Fire is much less capable and versatile than the 
entry-level $499 iPad 2. It has a fraction of the apps, a smaller screen, much 
weaker battery life, a slower Web browser, half the internal storage and no 
cameras or microphone. It also has a rigid and somewhat frustrating user 
interface far less fluid than Apple's. "But the Fire has some big things going 
for it. First, the $199 price, though the Fire's seven-inch screen is less than 
half the surface area of the iPad's display. Second, the Amazon and Kindle 
brands, already known and loved for e-readers and more. Third, Amazon is the 
only major tablet maker other than Apple with a large, famous, easy-to-use 
content ecosystem that sells music, video, books and periodicals. The Fire can 
be thought of as a hardware front end to all that cloud content." Suspicion: 
the Kindle Fire will kill the 7in "official Android" market. Effect on the 
iPad: harder to measure.

Kindle Fire gets torn down - no surprises here >> TechCrunch 
<http://techcrunch.com/2011/11/15/kindle-fire-gets-torn-down-no-surprises-here/>


"iFixit, bless their hearts, have taken a Kindle Fire to pieces, though as it 
turns out, there aren't too many pieces to begin with. The battery is one huge 
unit, and all the processing and I/O occurs on a single PCB at the bottom of 
the device. "Those expecting a carbon copy of the Playbook both outside and in 
will be disappointed: the layout, batteries, PCB, and all the components are 
different, making the form factor more or less the only real similarity between 
the two devices." They share a processor. Basically, tablets are now a battery, 
screen, and a circuit board.

Coffee Time: Market Share vs Profit - journal >> minimally minimal 
<http://www.minimallyminimal.com/journal/2011/11/16/coffee-time-market-share-vs-profit.html>


Compares the phone models Apple sells in the US with those that Samsung sells. 
One concludes that Samsung must have really good supply chain control, because 
that's some SKU [stockkeeping unit, ie different piece of merchandise] 
challenge there.

Don't Be Too Disappointed By Google Music's Lackluster Debut >> TechCrunch 
<http://techcrunch.com/2011/11/16/dont-be-too-disappointed-by-google-musics-lackluster-debut/>


"There are two things the critics decline to acknowledge: that Google is 
providing a simple, free service, and that all Google products start out 
underwhelming and gradually expand. Android was a mess when it showed up. And 
it's still a mess -- a mess blowing up to the tune of half a million devices a 
day. We all know Google doesn't ship complete products. So why do we waste our 
breath in day-one aspersion or praise when it's going to be a new Music down 
the line?"

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on delicious 
<http://delicious.com/guardianista>
 