
A quick burst of 9 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

U of T neural networks start-up acquired by Google >> University of Toronto 
Media Room 
<http://media.utoronto.ca/media-releases/u-of-t-neural-networks-start-up-acquired-by-google/>

Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has picked up a 
ground-breaking start-up out of the Department of Computer Science, University 
of Toronto.

 University Professor Geoffrey Hinton and two of his graduate students, Alex 
Krizhevsky and Ilya Sutskever, incorporated DNNresearch Inc. in 2012, and the 
company has been acquired by Google for its research on deep neural networks.

 Hinton is world-renowned for his work with neural nets, and this research has 
profound implications for areas such as speech recognition, computer vision and 
language understanding.

 "Geoffrey Hinton's research is a magnificent example of disruptive innovation 
with roots in basic research," said U of T's president, Professor David Naylor. 
"The discoveries of brilliant researchers, guided freely by their expertise, 
curiosity, and intuition, lead eventually to practical applications no one 
could have imagined, much less requisitioned.

 This will all get open-sourced, for sure, won't it? (Thanks 
@modelportfolio2003 for pointer.)

Andy Rubin's email to Android partners >> WSJ Digits blog 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2013/03/13/andy-rubins-email-to-android-partners/?mod=WSJBlog>

Final paragraph: 

As for me, I am an entrepreneur at heart and now is the right time for me to 
start a new chapter within Google. I am amazed by what we have accomplished 
from those early days (not so long ago!), and remain passionate about the power 
of a simple idea and a shared goal -- an open source platform freely available 
to everyone -- to transform computing for people everywhere.

 That's the true transformation that Android has achieved. And that 
transformation has barely begun.

Mysterious partner buys 1 million BlackBerry 10 devices >> AllThingsD 
<http://allthingsd.com/20130313/mysterious-partner-buys-1-million-blackberry-10-devices/>

BlackBerry just won its biggest vote of confidence yet: A massive order for 
handsets running its next-generation operating system. The company said 
Wednesday that an "established partner" had agreed to buy 1 million BlackBerry 
10 devices. The deal marks the largest-ever single purchase order in 
BlackBerry's history, according to the company.

 Almost certainly the US government, as was announced last November 
<http://mobile.bloomberg.com/news/2012-11-13/rim-counts-on-wave-of-blackberry-government-upgrades.html>
. Certainly a vote of confidence, whoever it is.

In rare move, Apple goes on the defensive against Samsung >> WSJ.com 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324077704578358760931327672.html>

In a rare interview a day before Samsung Electronics announces a new flagship 
smartphone in New York,Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
marketing chief Phil Schiller on Wednesday played down the expected competition 
from the device and discussed how believes such products -- which run Google's 
Android software -- are inferior to Apple's iPhone.

 He shared data on the iPhone's popularity and said Apple's own research shows 
that four times as many iPhone users switched from Android than to Android 
during the fourth quarter, according to company research.

 Unsurprising comments, intriguing data. But the headline - how do you "go on 
the defensive"? Surely you go on theoffensive? Which Schiller seems to have 
done here.

Will Android tablets pass iPad in 2013? >> Tech.pinions 
<http://techpinions.com/will-android-tablets-pass-ipad-in-2013/15077>

Technically, yes. But let Ben Bajarin explain: 

The problem when we talk about Android market share in both smartphones and 
tablets, is that we are not talking about market share in which a universal app 
store medium exists. This is because Android can be taken and forked, to the 
chagrin of Google, and used for the sole agenda of others thus not benefiting 
Google or the Play Store developers. This is the problem we have when we look 
at the Android growth in tablets. The greatest percentage of it is coming from 
Amazon with their Kindle fire, and the Chinese market. The Kindle Fire runs a 
forked version of Android and developers must use Amazon's SDK and proprietary 
app store. 90% of Chinese Android devices sold do not come with the Google Play 
store installed but rather have ties to dozens of local app store from local 
service providers. Therefore to get an accurate picture of the Android market, 
it is more helpful to break out market share by devices which have the Play 
store and the ones that do not. If we did, then IDC's, chart would look more 
like this.

 It's a telling diagram. AOSP (forked non-Google Android) is huge - and 
lumping AOSP and Google Android together gives a false picture of what's going 
on. Trouble is, the AOSP numbers are very hard to acquire, despite being 
significant.

Acer President: more comfortable about Windows 8 uptake due to Microsoft's 
support >> Fox Business 
<http://www.foxbusiness.com/technology/2013/03/11/acer-president-more-comfortable-about-windows-8-uptake-due-to-microsoft-support/>

Acer President Jim Wong told the Wall Street Journal on the sidelines of a 
media event in Taipei that he expects sales of Windows 8 touch-based devices to 
pick up in the second half of the year. He declined to specify what support 
Microsoft has given Acer and PC makers. Several sources in Taiwan saidMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> has recently offered steep 
discounts on Windows 8 to PC makers to boost development of touch-controlled 
devices.

 Mr. Wong said the company's operating margin had already bottomed at 0.3% in 
the third quarter and is expected to rise this year. The company expects its 
tablet shipments to exceed 5m units this year, with a 50% chance of reaching 
10m, boosted by strong demand for Acer's new low-cost tablet, the Iconia B1, he 
said.

 What are the factors in that 50% each-way bet of hitting 10m? And of course 
those aren't PCs - they're tablets running Windows 8.

Windows 8 device choices baffle buyers >> Information Week 
<http://www.informationweek.co.uk/software/windows8/windows-8-device-choices-baffle-buyers/240150267?cid=RSSfeed_IWK_ALL>

Kevin Casey: 

[Forrester senior analyst David] Johnson added that the differences - both 
significant and subtle - between various Windows 8 models aren't always 
apparent to buyers until they've had a chance to use the devices. A road 
warrior might be better suited for a device with a built-in keyboard instead of 
a true tablet, for example, but they might not figure that out until it's too 
late. "This is something that we think many buyers will not fully grasp until 
after they've made their purchase and have to live with their choice for the 
long term," Johnson said.

 That lack of practical information is, in business-speak, a barrier to entry. 
I spoke recently with Terena Bell, CEO of the translation firm In Every 
Language, who explained why she'd been impressed by Microsoft's extensive ad 
campaign behind the Windows 8 launch. Yet when she decided to plunk down her 
company's cash on a Windows 8 machine that would run upwards of $1,000, she was 
stumped by her hardware choices and had trouble finding reliable information 
and reviews. Microsoft's slick ads were both friend and enemy - they first got 
Bell interested in, and later confused by, Windows 8.

Eye-tracking tech will be open to iPhones and other devices >> NYTimes.com 
<http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/03/12/eye-tracking-tech-will-be-open-to-iphones-others/>

Brian Chen: 

Samsung Electronics won't be the only company that gets a fancy eye-tracking 
feature. A start-up company called uMoove, which has been developing this type 
of technology for three years, says it will offer eye- and head-tracking to 
anyone, including device makers like Apple and software developers who make 
mobile apps.

 Based in Israel, has been working on a technology for smartphones and tablets 
to track eye and head movements using a device's front-facing camera. It said 
on Tuesday that very soon it would offer a software tool kit to apply its 
technology to applications.

TripAdvisor reminds everyone why travel agencies are screwed >> Skift 
<http://skift.com/2013/03/12/tripadvisor-report-reminds-everyone-why-travel-agencies-are-screwed/>

A recent study conducted on behalf of TripAdvisor by independent research firm 
StrategyOne found that only 7% of Brits visited a high street travel agent to 
book their latest trip. Travelers in the UK and abroad now turn to web services 
as their primary booking tool. Brits were most likely to book via web-based 
travel agencies (27%) or directly on hotels' own websites (23%).

 The study also found the Internet to be the most useful to travelers when 
researching a trip. Travel review sites were regarded the most helpful with 38% 
of respondents choosing them as their top choice, but the data could be skewed 
given that it was administered by TripAdvisor.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service.
 