
An associate of Chechnya’s Kremlin-backed leader Ramzan Kadyrov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ramzan-kadyrov> was involved in the murder 
of Boris Nemtsov, a Russian court has heard, in a twist to the investigation 
that raises as many questions as it answers.

Zaur Dadayev, a Chechen, was one of five men to appear in a Moscow courtroom 
on Sunday, all from Russia’s north Caucasus region.

“Dadayev’s involvement in committing this crime is confirmed by, apart from 
his own confession, the totality of evidence gathered as part of this criminal 
case,” said Judge Natalia Mushnikova.

Dadayev raised his index finger in the courtroom, a common Islamist sign 
<http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/141956/nathaniel-zelinsky/isis-sends-a-message>
, and said “I love the prophet Mohammed”, according to reporters present.

 “I knew Zaur as a genuine Russian patriot,” the Chechen leader wrote on his 
Instagram page on Sunday evening, confirming that Dadayev had served in one of 
his battalions. “He was the deputy commander of the battalion, and one of the 
most fearless and courageous soldiers of the regiment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425838556041%2Fd328110b-91df-4a0b-8f64-9f3593778488-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder%3A%20Chechen%20chief%20Kadyrov%20confirms%20link%20to%20prime%20suspect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder%3A%20Chechen%20chief%20Kadyrov%20confirms%20link%20to%20prime%20suspect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425838556041%2Fd328110b-91df-4a0b-8f64-9f3593778488-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Tamerlan Eskerkhanov is taken into court by a policeman. Esterkhanov said he 
was at work at the time of Nemtsov’s murder and had witnesses who could prove 
it. Photograph: Dmitry Serebryakov/AFP/Getty 
Kadyrov said Dadayev was “fully devoted to Russia” and suggested the murder 
may have been in response to anger over Nemtsov’s support for the Charlie Hebdo 
cartoons.

“Everyone who knows Zaur says he is deeply religious person and like all 
Muslims was very shocked by the actions of Charlie [Hebdo] and by comments 
supporting the printing of the caricatures,” wrote Kadyrov. “If the court finds 
Dadayev guilty then by killing a person he has committed a grave crime. But I 
want to note that he could not do anything that was againstRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, for which he has risked his own 
life for many years.”

Nemtsov was gunned down on 27 February as he walked home across a bridge in 
the centre of Moscow, right by the Kremlin. He was shot four times and the 
killer escaped in a car, with many of Nemtsov’s allies noting the professional 
nature of the murder and raising suspicions about how such a brazen killing 
could take place.

Many of Nemtsov’s allies have blamed the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, 
personally for the murder. Some suggested that Putin’s rhetoric about a “fifth 
column” inside Russia had created an atmosphere of hatred that may have been 
seized on by radical nationalists, while others implied Putin may have ordered 
the killing.Alexei Navalny <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>, 
Russia’s most prominent opposition leader, said the only way to disprove the 
Kremlin’s involvement was if the case was investigated properly and solved.

Putin has said he has taken “personal control” of the investigation, and his 
spokesman announced hours after the killing that the assassination had been 
“100% provocation” designed to make Russia look bad.

The “Anti-Maidan” movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/26/russia-anti-maidan-protest-moscow>
, made up of politicians, nationalists and the head of a biker group close to 
Putin, said last week “Nemtsov’s American curators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/06/alexei-navalny-russian-opposition-is-not-deterred-by-boris-nemtsov>
” were behind the attack. Investigators had said they were investigating 
various theories, including Islamic extremism and a feud between opposition 
leaders.

In previous high-profile murders in Russia, the person who ordered them has 
not been found, with officials often suggesting it was set up from outside the 
country to discredit Putin and the Kremlin. When the exiled oligarch Boris 
Berezovsky was still alive, officials would often claim he was behind various 
deaths as “false flag” operations that were made to appear as though they had 
been sponsored by the Kremlin; now he is dead, the claim is that the CIA or 
other western intelligence agencies were responsible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425838824044%2F4de27bb0-08da-4e67-aaad-35a0fdafea62-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder%3A%20Chechen%20chief%20Kadyrov%20confirms%20link%20to%20prime%20suspect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder%3A%20Chechen%20chief%20Kadyrov%20confirms%20link%20to%20prime%20suspect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425838824044%2F4de27bb0-08da-4e67-aaad-35a0fdafea62-680x1020.jpeg>
 The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said he was taking ‘personal control’ 
of the investigation but many of Boris Nemtsov’s allies blame Putin for the 
murder. Photograph: Mikhail Klimentyev/AP 
However, the weekend’s events make the “foreign agents” line seem unlikely. 
The arrests were announced on Saturday by Alexander Bortnikov, head of Russia’s 
security service, the FSB. Information about the suspects, their backgrounds 
and what their role was in the murder of Nemtsov remains hazy. Many were 
detained in Ingushetia but details about how and by whom the detentions took 
place were scarce. Some analysts suggested the confusion may be down to the 
many agencies working on the investigation, with some possibly trying to solve 
the crime and others striving to cover it up.

Russian news agencies said a 30-year-old man who was a suspect in the Nemtsov 
murder had blown himself up with a grenade when police tried to detain him in 
Grozny, the Chechen capital – an event liable to raise suspicions. Kadyrov said 
the man’s name was Beslan Shavanov, and said he was also a “brave warrior”.

In court, Dadayev and Anzor Gubashev were charged with murder, while three 
others, Shagid Gubashev, Tamerlan Eskerkhanov and Khamzat Bakhayev, were not 
formally charged but remanded in custody pending further investigation. All 
except Dadayev protested their innocence. Esterkhanov said he was at work at 
the time of the murder and had witnesses who could prove it.

The men were marched in and out of the Moscow courtroom with their heads bowed 
and arms handcuffed behind their backs. Once inside the defendants’ cage in the 
courtroom, they attempted to hide their faces from television cameras using 
their hoods, collars or sheets of paper.

In the murder of the investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaya in 2006, a 
group of Chechens were tried for the killing but the person who ordered it was 
never identified. Authorities hinted repeatedly that they believed Berezovsky 
was behind it, an explanation that was dismissed by Politkovskaya’s friends and 
colleagues. The journalist had written many articles exposing human rights 
abuses inChechnya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chechnya> under Kadyrov.

Chechens are again in the spotlight over Nemtsov’s murder, though Kadyrov 
admitting he knew the murderer well, and going some way to justifying it, is a 
surprising development. State television gave extensive coverage to the court 
cases, and correspondents suggested that the men could have killed Nemtsov over 
his support for the cartoons of the prophet Muhammad published by the French 
magazine Charlie Hebdo. Later, Kadyrov’s statement seemed to bear out that this 
is the line investigators will pursue. Nemtsov had written a brief blog post 
criticising the murder of the Charlie Hebdo cartoonists.

Nemtsov’s 23-year-old Ukrainian girlfriend, Anna Duritskaya, was walking with 
the politician at the time of the killing and spent many hours giving evidence 
to police. However, she said she neither saw the face of the man who shot 
Nemtsov nor remembered much about the getaway car.

Nemtsov’s ally Ilya Yashin has said he plans to continue compiling a report on 
the involvement of Russian soldiers in the conflict in Ukraine, which Nemtsov 
had been working on before his murder.





The Chechen connection

Extraordinary footage filmed late last year 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-UqfPoED0QM> shows Ramzan Kadyrov addressing a 
stadium in Grozny filled with thousands of armed Chechen police and special 
forces members dressed in camouflage standing to attention around the stadium. 
Kadyrov gives a long speech saying the men have pledged loyalty to Russia, and 
President Vladimir Putin personally, and ends by shouting: “Long live our great 
motherland, Russia! Long live our national leader, Vladimir Putin!Allahu Akbar!”

Kadyrov, a former militant, has won huge concessions from Moscow to rule 
Chechnya as he pleases, essentially turning it into his own fiefdom, where 
dissent is not tolerated and elements of Islamic law are in place. The 
unwritten deal is that Kadyrov promises nominal loyalty to Moscow of a region 
the Kremlin fought two bitter wars to bring under its control, while in return 
Moscow gives him a free hand to do as he wishes. Many Russian politicians 
privately express worries about the amount of power he has built up and the 
potential threat his armed divisions could one day pose.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425839438734%2Fcf0e427e-9f57-4be8-9ee8-310546512b42-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder%3A%20Chechen%20chief%20Kadyrov%20confirms%20link%20to%20prime%20suspect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Nemtsov%20murder%3A%20Chechen%20chief%20Kadyrov%20confirms%20link%20to%20prime%20suspect&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fboris-nemtsov-five-suspects-appear-in-court-over-opposition-leaders-killing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425839438734%2Fcf0e427e-9f57-4be8-9ee8-310546512b42-680x1020.jpeg>
 The Chechen commander Sulim Yamadayev, who was murdered in Dubai. Ramzan 
Kadyrov’s cousin Adam Delimkhanov, who is a Russian MP and seen as Kadyrov’s 
right-hand man, is a suspect in the case. Photograph: AP 
Kadyrov has always denied allegations of human rights abuses and extrajudicial 
killings, but his opponents have a habit of meeting suspicious ends. In 2009, 
Dubai police issued an arrest warrant for Kadyrov’s cousinAdam Delimkhanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/30/russian-banker-london-clues-moscow>
, who is a member of the Russian parliament and widely seen as Kadyrov’s 
right-hand man. Delimkhanov was wanted in connection with themurder of the 
Chechen commander Sulim Yamadayev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/06/kadyrov-yamadayev-chechnya-dubai-kremlin>
 in Dubai. Yamadayev’s brother Ruslan was shot dead in central Moscow a year 
earlier.

Delimkhanov continues to sit as a Russian MP, and the Sever battalion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/16/chechnya-russia-analysis>, in 
which the Nemtsov murder suspect Zaur Dadayev served, is controlled by his 
brother.

In January, several hundred thousand people gathered for a march in Grozny “in 
defence of the prophet Mohammad”, to condemn the Charlie Hebdo cartoons.

Around the same time Kadyrov said Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the former oligarch 
who became an opponent of Putin and now resides in Switzerland after spending a 
decade in prison, was now his “personal enemy”. Khodorkovsky had written on 
Twitter that all respectable news outlets should republish the Charlie Hebdo 
cartoons in the wake of the Paris killings.

“I am certain that even in his beloved Switzerland there will be thousands of 
law-abiding citizens who want to bring him to account,” wrote Kadyrov.

That Dadayev said in court that he loved the prophet Mohammad could suggest 
that the motive in Nemtsov’s killing was related to the Charlie Hebdo cartoons. 
Russian investigators had initially mentioned this as one possible theory. 
Kadyrov’s Instagram post on Sunday evening also suggests that the Charlie Hebdo 
cartoons is being floated as the motive.

However, of all the issues on which Nemtsov was outspoken, his stance on the 
Charlie Hebdo cartoons and massacre was not something he was particularly known 
for – he wrote just one short blog post on the issue. The demonstrative nature 
of his killing, right outside the Kremlin, will do little to shake the 
conviction of many that this was primarily a political, rather than a 
religious, killing.
 