
It began with Microsoft in July 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-08-21/microsoft-leaves-lobbying-group-alec-amid-split-over-renewables.html>
, thenGoogle in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/23/google-to-cut-ties-with-rightwing-lobby-group-over-climate-change-lies>
 – and now Facebook, Yelp, Yahoo, SAP America, AOL andeBay have all followed 
suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/dec/19/ebay-google-dumps-alec-climate-change-denial>
. These companies have now ended their relationship with the controversial 
American Legislative Exchange Council, or Alec.

This isn’t the first exodus Alec has seen. Companies such as Amazon, 
Coca-Cola, McDonald’s and Walmart alsopulled out of the group after it 
supported Florida’s 2005 “stand your ground” gun law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/alec-funding-crisis-big-donors-trayvon-martin>
 after an unarmed black teenager, Trayvon Martin, was killed by a neighborhood 
watch volunteer, George Zimmerman, in 2012.

But the recent exodus is the first that is largely attributable to the 
organization’s views on climate change. The trend highlights a major change in 
business attitudes towards climate change, indicating – perhaps for the first 
time – that major tech companies see environmental regulation as key to 
business.

This tech shift has sent shockwaves through climate advocacy circles. But 
perhaps even more fascinating has been the simultaneous distancing from Alec by 
major corporations affiliated with the fossil fuel industry.

Since September, Occidental Petroleum, Emerson Electric, Wells Fargo (a major 
O&G investor), Union Pacific, Northrop Grumman, and BP have all announced they 
too are discontinuing their Alec membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/23/alec-bp-british-petroleum-companies-conservative-lobbyist>
. And while these companies were more elusive about the rationale for their 
respective withdrawals, recentcampaigns 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/news/press_release/bp-leaves-alec-shell-next-0481#.VRCVVWTF_RI>
 andengagement by shareholders 
<http://www.prwatch.org/news/2015/01/12719/ALEC-northrop-grumman> likely had 
them feeling the heat on climate action.

Companies across all industries would be wise to take heed of this case study. 
Perhaps more than any other story on this topic in recent months, the Alec 
climate saga illustrates the rapidly evolving landscape in which sustainable 
businesses are expected to play. In this new, polarized and hyper-connected 
world, action on climate change is increasingly framed as a moral issue on par 
with social causes like workers rights and racial equality. To deny climate 
change is to risk alienating millennial consumers and open the door to activist 
campaigns.

The Alec emigration is also a lesson to companies that sustainability cannot 
be separated into its own silo. Google, for instance, has madestrong strides 
<https://www.google.com/green/> reducing its carbon footprint, but this 
progress has not been reflected in its political spending and partnerships. 
Businesses and nonprofits alike (see the recent Susan G Komen Foundation-Baker 
Hughesdebacle 
<http://www.motherjones.com/blue-marble/2014/10/fracking-susan-g-komen-drill-bits>
) committed to responsible causes must vet all departments and communications 
for actions that could be seen as hypocritical, and ensure that the company 
they keep aligns with their sustainability vision.

Lastly, the remarkably short time frame in which an entire sector shifted its 
rhetoric shows that lagging behind on climate change – either in action or in 
posturing – is increasingly likely to lead to brand damage. Campaigners are 
growingincredibly savvy and innovative 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/greenpeace-fortune-500-deforestation-global-warming-2014-6>
. Companies might feel far removed from the climate change debate, but to stay 
silent or partner poorly is to risk going viral for all the wrong reasons (see
Greenpeace’s Lego-Shell campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/oct/10/greenpeace-lego-shell-climate-change-arctic-oil>
 orClimate Parent’s Radio Disney-Ohio Oil & Gas Association campaign 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2014/01/09/3144321/radio-disney-ends-oil-gas-tour/>
).

Climate change is not the only issue facing growing stakeholder concern, of 
course. The Alec example is just a small part of a larger trend occurring in 
the consumer marketplace, one that we at Future 500 call “brand politics 
<https://www.future500.org/top-10-stakeholder-issues-report-2015/>”. 

Corporate stakeholders and consumers increasingly care not only about how 
sustainable a company’s own products and operations are, but also what that 
company stands for – and with whom they stand.

Consumer-facing brands are particularly compelling campaign targets in this 
movement, as their prominence makes it easier to garner public attention and 
can ultimately provide inroads to bigger, but less recognizable, corporate 
players up or down the supply chains.
While companies shouldn’t feel obligated to capitulate – or even respond – to 
each petition sent their way, executives should begin establishing their 
positions on trending topics of social consequence, and proactively identifying 
key stakeholders.

The majority of global brands now recognize that ignoring climate science is 
bad for business. In the years ahead, nearly all consumer-facing companies (and 
their suppliers) face the likelihood of being asked to take a clear public 
position on an ever-expanding group of environmental and social issues, from 
carbon pricing to income inequality. Encouragingly, many forward-thinking 
companies are seizing this momentum to proactively partner with civil society 
organizations, and toadvocate <http://www.ceres.org/declaration/sign> for 
progressive climate policies andother mitigation strategies 
<http://www.theclimategroup.org/what-we-do/programs/re100/> like renewable 
energy growth <http://www.theclimategroup.org/what-we-do/programs/re100/>, 
forest protection 
<https://www.future500.org/assuming-lead-southeast-asia-increases-protection-tropical-forests/>
, andmaterials innovation <http://www.launch.org/>.

In the case of Alec, expect campaigners like Forecast the Facts and CMD to 
shift the pressure to remaining group members with prominent brand recognition, 
such as Expedia, Comcast, FedEx, Pfizer, and Shell. In the broader marketplace, 
businesses striving for sustainability should recognize that their influence – 
and therefore their accountability – spreads further than they think.

The values-led business hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/values-business> is 
funded by SC Johnson. All content is editorially independent except for pieces 
labelled “brought to you by”. Find out more here.
 