
Oil company shares are showing signs of recovery as the crude price stabilised 
after its recent slump.

Brent crude has edged up 0.65% to $64.66 a barrel, and the sector was also 
helped by a positive update from oil services businessWood Group.

Wood said it expected its 2014 performance to be better than last year and in 
line with expectations, and believed it would be relatively resilient next year 
helped by its reimbursable order book - which should protect it from any cost 
overruns - and long term contracts. The sector has been under pressure on fears 
that oil companies would cut investment if the low oil price makes projects 
increasingly uneconomic.

The company also announced a $750m five year contract with BP for engineering 
and construction services in Grangemouth in Scotland.

The news has lifted its shares by 16.5p to 579p, while Credit Suisse said the 
company was its only outperform recommendation in an uncertain sector.

Petrofac, hit hard by the decline in the oil price on Wednesday, has recovered 
12p to 729p.

BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> is 7.2p better at 406.8p while 
Royal Dutch Shell A shares have risen 24p to £20.59.

Overall the FTSE 100 has edged up 7.6 points to 6507.1 ahead of Russia’s 
interest rate decision - with the central bank widely tipped to raise borrowing 
costs in another effort to prevent the relentless slide of the rouble - and 
news of the latest takeup of the European Central Bank’s offer of cheap loans 
to eurozone banks, the so-called TLTRO programme. Analysts are concerned that 
demand will be quite low.

Elsewhere there are still worries about the state of Greece and the prospect 
of another eurozone crisis following news that the vote for a new president had 
been brought forward to next week.

Elsewhere Aberdeen Asset Management is down 14.2p at 424.4p as its shares went 
ex-dividend, while a dip in the gold price has leftRandgold Resources 121p 
lower at £42.50.

Ocado has added 6p to 340p despite fourth quarter sales growth at the online 
grocer slipping to 14.9% from 15.5p in the previous three months. Average order 
size fell 1.7% to £109.74. Jefferies said:

Ocado <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> has reported a solid end to 
fiscal 2013/14, with fourth quarter retail growth of 14.9%, likely implying 
some growth in market share over the past year. Going forward we continue to 
see two very conflicting impacts on the stock, with international licensing a 
clear support, tempered by the risk of a break in the Waitrose relationship.
 