
British Petroleum is the latest company to pull its membership from the 
American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), the oil company announced on 
Monday. The oil giant is now the third oil and gas company to leave the 
conservative nonprofit that acts as a lobbying group.

BP’s departure follows a wave of exits by tech companies from Alec at the end 
of last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/dec/19/ebay-google-dumps-alec-climate-change-denial>
. Google, Yahoo, Facebook, eBay and Yelp all cut ties with the organization 
following criticism by environmental nonprofits for drafting model legislation 
that denies any human contribution to climate change.

However BP spokesperson Brett Clanton did not mention the group’s position on 
climate change in a statement announcing the decision:“We continually assess 
our engagements with policy and advocacy organizations and based on our most 
recent assessment, we have determined that we can effectively pursue policy 
matters of current interest toBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> 
without renewing our membership in Alec.”

BP’s exit comes a few months after Occidental Petroleum (Oxy) announced that 
it would depart from Alec, and a year after ConocoPhillips, an American 
multinational energy corporation, did the same. All companies have stayed 
tight-lipped about precisely why they’ve chosen to leave the group, but a proxy 
statement for Oxy’s annual shareholder meeting, held in May 2014, sheds some 
light on the subject. In it, the Needmor Foundation, which holds 800 shares of 
Oxy stock,proposes that the company review and evaluate its relationships with 
various trade groups 
<http://www.oxy.com/investors/Documents/Oxy_2014_Proxy_Statement.pdf> (pdf). In 
regards to leaving Alec, the foundation wrote:

Alec has been associated with contentious anti-immigration, voter 
identification and Stand Your Ground, legislation. More recently, Alec 
initiatives have opposed climate change policies and efforts to weaken state 
renewable energy standards with the Heartland Institute. Occidental Petroleum 
is a member of Alec and funds its work. We believe this partnership may bring 
significant reputational and business risk to the company.

Oxy’s board of directors recommended against the proposal, noting that the 
company is a member of several trade groups and that a review of all those 
memberships would be onerous, given that the reputational risk seemed only to 
be with Alec.

“Occidental contributed only $25,000 in 2011, $12,500 in 2012 and $2,500 in 
2013,” the board wrote. “This is a small fraction of the more than $10m a year 
Occidental spends on trade associations and other organizations. Based on the 
information it has received from such organizations, only approximately 12% of 
that aggregate amount was used by those organizations for lobbying purposes.”

Nonetheless, shareholders were sufficiently concerned about the risks of being 
associated with Alec that after that meeting Oxy announced its intention to 
leave the group.

Ebay joins Google and others in dumping Alec over climate stance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/dec/19/ebay-google-dumps-alec-climate-change-denial>
Media and public interest groups have speculated that similar factors were at 
play for BP, but the company insists its decision has more to do with the 
current economic landscape than any sort of political rift with Alec.

“For us it’s more about just prioritizing what we do on the lobbying level and 
the groups we choose to be members of and where we can get the most bang for 
our buck,” said Clanton.


 