
The birds lie beautiful, iridescent against the folds of a polythene bin bag. 
They don't look peaceful. They look dead. They're a brace - a young couple. My 
mind races with macabre romanticism, imagining the dead lovers' characters.

He's a preening fop, proud and dandy. She's a Laura Ashley librarian; shy, but 
bright. Her sensitivity coupled with his sense of unbridled adventure gives 
them that impenetrable air of invincibility that is exuded by soul mates when 
confronted by the tedious insignificance of the rest of creation. I don't know 
whether I should cut their heads off first, or pull off their feathers.

The pheasants are a present from my friend Gordon. His dad is a gamekeeper 
near Loch Lomond. Guinea fowl, peacocks, grouse and rare-breed hens peck for 
grit and grains among rusting MoD miscellanea and abandoned Vespas.

I decide to pluck the feathers first and start with the gent. I keep him in 
the bin bag to catch his clothes as I strip him. Because he has been hanging 
for 12 days he's ripe and they come off easily. I try to be gentle. When I'm 
careless, his skin rips, revealing the yellowy fat underneath. His dignity is 
plucked until he's naked apart from the feathers around his head. He looks like 
a murdered gangster, humiliated in death, wearing nothing but his trilby and 
brilliantine. His bumpy skin is bruised a violent purple from where he was 
shot. I carve the lead from his wounds. His moll takes less time, as if she 
doesn't care so much about losing her dowdy dress. As I cut off their heads, 
they are transformed. They are no longer creatures with a personality. They are 
meat.

I am embarrassingly squeamish. When I watched Dirty Pretty Things on a flight 
recently, I passed out during the operation scene and was woken by [bandmate] 
Nick McCarthy and a steward slapping my face. As I pull the wormy entrails out 
of the birds, I feel nothing, however. I wonder if it's because I've gutted 
hundreds of birds before, but it's not. It's because it's no longer a bird. 
It's now meat and there's no compassion for meat. It scares me when I consider 
the implications of this, so I don't. I get on with it. I brown the pieces, put 
them in a casserole dish with some vegetables and herbs then drown them with a 
bottle of wine. A few hours later, there is a general candle-lit murmuring of 
"rich", "tender", "gamey" etc. Beautiful feathers lie under peelings and coffee 
grounds, like a secret between a murderer and his kill.

Â· Alex Kapranos is the lead singer of Franz Ferdinand
 