
It is now nearly a decade since 9/11, and in the aftermath of that atrocity 
the US "lost a little of its greatness", in the words of one courageous 
military lawyer,David Frakt 
<http://www.andyworthington.co.uk/2009/08/08/david-frakt-military-commissions-a-catastrophic-failure/>
. Mr Frakt was protesting to a military commission of "the pointless and 
sadistic treatment of … a suicidal teenager", a Guantanamo inmate put in 
solitary, then systematically sleep-deprived by being shifted from cell to cell 
every couple of hours. There was at least the ghost of an excuse for bullying 
and sometimes torturing Arab and Afghan "combatants". It was done in the name 
of saving American lives.

There is no such need for the cruel mistreatment now reported as being 
practised on one of their own, the diminutive US privateBradley Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bradley-manning>. Yet when Hilary Clinton's 
spokesman, PJ Crowley, wiselypointed this out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/11/bradley-manning-clinton-crowley-comments>
 – calling the treatment "counterproductive and stupid" – hehad to resign 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2011/03/13/AR2011031303730.html>
. Mr Manning is accused of givingWikileaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> the video of a helicopter killing 
civilians in Baghdad, the logs documenting disasters of war in Afghanistan, and 
the 250,000 diplomatic cables which have shed such a dramatic light on world 
affairs. As a result, Mr Manning is made to stand naked outside his cell this 
morning, and apparently on all future mornings. This is the culmination of a 
punitive regime which has gone on for 10 months under which, although untried 
and unconvicted, he is not allowed to sleep or exercise in his cell during the 
day, is denied any personal possessions and is barred from conversing with the 
guards.

Every five minutes he is required to answer that he is fit and, if he turns 
his face away while asleep, he is immediately forcibly woken up. In an 
Orwellian trick, this is dubbed "prevention of injury" for his own protection. 
When Manning finally protested, sarcastically, that he could no doubt injure 
himself with the boxer shorts which are all that he is left with at night, the 
boxer shorts, too, were taken away. This regime of near-torture is perhaps 
designed to break him, in the hope he will incriminate WikiLeaks chiefJulian 
Assange <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> and other associates 
on some conspiracy charge. Yet is that sensible?

So far, the reaction of the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> to the leaks has 
been relatively measured. It is tacitly accepted that no lives have been lost, 
and US diplomacy has not collapsed in the sunlight. Perhaps these frank 
assessments of corruption even emboldened the uprising against tyranny in 
places such as Tunisia. It would send a dire message to other tyrannies if the 
US itself responds to a leak as if it were itself a tyranny. It was, after all, 
the US top brass who failed to look after their data. We have not seen any 
heads roll there yet.
 