
Congratulations to Madame Tussauds, which has released this week’s most 
surreally creepy video 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/showbiz/celebrity-news/madame-tussauds-separates-brad-pitt-and-angelina-jolie-waxworks-following-split-a3350156.html>
. Following certain news in the world of celebrity, Tussauds has formally 
separated its likenesses of Dannii Minogue and David Spade. Or “Angelina Jolie 
and Brad Pitt”, as its official press release has it. But really: look at the 
evidence.

Either way, the news is accompanied by an amusing film sequence. I find myself 
slightly mesmerised by the Tussauds’ operative obsessively brushing Brad’s 
dinner jacket lapel, like some Downton Abbey butler fussing away at his master, 
even though they both know it will take far more than bristle to shift the 
shitstain of a category five PR campaign unleashed by the 17-times winner of the
Humanitarian Mother of the Year award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/nov/27/angelina-jolie-paris-hilton-tony-blair-lassie-save-the-children-award>
. Presumably by design, the brushing is watched over by the adjacent figure of 
Morgan Freeman, who I imagine is delivering an elegiac voiceover – because 
that’s what he does – in which we are encouraged to think of this Hollywood 
divorce as a redemptive tale that ultimately attests to the conquering power of 
the human spirit.

As for Brad’s estranged wife, we cut to the waxworks’ ladies maid, who is 
fixing Angelina’s diamante necklace, which has a glint far inferior to that in 
madam’s own eye. Tussauds has positioned Angelina next to Nicole Kidman, who is 
presumably advising her to tip off the paps when she finally gets the decree 
nisi, and recreate hericonic image of liberation 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=nicole+kidman+divorce+photo&tbm=isch&imgil=okuvylzupaL1zM%253A%253BzJ1heiFBoQUsoM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fwww.dailymail.co.uk%25252Ftvshowbiz%25252Farticle-2167825%25252FKatie-Holmes-Tom-Cruise-divorce-Katie-emerges-wedding-ring-time.html&source=iu&pf=m&fir=okuvylzupaL1zM%253A%252CzJ1heiFBoQUsoM%252C_&usg=__qamauo6yOc0_zxJY1lT2he80N-A%3D&biw=1408&bih=640&ved=0ahUKEwiJzfTph6PPAhUpCZoKHU0KA5oQyjcIQA&ei=AdrjV8nIDamS6ATNlIzQCQ#imgrc=okuvylzupaL1zM%3A>
 from Tom Cruise.

Excitingly for former Twilight star Robert Pattinson, he has been placed 
between the sundered couple 
<https://twitter.com/MadameTussauds/status/778524742567464960> – quite the 
biggest thing he’s been in for years. However, the atmosphere is currently so 
fevered that we should expect Robert to have to issue a statement denying any 
involvement – waxen or otherwise – in the split.

“We reacted quickly to yesterday’s news of the separation of Angelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> and Brad Pitt,” heavy-breathes 
Tussauds’ press release. “The couple’s wax figures, which were launched in 
2013, have been split up and are now featured at a respectful distance from 
each other.”

Well, they are currently. But if things continue in this direction, you have 
to think Brad is just a few more front pages from being formally moved over the 
trapdoor, and only a few more from being melted down and reshaped into Mary 
Berry.
 