
Pretty much all the cliches of the fairytale (the noble prince, the helpless 
princess) have long been satirised, in everything fromThe Princess Bride 
<http://princessbrideforever.com/> to Shrek to the Zog books by the brilliant 
Julia Donaldson <http://www.juliadonaldson.co.uk/>. But there is one myth that 
even the most cynical of humans stubbornly clings to – the promise of “happily 
ever after”, even if all around us is the proof that this is about as likely as 
a fire-breathing dragon.

According to a recent report 
<https://www.rt.com/uk/360408-unhappy-relationships-economic-recession/> from 
the Office for National Statistics, the number of couples in Britain who 
describe themselves as “extremely unhappy” has doubled in the past five years, 
while those who describe their relationship as “perfect” has gone down from 
9.2% to 5.9%. The ONS does not state how many of those who claimed their 
relationship was “perfect” in previous studies are now saying they are 
“extremely unhappy”, but I’d wager there was significant crossover. After all, 
those who cling to an illusion are the most likely to be disappointed by the 
reality.

This summer has proffered plenty of evidence of the death of this myth. From 
Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/24/brangelina-divorce-pr-feeding-frenzy>
 toElizabeth Gilbert, author of Eat, Pray, Love, and her husband 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/elizabeth-gilbert-separates-jos%C3%A9-nunes_us_5776d10ae4b0a629c1aa05e6>
, some of the most loudly self-proclaimed happy relationships have come to an 
end. When a high-profile marriage ends, the journalistic cliche is to say 
that the reason fans feel unnerved is because they think that, if the 
celebrities can’t make it work, who can?

This is nonsense. As much as people still desperately want to believe in a 
happily ever after, only the most naive child would think that buckets of 
money, the constant glare of attention, and at least one desperately needy and 
narcissistic person sounds like a recipe for a happy marriage. Frankly, I’ve 
always thought it a miracle that any celebrity marriages last.

Instead, the shock of a high-profile divorce is that these are the people who, 
more than anyone, have promoted the myth of happily ever after, through their 
work and, often, through interviews and romantic photo opportunities.Johnny 
Depp and Amber Heard met on movies 
<http://www.etonline.com/news/189603_johnny_depp_and_amber_heard_to_divorce_a_timeline/>
, as did Pitt and Jolie – films that ended with the promise that only happiness 
awaited their characters after the closing credits. Elizabeth Gilbert’s 
relationship with Jose Nunes was the basis of her best-known books, from Eat, 
Pray, Love (made into a predictably slushy Hollywoodfilm 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0879870/>) to Committed, her book about her 
marriage. But in July, Gilbert announced they were divorcing, and that she is
now in a relationship with her best friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/08/eat-pray-love-author-elizabeth-gilbert-says-she-is-in-a-same-sex-relationship-i-love-her-and-she-loves-me>
, who is currently undergoing cancer treatment. Amid the supportive cheers, 
some of Gilbert’s fans expressed sadness for Nunes, and who can blame them? He 
had been sold as their symbol of the happily ever after. (By contrast, the most 
recent celebrities to separate,Zoë Ball and Norman Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/24/zoe-ball-and-norman-cook-announce-breakup>
, were always extremely open about their struggles with infidelity, addiction 
and the general mundanity of marriage. For this reason, the announcement of 
their split felt to me like the saddest of all.)

And yet the myth persists. In her third Bridget Jones book, Mad About The Boy, 
Helen Fielding famously killed off Mark Darcy, presumably partly because she 
herself was divorced by this point and somewhat over the happily ever after 
storyline. (It is often forgotten how sceptical the original book was about 
marriage, with its satirisation of Smug Marrieds.) But Hollywood would never 
allow such cynicism: in the latest absurd movie instalment, Bridget Jones’s 
Baby, Darcy is firmly resurrected. Do you really need a spoiler alert if I say 
“Guess the ending?”

The best books I have read recently are the ones that resist the simplistic 
love-cures-all conclusions. In Jessi Klein’s terrific collection of essays,
You’ll Grow Out Of It 
<https://www.hachettebookgroup.com/titles/jessi-klein/youll-grow-out-of-it/9781455531189/>
, she continues the story after her wedding, describing her fertility struggles 
and the toll this took on her relationship. Rachel Dratch’s memoir, Girl Walks 
Into A Bar, is a fascinating riposte to the upbeat “you go girl!” female memoir 
cliche, detailing not just her diminishing professional success but an honest 
account of what it’s like to be single in your mid-40s. On screen, Desiree 
Akhavan’sAppropriate Behavior <http://gb.imdb.com/title/tt3077108/> has proved 
it is possible to make a delightfully optimistic romcom that begins and ends 
with a breakup.

I never liked Elizabeth Gilbert’s gratingly simplistic memoirs, but her last 
novel <http://www.elizabethgilbert.com/books/the-signature-of-all-things/>, The 
Signature Of All Things, is astonishingly brilliant: big-hearted and 
beady-eyed, it looks at how the romantic fantasy can corrode a woman’s 
imagination and blind her to reality. Most of all, it knows that happy endings 
come in all guises, not just with a bridal veil.
 