
Hollywood is already planning a film about the WikiLeaks whistleblower Bradley 
Manning, who could face the rest of his life in jailafter being convicted on 30 
July of leaking US secrets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/30/bradley-manning-wikileaks-judge-verdict>
.

The project is being put together by Alex Gibney, a film-maker who has plenty 
of experience of the territory. The writer-director, who won an Oscar for his 
searing 2007 indictment of questionable activities by American soldiers in 
Afghanistan, Taxi to the Dark Side, also put together the popular Sundance 
documentaryWe Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155910/we-steal-secrets>.

The Bradley Manning project will be a drama rather than a factual film. Gibney 
last year optioned Denver Nicks' book Private: Bradley Manning, WikiLeaks, and 
the Biggest Exposure of Official Secrets in American History.Variety reports 
<http://variety.com/2013/film/news/bradley-manning-movie-already-in-the-works-1200569840/>
 that he is currently looking for a screenwriter.

"The Bradley Manning story is easily one of the most important stories of the 
last decade," said Nicks in a recent interview. "In many ways, Bradley 
Manning's story is the story of the United States in the post 9/11 era."

Whistleblowing is a popular subject with Hollywood film-makers right now. As 
well as Gibney's documentary on Assange, Bill Condon's forthcoming biopicThe 
Fifth Estate <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/151168/fifth-estate> stars 
Benedict Cumberbatch as the WikiLeaks activist, with Goodbye, Lenin's Daniel 
Brühl as his erstwhile confidante Daniel Domscheit-Berg. The latter film 
centres on the early days of the site and is based on Domscheit-Berg's own book 
Inside WikiLeaks: My Time with Julian Assange at the World's Most Dangerous 
Website, as well as Guardian writers David Leigh and Luke Harding's WikiLeaks: 
Inside Julian Assange's War on Secrecy. Meanwhile, Hollywood agency WME was 
last month reported to be offering a film about Edward Snowden, who exposedthe 
US National Security Agency's programme of widespread surveillance of its own 
citizens via the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/14/edward-snowden-story-nsa-whistleblower?CMP=twt_gu>
 on 6 June, to studios.

Manning was convicted on 17 out of 22 charges at a military court on 30 July, 
as well as on four amended charges, and faces up to 136 years behind bars. He 
was, however,found not guilty of the single most serious charge against him – 
that he knowingly "aided the enemy" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/30/bradley-manning-wikileaks-judge-verdict>
, by disclosing information to the WikiLeaks website.

"I hope that Judge Lind will be lenient in her sentence, taking into 
consideration Manning's intent, his willingness to take responsibility for his 
actions, and the outrageously abusive treatment he has received at the hands of 
the Obama administration," said Gibney in response to the Manning verdict.
 