
Celebrity marriages have not had the best of times: Ben Affleck and Jennifer 
Garner,Johnny Depp and Amber Heard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/05/johnny-depp-amber-herd-domestic-violence-divorce>
, Gwen Stefani and Gavin Rossdale. Middle-aged, male A-list stars are taking a 
beating. The situation has become so dire that the celebrity news channel E! 
Online is predicting the “End of an era for celebrity idol worship”.

But nothing quite prepared the celebrity world for the totalling of Brangelina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/brangelina-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce-love>
.

Brad Pitt: FBI evaluating whether to investigate airplane incident
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/23/fbi-brad-pitt-airplane-incident> 
From alimony to palimony to the rise of the pay-as-you-go marriage (the 
wage-earning party to pay into a separation fund throughout the length of the 
marriage so there are no surprises when or if the marriage eventually ends), 
Hollywood couples have long been pioneers when it comes to marital innovation, 
but the end of Brad Pitt/Angelina Jolie has left a nuclear pall over 
Hollywood-land.

The normally loquacious PR Howard Bragman, known for containing tabloid 
feeding frenzies, offered no advice. “Just sad to me,” he wrote in an email.

In some instances, say managers, both parties should be able to walk away with 
their careers and box-office potential enhanced. But the Brangelina marriage 
crack-up already looks to be heading in the opposite direction, with reports of 
the FBI looking into“an incident” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/23/fbi-brad-pitt-airplane-incident> 
on a flight the Pitt-Jolie family took on 14 September.

Pitt was reportedly “lawyering up” after the FBI announced the agency “is 
continuing to gather facts and will evaluate whether an investigation at the 
federal level will be pursued”.

“This one is going to end with both of them having their images bruised,” 
predicts Allison Hope Weiner, a lawyer and journalist who has covered Hollywood 
for more than 15 years.

What is clear is that in this confrontation nothing is left to chance and the 
leaks that appear in the media – usually via celebrity website TMZ’s host 
Harvey Levin, are deliberate and highly strategised.

“They know that if they can get to Harvey first, and he publishes first, they 
can set the tone because the rest of the media considerTMZ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/tmz> a first-party source,” says one talent 
manager familiar with the frontlines of Hollywood scandal. “Angelina needs some 
kind of leverage to go for full custody for the kids.

“If you’re wise enough you can see that websites like TMZ granulate – 
serialise – everything because it creates entertainment product for them to 
carry it. They’re making money off it.”

It’s no mystery, then, that barely a week into the split, the children are 
already the focus of the battle. On Thursday, theLA Times received a leak that 
Pitt was subject to the FBI investigation over the private plane trip back from 
France last week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fbrangelina-divorce-pr-feeding-frenzy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71ffbc6dc507f44aeb174f753a4ffa1301726399%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brad%20Pitt%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20the%20search%20for%20the%20perfect%20PR%20Hollywood%20divorce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fbrangelina-divorce-pr-feeding-frenzy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brad%20Pitt%2C%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20the%20search%20for%20the%20perfect%20PR%20Hollywood%20divorce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2Fbrangelina-divorce-pr-feeding-frenzy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71ffbc6dc507f44aeb174f753a4ffa1301726399%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Image conscious: Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie at the Cannes film festival in 
2011. Photograph: Valery Hache/AFP/Getty Images 
As TMZ reported: “Sources familiar with the situation tell us, Brad, Angelina 
and their kids were on a flight last Wednesday when he allegedly got wasted on 
the private jet. He allegedly went wild, screaming at the kids.”

The website continued: “We’re told the plane landed at an airport around 8pm, 
and witnesses say Pitt continued his rant on the tarmac, and even tried leaving 
in one of the fuel trucks.”

In her divorce filing, Jolie listed the couple’s date of separation as the 
following day, 15 September, and it was later suggested that the LA county 
department of children and family services had looked into the incident.

Queen of divorce: Angelina Jolie hires expert in separating Hollywood royalty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/23/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-divorce-lawyer-laura-wasser>
Though LA celebrity divorce lawyers routinely deny leaking to TMZ – and blame 
court clerks for those leaks – both anti-Pitt items suggest that Jolie’s 
publicists and lawyers (she is represented by divorce specialist Laura Wasser) 
are setting the pace.

“How do you think the media find out that a parent is being investigated for 
not properly caring for a child?” says Weiner. “In many instances, the 
existence of an investigation is leaked to the press.”

By Friday, Pitt was fighting back, reportedly enlisting the help of attorney 
Lance Spiegel, who has worked with celebrities such as Charlie Sheen and 
Michael Jackson. One source toldPeople magazine: “He was appealing to her to do 
this quietly – not to save the marriage but to consider the wellbeing of the 
children – and it was ignored. He is just wrecked by this.

“He was willing to do anything, change any habit, change any lifestyle, to do 
what had to be done to make this work,” adds the source. “And by ‘make this 
work’ that means doing what has to be done to make even a split one that is 
amicable and in the best interests of the children.”

Jolie’s demands are already clear: The actor, 41, has asked for physical 
custody of the children and is requesting that Pitt be granted visiting rights, 
while Pitt wants shared custody, sources have said.

While none of that is entirely new or surprising, the PR battle over both 
stars’ parenting skills is well under way, according to Weiner: “It’s managed 
so the client looks like a loving and caring parent. In some cases, nannies are 
instructed to walk in the back so parents can be photographed with their 
children and look as if they have no professional help with parenting.

“Moreover, paparazzi are informed when to catch parents out at the park with 
their children, providing an opportunity for the star to be photographed 
‘spending quality time’ with his or her child.”

How Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt defined the 21st-century fame machine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/21/how-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame>
Could a celebrity divorce ever be harnessed to engineer a career lift? The 
answer, in at least one high-profile case, seems to be yes.

When Gwen Stefani divorced British rocker Gavin Rossdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/04/gwen-stefani-gavin-rossdale-file-for-divorce>
 for allegedly cheating with the nanny – “the two of us have come to the mutual 
decision that we will no longer be partners in marriage; we remain partners in 
parenthood” – Stefani came swinging back with a new relationship (Blake 
Shelton), and heartbreak-linked new material: a duet (Go Ahead and Break My 
Heart); a hit album (This is What Truth Feels Like) and a TV show (The Voice).

“They may say that but it’s a racket among the lawyers,” says the talent 
manager. “They want to inflame and create issues that extend the 
back-and-forth. Then it becomes a media thing – a crisis – and that becomes 
licence to bill.” And that’s before the whole thing gets wrapped up in a 
non-disclosure agreement.

When Depp and Heard’s marriage hit the rocks earlier this year amid reports of 
domestic violence, a settlement was quickly agreed before any further damage 
could be inflicted.

The couple concluded their relationship with this, somewhat enigmatic, 
statement: “Our relationship was intensely passionate and at times volatile, 
but always bound by love. Neither party has made false accusations for 
financial gain. There was never any intent of physical or emotional harm. Amber 
wishes the best for Johnny in the future.”

THE PRICE OF SEPARATION

Tiger Woods and Elin Nordegren

The couple divorced in 2010 following reports of Woods’ serial infidelity. 
Details of the financial settlement have not been disclosed, but US media 
reports suggest the former Mrs Woods will receive more than $100m (£77m).

Steven Spielberg and Amy Irving

Reports suggest the film director paid $100m to Irving after they divorced in 
1989. The couple had been married for three and a half years but cited 
career-related pressures as a reason for separating.

Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise

The couple, pictured, adopted a son and daughter, Connor Antony and Isabella, 
and were married for 11 years, separating in 2001. Cruise cited irreconcilable 
differences. It was not disclosed how the couple divided their £214m joint 
fortune.

Mel Gibson and Robyn Gibson

After their 30-year marriage ended in 2011, Robyn, the mother of Mel’s seven 
children, was reported to have been awarded half of her ex-husband’s estimated 
$850m fortune.
 