
The death of Edward Albee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/16/edward-albee-dies-playwright-whos-afraid-virginia-woolf>
 this week was an excuse to revisit one of the greatest semi-factual toxic 
marriages of cinema: the film version of hisWho’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nInE5TITzE8> Richard Burton and Elizabeth 
Taylor were in a state of boozy, agonised meltdown, and those performances may 
well have been a catharsis for personal issues.

Perhaps our generation has its own Woolf-anxiety couple in Brad Pitt and 
Angelina Jolie,who today filed for divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
 after being an item since 2005. They have only beenmarried since 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/28/angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-marry-in-france>
, which will give pause to all those who fear that getting legally hitched 
amplifies the existing problems in any long-term relationship. For outsiders to 
speculate about their private pain would be impertinent, especially considering 
thecourage with which Jolie has faced her own health issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/14/angelina-jolie-double-mastectomy>
. But the fact is that the Jolie-Pitt alliance began with a film about marriage 
– and now appears to have ended with one.

Angelina Jolie files for divorce from Brad Pitt after 12 years together
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
They got together at the very beginning, after filming the action comedy Mr 
and Mrs Smith, playing supercool assassins: each of their professions is a 
secret from the other – and each of them finally gets an assignment to kill the 
other.

It was, in a semi-intentional way, a brilliant parable for marriage and 
Hollywood career-partnership and the “frenemy” qualities inherent in a 
competitive working situation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0adf3bc25f298aaa03c920d0f9790626f17eb5a7%2F0_115_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Angelina%20Jolie%3A%20a%20marriage%20that%20started%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20ended%20%E2%80%93%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Angelina%20Jolie%3A%20a%20marriage%20that%20started%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20ended%20%E2%80%93%20on%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0adf3bc25f298aaa03c920d0f9790626f17eb5a7%2F0_115_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Spousenemies … Pitt and Jolie in Mr and Mrs Smith. 
Mr and Mrs Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/jun/10/1> 
featured very droll scenes of them side-by-side on the couch, in archly 
“civilian” mode, apparently attending couples therapy. (It also had a surreally 
random moment at the very end, in which Mrs Smith confesses out of the blue 
that she is Jewish.) There was a kind of meta-hilarity in all this, and it 
might even have given the start of their romance a screwball quality, were it 
not for the fact that Brad was already married to Jennifer Aniston.

They worked together just twice more. Brad Pitt was the producer of A Mighty 
Heart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/21/angelinajolie.drama> 
(2007), directed by Michael Winterbottom, in which Jolie played Mariane Pearl, 
wife of the missing journalist Daniel Pearl – a role in which she was 
controversially required to wear dark makeup to play a woman of partly Cuban 
descent. It was not a very successful film, though undoubtedly a seriously 
intended one, and clearly something to which both Pitt and Jolie were committed.


By the Sea review – Angelina Jolie Pitt's ambitious but indulgent Euro-drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/10/by-the-sea-review-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie>
But their relationship appears to have ended on camera, too. The second film 
in which they acted together,By the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/by-the-sea> (2014), was an agonisingly 
detailed, 1960s-style portrait of a marriage which is set in the south of 
France, and which appeared indebted to Antonioni’s L’Avventura and Stanley 
Donen’s Two for the Road.

There are long scenes of moody, eloquent silence in their hotel room, in which 
Jolie retreats into depression and Pitt gets picturesquely drunk at a 
neighbourhood bar.

I felt it was a little absurd at the time – but actually, this is a movie that 
improves in retrospect. It is ambitious and heartfelt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fby-the-sea-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757418920%2FKP_722215_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=By%20the%20Sea%20-%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fby-the-sea-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=By%20the%20Sea%20-%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fby-the-sea-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F10%2F1449757418920%2FKP_722215_crop_640x480.jpg>
Watch a video review of By the Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/dec/10/by-the-sea-video-review> 
Was By the Sea the last therapeutic gasp for Brangelina? The couple they 
portrayed on screen were working through their problems, and perhaps Brad and 
Angelina were working through their own problems too. Or perhaps they were 
doing the opposite: creating a massive delusional diversionary tactic, a 
fiction that looked equivalent to their own problems but wasn’t, a giant 
project with which they could wrest back creative control of their personal 
lives from the gossips.

Jolie’s character in that film had no children, but the actor herself has a 
large family of adopted and biological children – a source of tension that is 
not really touched on in the film.

Perhaps they will work together again, and Burton-Taylor nostalgists might 
even wonder about the possibility of their remarrying. By the Sea deserves 
another look. They are certainly a really potent on-screen partnership.
 