
More than 400 scientists including two Nobel laureates have signed a letter 
stating that brain experiments on primates are crucial to medical advances, in 
response to claims that they are cruel and no longer useful.

Last week, Sir David Attenborough and the primatologist Dame Jane Goodall 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/david-attenborough-primates-neuroscientists-cruel-brain-tests-a7230711.html>
 called for an end to the use of non-human primates in certain neuroscience 
experiments, saying medical progress in this area could now be made without the 
use of monkeys.

Primate research is crucial if we are to find cures for diseases like 
Parkinson's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/13/primate-research-is-crucial-if-we-are-to-find-cures-for-diseases-like-parkinsons>
In a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/13/primate-research-is-crucial-if-we-are-to-find-cures-for-diseases-like-parkinsons>
, scientists including the Nobel laureates Sir John Gurdon and Sir John Walker, 
rejected this claim, arguing that primate research was still critical for 
developing treatments for dementia and other debilitating illnesses.

“Neurodegenerative diseases are a major and growing scourge of our ageing 
population,” Walker told the Guardian. “If we are to find ways for prevention 
and cure, continued experimental access to primates under carefully controlled 
conditions is essential.”

The latest round in the long-running debate on animal research was triggered 
by a research paper, which concluded that there was no longer any need for 
experiments on primates involving movement restraint or fluid deprivation.

The review, by the campaign group Cruelty Free International (formerly the 
British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection), suggested the need for such 
experiments had been superseded by modern brain imaging techniques, such as 
MRI, and by the ability to make recordings from patients’ brains during surgery.

Speaking in support of the findings, Attenborough told the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/david-attenborough-primates-neuroscientists-cruel-brain-tests-a7230711.html>
: “The recognition that apes, certainly, and to an extent other primates, are 
so akin to ourselves, and can suffer so much, as we can, has transformed our 
attitude, or should have transformed our attitude, to using them for our own 
benefit.”

Goodall, who has studied wild chimpanzees in Tanzania over fives decades, 
said: “To confine these primate relatives of ours to laboratory cages and 
subject them to experiments that are often distressing and painful is, in my 
opinion, morally wrong.”

However, scientists expressed their concern that the importance of primate 
research had been played down.

Sir Colin Blakemore, an eminent neuroscientist and signatory of the Guardian 
letter, said: “In the past year alone, research on monkeys has helped efforts 
to create new vaccines and treatments for Ebola, Zika and Aids, to develop new 
cholesterol-reducing drugs to prevent heart disease, and to design prosthetic 
devices for seriously disabled people. Somehow, we need to balance moral 
responsibility to human beings against moral obligations to animals.”

Roger Lemon, emeritus professor at University College London, said the CFI 
review appeared to place animal welfare above that of patients. “The paper 
suggests that all the work done in primates could be done in seriously ill 
patients. It suggests that they don’t have that much respect for ill people.”

Research on primates accounts for less than 0.1% of all animal research in the 
UK and this figure has been following a downward trend for the past few decades.
In 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/20/rise-in-number-of-animals-used-in-uk-research-home-office-report-shows>
, 3,612 procedures were carried out on primates, out of 4,142,631 total 
procedures on all species (figures are given by procedure rather than by 
animal).


The US National Institutes of Health announced last year that it would end the 
use of chimpanzees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/19/national-institutes-health-end-chimpanzee-research>
 in medical research. Research on great apes (chimpanzees, gorillas and 
orangutans) has been banned in the UK since the 1980s, but other primates, such 
as marmosets and macaques continue to be used in neuroscience experiments, 
including in the development of new drugs.


For instance, scientists at King’s College London estimate that around 80% of 
all drugs for the treatment of Parkinson’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/oct/13/lab-where-marmosets-are-given-parkinsons>
 were originally tested at the marmoset laboratory there. But some research 
carried out on primates relates to more basic questions about the organisation 
of the brain, for instance, how memory or the visual system works.

Vicky Robinson, the chief executive of the National Centre for the 
Replacement, Refinement and Reduction ofAnimals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> in Research (NC3Rs) said that both 
sides of the debate had been disingenuous about the value of the work.

“One over-exaggerates the state of the available alternatives and the other 
generalises the medical benefits that research using these animals has 
delivered,” she said. “It is time for a great deal more transparency from both 
sides. Anything else undermines the science as well as downplaying the animal 
welfare concerns associated with these experiments.”

Dr Katy Taylor, the director of science at Cruelty Free International, said: 
“The use of non-human primates in neuroscience experiments is a hugely 
controversial area of research with profound ethical and moral concerns. An 
increasing number within the scientific community question the morality and 
value of subjecting monkeys to such substantial levels of suffering – suffering 
that can involve invasive brain surgery, water deprivation, physical coercion 
and physical restraint.”
 