
It’s Tuesday afternoon and the current status of the internet is 
“hyperventilating”.Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie are filing for divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
. Yep, Brangelina is over and people are going brananas – but the spotlight 
isn’t Brad or Angie or even Shiloh. No, it’s on Jennifer Aniston. Again.


Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt: a marriage that started – and ended – on screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
It’s been 11 years since the two split, and yet the Brangelina breakup has 
caused ripple effects all over social media, withmemes and gifs 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/jen-aniston-memes-explode-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-news-article-1.2799445>
 of an ecstatic Aniston flooding Twitter and Facebook. Offline there is similar 
excitement. Hairdressers are full of women demanding “a Rachel” to pledge 
solidarity for Jen. Offices are empty as people run out to try and find that 
Team Jolie shirt they’re pretty sure is still in their closet. In lower 
Manhattan I observed one woman sobbing outside Goodwill. “I knew I shouldn’t 
have donated my Team Jolie shirt away” last year she said, between tears.

I may be exaggerating slightly – but only slightly. People really, really care 
about the supposed Jolie v Jen rivalry. Indeed this largely fictional feud 
lasted longer than Brad Pitt’s marriage to Aniston and Jolie combined. But why?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fjennifer-anniston-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-feud-rivalry-sexist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc48553b8f970b159e8b8c965016ff3a5e7adaa94%2F0_44_1934_1160%2F1934.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brangelina%20is%20over%3A%20can%20we%20kill%20Team%20Jolie%20v%20Team%20Jen%20feud%2C%20too%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fjennifer-anniston-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-feud-rivalry-sexist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brangelina%20is%20over%3A%20can%20we%20kill%20Team%20Jolie%20v%20Team%20Jen%20feud%2C%20too%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fjennifer-anniston-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-feud-rivalry-sexist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc48553b8f970b159e8b8c965016ff3a5e7adaa94%2F0_44_1934_1160%2F1934.jpg>
 Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston in the drama-free days of the year 2000. 
Photograph: Chris Pizzello/AP 
First, imagine that we’re back in the 90s (which shouldn’t be too difficult 
since there is a Clinton running for president and kids running for Pokémon). 
In the 90s, Jennifer Aniston and Angelina Jolie represented two poles of 
“womanness”. Aniston was in every living room in the country – America’s 
sweetheart, the girl next door, everyone’s Friend. Meanwhile, Angelina Jolie 
was known for being a Bad Girl. Or, as the Mirrordelightfully put it 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/angelina-jolie-40-how-blood-smeared-5818828>
: “a blood-smeared druggie”. She famously married Jonny Lee Miller wearing a 
white T-Shirt with his name smeared on it in blood. A few years later Jolie 
dated a woman – having the nerve to do so unapologetically before bisexuality 
became trendy.

While Angelina Jolie moved more into the mainstream in the early 2000s, she 
was still very much known for her “edgy” past. So when Brad Pitt ended his 
five-year marriage with Jennifer Aniston in 2005, the media were quick to turn 
the story into a familiar narrative of Wronged Woman v Evil Seductress. The 
story became less aboutJennifer Aniston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-aniston> and Angelina Jolie and more 
about different stereotypes of women. You were either a good girl or a bad 
girl. A Jen or a Jolie. Who you supported said something about who you were.
¯\_(ツ)_/¯ (@sara_bee) 
It's happening pic.twitter.com/s71aYUK6lk <https://t.co/s71aYUK6lk>
 <https://twitter.com/sara_bee/status/778248916630396929> September 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/sara_bee/status/778248916630396929> 
Which is why the Team Jolie/Team Aniston T-shirts created by LA boutique 
Kitson in 2005 flew off the shelf. They weren’t so much a fashion statement as 
a statement about their wearer. And most people, it seemed, wanted to tell the 
world they were a Jen. The Team Aniston shirts sold 25times faster 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/08/14/showbiz/celebrity-news-gossip/jennifer-aniston-angelina-jolie/>
 than Team Jolie to begin with. The popularity of the Team T-shirts helped fuel 
the rivalry. Taking it out of the gossip mags and into people’s closets. Making 
it part of popular culture.

Over the years the “rivalry” remained a media mainstay because it was a 
convenient way to talk about what a woman should and shouldn’t be. Jennifer was 
a barren spinster, poor Jen! Jolie, again, was the polar opposite. A fertile 
earth mother. We’re starting to likeAngelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> now! She’s changed!

But everything must end. The clock has finally run out on this story. After 
all, it’s not the 90s any more: it’s a female Clinton running for president and 
the Pokémon are in augmented reality. What’s more, it’s no longer so easy or 
acceptable to talk about Jolie and Aniston in terms of tropes.

Farewell, Brangelina – and the dream that love can last | Mary Valle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/brangelina-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce-love>
Jolie has spent years working with the United Nations, becoming an important 
advocate for refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/16/angelina-jolie-pitt-refugees-un-donald-trump-immigration>
. Aniston is no longer “poor Jen”. She’s married to Justin Theroux and has hada 
successful movie career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/cake-jennifer-aniston-review-soggy-bottomed>
. In short, they’re both incredibly talented women who are a lot more than 
their wombs and their men. Of course, they always were, it’s just that it’s no 
longer so easy for the media to pigeonhole them.

What’s more, I’d like to think it no longer makes much sense for the media to 
pit women against each other in this tired, sexist way any more. The popularity 
of TV shows like Broad City and the Beyoncéfication of feminism has been a 
wake-up call to the media that women aren’t just interested in whether the girl 
is going to get the guy – they want to see female friendships and solidarity. 
So I suggest we take this opportunity to end the Jolie/Jen rivalry once and for 
all.

 Indeed, I’m all up for a modern plot twist. What do you reckon? A Mrs and Mrs 
Smith movie, anyone?
 