
We warmly welcome the decision taken last week by the Brazilian environment 
agency,IBAMA <http://www.ibama.gov.br/>, to stop the huge São Luiz do Tapajós 
dam that threatened to wipe out a whole swath of pristine rainforest deep in 
the heart of the Amazon (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/05/major-amazon-dam-brazil-opposed-by-tribes-fails-get-environmental-license>
, theguardian.com, 5 August). This was a day of relief and hope not just for 
the Munduruku indigenous people, who faced having their ancestral lands 
flooded, but for everyone who cares about protecting one of the world’s great 
natural wonders.

The Tapajós river and the surrounding rainforest are areas of unparalleled 
natural beauty and biodiversity, where new animal species are still being 
discovered to this day.

The Brazilian watchdog’s decision marked a turning point in the struggle to 
protect this corner of the Amazon, but the fight isn’t over yet. The cancelled 
dam is one of five planned for this highly sensitive area, and the environment 
agency’s powers to defend the rainforest are now under threat. The best way to 
protect this land and its people is for the Brazilian government to recognise 
the Munduruku’s right to their territory, and for dam construction companies to 
stay out of this destructive business.
Raymond Blanc, Jim Broadbent, Peter Capaldi, Caroline Catz, Charlotte Church, 
Lily Cole, Olivia Colman, Emma de Caunes, David de Rothschild, Jonathan 
Dimbleby, Abigail Fallis, Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, Ranulph Fiennes, Livia 
Firth, Ben Fogle, Rebecca Frayn, Leebo Freeman, Terry Gilliam, Dave Gilmour, 
Jane Goodall, Jamie Hewlett, Kurt Jackson, Bianca Jagger, Terry Jones, Anish 
Kapoor, Annie Lennox, Joanna Lumley, Glyn Macey, Alistair McGowan, Renu Mehta, 
Roger Moore, Simon O’Brien, Dermot O’Leary, Michael Palin, Bruce Parry, Paul 
McCartney, Grayson Perry, David Puttnam, Vanessa Redgrave, Mark Rylance, Greta 
Scacchi, Timothy Smit, Alison Steadman, Emma Thompson, Sophie Thompson, Zoë 
Wanamaker, Vivienne Westwood, Benjamin Zephaniah

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 