
For the first 20 minutes of Treasury questions it was business as usual, with 
the shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, getting redder and redder in the face and
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> narrowing 
his eyes nonchalantly in his new, disturbing approximation of a sultry 1960s 
French new wave actor. "You know how I've been telling you all for the past 
three years that low interest rates are a symptom of a vibrant economy in 
recovery," he purred. "Well, today I can tell you that the news the governor of 
the Bank of England has said interest rates will rise sooner than expected is 
also sign of a vibrant economy in recovery."

Before Balls had a proper chance to unpick the chancellor's logic, the Commons 
began to pulsate with vibrating mobile phones. Broadsword to Danny Boy! 
Broadsword to Danny Boy! The economy was put on hold as every MP checked their 
messages.Andy Coulson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson>, the 
former editor of the News of the World and former No 10 press secretary, had 
been found guilty of conspiracy over phone hacking.

Within a matter of seconds the wannabe Alain Delon 
<http://www.bing.com/images/search?q=%22Alain+Delon%22&qpvt=%22Alain+Delon%22&FORM=IGRE>
 looked more like an extra in Nosferatu. Osborne had backed Coulson's 
appointment and the verdict made both his and the prime minister's judgment 
look distinctly iffy. Balls couldn't believe his luck, and chanced his arm with 
a question late in the session.

"Does the chancellor now accept it was an error of judgment …?" The Speaker, 
John Bercow, tried to rescue Osborne by arguing that this wasn't a Treasury 
question. "I can't see what the relevance of this is to the chancellor of the 
exchequer," he said. The Speaker was the only person in the House who couldn't, 
and Balls wasn't to be denied. "Does the chancellor accept he has brought into 
disrepute the office of the chancellor and the Treasury by urging the prime 
minister for his own reason to bring Mr Coulson into government?"

On a normal day, Alain would have attacked the shadow chancellor with elan. 
"Why is the opposition so keen to focus on bad news? Can he not join with me in 
asking the house to celebrate the news that Rebekah walks and that the Chipping 
Norton kitchen suppers can resume? Can he also not lament with me that Charlie, 
Rebekah's husband, lost his entire lesbian porn collection as a result of a 
wholly unnecessary clean-up operation by News International?"

What he actually said was: "If a statement is necessary, I will make one. But 
can I just say that the person who worked alongsideDamian McBride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/28/damian-mcbride-why-hate-me> 
is no one to give lectures?"

Getting in a dig at Gordon Brown's former press secretary was a sign of how 
badly rattled Osborne was. McBride may have been an unpleasant piece of work 
but he's never been found guilty of a serious charge at an Old Bailey trial.

Thankfully for the chancellor, he had Philip Hollobone, MP for Kettering, to 
bring things back to Kettering. But then, Hollobone brings everything back to 
Kettering. If there was an earthquake 20 miles away in Leicester, Hollobone 
would be on his feet asking if the chancellor could expedite £20,000 for a new 
roundabout on the A14 outside Kettering. Hollobone will go far. In Kettering, 
if nowhere else.
 