
Leave campaigners have pulled the plug on a Brexit pop festival that struggled 
to secure performers.Bpoplive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/feb/26/leave-aid-grassroots-out-anti-eu-festival-hottest-music-event-nigel-farage>
 has been “shut down” by the “spiteful” Electoral Commission, the Leave.EU 
campaign has claimed.

A number of artists due to appear at the event dropped out after discovering 
it was being staged to cheer on the campaign for Britain to sever ties with
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Tickets for the Last 
Night of the Brexit Proms concert in Birmingham had been reduced from £23 to £5.

Leave.Eu’s Andy Wigmore, a coordinator of the event, said: “This promised to 
be a truly unique event, with a live orchestra, a little tongue-in-cheek 
entertainment and speeches fromNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> and other leading lights of 
the Leave campaign.

“It was intended as a huge and well-deserved thank you to all of our 
supporters; a celebration of their extraordinary efforts in this referendum.

Leave Aid: Grassroots Out’s anti-EU festival is the hottest music event of the 
year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/feb/26/leave-aid-grassroots-out-anti-eu-festival-hottest-music-event-nigel-farage>
“But the Electoral Commission, which has been pursuing a spiteful vendetta 
against us since we reported their crooked activities during the Leave campaign 
designation process to the Treasury select committee, has decided to shut us 
down.

“After insisting we tick all sorts of superfluous boxes and fill in various 
time-wasting forms in triplicate,” said Wigmore, the elections watchdog had 
issued a “final demand for more information”.

He said: “Despite our best efforts, the constant pressure and repeated threats 
have finally killed off what should have been a great event for our dedicated 
and hard-working supporters.”

Sister Sledge, East 17, the 90s boy band 5ive, the Britain’s Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> judge Alesha 
Dixon and thedrum’n’bass act Sigma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/04/brexit-concert-sigma-cancels-gig-pro-eu>
 were among the acts who had already pulled out of the festival.

The Elvis impersonator Gordon Hendricks and Cheryl Baker, Jay Aston and Mike 
Nolan, who made up three quarters ofBucks Fizz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/aug/24/bucks-fizz-judge-ownership-name> 
but can no longer use the name, were set to play the gig at the 15,000-seat 
Genting Arena in Birmingham.

Leave.EU’s campaign chief, Arron Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/arron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit>
, said 8,000 ticket holders would be offered a refund or allowed to attend the 
postponed concert in September, which will be staged in aid of his Love Saves 
the Day foundation. Banks made various allegations about the Electoral 
Commission, including a claim that it had a “long record of general 
incompetence”.

Banks said: “After June 23rd we will be taking aggressive action to ensure the 
wider public comes to share that opinion. They are not fit for purpose, utterly 
incompetent and have overseen the transformation of the Britain’s electoral 
process into a circus worthy of a corrupt banana republic.”

Robert Oxley, the head of media for the official Brexit campaign Vote Leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/vote-leave-official-brexit-campaign-eu-referendum-boris-johnson>
, said: “Bpoplive has been cancelled. The ticket holder will be gutted. We wish 
them well.”
 