
Managing Britain’s exit from the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> is such a formidable and complex 
challenge that it could overwhelm politicians and civil servants for years, 
senior academics have warned.

Theresa May has announced she will trigger article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
 – the two-year process of negotiating a separation from the EU – by the end of 
March next year. The government will also publish a great repeal bill, which 
will transfer all EU-originated laws into British law, so that MPs can decide 
how much they want to discard.

A report from The UK in a Changing Europe <http://ukandeu.ac.uk/>, an 
independent group of academics led by Prof Anand Menon of King’s College 
London, warns that this will only be the start of the process of extricating 
Britain from the EU and establishing new relationships with other member states.

Theresa May's 'great repeal bill': what's going to happen and when?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-great-repeal-bill-eu-british-law>
“Brexit has the potential to test the UK’s constitutional settlement, legal 
framework, political process and bureaucratic capacities to their limits – and 
possibly beyond,” Menon said.

The group of experts, commissioned by the Political Studies Association, found 
that identifying and transposing the legislation to be included inthe great 
repeal bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-great-repeal-bill-eu-british-law>
 – and then deciding what to keep and what to ditch – will be a daunting task 
for civil servants.

They also warn that while article 50, as set out in the Lisbon treaty, 
concerns the terms of a divorce with the rest of the EU – including what share 
of EU liabilities the UK should take on, for example – it is unclear whether 
the process can allow for parallel negotiations on Britain’s future status.

And they suggest the repatriation of decision-making in key policy areas 
including agriculture, the environment and higher education to Britain from 
Brussels could affect the balance of power between Westminster and the devolved 
parliaments – another major constitutional headache for politicians.

Pro-Brexit ministers, including the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, and 
Brexit secretary, David Davis, have tended to play downthe difficulties of 
extricating Britain from the rest of the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/liam-fox-pre-brexit-deal-setback-european-union>
.

But Menon said: “An irritating aspect of the current debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/12/daily-mail-bremoaners-brexit-mps-cbi-bbc-paul-dacre>
 is the tendency of Brexiters to accuse those who warn of difficulties of 
‘talking Britain down’. It’s a good line buta pathetic argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/brexiters-debate-scared-plan-britains-future>
. Since when was rational debate a bad thing? Forewarned, surely, is forearmed, 
and this report will help identify potential stumbling blocks ahead.”

On the issue of who at Westminster is in charge of the Brexit process, the 
academics sayit will inevitably be Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/theresa-may-rules-out-commons-vote-on-single-market-exit>
.

The study comes as the government’s pledge to protect Japanese carmaker Nissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/nissan-eu-tariff-free-brexit-sunderland>
 from the potentially unfavourable effects of Brexit leads tocalls from other 
industries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/28/nissan-deal-hard-brexit-britain-trade-europe>
 for their causes also to be prioritised.

Stephen Dorrell, the former health minister, warned against sacrificing UK 
life sciences, saying the wrong “hard Brexit” deal could affect Britain’s 
access to new drugs.

Brexit 'not good news for British science' warn new Nobel laureates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/06/brexit-not-good-news-for-british-science-warn-new-nobel-laureates>
“Alongside the motor industry and financial services, the life science sector 
is an essential British interest which must be a priority for ministers in 
their Brexit negotiations,” he said.

Dorrell, who has co-authored a report with Luke Tryl published by Public 
Policy Projects, added: “Science and science-based industry is a global 
activity and we face a simple choice: we either participate in full in that 
global scientific community or we prejudice a key British national interest.”

Tryl said that “simple commercial reality” meant companies could prioritise 
the European market for launching products if there were restrictions affecting 
the UK.

The study comes as parliament once again discusses the issue of the UK’s 
membership of the customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/chancellor-economic-risks-uk-leaving-eu-customs-union-philip-hammond-treasury-economy>
, in an adjournment debate tabled by Helen Goodman, the Labour MP and member of 
the treasury select committee.

She said: “Leaving the customs union would be disastrous for the UK and our 
manufacturing industry. Outside of the customs union, we may have to pay 
tariffs and would certainly have to comply with the rules of origin – a 
bureaucratic procedure to show where all the components in a product come from 
– when we export into the EU market. The tariffs vary – many are around 5%-10% 
– but the OECD estimates that the rules of origin can add 24% to costs.” She 
hit out at “hard Brexiteers” such as Liam Fox, the trade secretary, saying they 
were being wildly optimistic by relying on deals with third-party countries.

 