
Brian Bedford, who has died aged 80, was, said the New York Times in 2011 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/09/theater/09bedford.html>, “the finest 
English-language interpreter of classical comedy of his generation” – a 
reputation forged over 50 years, mostly on Broadway and also at the Stratford 
Ontario Festival theatre in Canada, where he more or less settled. On neither 
side of the Atlantic has anyone played more of the leading Shakespearean roles 
than Bedford. But he also specialised in high comedy, and Molière. He last 
appeared on Broadway, in 2011, as an acclaimed Lady Bracknell in The Importance 
of Being Earnest.

As a shining star in the West End of London in the late 1950s and early 60s, 
Bedford decided to escape a gilded social and theatrical milieu in which he 
felt uneasy, for America. He first went to New York in 1959, inJohn Gielgud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/may/22/news.obituaries>’s production of 
Peter Shaffer <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/shaffer>’s Five Finger 
Exercise, which was welcomed byKenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/kenneth-tynan> as “the most accomplished new 
play in a wretched season”.

Bedford played, said Tynan, a young man whose “love for his mother [played by 
Jessica Tandy 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-jessica-tandy-1448550.html>] 
goes far beyond the normal bounds of filial duty,”, and executed a role full of 
sarcasm and complaint without once sneering. Bedford had played the role in the 
West End, shortly after playing Ariel – in silver hair and wispy green veils – 
to Gielgud’s Prospero in The Tempest, directed byPeter Brook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/19/peter-brook-theatre-director-at-90>
, at Stratford-upon-Avon. That production transferred to Drury Lane in London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbrian-bedford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa11ddbb05fc88415e8afdcbcdbd89a53e4638d83%2F21_71_2930_1758%2F2930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brian%20Bedford%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbrian-bedford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brian%20Bedford%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbrian-bedford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa11ddbb05fc88415e8afdcbcdbd89a53e4638d83%2F21_71_2930_1758%2F2930.jpg>
 Brian Bedford, left, as Lady Bracknell in the New York production of The 
Importance of Being Earnest in 2011. Photograph: BEI/Rex/Shutterstock 
By 1967 Bedford had fully decamped to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> and, from 1975, when he played 
Malvolio and Angelo in Measure for Measure at the Stratford festival, he 
relocated almost permanently to a cottage in Ontario that he renovated and 
shared with his partner, the actor Tim MacDonald.

Bedford was born of Irish Catholic extraction in Morley, West Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>, to Arthur Bedford, a postman, 
and his wife, Ellen (nee O’Donnell). The family home had an outside lavatory 
and no running hot water. Two of Brian’s three older brothers died of 
tuberculosis, and Arthur took his own life.

Brian was educated at St Bede’s school in Bradford. He left aged 15 to train 
as a warehouseman, then joined the Bradford Civic theatre as an amateur and 
befriended Brian Epstein, the future manager of the Beatles, who was also in 
the company. He won a place at Rada (1952-54) in London, where his classmates 
includedPeter O’Toole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/15/peter-o-toole-dies-81>, Albert 
Finney, who directed him in Noël Coward’s Private Lives, andAlan Bates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/dec/29/guardianobituaries.filmnews>, a 
lifelong friend.

Bedford played Hamlet, aged 21, at the Liverpool Playhouse before making a 
London debut at the Arts theatre as Travis de Coppet in The Young and the 
Beautiful, based on a story of Scott Fitzgerald. This brought him to the 
attention of the leading West End producer Binkie Beaumont and his partner,John 
Perry, 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-john-perry-1609773.html> who 
virtually adopted him, becoming, Bedford said, “the parents I always wanted”.

Before joining Gielgud in Stratford, he played the Sicilian immigrant Rodolpho 
in Brook’s British premiere ofArthur Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/12/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
’s A View from the Bridge, performed at the Comedy theatre (now the Harold 
Pinter) in 1956 under club conditions; the Lord Chamberlain refused a licence. 
Rodolpho is described by the play’s hero, whose daughter he loves, as “walking 
wavy”. This sexual ambiguity was at the heart of the controversy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbrian-bedford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3f50aa126fd8788f32b4a27f76f8dfaff03c782%2F35_71_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brian%20Bedford%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbrian-bedford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brian%20Bedford%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fbrian-bedford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3f50aa126fd8788f32b4a27f76f8dfaff03c782%2F35_71_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
 Brian Bedford with Geraldine McEwan in The Private Ear in the the early 1960s. 
Photograph: John Dominis/The Life Picture Collection/Getty Images 
Other London appearances before Bedford left for good were in Frederick Knott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jan/16/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
’s Write Me a Murder (1962) at the Lyric, a murder thriller with violent plot 
twists; as the tubercular, romantic artist Louis Dubedat in an all-star 
Haymarket revival of Shaw’s The Doctor’s Dilemma in 1963; and as Tom in Ann 
Jellicoe’s The Knack at the New theatre (now the Noël Coward) in 1964.

On Broadway, he cemented his standing after Five Finger Exercise as an 
elegant, murderous gang leader in Pauline Macaulay’s The Astrakhan Coat (1967) 
and as Edward Chamberlayne in TS Eliot’s The Cocktail Party at the Lyceum in 
1968. Also in 1968, he was the effete bridegroom of Estelle Parsons’s fading 
burlesque star in Tennessee Williams’s The Seven Descents of Myrtle, a big flop 
that registered, according to the criticBrooks Atkinson 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1984/01/14/obituaries/brooks-atkinson-89-dead-times-drama-critic-31-years.html?pagewanted=all>
, “a collapse of talent”. He soon recovered: I saw him in a superb Broadway 
revival of Private Lives in 1969.

Bedford won a 1971 Tony award on Broadway as the riotously despicable Arnolphe 
in Molière’s mordantly moralistic The School for Wives (in which he grooms his 
own ward as his putative wife and lover) and then starred in two British modern 
classics: on a US tour in the title role ofSimon Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/aug/07/simongray.theatre>’s Butley 
(1973), then on Broadway as the philosopher George Moore inTom Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>’s Jumpers (1974), a performance 
admired as much for its meticulous articulation as its amnesiac buffoonery.

This ushered in his “golden age” at Stratford Ontario (1975-80) which 
coincided with the artistic directorship ofRobin Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/30/robin-phillips> and the 
participation of Maggie Smith. Opposite Smith, who renewed her career in this 
period, he played Richard III, Jaques in As You Like It and, once more, Elyot 
in Private Lives (“a brilliant black diamond of a performance”, said one 
critic). When he played Benedick to Smith’s second Beatrice (the first was with
Robert Stephens 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-sir-robert-stephens-1581909.html>
 at the National) in 1980,Michael Billington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michaelbillington> thought “they sparked 
off each other like Spencer Tracy andKatharine Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jul/01/guardianobituaries.film>.”

Other roles over the years at Stratford included Brutus, Macbeth, Shylock and 
Leontes. And as he developed solo touring shows based on Shakespeare and Oscar 
Wilde, Bedford diversified into television – he popped up in Cheers, Frasier 
and Murder, She Wrote – and in movies. His best known film credits include 
Grand Prix (1966), the voice of a distinctly foxy Robin Hood in the 1973 Disney 
film and the FBI executive Clyde Tolson in Oliver Stone’s Nixon (1995) with
Anthony Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins>.

But he was really a stage animal, perhaps one of the last “old school” 
flamboyant actors whom most of the modern theatre –Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1989/dec/27/poetry.beckettat100> and Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
, for sure – had passed by. He continued to surprise and delight his audiences, 
as King Lear – which he performed, in his own production – in 2007 at Stratford 
Ontario, as a “heart-breaking” 1994 Timon of Athens and as a definitive Orgon 
in Molière’s Tartuffe on Broadway in 2003.

He and Tim, partners since 1986, were married in 2013. Tim survives him.

• Brian Bedford, actor, born 16 February 1935; died 13 January 2016
 