
Margaret Thatcher seems likely to receive a state funeral and her place in 
Westminster Abbey (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/22/privatising-thatchers-funeral-fitting-tribute-legacy?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 22 December). There are objections to this. Churchill and Gladstone, 
similarly honoured, readily put aside past conflicts, however intense. Mrs 
Thatcher, seeing not opponents but enemies, did reliable personal bitterness 
all round. She told Neil Kinnock in the Commons, that he was "a Marxist, a 
fellow traveller". Working people she divided into "the enemy within" and "the 
staunch".

Irrational animus extended to foreigners, especially Germans, and her own 
party. Remember the crazy Chequers seminar discussing the German national 
character and the insulting treatment of Chancellor Kohl – at an Anglo-German 
friendship gathering. The Major government, achieving the only things that 
matter – stable prices, rising employment and bouyant inward investment – would 
have been recognised as a success but for the running internal revolt that she 
busily inflamed.

As for Thatcher as success, that should be seen in the light of her chief 
objective, containing inflation. The index, around 10% in 1979, went down for a 
while, but on her departure, stood at 10%. The miners' strikes had been 
destructive andArthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill> foolish, but mounted 
police clubbing strikers expressed a class hatred which every previous Tory 
leader since Churchill had rejected. The application in 1981 of furious 
deflationary measures crippled manufacturing and thus exports. A Thatcher 
loyalist, John Bruce-Gardyne MP, defined manufacturing as "the tie-clip making 
sector".

Error was not confined to office. Failure to survive in the ERM derived from 
her earlier insistance that the pound should only enter with a high valuation. 
From mistaken fear of new inflation, she equipped us with an overvalued 
currency, assured of hostile speculation.Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> was a vivid personality 
and dedicated worker, but wrong so often and, to paraphrase that pseudo-St 
Francis text, the bringer of division and bitterness.

Edward Pearce

York 
 