
British steelmakers have called on the government to use next month’s budget 
to provide emergency help for their industry after the world’s largest 
producer, ArcelorMittal, reported an annual loss of nearly $8bn (£5.5bn).

Lobby group UK Steel said the dire financial results showed the crisis from 
global overcapacity and rock bottom prices was worsening and ministers must 
react quickly and more robustly.

“Sajid Javid held a steel summit in Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/27/time-running-out-for-uk-steel-industry-trade-chief-tells-ministers>
 last October and promised action and many people thought ‘job done’. But these 
(financial) results show much more is action is needed in the UK and Europe on 
costs and Chinese competition,” argued Gareth Stace, director of UK Steel.

“The government must use the budget to take action on business rates and use 
state aid rules to improve the industry’s energy efficiency as well as 
pressuring the European Union to speed up anti-dumping measures.”

Stace was speaking after ArcelorMittal, owned by London-based billionaire 
Lakshmi Mittal, saw shares slump 7.4% to €3.41(£2.60) on the Paris stock 
exchange.

ArcelorMittal said it was raising $3bn through a rights issue to shore up its 
finances, with the Mittal family committed to take up its pro-rata stake of 
$1.1bn. The company, which has no UK assets, said it had sold its 35% stake in 
the Spanish company Gestamp, which makes steel parts for carmakers, for $979m.


The emergency cash-raising comes just days after Tata Steel, which has plants 
in Scunthorpe and Port Talbot, reported its financial losses had doubled to 
£68m over the last three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/tata-steel-reports-third-quarter-loss-chinese-imports>
.

Stock markets suspect Federal Reserve has interest rate jitters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/feb/04/stock-markets-suspect-federal-reserve-interest-rate-jitters>
ArcelorMittal ran up a net loss of $7.95bn 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/arcelormittal-s-a-/gnw/arcelormittal-reports-fourth-quarter-2015-and-f---/20160205060143H3988/>
 in 2015, after $1.86bn the previous year. Sales fell 20% to $63.6bn, with the 
company producing 92.5m tonnes of steel and 62.8m tonnes of iron ore over the 
year.

In the fourth quarter, sales fell 25% year-on-year due to a 22.6% fall in 
average steel selling prices, a 6.8% decline in steel shipments and a 37% slump 
in iron ore prices. The company is pushing ahead with cost reductions.

More than half the annual loss was the writedown of its mining operation. 
There were further exceptional charges related to the writedown of inventory 
following the “rapid decline of international steel prices”, the company said. 
Stripping out one-off items, ArcelorMittal was still in the red with a $300m 
loss, compared with $400m in 2014.

Chief executive Mittal, who also owns part of Queen Park Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/18/tony-fernandes-qpr-takeover> 
football club, said: “2015 was a very difficult year for the steel and mining 
industries … prices deteriorated significantly during the year as aresult of 
excess capacity in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/28/british-steel-industry-buckles-under-weight-cheap-chinese-product-ssi-redcar>
.”

He said the mining business had slashed cash costs by 20%, more than the 
initially targeted 15%, and will cut costs a further 10% this year. He set out 
an “Action 2020 plan” to get the company back on track.

Mittal added: “Looking ahead, although we have started to see a recovery in 
Chinese steel spreads from 2015 lows, 2016 will be another difficult year for 
our industries.”

The financial results again highlight the problems facing Britain’s steel 
industry, where 5,000 workers have lost jobs since last summer. Tata, which 
owns the remnants of British Steel,announced a further 1,050 job losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/tata-job-cuts-union-calls-for-government-action>
 last month, taking total cuts at its UK arm to about 3,000 since October.
 