
Armenia and its tragic history has had an intensive blast of media coverage  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> in the run-up to the April 24 
centenary of what is now widely - though not universally - referred to as the 
genocide of 1915. Presidents Vladimir Putin and Francois Hollande will be in 
Yerevan representing Russia and France, the two most important countries to 
have risked Turkey’s wrath and use the G-word with reference to the mass 
deportations and killings in the final days of the Ottoman Empire. The US, 
which alsodoes not use it 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/04/obama-armenian-massacre-shun-genocide-117202.html>
, is sending the Treasury Secretary, Jack Lew. Britain will be represented by 
John Whittingdale, the Conservative chairman of theall party committee on 
Armenia. <http://www.allparty.org/all-party-groups/armenia>

No disrespect intended to Whittingdale, to the UK ambassador to Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> or to the Bishop of London, who 
will also be there. But the level of UK representation is far below that of the 
three other permanent members of the UN security council. Another point of 
comparison is that the Prince of Wales is leading the UK delegation to the 
Gallipoli centenary commemoration on the same day. And the date for that, 
Armenians believe, was chosen deliberately by the Turks - long loyal Nato 
allies - to overshadow their own event at the Genocide Memorial in Yerevan.

Britain’s position on genocide recognition is not new. But documents released 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/359566/FOI_ref_0298-14_Attachment_42.pdf>
 under the freedom of information act - though heavily redacted - shed light on 
an internal government debate 18 months ago about whether its policy should 
change. The outcome of the discussion – apparently between the embassy in 
Yerevan and the minister for Europe in London - was to continue the policy 
while taking a “forward-leaning” stance on participation in commemoration 
events. “But we should ensure that this is not mis-read as lack of recognition 
(in the wider sense) of the appalling events of 1915-16,” the anonymous 
official commented. “It would be right to participate more actively in 2015 
centenary events, as well as continue efforts to promote reconciliation.” The 
foreign office insists that the presence of Whittingdale and co. does indeed 
represent more active involvement.

Ironically, back in May 1915, when the horrors of Armenian suffering in 
eastern Anatolia were being extensively reported, Britain, with its French and 
Russian allies, condemned what they called a “crime against humanity” - then a 
novel phrase. The modern position, however, is that it is not up to governments 
to decide what constitutes genocide. “The UK recognises as genocide only those 
events that have been found so by international courts (eg, Holocaust, 
Srebrenica, Rwanda) and this needs to dictate our approach on recognition,” the 
document notes. That view has beenrobustly challenged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/23/armenians-want-acknowledgment-that-1915-massacre-was-crime-geoffrey-robertson>
 by Geoffrey Robertson, QC, whose arguments apparently galvanised the FCO into 
this internal discussion.

Another option was considered in 2013: to follow Russia, France and others and 
formally recognise the Armenian massacres as genocide – given the May 1915 
statement and the preamble to the 1948 UN convention on genocide. That would 
“be received positively by both the Armenian government and the UK diaspora,” 
the document noted. It added: “However, this would be a significant and 
far-reaching change in HMG policy.” Tantalisingly, the next sentence has been 
redacted. So bizarrely, there is no mention of Turkey at all. Another FCO 
document on the issue, which reports on the decision of the Swedish parliament 
to adopt the G-word in 2010, refers to the “drastic effect” on relations 
between Stockholm and Ankara, including the cancellation of a visit by the then 
Turkish prime minister and now president Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Britain 
presumably fears similar retaliation by Turkey if it recognised theArmenian 
genocide <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide>. But freedom of 
information does not extend to having that obvious and embarrassing objection 
spelled out.
 