
Amid all the government’s rhetoric about serving the interests of the many not 
just the privileged few 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-to-call-for-unity-equality-and-successful-exit-from-eu>
, the planned cuts to apprenticeship funding – published on the quiet in the 
middle of the summer recess – are a direct and damaging attack on the life 
chances of young people. And the hardest hit will be those from working-class, 
low-income and disadvantaged backgrounds.

Next spring, the funding rates for 16- to 18-year-old apprentices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/04/uk-apprenticeship-funding-rethink-attacked-labour>
 will be cut by about a third – a figure rising to more than half for those 
living in the most-deprived areas. The two most popular apprenticeships – 
business administration and construction – face cuts of between 27% and 52%. In 
my constituency, the local college told me that the new rates equate to an 
average 38% cut across the board. Inexplicably, swingeing cuts for young people 
in deprived areas are being handed down alongsideincreases in funding for 
learners 
<http://feweek.co.uk/2016/08/19/exclusive-funding-rates-cuts-up-to-50-for-the-most-deprived-16-18-apprentices/>
 who are aged 24, live in affluent areas and work for larger employers.

For too long apprenticeships have been seen as the poor relation to higher 
education

Time and again over the course of the last six years, austerity has hit 
hardest those living in the most-deprived areas. Following so soon after the
scrapping of maintenance grants to support young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/01/maintenance-grants-scrapped-for-poorest-students>
 from low-income backgrounds into higher education, working-class kids are yet 
again being left behind, while those from privileged backgrounds escape 
unscathed.

Why is this not further up the news agenda, and why does the government not 
even feel the need to explain what it is doing? The answer, unfortunately, is 
that for far too long apprenticeships have been seen as the poor relation to 
higher education. Over the course of the last six years, skills provision has 
been quietly decimated, and although the governmentpulled back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/25/further-education-sector-budget-protect-spending-review>
 from taking the axe to budgets again in last November’s spending review, I 
fear that this next round of cuts might be the final nail in the coffin.

Large numbers of apprenticeship-providers have already warned that they will 
be forced to cut back or even withdraw provision altogether, as their 
programmes will simply no longer be financially viable. This clearly undermines 
the government’s pledge tocreate 3 million apprenticeships by 2020 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-kick-starts-plans-to-reach-3-million-apprenticeships>
. The government will continue to point to this target as evidence of progress, 
but this is actually about quality as well as quantity.

The providers that do manage to survive will have to pare programmes back to 
the bone, and will not be able to provide the sort of rigorous, high 
quality-programmes that will equip our young people with the technical skills 
that they, businesses and our economy so desperately need.

Youth unemployment is already worryingly high at 13.7%, and well over 1 
million 16- to 24-year-olds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/more-youngsters-shut-out-of-work-or-training-study-finds>
 are not in education, training or employment during any six-month period. The 
skills gap andproductivity crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/25/growth-uk-productivity-crisis>
 holding back Britain’s businesses and economy are both well-documented and of 
serious concern. Surely the government can appreciate how closely 
apprenticeships and further education more generally ties into its own stated 
objectives of a dynamic, modern economy that “works not for a privileged few, 
but for every one of us”?

UK apprenticeship funding changes attacked by Labour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/04/uk-apprenticeship-funding-rethink-attacked-labour>
Education and training for over-16s is not just an add-on for the millions of 
young people who do not follow the neat linear trajectory from school to 
university – it equips people who are not well-suited to academia with the 
skills that can transform their life chances. There are very few areas of 
government policy in which public investment directly leads to such a large 
dividend in terms of increasing social mobility.

These cuts represent everything that is wrong and unjust about the 
Conservative government’s pursuance of an austerity agenda: it is the poorest, 
the most-disadvantaged and those who most need support who suffer the greatest. 
That’s why more than50 Labour MPs have written to the apprenticeships and 
skills minister Robert Halfon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/04/uk-apprenticeship-funding-rethink-attacked-labour>
 calling on him to reverse these misguided cuts.

On the steps of Downing Street, Theresa May promised 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-from-the-new-prime-minister-theresa-may>
 to “help anybody, whatever your background, go as far as your talents will 
take you”. These cuts would achieve the opposite effect, and they are a 
betrayal of young people from working-class and low-income backgrounds.
 