
The first person charged with Victoria's "courtsiding" offence is one of six 
people who travel to tennis tournaments the world over to send live score 
updates to a British betting agency, a court has heard.

Briton Daniel Thomas Dobson, 22, was arrested after an Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> match last week after 
intelligence was received by Tennis Australia and passed on to police.

He is accused of using a device hidden in his shorts to send live point 
details from the match to the betting agency Sporting Data Limited.

His lawyer, David Galbally QC, told Melbourne magistrates court on Thursday 
Dobson was seeking to have the charges dropped. But prosecutors rejected 
Galbally's submission and will push ahead.

Prosecutor Luke Excell said Dobson was allegedly one of six people who travel 
the world to send live results of points won at tennis tournaments directly to 
the betting agency.

"He's previously been asked to leave a tournament in New Zealand," Excell told 
the court.

Dobson has been charged with one count of engaging in conduct that would 
corrupt a betting outcome.

He allegedly had a device built into his shorts and linked to his mobile phone 
which allowed him to wirelessly relay the results as they happened.

Dobson sent results before the agency could get them through the official 
channels and that had the ability to affect betting odds, a police prosecutor 
told a hearing last week.

But Dobson's lawyers say their client was simply collecting data for the 
betting agency.

Dobson was bailed to live in a Melbourne hotel after his arrest on 16 January, 
but Galbally said his client wished to return to England until his committal 
hearing later in the year.

Galbally said Dobson planned to live with his father, Detective Inspector Tim 
Dobson of the Metropolitan police, upon his return to Britain.Â The court could 
therefore have confidence he would return to face the charge, Galbally said.

Magistrate Gerard Lethbridge said he would allow Dobson to return home on a 
surety of $10,000.

Dobson will fly out of Australia on Monday night and will not be required to 
return for a procedural hearing in March.
 