
Beauty’s lime-green tights set her apart from the dreariness of a street lined 
with parked semi-trucks and empty walls topped with razor wire. She was 
working, waiting for men who would pay her for sex. It was March of 2012, and 
she had been in Hunts Point, in the Bronx borough ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City, only a few months. I was a 
year into a project photographing and documenting the lives of street addicts.

She approached me with a broad smile and a want to talk. After an hour of 
listening, I asked her the question I asked everyone: “How do you want to be 
described?”

“Like in one sentence?”

“Yes, one sentence.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422978535615%2F1540b215-295b-4c79-9ae7-74b21f66f7c1-1612x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422978535615%2F1540b215-295b-4c79-9ae7-74b21f66f7c1-1612x2040.jpeg>
 Beauty in the Bronx, 2013. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
“I’m a good person. I don’t like to see anyone down. I like to make people 
happy.” She smiled, “Yo, that is like three sentences, but you a writer, right? 
So you can turn that shit into one sentence.”

For the next three years, as my project deepened, I looked forward to my time 
with Beauty. Mostly it was late-night conversations on empty streets, but being 
her friend also meant spending time in hospitals, prisons and other sad 
institutions.

She had it rough – beaten by men, selling sex to survive, and living under 
bridges, on roofs, in shelters. Yet she didn’t feel sorry for herself. She 
didn’t want or expect sympathy, because she wasn’t a victim. She was Beauty, 
she had it pretty good, and she could never imagine things weren’t going to get 
better.

I loved listening to her: the quick wit, and her nonstop stories told in a 
voice closer to singing than talking. She made me, and everyone else, laugh 
about things that had no right to be funny. She would spin a 15-minute 
soliloquy, her arms waving and her face one big smile, about having no home, 
about riding the subway at night to sleep and staying away from men trying to 
grab her in the dark:


“Of course I pissed in my pants. Yo. I can’t just whip out my dick, riding 
between rolling cars, and piss into a tunnel. The 2 train doesn’t have toilets 
and sinks. You understand? I got to let it loose in my pants. I done jumped the 
turnstile once, and I ain’t gonna do it again, so I just go. You got to. It be 
like, at first, damn that is warm, and then I forget about it, because it just 
pee.”

She could be lost to rage, but a rage every other New Yorker understands, one 
that comes from not suffering fools, especially people who take themselves far 
too seriously. “Yo. Are the cops being real? Throwing me a disorderly conduct, 
when all I was doing was just sitting on the wall sipping a grape soda? Grape 
soda, straight up. Not mixed with anything. They always hasseling me for being 
me.”

Whenever I saw her, I made the offer I make everyone I work with in the Bronx: 
I will drive them away from Hunts Point to anywhere in the US. This Christmas, 
Beauty asked to be driven back toOklahoma City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oklahoma-city>, to stay with her mother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467633299%2F80ddc3e6-b609-448c-be15-02bb445751b0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467633299%2F80ddc3e6-b609-448c-be15-02bb445751b0-1020x612.jpeg>
 Beauty lighting a smoke. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
This is how, a few days later, we found ourselves at a Missouri truck stop, 
where I handed her my last $20 bill to buy something from the dollar menu. She 
tossed it back on my table with a scowl: “Fuck this, I ain’t spending our last 
dollars on fries. I am going out to smoke a blunt.”

She had sprinkled her last pack of K2, a synthetic mix of various chemicals 
sprayed on herbs and sold in bodegas, on a blunt rolled the night before in a 
Pennsylvania truck stop. Instead, she smoked a Tropical Fusion Swisher Sweet 
cigarillo, straight up. She glanced at a group of police officers armed with 
bags of Big Macs and Happy Meals boarding SUVs. “They don’t know about my 
warrant out here,” she said before changing the topic. “You ain’t going to get 
gas? We got like another 1,000 miles to go?” I told her I was waiting for 
cheaper prices farther south, near her home in Oklahoma City.

It was the first time she commented on anything to do with the drive. Holding 
her lighter tightly, she collapsed into the back seat of the van and fell 
asleep.

 Two hours later, as I pulled in to the next truck stop and before I could get 
out to pump gas, she started yelling. “I thought you had everything all set up! 
I thought you had your money in order! I thought if you going to drive two days 
to take me home, you would have gotten a roll of bills. Now you out. Out. And 
we about to be stuck. I ain’t working no trucks for you. I thought you had your 
shit lined up. Damn. A man comes and tells me he got his money in order, he 
better have his money in order.”


“Beauty. I am just out of cash, but I got plenty of money. I got credit cards 
and a bankcard. How do you think I’ve been paying for the gas or for the hotel 
last night?” Her face, tangled with anger, relaxed. Nobody in Beauty’s life, 
certainly not a man, had money other than cash.

She grabbed my soda: “Well, I’m gonna steal that Dr Pepper, just letting you 
know. That’s what I say before I steal. To be polite.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467533349%2F78adcff0-0909-446d-a22a-6c58f2139c28-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467533349%2F78adcff0-0909-446d-a22a-6c58f2139c28-1020x612.jpeg>
 A stop on the way to Oklahoma. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
Beauty was born Daphenie, birthed in a prison hospital in Oklahoma to a mother 
doing time for drugs and other charges. Her mother stayed in prison for most of 
Beauty’s early life. “I looked forward to visiting on Sundays. She would braid 
my hair out in the visitors’ yard.” Beauty was passed among various aunts and 
cousins, depending on who was out and free. They all lived in the same poor 
section of Oklahoma City, filled with a grid of wide, flat roads holding fast 
food chains, gas stations and corner liquor stores.

Her schools were within walking distance, and filled with kids like Beauty: 
poor and black. In middle school, she was diagnosed with ADD and placed in a 
special education class. In high school, she worked hard and made the 
cheerleading squad, but dropped out at 16, frustrated by a schoolwide 
restructuring that cut back on the special classes she was enrolled in.

By then, using a fake ID, she had already started stripping at the XXX-tasy 
Ranch, a club near a tangle of interstates filled with men wearing cowboy 
boots. She went home with a few customers who offered her money for sex. She 
turned to street prostituting a few months later, something she didn’t hide 
from her mother or friends. Most had done and did similar work when an 
addiction flared and cash was tight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423147199287%2Fe0fee8ec-0dc5-44e9-9284-095c7797cf62-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423147199287%2Fe0fee8ec-0dc5-44e9-9284-095c7797cf62-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Beauty smiling on the road. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
Beauty was surrounded by crack. It was her mother’s drug and the drug of the 
streets around her. The parking lots of corner stores near her home, where kids 
run to buy quarter candy, are strewn with tiny plastic bags. Inside, you can 
buy crack pipes disguised as containers holding tiny plastic flowers. Beauty 
ran from and will not tolerate that drug. “When my mom found crack, that’s when 
the walls started coming in on me. I can’t stand that peppermint burning smell.”

Beauty fled into the false safety of K2. Crack is an awful drug, but what you 
buy on the streets is generally consistent. K2 is worse. It is labeled as 
potpourri and marketed as synthetic marijuana, although it has nothing to do 
with either. What they spray onto the herbs is an ever-changing mixture of 
chemicals meant to stay one step ahead of regulators and give an unpredictable 
high to the smoker.

Three and a half years ago, aged 21, Beauty left Oklahoma City to come to the 
Bronx with a pimp who promised she would “make mad money”. He took her to Hunts 
Point, where she started walking the empty industrial streets they call “the 
track”, trying to draw the attention of men looking to pay for blowjobs and “to 
party” – a lot of them truckers hauling foods from the Hunts Point Market. When 
not walking the track, she sat on a low wall outside the high fence of a 
monastery, smoking blunts with her friends, many of whom lived in a shelter 
across the street.

That first pimp’s name is forgotten. She quit him early, and started working 
through a series of pimps with names like Sexy, G, Campaign, Dee and Heavy. The 
pimps, like her, were homeless. They, like her, mostly preferred K2 as their 
drug, although they also dabbled in crack and heroin. They, unlike her, didn’t 
sell sex for money.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423147822737%2F1b998502-ad6e-4a25-ad3e-f95700b26e1b-2060x1473.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423147822737%2F1b998502-ad6e-4a25-ad3e-f95700b26e1b-2060x1473.jpeg>
 Beauty in the Bronx, 2013. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
She loved each of them upfront with the same giddy expectation. This one 
wasn’t going to beat her. This one was going to “get off his ass and hustle”. 
If things went well for a few weeks, talk turned to going back to Oklahoma with 
him.

Each one failed her and each one hit her. G was the last one. He was around 
for about a year and was good to her for a while, stood by and didn’t freak 
when the K2 started causing her seizures. It didn’t last, though. “I was always 
taking care of him, earning double dollars for me and him, and he never did 
nothing, except come around touching me,” she said. “We were real tight for a 
minute. I was even going to take his name. First guy I was willing to do that 
for. He let me down though, messing around with other pussy, trying to pimp on 
everyone else.”

A few months ago, during Thanksgiving week, Beauty spent an hour sitting in 
the Hunts Point McDonald’s on my computer, looking at pictures of friends and 
relatives on Facebook (“That is my cousin Bo. He’s walking now. So damn cute”). 
She spent a long time looking at pictures of her mother, who was out of prison, 
clean for four years and dedicating her time to the church.

Beauty’s optimism was gone. She wasn’t getting any nights in the shelters 
since she was running from a warrant, having to sleep on subways. Her seizures, 
ugly fits of tongue biting that ended with her waking up in Lincoln hospital, 
were becoming regular.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422468308291%2F4c798a6e-16ce-4a2f-b1ce-4ebc2c4f1ffa-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422468308291%2F4c798a6e-16ce-4a2f-b1ce-4ebc2c4f1ffa-1020x612.jpeg>
 Beauty, in hospital after a seizure. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
I made her the offer I had been making since I met her three years prior: I 
would drive her back home to stay with her mom. Only her, not her and a pimp. 
The answer was the same: maybe. G was on the outs, but still figured in her 
future. He was in a shelter at 125th Street, where she had close friends, a 
couple “who are straight up and working to get custody of their kids back. They 
have a tarp space under the Bruckner they willing to share”.

 I left her with a time: 9am the day after Christmas. I would be at the 
McDonald’s in Hunts Point. If she wanted to quit the Bronx and get a ride to 
her mom’s home in Oklahoma City, she had to show up then. And she did, exactly 
at 9, carrying a light backpack and smelling of the streets. “I haven’t 
showered in a long time. Was at G’s father’s house a few week ago, but his 
father’s wife was there. I wasn’t gonna disrespect her by using the shower.”

I gave her my phone and computer while we waited three hours to make sure she 
really wanted to go. She spent that time figuring out her old life, leaning 
over the keyboard, squinting (her glasses were lost long ago) at photos of 
babies, weddings, selfies. She wrote phone numbers on her skin, the letters 
worming their way around a thick burn mark in the center of her hand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422468664061%2Fe3dbca10-6844-4f0c-99d3-ecf0b83a377a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422468664061%2Fe3dbca10-6844-4f0c-99d3-ecf0b83a377a-1020x612.jpeg>
 Beauty on the author’s computer. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
She called everyone who would answer, her voice once again filled with 
happiness and strength. “I am coming home, for real, not shitting you. Like in 
two days. I be smoking K2, they still got it down there too, right? To be 
straight up with you, I been street homeless. I was gonna bring this nigga with 
me but he left me and I’m glad he left.”


She smoked her last cigarette in the Bronx before getting into my van. “Time 
to lose this place. I am tired of sleeping on trains, tired of hustling for a 
few dollars out here. I am scared, sick of running from police. I don’t got 
anyone here. I don’t trust anyone here.”

A half hour later, when we reached the top of the George Washington Bridge, 
she started rocking, nervous, sucking on her first and middle fingers, staring 
out at the Hudson River below, looking the opposite direction of the Manhattan 
skyline. Sucking her fingers was a habit, one she did after smoking K2 or when 
upset with a man.
 Beauty on her way to Oklahoma. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
When the tollgate lifted, we joined the traffic heading west into New Jersey 
and she changed her mind. “I can’t do this. I can’t leave. I got nothing in 
Oklahoma.” I told her if she still felt the same way in 20 minutes I would drop 
her off at a PATH train station with service back into Manhattan and give her 
$40. She was asleep by then, slumped over, her fingers fallen out of her mouth.

For the next two days, as we drove further west, Beauty mostly slept, jacket 
pulled over her head, or stared out the window. When awake her face was lit by 
the glow of the phone, reading Facebook or calling blood family in Oklahoma and 
street family in the Bronx.

She spoke often to her mom, asking her to get clothes and hair braids from her 
sister, to be ready to make her favorite meal of noodles and chicken. She asked 
if she could borrow $20, a request that was denied.

The first night we collapsed in a small hotel just off the interstate, about 
halfway to our destination. Beauty loved the room. She fingered the ironing 
board – “This place gots everything!” – and spent most of the early night 
watching TV. She took $20 and walked across the parking lot to buy herself a 
burger and Sprite. She came back straightaway. I wasn’t certain she would; she 
had noted the truck stop across the street and how a few of the rigs were 
probably headed to the Bronx.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467432142%2F85fa0d41-667d-475a-b25d-9e92d9780346-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467432142%2F85fa0d41-667d-475a-b25d-9e92d9780346-1020x612.jpeg>
 Beauty on the phone, talking to her family. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
She spent the next morning talking to more friends, laying on the bed and 
laughing. She unwrapped the last of her meal, saved from last night, and ate. 
She went outside to smoke, an edge coming back into her voice: “I should of 
bought a whole lot more K2. We got another day of this.”

 With each new state we entered, she would call her mom, excited, hoping the 
proximity would convince her that her middle child was really coming home.

The K2 was a day gone and the mood swings picked up, the highs getting higher 
and the lows getting lower. “I need something to keep me right. I need K2 or a 
man; they stop all the anger.” She used to sleep after smoking; now she stayed 
up and narrated nonstop memories, her words coming faster the closer we got. 
She told stories of growing up, of aunts and uncles and cousins she missed. She 
talked of her mother’s older boyfriend, Mr Fields, who has been in her mother’s 
life for 34 years. They started dating when her mom was 16. He was a farmer 
with land, cattle and chickens, a good, decent man who stood by when her mother 
would fall into crack.

At dusk, with a light snow falling, we pulled into a Waffle House parking lot. 
She was talking into the phone, angry about something, and left the car. She 
walked into another empty parking lot and hid behind an idling semi-truck. She 
dropped her pants and peed, squatting against the wheel of the truck. She 
continued speaking into the phone as she peed, as she pulled up her pants, as 
she entered the Waffle House, only putting the phone down to politely order: 
“Yes ma’am. I will have a burger, chili and Sprite. Thank you.”


When we crossed into Oklahoma, her words quickened, each new sign or landmark 
prompting a memory, regret or fear:

“My momma had a girlfriend named Sweet Pea who lived here in Tulsa. She was a 
drug dealer who always treated us right, buying us presents even when momma 
slept on the couch and wasn’t good to Sweet Pea. She was always getting into 
things. Came into the house once bleeding. Someone had thrown a coffee cup at 
her head. Never seen so much blood. Ever.”

 “You ever been to a Golden Corral? They don’t got them up in Bronx, they a 
Southern thing. They my favorite. Like a second Walt Disney World with food. 
That is the shit.”

 “Not sure what my momma is thinking. I can’t fit in my sister’s clothes, that 
bitch is big!”

“I get home and everybody will start wanting my check. Social Security gives 
it to me and then all them people start clawing for it, trying to make a claim 
on it.”

“I miss G.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467689889%2F6055f206-96f8-41ca-93aa-046e0fb7a760-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467689889%2F6055f206-96f8-41ca-93aa-046e0fb7a760-1020x612.jpeg>
 Beauty’s mother’s house, in Oklahoma City. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
Her mother now lived in a small apartment complex. Many of Beauty’s relatives 
lived in the same neighborhood, some on the same street and a few in the same 
building. “Can you believe that? She just lives three doors down from her 
momma, and she thinks she making it on her own.”

We pulled into the parking lot and our headlights lit a courtyard empty except 
for a basketball lying on a dirt patch. Beauty sat still and refused to leave. 
“I left this place because everybody here is lazy. In Oklahoma, niggas will 
just wait on a bitch, try to get you pregnant and then leave. In New York they 
get up and hustle. They ain’t always pimping on you. They are men.”

She took her bag and walked around the complex, squinting for her mother’s 
number. A woman, Beauty’s age, stuck her head out from one of the screen doors 
and smiled. “Hi, Daphenie. I see you are back.” Beauty started yelling, 
screaming at the woman, who closed the door: “Mind your own business bitch. I 
ain’t any of your concern. You hide behind that door. Come outside and I will 
fuck you up.”


Still yelling, Beauty entered her mother’s apartment. Her mother tried to hug 
her – “You home now, it’s OK” – but she was bent over and lost in anger. Her 
mother hugged me. “You can go. She will be OK. She has these fits now and then. 
We just need to get her a bath, some sleep and her medicine. Come back in the 
morning.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467724133%2F29484389-f966-45c8-97cc-c733ff23db59-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467724133%2F29484389-f966-45c8-97cc-c733ff23db59-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mr Fields, a longtime friend of the family. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
I waited in my hotel expecting a late-night call, a plea to take her back to 
the Bronx. It didn’t come. Instead Beauty, who had on the trip friended me on 
Facebook, poked me and sent requests to play Candy Crush.

The next morning she was bathed and wearing borrowed clothes, sitting in the 
living room with her mother and Mr Fields. Daphenie – no one calls her Beauty 
here – apologized for the night before. On the living room table were family 
photos, group shots of her aunts and uncles. She held the pictures and told 
stories about the past, about times she waited for her mother to come home, 
hoping she wouldn’t be turned out on drugs or messed up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467766206%2Fab093852-15ec-472b-899c-4bbb35834dea-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronx%20Beauty%3A%20struggling%20with%20addiction%2C%20my%20friend%20still%20made%20it%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fbronx-beauty-struggling-with-addiction-my-friend-still-made-it-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422467766206%2Fab093852-15ec-472b-899c-4bbb35834dea-1020x612.jpeg>
 Beauty and her mother. Photograph: Chris Arnade 
Her mother, steeped in the language of recovery, worked through a series of 
platitudes – “You need to be sick of being sick” – before telling her: “When 
you turned to prostituting, when you began living on the streets, we all stood 
strong, hoping it would pass like my addiction passed. We just glad you are 
back with us, here where you got family. You’re better off here.”

 Her daughter hugged her and went quiet, before regaining her voice. “Maybe, 
Momma. Maybe. But I made it on my own. I made it in New York. The Bronx, New 
York. I might of sucked a few dicks, I might of slept on a few subways, but I 
made it.”

Three days after arriving in Oklahoma City, Beauty turned herself in on 
warrants outstanding from five years prior. During the booking process, while 
handcuffed, she kicked out the back window of a police car. Mr Fields paid her 
bail. Her mother is arranging with the city to get her medications, her 
benefits and her own apartment. Two weeks later she started once again sending 
me requests to play Candy Crush. 

To see more of Chris Arnade’s work, visit his photography page 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/arnade/sets/72157627894114489/>
 