
Oscar night, in all its pallid, elephantine glory, is upon us, and the best 
picture raceappears to be a tight one 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/in-contention/oscars-predictions-best-picture-1201601053/>
 betweenThe Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/15/why-the-revenant-should-win-best-picture-in-the-2016-oscars-video>
,Spotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/18/spotlight-best-picture-2016-oscars-video>
 andThe Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/17/the-big-short-best-picture-2016-oscars-video>
. Whichever one wins, it’ll have beaten a superior contender inBrooklyn 
(Lionsgate, 12), John Crowley andNick Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nickhornby>’s gleaming, full-hearted 
adaptation of theColm Tóibín <https://www.theguardian.com/books/colmtoibin> 
novel, a deceptively simple story of physical and psychological resettlement 
that musters up uncommon generosity toward almost every character. None more 
so, of course, thanSaoirse Ronan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/saoirse-ronan>’s Eilis, a young Irish 
immigrant quietly carving her place in the Big Apple, buffeted between that 
reality and the promise of more complacent happiness back home.

It’s not a matter of life and death, but the torn life-and-life drama here is 
no less urgent and moving: this lovely film understands the weight and 
consequence of practical and romantic decisions we’re forced into when we 
perhaps haven’t lived enough to make them. Ronan may not win on Sunday, yet 
this is the besotted showcase her alabaster silent-film features have been 
waiting for: Eilis’s every thought, her every fear, is written into that 
extraordinary face.

There was no Oscar attention – nor even a UK cinema release – for James White 
(Soda, 15), and Josh Mond’s superb, tough and tender fractured family study can 
consider itself cheated on both counts. Certainly the extraordinary, pain-riven 
performances of Christopher Abbott andCynthia Nixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/23/cynthia-nixon-sex-and-the-city>, 
as a self-destructive slacker and his lovingly frustrated, cancer-stricken 
mother, have few equals among tonight’s nominees: it’s one of the most 
exactingly performed observations of the ways in which parents and children 
hurt one another, inadvertently and otherwise, we’ve seen of late. Yet this 
isn’t lugubrious misery porn: Mond’s film has euphoric surges of human honesty 
and hot, angry feeling that twists its way into hope.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpdw828U3KMY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpdw828U3KMY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dpdw828U3KMY&media=>
 Watch the trailer for James White. 
I rather wish I was writing that last sentence about Sarah Gavron and Abi 
Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan>’s Suffragette (Fox, 12), a 
film that certainly arrived on screens with ambitious designs on awards glory, 
and has beenconspicuously absent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/15/failed-oscarbait-carey-mulligan-cate-blanchett-freeheld-concussion-demolition>
 from the conversation ever since. The rise of the Women’s Social and Political 
Union certainly should have made for a rousing, large-canvas chunk of prestige 
history, yet the film takes a markedly timid, confined approach to a story of 
revolution and liberation. OnlyCarey Mulligan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan>, as the audience’s fictional 
window on to the movement, provides flashes of steel that cut through the 
tasteful hessian upholstery of it all; otherwise, it’s a drably missed 
opportunity.

As is He Named Me Malala (Fox, PG), another would-be inspirational portrait of 
a genuinely inspiring female activist: the preternatural intelligence and 
initiative of teen Nobel laureateMalala Yousafzai  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malala-yousafzai>go without saying, but 
Davis Guggenheim’s flatly fawning documentary dutifully recaps her virtues 
anyway, rarely reaching beneath the surface to tell us anything we might not 
know.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D056FI2Pq9RY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D056FI2Pq9RY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D056FI2Pq9RY&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Suffragette. 
Still, both films boast more feminist gumption than Nancy Meyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/01/nancy-meyers-the-intern-interview-women-hollywood>
’s limpThe Intern (Warner, 12), a workplace comedy with mangled inklings of a 
contemporary social agenda.Anne Hathaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anne-hathaway>’s go-getting fashion 
entrepreneur and family woman gets to have it all, but only with the twinkly 
assistance of a benevolent PA played by – pay attention, for this is its one 
joke –Robert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro>. How the 
white alpha male has fallen! And yet what wisdom he still has to impart to 
capable young women! Meyers has long established a reputation for lineny 
upmarket wish fulfilment; it’s yielded its cushiony comforts in the past, but 
has never seemed quite this blinkered.

As far as lightweight tales of privileged professional strain go, I have more 
time for John Wells’s widely deridedBurnt (EIV, 15), in which Bradley Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradley-cooper>’s bad-boy culinary wonder 
hits the London haute cuisine scene, only to find his swagger tamed bySienna 
Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sienna-miller>’s right-minded sous 
chef and single mum. It’s at least as silly as it sounds, but made palatable by 
gold-plated production values and Cooper’s increasingly impressive knack for 
exposing the bristly self-loathing beneath the glib all-American princes he 
plays.

“Palatable”, meanwhile, is perhaps not the word for Aussie one-off The Smuggler
 (Trinity, 15), the suspense of which hinges on the resilient digestive system 
of a hapless heroin mule caught at the airport – and held in custody until the 
swallowed goods emerge. The blend of gross-out comedy escapade and, well, 
tightly clenched endurance thriller is most peculiar, but it’s a good-humoured 
novelty.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALmnUBqbhuo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALmnUBqbhuo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DALmnUBqbhuo&media=>
 Watch it and marvel… It Happened One Night. 
Back to the Oscars, where for anyone displeased with the outcome of Sunday’s 
awards, Mubi iscurrently streaming 
<https://mubi.com/films/it-happened-one-night> a welcome reminder of the 
Academy’s occasional, elusive ability to get it right. One of the most purely 
pleasurable films ever to be burdened with best picture prize,Frank Capra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/frank-capra>’s It Happened One Night honestly 
looks as fresh and frisky today as it did back in 1934: that pinballing, 
peppermint-crisp dialogue, with its fast undercurrent of sexual and gender 
politics, so lithely lobbed betweenClark Gable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/22/clark-gable-screen-legend> and 
Claudette Colbert, makes most Hollywood romantic comedies look dimly retrograde 
by comparison. If you’ve never seen it before, watch, marvel and try not to 
avoid the nagging thought that its springy joys would surely be trampled by the 
macho gurnings ofThe Revenant in a modern-day awards race.
 