
“I don’t want to be the first person to mention the name,” said the writer 
Moustafa Bayoumi <http://moustafabayoumi.com/> as he brought up Donald Trump 
during the Terror, Threats and Fear panel at the Brooklyn book festival 
<http://www.brooklynbookfestival.org/> on Sunday, attributing the resurgence of 
anti-Muslim fringe groups to the rise of the Republican candidate. In this 
context, he said, he preferred the term “Trumpism, rather than Trump”.

Bayoumi, author of This Muslim American Life 
<http://nyupress.org/books/9781479835645/>, shared the panel with Amitava Kumar 
<http://www.amitavakumar.com/>, author of A Foreigner Carrying in the Crook of 
His Arm a Tiny Bomb, andMasha Gessen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/masha-gessen>, whose book The Brothers, 
about the Boston Marathon bombers Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, provided the 
subject matter for much of the talk.

“It’s impossible to predict the roots of an act of violence,” said Gessen, as 
the panelists questioned the value of a “theatre of protection” if they impeded 
personal liberties and spoke of an “economy of terror”, in which informants and 
terror suspects with “no other recourse to wealth” sought to transcend their 
financial destinies. Easy solutions were not offered, but a throwaway comment 
by Gessen seemed to point towards a troubling universal cause. “Nobody is going 
to blow people up if they’ve had a great life,” she said.


Bayoumi would have been pleased to learn that he was neither the first to 
mention Trump, nor the first to wish he didn’t have to. During the earlier, 
Nation-hosted panel The Whole World is Watching, journalistSarah Jaffe 
<http://sarahjaffe.com/> lamented the things “going on in the world that we 
don’t see, because we’re busy hanging on every word Trump says”. Meanwhile,
Mychal Denzel Smith <https://www.thenation.com/authors/mychal-denzel-smith/> 
noted that for Trump’s supporters, “democracy is in full force”, while the left 
wing of US politics had “seen what happened on the right and panicked back to 
the centre”. Still, the Nation’sSarah Leonard  
<https://www.thenation.com/authors/sarah-leonard/>offered hope to despondent 
Bernie fans. “These movements come in waves, they cascade,” she said, “There 
will be others [after Bernie Sanders], don’t panic.”


Panic was hardly in the air. But in the context of the looming election, it is 
no surprise that the festival’s speakers described an America that is riddled 
with anxieties. These ranged from the collective, with issues like war, 
recession and clashing communities stirring up insecurities, guilt and fear, to 
the personal. In one panel, American Angst and Anxiety,Emma Straub  
<http://www.emmastraub.net/>covered teenage angst – “the purest angst of all” – 
with a reading from her novel Modern Lovers, in which Ruby, “a black Jew with 
lesbian moms”, rages against her situation with considerable solipsism. 
Elsewhere in the book, she told us, a middle-aged couple’s angst stemmed from 
unfulfilled creative ambition, though they lived a life with “all the trappings 
of success”.

This talk of an artist’s ambition contrasted with Helen Ellis 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/24/fashion/the-real-housewife-of-new-york.html?_r=0>
’s confession that, despite critical acclaim for her story collectionThe 
American Housewife 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/01/14/462263271/frisky-subversive-american-housewife-practices-shock-and-awwww>
, she had no desire to be considered a writer. Instead, she said, she channeled 
her daily experience of a housewife’s ennui into her characters, trapping them 
in “gilded cages” in which they could entertain themselves with mischief. These 
perspectives led the charge for the middle-class New York experience, with its 
accompanying existential niggles, while a panel led by the podcastLit Up’s 
Angela Ledgerwood <http://thelitupshow.com/tag/angela-ledgerwood/> dug deeper 
into family life, asGayle Forman <http://gayleforman.com/> described a mother’s 
decision, in her novel Leave Me, to break the ultimate taboo and abandon her 
family.

Ledgerwood’s panel guests included Ali Eteraz <http://alieteraz.com/>, whose 
Native Believer returned my mind to a prevailing theme of the day – the Muslim 
experience in America. In Native Believer, M is a secular Muslim who is fired 
from his job for nebulous reasons, which we suspect are related to his 
heritage. Despite his own belief that he is living in “post-racial America”, M 
is unable to escape from prejudices formed without his participation, in part 
due to the ongoing war on terror.

This is an experience that came up repeatedly from other sources in panels 
throughout the day. The children’s writer,Jeanette Winters 
<http://www.jeannettewinters.com/>, spoke about calls to ban her book The 
Library of Basra in Florida schools because of its depiction of a child praying 
to Allah, and its inclusion of the phrase “inshallah”. The transformation of 
individuals to faceless symbols during the 15 years since September 11 was also 
encapsulated poignantly in a metaphor by the artistMolly Crabapple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/25/molly-crabapple-drawing-blood>
, who spoke about her experiences drawing prisoners in Guantánamo Bay. “They 
have been turned into orange jumpsuits,” she said, “who can be attached to 
whoever the US is currently at war with.”


The festival took place less than 24 hours after Saturday’s explosion in 
Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
, and before any details emerged of what it was. Although it was perfunctorily 
raised at the start of the Terror, Threats and Fear panel, the explosion was a 
non-issue elsewhere. That was a testament to the fabled resilience of New 
Yorkers and to the unwillingness of the festival’s attendees and performers to 
jump to quick conclusions. Instead, they focused on a shared love of words and 
discourse.

Nowhere was the powerful draw of literature more visible than in the two-block 
queue around the St Francis College Auditorium, ahead of a highly anticipated 
conversation withMargaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>. Over the course of an hour, 
the beloved author ofThe Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/29/books-to-give-you-hope-the-handmaids-tale-by-margaret-atwood>
 and the MaddAddam trilogy entertained her fans. She also discussed her latest 
work, a graphic novel calledAngel Catbird 
<http://www.darkhorse.com/Blog/2198/dark-horse-comics-announces-first-graphic-novel-bo>
, which features a superhero character with an “identity crisis”, along with 
helpful tips on how to look after your cat.

“There’s a lot of cat puns in this book, I apologise,” said Atwood, who seems 
to have a permanent twinkle in her eye.

Atwood’s final thought was with the Future Library 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/05/margaret-atwood-new-work-unseen-century-future-library>
, the public art project to which she has contributed a story, to be read for 
the first time in 2114. There is an inherent optimism coded into this project, 
as in her answer to a question, from founderKatie Paterson 
<http://www.katiepaterson.org/>, about artistic forms she has yet to try: 
“Maybe there is some medium that is yet uninvented that I will explore.” For 
the worries of the near future, however, she had a simple solution. “Canada is 
not big enough to come to the rescue,” she said, “But you’re all welcome. We’ll 
set up cots.”
 