
So how did the national press react to the appearances of Gordon Brown and 
George Osborne at Leveson - a tribunal, according to Simon Hoggart, that"long 
ago became more important than the House of Commons." 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/jun/11/sketch-government-u-turns-david-gauke>

There was, in fact, unanimity in most of the commentaries and sketches. In 
short, Osborne eased himself past all the obstacles while Brown evinced 
sympathy.

However, there was, to quote the BBC's political editor, Nick Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nickrobinson>, many moments when 
journalists' jaws dropped. Were they really telling the truth, the whole truth 
and nothing but the truth?

Most of the sketch-writers concentrated on Brown's performance. The Times's 
Ann Treneman began by saying it wasso poignant to watch him that she tried not 
to stare. 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/sketch/article3442754.ece> She 
wrote:

"His testimony was revelatory — but only about himself... Now we know what 
he's been up to. Walter Mitty was an amateur. The Secret Life ofGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> stars a man who, despite 
being at the centre of attack-dog politics for years, was an oasis of calm, of 
piety, a man who knew nothing about plots or briefing against Tony Blair or, 
indeed, anyone else."

Benedict Brogan, in a Daily Telegraph online comment, appeared to agree. He 
judged that Brown"has done yet more harm to his reputation, 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/news/benedictbrogan/100164340/leveson-why-gordon-browns-self-destruction-is-a-vindication-for-george-osborne/>
 in the process helping George Osborne to enhance his." Why? In sum, because 
one comes across well on TV while the other doesn't.

The headline over Simon Carr's sketch Two slick operators, and no hint of 
wrongdoing 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/commentators/simon-carr/simon-carr-two-slick-operators-and-no-hint-of-wrongdoing-7837028.html>
 conveyed his scepticism about the way in which both men sought to distance 
themselves from the idea that News International figures in their everyday 
concerns.

But The Independent's leading article didn't mention Brown, concentrating on 
Osborne, who it thought, "superficially at least... did a fine job" by being 
"relaxed, composed, straightforward." 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/leading-articles/leading-article-a-question-of-judgement-at-leveson-7836884.html>

Unsurprisingly, the Daily Mail's Quentin Letts preferred to look at Brown. But 
I detected, despite his description of Brown's opening salvo as part 
after-dinner speech, part the ramblings of a late-night phone-in on Radio 
Loonshire", 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2157900/His-lip-curled-like-Ali-Baba-s-slippers.html>
 that he had not dipped his laptop in vitriol.

He, like other commentators, didn't buy the denials:

"The polygraph industry will study, perhaps with admiration, Mr Brown's claims 
not to have known about a plot to unseat Tony Blair. He said he never allowed 
vested interests to be favoured over the national interest.

He insisted, glowering, that he never had the much-discussed telephone call 
when he reportedly declared war on the Murdochs. At mentions of the Tories, his 
lip curled like one of Ali Baba's slippers and his eye acquired an Arctic 
frost...

One could dispute much that he said yesterday but afterwards my chief feeling 
was was one of sorrow – for this once powerful man's plain unhappiness, 
whatever its cause."

Nick Robinson, on BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> radio 4's Today 
programme this morning, seemed to agree with Letts's assessment, though without 
the purple prose. He also said that Osborne showed how "silky" he is compared 
to Brown.

Similarly, Michael White in The Guardian: "Brown's was a riveting performance, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/jun/11/leveson-inquiry-gordon-brown-george-osborne>
 with its agonising, its contradictions, its gnawing obsessions. If Brown was a 
rain-sodden Brontë novel, Osborne was pure Julian Fellowes, Downton Abbey's 
Lord Grantham cheerily assuring the servants that we're in this together, even 
you Coulson."

George Eaton, blogging for the New Statesman, believed that Osborne had 
"emerged unscathed" 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/blogs/2012/06/osborne-emerges-unscathed-leveson>
. He wrote: "There were no bombshells, no revelations of inappropriate contact 
with the Murdochs, and Osborne successfully fielded a series of questions on 
Jeremy Hunt and Andy Coulson."

But, as many writers implied, Osborne was just a warm-up act for David Cameron.

Update:A final, belated word on The Sun's coverage of Brown. It went into 
attack mode in an article about"scheming" Brown sparking disbelief in 
Westminster. 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/4367660/Gordon-Brown-denies-bid-to-grab-No10-job-from-Tony-Blair-at-Leveson-Inquiry.html>

It ran a trenchant piece by Brown's biographer, Tom Bower 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/4367660/Gordon-Brown-denies-bid-to-grab-No10-job-from-Tony-Blair-at-Leveson-Inquiry.html>
, in which he accused Brown of tipping "tipped from fantasy into crude 
distortion" in a "revisionist view of his conduct and history" that was 
"breathtaking".

Bower wrote: "Brown confirmed his untrustworthiness. He cast himself as an 
unreliable witness and as a master of disloyalty."

The paper also carried an interview with Lord Dannatt 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/4367708/Ex-Army-chief-General-Sir-Richard-Dannatt-blasts-Gordon-Brown-for-claiming-The-Sun-highlighted-Afghan-war-shortfalls-to-undermine-him.html>
, the former army chief of staff, taking issue with Brown's view about the 
motive behind The Sun's stories of military shortfalls in Afghanistan.
 