
What an unadulterated joy it is to see Bruce Dern leading a movie for a change 
– and a good movie, at that.Alexander Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne>'s Nebraska may come to be 
seen as his swansong, but I hope it leads to a final decade of great 
performances from one of my all-time favourite actors, now 77 years old.

Dern has played a lot of disagreeable cranks in his time, but Woody Grant, the 
semi-senile retiree who keeps trying to walk from Montana to Lincoln, Nebraska, 
to pick up a supposed million-dollar prize, is an almost opaque figure. Dern 
seems to have subtracted half of his own mind and awareness for the part, and 
this draws the audience toward him to find out, or guess at, the things his old 
age incites. Finally, his son David (SNL's Will Forte, in a revelatory straight 
performance) agrees to drive him the 800 miles to Lincoln, if only to prove 
there's really no prize. Along the way they stop off in the small town Woody 
abandoned decades ago, and fall prey to greedy, predatory relatives who believe 
Woody's story about the money. Shot in a lustrous but melancholy monochrome 
entirely appropriate to the movie's sombre tone,Nebraska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nebraska> is less about a quest for a million 
bucks than a search for meaning late in life, and the sadness that comes when 
we realise there isn't any. Dern, all windblown white hair and stubble, is 
often entirely silent and withdrawn, and all the more compelling and poignant 
for that.

Perhaps this late-blooming role will direct viewers back to some of the 
highlights of the Dern back catalogue, which need to be separated from the many 
bad movies he has also made. A good starting point is 1972's The Cowboys, in 
which Dern became the first man to killJohn Wayne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/johnwayne> in a movie. "America will hate you 
for this," Wayne told Dern, who replied, "Yeah, but they'll love me in 
Berkeley!" In the 70s, after a long slog through every 60s TV western, a 
half-dozenRoger Corman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/roger-corman> cheapies 
(including The Trip and The Wild Angels) and a crucial small role in the 
flashback finale of Hitchcock's Marnie, he became the wild card of the 
Hollywood renaissance. As Jack Nicholson's con-man brother inThe King Of Marvin 
Gardens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/19/king-of-marvin-gardens>, 
he embodies the self-delusion of the American dream of success and wealth, 
while his brutish Tom Buchanan in the 1974 version of The Great Gatsby is one 
of the few worthwhile things about that stinker. Silent Running proved he could 
make interacting with robot-droids unbelievably real and heartbreaking, while 
his psychotic side was unleashed in the John Frankenheimer flop Black Sunday in 
1975. Perhaps his greatest moment is in the finale of Coming Home when, facing 
his adulterous wife and her lover (Jane Fonda and Jon Voight) with his combat 
rifle, he loses it so badly that his hysterical voice rises to a murderous 
broken scream that is utterly chilling and heartbreaking. A magnificent actor – 
and well worth the homework.
 