
"You often hear about how thankful Buddy Guy is to Stevie Ray Vaughan for 
introducing a whole new generation of listeners to the blues masters, and I'm a 
perfect example. I got turned on to Buddy by the intense connection I had with 
Stevie. He was talking about Buddy Guy, playingBuddy Guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/buddy-guy> songs, playing Buddy's licks, and 
that sent me deeper and deeper back in time. I would listen to Buddy and then I 
could understand what Stevie was doing, and then I could understand what Buddy 
was doing, then finally what you do becomes more you. That's what the blues is 
like: you have to unfold it.

"I immersed myself in his music. I think I was aware, being 13 in 1990, that 
there had been a good 60 years of blues before me that I could consume. So I 
got right into Buddy Guy. I think the first record was Damn Right, I Got the 
Blues, because I worked backwards, but the record that killed me was Stone 
Crazy, the one he made for Alligator Records in 1981. It's an unbelievable 
document of how fiery this guy is. It's recorded live in the studio and it's 
got that real late seventies, funky, groovy, pimped out thing. And his singing! 
Everyone talks about him as a guitar player, but he's such a great singer."If 
you follow Clapton or Hendrix back, you get to Buddy Guy. He really invented 
this abandon on the guitar that Hendrix saw and adapted. He came up playing on 
those Chess Records dates, where the two-and-a-half-minute blues song was the 
norm. He broke out of that and madethe lead electric guitar more than a slight 
interlude <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UQRV6YlhqgQ> in the song. Buddy paved 
the way for Hendrix to play these nine-minute solos.

"He invited me to come to Chicago, have dinner and play at his club â€“ so I did 
just that, and we hit it off. I was 26 and he was in his 60s, so it's not a 
traditional sort of relationship, but Buddy and I found a quick connection. Any 
time he's in town and wants to play, I'll be there.I learn from him all the 
time and I've never taken it for granted. Every time I'm on stage with him I 
travel back in my mind to the 16-year-old kid who wrote a letter saying, 'Can I 
please be on your guest list some night, because I'm too young to get into a 
bar but I really need to hear you play?' I did that! So the wow factor never 
leaves."

Key recording: I Left My Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blues> in 
San Francisco (MCA, 1967)
 