
If the idea of working for the same company nine-to-five everyday is sending 
you to sleep, have you ever considered taking on a few freelance roles? 
Portfolio careers arecurrently on the rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/27/could-a-portfolio-career-be-for-you>
 – and most popular with graduates in the creative arts such as artists, 
journalists and photographers.

“Only 20% of those with multi-strand careers do so because they needed to take 
more than one job to make a living,” says Charlie Ball, deputy director of 
research atProspects <http://www.prospects.ac.uk/>. Instead, most freelancers 
in the creative industries opt for the freedom and flexibility a portfolio 
career brings.

However, juggling several jobs and always having to pitch for work isn’t easy. 
“You need to be resilient, confident and optimistic,” says Jan Moore, assistant 
head of the careers and employability service at Manchester Metropolitan 
University. “Great people skills will help to get your name out there, but 
there is always uncertainty in portfolio careers.”

Because of this uncertainty it is essential to build a client base and gather 
a strong body of work to present to potential clients when looking for creative 
work.

“It’s also important to be highly organised and flexible, as you’ll be doing 
several things at once and facing tough deadlines,” adds Moore. “Organising 
your finances is part of this, and if you’re going to set up a company – 
whether an entrepreneurial venture or a theatre group – it’s worth getting 
business advice.”

So, if you’re looking to start a portfolio career in the creative industries, 
and want advice on where to begin – join us onWednesday 10 June from 1–3pm BST 
for a live chat with the experts. We’ll be discussing:

 * How to build and present a portfolio of work 
 * Using part-time roles to fit in around creative work 
 * How to find and pitch for freelance roles 
 * Where to begin when setting up a portfolio career 
The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever:create a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can 
tweet us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
who can post them for you.

Panel

Susan Jones is a writer and consultant on contemporary visual art. As an 
experienced artists’ adviser, Jones contributes to FuelRCA and a-n The Artists 
Information Company and is currently researching the impact of portfolio 
careers on creativity.

Rob Turner is an artist <http://robturners.blogspot.co.uk> who works on public 
and community arts projects across the UK and beyond. His clients have included 
Regional Wildlife Trusts, NHS, Local Authorities, Heritage and Cultural 
Organisations.

Laura Palmer is an internationally published, freelance photographer and 
filmmaker. Palmer’s clients range from editorial (BBC), to commercial record 
labels (Warner Bros) to corporate clothing brands (SuperDry).

Eleanor Turney is an arts journalist and editor of The Space 
<http://www.thespace.org/>. She is co-director of Incoming Festival at New 
Diorama Theatre, web editor for the British Council’s theatre team, and writes 
regularly for The Stage, The Guardian and others.

Rachel Nelken is senior producer at the Roundhouse 
<http://www.roundhouse.org.uk/>, and runs ArtsTrain 
<http://www.artstrain.org.uk/>, a creative music project for young people. 
Nelken has a successful portfolio career working with arts funders, creative 
producing and developmental roles.

Clare Whitmell is a Guardian writer and a qualified career coach. Whitmell 
specialises in writing and presentation skills coaching. She also blogs about 
CV writing and job-hunting tips onJobMarketSuccess.com 
<http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/>.

Alex Dyer is managing partner of Theataccounts 
<http://www.theataccounts.co.uk/> – a specialist accountancy practice for the 
entertainment industry. He developed Theataccounts to combine accountancy 
knowledge with his passion for the arts.

Dany Louise writes about the visual arts and cultural policy, contributing to 
the Guardian, New Statesman, a-n Arts Newsand her blog 
<http://www.danylouise.wordpress.com/>. Louise also runs Interpretation Matters 
and is the author of The Interpretation Matters Handbook.

Mar Dixon works across the digital, publishing and tech sectors. Dixon is the 
creator of many cultural projects, including MuseomixUK, Open Community Lab and 
MuseumCamp and is a regular speaker at international conferences.

Laura Crossley is a museums and libraries consultant 
<http://www.lauracrossley.com> who specialises in community engagement and 
creating sustainable cultural partnerships. She combines her portfolio career 
with studying for a PhD in Museum Studies.

Katy Cowan is managing director of Boomerang <http://www.boomerangpr.com>, an 
independent PR agency which has clients including BBC and TATA. Cowan has also 
spent the past six years running her own online magazine for the creative 
industries,Creative Boom <http://www.creativeboom.co.uk>.

Pete O’Hara is a chartered accountant with over 30 years’ experience of 
working in the cultural sector. He combines being director of the charity 
Creativity Culture and Education withan accountancy practice 
<http://www.peteohara.co.uk/> based in Newcastle upon Tyne.

David Locke is an independent photographer <http://www.david-locke.com> and 
co-owner ofHeadshot London <http://www.headshotlondon.co.uk> – a photographic 
company serving PR and creative agencies as well as corporate clients across 
the UK.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 