
The Bernie Madoff scandal has its fair share of high-profile victims – there's 
Kevin Bacon, Steven Spielberg, Eliot Spitzer andZsa Zsa Gabor 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/mediaNews/idUSN2433193420090124>.

But spare a thought for Craig Kugel, a human resources functionary at Madoff's 
firm who suddenly finds himself in a pickle over his boss's Mercedes.

Six weeks before Madoff Securities firm imploded in a $50bn alleged fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bernard-madoff>, Kugel was dispatched to 
lease a new car for 70-year-old Bernie. According to court documents, he duly 
went to a dealership called Rallye Motors on Long Island and picked out a shiny 
new Merc.

A salesman at the dealership wanted financial details on Madoff Securities to 
authorise a leasing arrangement. Bernie didn't want to provide any documents 
and Kugel was therefore hurriedly made a director of the firm so that he could 
sign for the car as a guarantor.

Kugel has filed an objection to bankruptcy proceedings surrounding the 
wind-down of Madoff's firm, complaining that he is now in hock to the tune of 
$58,212.76 (£40,734) to cover the 36-month lease.

"Craig Kugel never intended to be a personal guarantor of the lease for 
Bernard L Madoff Investment Securities LLC," say documents prepared by his 
lawyers. "Craig Kugel has had no use or benefit whatsoever of said vehicle."

Poor old Craig joins a long, long queue of people with a grievance against 
Bernie, who has taken to wearing a bulletproof vest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/14/bernard-madoff-useconomy> for 
any court-approved forays outside the Manhattan penthouse apartment where he is 
being held under house arrest.

Victims may, or may not, be amused to learn that a Connecticut toymaker has 
produced a limited editionBernie Madoff doll 
<http://www.bostonherald.com/business/general/view.bg?articleid=1148518&srvc=home&position=1>
 holding a wad of dollar bills and sporting a gold wristwatch. It costs 
$149.99. Voodoo, anyone?

The economy messes with the US Mail

A carved inscription over the entrance of Manhattan's central post office is 
robust on the reliability of mail deliveries. Quoting Herodotus, it reads: 
"Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stays these couriers from 
the swift completion of their appointed rounds."

Postmen may be able to withstand the weather – but the economy might just stop 
them. The US Post Office has asked Congress for permission to suspend 
deliveries on its quietest days of the week. This could well mean an end to 
mail rounds on Saturdays.

An arm of the government, the US Post Office lost $2.8bn last year and could 
plunge as much as $6bn into the red for 2009. The number of letters and 
packages sent by Americans fell by 9bn items to 202bn – the biggest annual fall 
on record.

The postmaster general, John Potter, cited "a revolution in the way people 
communicate", pointing to the use of email and online commercial services such 
as internet banking. There's also, of course, the thorny issue of junk mail. 
Until America's banks realised that they were essentially bankrupt, barely a 
day went by without a deluge of credit card offerings falling on doormats 
across the nation.

Not sure what the mailmen will make of this. The American Postal Workers' 
Union has yet to respond – it has other fish to fry.

The union was locked in a bizarre battle last year over a partnership between 
the post office and a firm called Goin' Postal in Las Vegas. The phrase "going 
postal <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Going_postal>" entered common parlance 
after a series of incidents in the 1980s when postmen became violent and shot 
people. Union presidentWilliam Burrus 
<http://www.apwu.org/news/nsb/2008/nsb-conv-2008-4-080822.htm> complains that 
its use implies that postal workers are "violent sociopaths".

Dan Brown probably already knows the crash is coming

Hold on to your nerves a week on Monday. Apparently the stockmarket is going 
to crash on 9 February 
<http://gawker.com/5141450/americas-most-correct-internet-conspiracy-theorist-calls-next-market-crash>
. Or so says somebody called Reinhardt who thinks the financial world is all 
tied up with a Catholic group of business leaders calledLegatus 
<http://www.legatus.org/public/index.asp>.

Sounds a bit dubious? Indeed. But Reinhardt has form. In a Google Finance 
posting in July, he predicted that "negative news" would cause a collapse in 
stocks on September 15. Stunned by the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, the Dow 
Jones Industrial Average duly slumped by 504 points that day in its biggest 
points decline for seven years.

You have been warned.
 