
Innocent Ntawumbabaye had obeyed police orders to open his front door when two 
officers walked wordlessly into his home and shot him several times in the head.

The 44-year-old milk seller wasn’t the only victim that day. On 11 December, 
after an attack on military installations in the capital, security forces loyal 
to president Pierre Nkurunziza responded bysummarily executing 87 civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/12/burundi-bodies-found-worst-violence-since-april-coup>
 in the space of a few hours.

Burundi president threatens to fight African Union peacekeepers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/burundi-president-pierre-nkurunziza-threatens-fight-african-union-peacekeepers>
Nkurunziza, a former rebel turned president, announced in April that he would 
run for a controversial third term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/protest-burundi-president-third-term-bujumbura-pierre-nkurunziza>
, in a move many observers say contravened a 2005 peace deal that ended the 
12-year civil war which claimed 300,000 lives.

His decision plunged the small central African country into a political 
crisis, prompting weeks of demonstrations by young activists in the capital 
demanding that the 52-year-old president step down.

An African Union proposal to deploy 5,000 troops to restore peace was rejected 
by the Burundian authorities, withNkurunziza last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/burundi-president-pierre-nkurunziza-threatens-fight-african-union-peacekeepers>
 warning that forces failing “to respect Burundi’s borders” would be attacked. 
Peace talks scheduled for Wednesday in neighbouring Tanzania have been delayed, 
with no fixed date given for when they might take place.

Human rights campaigners say Nkurunziza has now responded to any opposition to 
his third term with a blanket campaign of murder and intimidation in 
neighbourhoods where protests against his third term bid have been most intense.


“There is an atmosphere of real fear and impunity,” Rachel Nicholson, a 
researcher at Amnesty International who visited the country in early December, 
told the Guardian.


“Arbitrary arrests, disappearances and cordon-and-search operations 
accompanied by the killing of civilians have become routine at a time when many 
independent human rights organisations have been forced out of the country and 
people do not know who to turn to for redress,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fburundi-pierre-nkurunziza-police-protest-crack-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F166192d841f847071aa1e8b081cdca0966ad8a49%2F0_194_2918_1752%2F2918.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burundi%20civil%20war%20fears%20as%20president%20accused%20of%20campaign%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fburundi-pierre-nkurunziza-police-protest-crack-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burundi%20civil%20war%20fears%20as%20president%20accused%20of%20campaign%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fburundi-pierre-nkurunziza-police-protest-crack-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F166192d841f847071aa1e8b081cdca0966ad8a49%2F0_194_2918_1752%2F2918.jpg>
 Burundi’s president Pierre Nkurunziza in July, as the country awaited the 
results of the disputed election. Photograph: Marco Longari/AFP/Getty Images 
Amnesty International reported that the worst attacks 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/afr16/3116/2015/en/> since unrest began 
took place in early December, when police officers rounded on civilians after 
the unsuccessful dawn attack by armed men on military sites in Bujumbura.

Witnesses told Amnesty that the police responded by going into a number of the 
capital’s neighbourhoods, dragging men out of their homes and executing them.

Raoul Nijimbere, a 41-year-old said to have mental health problems, was shot 
and his body abandoned in the streets. The bodies of a teacher, a mobile phone 
seller and two bicycle taxi operators were also discarded in public, witnesses 
said.

This dynamic of fear is dangerous particularly because of the lack of 
information
​Thierry Vircoulon 
At least 400 people have been killed 
<http://www.undpi.org/World-News/Burundi-UN-says-nation-s-on-verge-of-civil-war-after-over-400-killings.html>
 since April, with both the African Union and United Nations coming under fire 
for doing little to stop the carnage, which has sent more than 220,000 people 
fleeing from their homes.

Ethnic violence

Though the resistance to Nkurunziza, a member of the Hutu community, has so 
far been multi-ethnic, locals say most of the killings by security forces have 
been carried out in Tutsi neighbourhoods of the capital Bujumbura.


Campaigners fear the political unrest will spark a repeat of the civil war 
between the Tutsi and Hutu ethnicities, or worse, a new cycle of genocide.

Thierry Vircoulon, of the International Crisis Group, says though the 
opposition has remained impressively united across ethnic lines, the danger of 
deterioration remains.

“The government seems to be playing the ethnic card, trying to demonise 
communities while this is in fact a political crisis about the third term. The 
regime rhetoric has created a lot of fear among the public and this dynamic of 
fear is dangerous particularly because of the lack of information,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fburundi-pierre-nkurunziza-police-protest-crack-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b7fac7c2e5ca1563cdaa8665eb9c12697d9a8d9%2F0_174_4843_2908%2F4843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burundi%20civil%20war%20fears%20as%20president%20accused%20of%20campaign%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fburundi-pierre-nkurunziza-police-protest-crack-down%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burundi%20civil%20war%20fears%20as%20president%20accused%20of%20campaign%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fburundi-pierre-nkurunziza-police-protest-crack-down%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b7fac7c2e5ca1563cdaa8665eb9c12697d9a8d9%2F0_174_4843_2908%2F4843.jpg>
 Opposition protesters make a barricade in a street in the Buyenzi district of 
the capital Bujumbura in May. Photograph: Berthier Mugiraneza/AP 
Burundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi> once enjoyed one of the 
region’s most vibrant media environments but that has changed in recent months. 
“Almost all the journalists have left, the lawyers have fled, entrepreneurs and 
players in the NGO world are all gone,” Vircoulon said.

When the crisis first broke out in April, Alexandre Buja, chairman of the 
union of journalists, consulted with colleagues and set up a joint newsroom to 
pool information for various FM stations.


Unrest in Burundi - In Pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/may/07/unrest-in-burundi-in-pictures>
But on 27 April the press centre was surrounded by police officers. Many 
journalists were physically assaulted and the security services demanded that 
they shut down the newsroom.

“They didn’t show us the order they said they had from the prosecutor,” Buja 
told the Guardian. “They just started brutalising us. They beat some of my 
colleagues very badly and we finally had no choice but to oblige.”

Buja went into hiding for several weeks but when a grenade was lobbed into the 
house his family were sheltering in, he arranged for them to take a flight to 
Kigali.

“It is a real tragedy what is happening,” he said. “When you shut down all 
avenues of independent expression what you have is a dictatorship.”


 