
The violence in Burundi is getting worse. Rumours of an armed rebellion by the 
secret police have been circulating, while observers report thatrape is 
increasingly being used 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/16/world/africa/burundi-forces-gang-rape-united-nations.html?_r=1>
 as a weapon in the escalating war.

The UN high commissioner for human rights 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/AboutUs/Pages/HighCommissioner.aspx> said in a recent 
report that atrocities in the east African country mean “all the alarm signals 
– including the increasing ethnic dimension of the crisis – are flashing red”.

Nine mass graves holding hundreds of bodies have also been found, including 
one on aBurundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi> army base, the UN’s 
Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein added.

At least 439 people have been killed since protests began in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/07/burundi-protests-deaths-man-set-ablaze>
 against President Pierre Nkurunziza’s quest for a third term, while an 
estimated230,000 people have fled <http://data.unhcr.org/burundi/regional.php> 
to neighbouring states.

But this escalation is all the more worrying given that there are few tangible 
solutions to the crisis in sight. Samantha Power, the US ambassador to the UN 
Security Council,has said Burundi 
<https://news.vice.com/article/burundi-is-going-to-hell-says-us-ambassador-to-united-nations>
 “is going to hell”, but that there is “no contingency planning, no UN presence 
[and] no dialogue”.


So what could be done to improve the situation? And by whom?

Give Magufuli a call
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F303543b34d8da052a34bfd25a0c3fa4a724a4eb1%2F0_0_4896_2937%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F303543b34d8da052a34bfd25a0c3fa4a724a4eb1%2F0_0_4896_2937%2F4896.jpg>
 A mural of John Magufuli, Tanzania’s newly elected president, in Dar es 
Salaam. Photograph: Daniel Hayduk/AFP/Getty Images 
The current crisis erupted when Nkurunziza decided to run for a third term in 
power, following the lead of others in the region similarly deciding to stay in 
office despite widespread public opposition.

But the fact he’s following a trend means there are few regional leaders who 
want to step in. Yoweri Musevini, who has been Uganda’s president since 1986,
has shown little enthusiasm <http://allafrica.com/stories/201601110002.html> in 
his role as official mediator so far, and no other diplomatic champion with the 
skill to broker peace has so far stepped forward.

What about South Africa 
<https://www.issafrica.org/iss-today/burundi-crisis-time-for-south-africa-to-lead>
? The country was pivotal in ending the previous civil war in Burundi with 
Nelson Mandela leading the historic mediations. However, given themyriad 
domestic concerns 
<http://africanarguments.org/2016/01/26/aap9-gloomy-outlook-for-south-africa/> 
facing the country – including calls for Jacob Zuma to step down – South 
Africa’s president seems unlikely to get involved at this time.

So perhaps Tanzania is the next best candidate. The energetic commitment 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/01/14/africa/tanzania-president-john-magufuli/> of 
its new president, John Magufuli, to reforming the country has made him popular 
in the region, and taking the lead on Burundi would be the perfect opportunity 
for him to gain standing on the international scene too. Given the presence of 
140,000 Burundianrefugees 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/burundi/burundi-humanitarian-snapshot-14-january-2016>
 on Tanzania’s soil, Magufuli already has the legitimacy he needs to lead 
diplomatic efforts.

Targeted sanctions
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3f9fcae08300be5a434bfffbde451ccd00c43be%2F0_87_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3f9fcae08300be5a434bfffbde451ccd00c43be%2F0_87_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Burundi’s President Nkurunziza in Bujumbura. Photograph: Goran 
Tomasevic/Reuters 
Nkurunziza is following short-term logic where he intends to violently crush 
the opposition while surviving long enough to make his staying in power afait 
accompli. But despite the dismal state of the economy, targeted economic 
sanctions can significantly pressure him and the ruling elite.

Though some figures in the army have already been sanctioned, the moves have 
been timid and ineffective so far.The EU 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34428832> and US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/23/obama-burundi-sanctions-security-officials>
 have banned certain leaders from travelling and have frozen their assets, but 
while this may have symbolic significance it does little to change matters on 
the ground.

These men don’t have strong links with the US or Europe and their respective 
banks. Instead, their money is in Kenya or SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. For sanctions to be effective, 
these are the countries who should be launching into action, targeting regional 
visas and local assets.

Keep a close eye on Rwanda
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5caf58e3b4295a7572b849ac469091330d44b640%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5caf58e3b4295a7572b849ac469091330d44b640%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Burundian refugees rest with their belongings on the shores of Lake 
Tanganyika. Photograph: Thomas Mukoya/REUTERS 
Recent allegations 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2015/12/14/burundian-refugees-face-forced-recruitment-in-rwandan-camp.html>
 that Rwanda is recruiting and training Burundian refugees to fight are 
alarming.

If true, it could signal serious danger for both Burundi and Rwanda itself, 
cementing fears that conflictbetween Hutu and Tutsi ethnicities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/rwanda-20-years-after-the-genocide>
 could be on the cards once again.

A Rwanda-sponsored rebel movement would give the Burundian government the 
perfect opportunity to portray the opposition as the footmen of the Tutsi-led 
Rwandan government.



That said, it makes sense for Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>
 to want to be proactive regarding the escalating violence in Burundi. The 
country’s leadership derives its legitimacy from having stopped the genocide in 
1994. There are more than 70,000 Burundian refugees on its soil, and many 
members of the ruling elite in Kigali have family connections in Bujumbura.

Nonetheless, clandestine support from Kigali to an armed group risks further 
jeopardising the stability of the region. If Rwanda wants to intervene, it’s 
paramount it does does in collaboration with other countries in the region, 
rather than acting alone.

Get independent radio back on air
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f36e223d1cb30b7df9552c56a4d661f97670cf4%2F0_73_4976_2986%2F4976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burundi%3A%20how%20to%20stop%20the%20bloodshed%20and%20avert%20civil%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fburundi-four-ways-to-stop-the-bloodshed-and-avert-civil-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f36e223d1cb30b7df9552c56a4d661f97670cf4%2F0_73_4976_2986%2F4976.jpg>
 Journalists and police look at weapons seized in Bujumbura. Photograph: 
STRINGER/AFP/Getty Images 
Negotiating for the return of the country’s independent radio shows is the 
best way to immediately debunk divisive ethnic discourse and wild rumours.

Unrest in Burundi - In Pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2015/may/07/unrest-in-burundi-in-pictures>
A free media would ensure better knowledge of what is happening outside 
Bujumbura. Given the current media blackout, little is known of the situation 
outside the capital and if mass killings were to happen in the countryside, it 
would be very difficult for news to travel.

The government has also been targeting foreign journalists. On Friday police 
were reported to have arrested a British and a French journalist during a sweep 
for rebels in flashpoint districts of the capital.

Moise Nkurunziza, deputy police spokesman, said the police had picked up 
British photojournalist Phil Moore and Jean Philippe Remy, a French journalist, 
during raids in Jabe and Nyakabiga neighbourhoods in Bujumbura on Thursday.

In a statement on its website, Le Monde demanded the immediate release of both 
journalists.
Tim Leslie (@Tim_Leslie) 
The deadly business of journalism in #Burundi 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Burundi?src=hash> https://t.co/KP9YsVDs3w 
<https://t.co/KP9YsVDs3w>
 <https://twitter.com/Tim_Leslie/status/689222546000973824> January 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Tim_Leslie/status/689222546000973824> 
Benjamin Chemouni is a PhD candidate at the London School of Economics 
focusing on Rwanda and Burundi
 