
I am no stranger to the peculiarities of Burundian democracy. As an active 
citizen committed to defending human rights over the past 20 years, I have been 
harassed, arrested, imprisoned and mistreated by the authorities.


In Burundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>, the exercise of 
democracy often means these things. On the evening of 3 August, I left my 
office in the centre of the capital city, Bujumbura, and barely even saw the 
motorbike ahead of me before the bullets shattered my windscreen and I was shot 
directly in the face.

Less than two weeks earlier the president, Pierre Nkurunziza, claimed victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/24/burundi-pierre-nkurunziza-wins-third-term-disputed-election>
 in an election marred by violence and intimidation of the opposition, civil 
society activists, journalists and voters themselves.

 A masked Burundian protester faces soldiers in front of a burning barricade 
in Bujumbura Photograph: Dai Kurokawa/EPA 
As a human rights activist I openly condemned the process, the president and 
the result. The United Nations and the African Union were on my side: they 
agreed theballot was neither free nor fair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/un-declares-burundi-elections-not-free-or-credible-amid-tense-standoff>
.

The bullet was my reward for exercising my democratic duty.

When the president announced that he would seek a third term in office – 
violating both the constitution and the peace accords that brought peace to my 
country after a decade of conflict – widespread protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/26/protest-burundi-president-third-term-bujumbura-pierre-nkurunziza>
 prompted new levels of government repressionand human rights abuses.

The violence caused many members of Burundi’s political opposition, 
independent journalists and human rights defenders to flee the country. It is a 
miracle that my own decision to remain in Burundi has not cost me my life. But 
what is democracy without political dissent, free media to report that dissent 
and the people to defend the right to express it?

While I am lucky to be alive, my friends, family and compatriots are at risk 
because targeted killings, arbitrary arrests, harassment and torture have 
become commonplace.

On Monday the UN high commissioner for human rights said there has been an 
“alarming upsurge” in the number of killings and arrests in Burundi since the 
president was sworn in for his third term. On Tuesday,unidentified gunmen 
killed Jean Baptiste Nsengiyumvaan 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/09/30/us-burundi-politics-idUSKCN0RU22H20150930>
, the head of a district opposition leader.


Great Lakes up in flames


If current trends continue, it is possible that violence will spiral out of 
control. Our region is a volatile one: civil unrest in Burundi could send the 
entire Great Lakes region up in flames again, echoing events in the 1990s and 
the Rwandan genocide.

Yet the international response to Burundi’s crisis continues to be disjointed 
and inadequate. The East African Community of Kenya,Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, Tanzania and Uganda have been 
paralysed in their ability to help by their rivalries and disagreements. 
Mediation efforts led by Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni have so far proved 
unproductive.

Not nearly enough pressure has been put on the Burundian government to respect 
human rights or the rule of law. There is no justice for the protestors who 
became victims of excessive force by the police. No justice for political 
prisoners being tortured by the so-called security services.

I am now writing from the safety of a hospital bed in Brussels, receiving care 
for my gunshot wounds. Luckily, friends helped me leave the country to get the 
necessary treatment. So here I lie in the city at the heart of theEuropean Union
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, which, together with its member 
states, funds a substantial portion of Burundi’s annual budget. This support 
gives the EU real leverage over the Burundian authorities.

In Burundi we have a saying: 'You cannot hide the smoke of the hut you set on 
fire'

The EU must wield that influence. A treaty between the EU and African states 
allows the EU to suspend budgetary aid to any country that is found to be 
wanting with respect to human rights, democratic values and the rule of law.

Brussels must make that threat and force the Burundian government to end human 
rights violations, bring perpetrators of crimes to justice and re-establish the 
rule of law, or suffer the consequences of a budgetary crisis.

As far as possible, international aid should be redirected towards NGOs, 
Burundian civil society, the independent media and humanitarian needs.

As EU officials and diplomats consider this course of action only a few miles 
from my hospital bed, they should know that they have my support. Taking a back 
seat as regional mediation efforts falter is no strategy.

In Burundi we have a saying: “You cannot hide the smoke of the hut you set on 
fire.”

Burundi is burning while the world is watching. The EU must help put out the 
fire before the house burns down.
 