
Vikam Modhwadia, programme coordinator, School for Creative Startups 
<http://www.schoolforcreativestartups.com/>

Before you think business plan, think business model
A business plan is a smart and sassy document you write for investors, lenders 
or potential partners to give them an understanding of your business, so they 
can make a decision to support it. A business model, on the other hand, is the 
practical understanding of how it will work. The School for Creative Startups 
has developed some key questions that will help you create your own:

 * The proposition: What do you do that people want? How do you know that your 
product is answering a need or fulfilling a desire?

 * The customer and market: Who are your customers and where do you find them? 
What are their attributes and what are your market segments?

 * The competition: Who are you up against and what can you learn from them?

My first business plan was a whopping 54-page word document, which was a big 
mistake
Pip Jamieson 
 * The industry: What do you have in common with your competition? Which 
trends are impacting your industry? How can you predict future trends?

 * The channel: What are the different routes to finding customers? 
 * The relationship: What financial relationship do you have with your 
customers? Do you want to sell your product by subscription, via a payment plan 
or as a product people buy at a fixed price?

 * The pricing model: How much should you charge for your product or service? 
What are your customers willing to pay? What are the other business costs to 
factor into your pricing model?

 * The key partner: Who is your key partner? How can suppliers, distributors 
and marketing companies become one? Who can you bring on board to help you 
deliver your product or service?

 * The asset: What is you key asset? What do you have to your advantage, to 
help you win customers? Is it physical, intellectual, human or financial?

 * The key competency: What activities must your business be good at in order 
to prosper? What skills and experience do you bring to the business? 
Pip Jamieson, founder and CEO, The Dots <https://the-dots.co.uk/>

Collaborate 
Getting your team excited about the business plan is key to its success. 
Before getting into the detail, a great first step is to spend an afternoon 
with the team and key stakeholders to work on thebusiness model canvas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QoAOzMTLP5s>: a useful visual collaboration 
tool that helps teams understand at a much deeper level the business’ 
relationship with customers, distribution channels, partners, revenue streams, 
costs and its core value proposition. This will help you consolidate your 
thinking before diving into the detail of the plan.

Keeping it visual can help
My first business plan was a whopping 54-page word document, which was a big 
mistake. If you can’t articulate your plan over 10 to 15 well-designed 
presentation slides, you will lose your audience. The key is getting the 
structure right from the get go, with a slide for each key component of your 
plan including business overview, target market, unique selling point (USP), 
market conditions, marketing plan, competitor analysis and so on. Keep text to 
a minimum and use graphs and visuals to explain some of the trickier bits. A 
good rule of thumb is that if someone can flick through your business plan in 
10 minutes and get it, you’ve done a cracking job.

Andrew Harding, managing director, CIMA <http://www.cimaglobal.com/>

Structure your plan
A challenge for anyone who is passionate about their business is to explain it 
in terms others can understand. A structured way of doing this is to articulate 
your business model in terms that lead to financial outcomes.

Start with your customers or the market segments you serve. Explain what 
assets, resources and relationships you have (or need) to serve them. Next, 
outline the processes and intangibles (specialist knowledge, skills, reputation 
etc) that enable you to meet customer needs competitively. Finally, you can 
explain what costs you will have and how you will generate income. Thinking 
about your business in this way will help you identify how to manage its 
performance and what strategies you will need to develop your business model. A 
business plan is simply a means of telling this story.

Sarah Wood, co-founder and COO, Unruly <http://unruly.co/>

People power
Remember that the point of the plan is to help you and your team focus. It 
should be an operational plan of action, not a bunch of theoretical concepts, 
notional market sizes and fanciful financial projections.

The people who you put in the plan are more important than the numbers you 
submit: who will you hire, when will you hire them and how will their success 
be measured? What alliances and partnerships beyond employees do you need to 
succeed? Although it’s good to be ambitious, the most useful business plans 
don’t look five or three years ahead. Things change too quickly for that to be 
much use. You want to have an agile, flexible mindset and a business plan to 
match so you can change direction if necessary.

Stuart Rock, editor-in-chief, Business is GREAT 
<http://www.greatbusiness.gov.uk/>

Sift, aggregate and test
Don’t just read one guide to writing a business plan; sift and aggregate the 
advice from several. None of them will provide you with passion, creativity and 
vision – that’s down to you – but you’ll have the all-important structure of a 
valuable business plan. Then test it with that most important constituency: the 
people who you believe will buy from you. Also, test it with someone who you 
can trust to be objective. Your plan will rarely survive contact with reality, 
but it’s a challenging process and an important discipline.

How arts companies and creative businesses can scale up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/apr/14/tips-arts-companies-creative-businesses-scale-up>
Scott Phillips, founder, Rise Art <http://www.riseart.com/>


Revisit your plan
We continue to iterate and improve on our business plan each quarter. I’m 
constantly looking at the latest research and speaking with our customers to 
see how we are doing in the real world. Our business plan always changes based 
on what we’ve seen that has worked and what’s not. We revisit it and modify the 
assumptions accordingly. Setting the business plan and agreeing regularly on 
the key indicators with the team also helps keep everyone honest. We know what 
is working and what is not, and we can measure our success or lack thereof 
accordingly. We also know where we need to focus our energy.

A really handy way to see if your product resonates with customers is to 
routinely survey your customers and establishnet promoters scores 
<http://www.netpromoter.com/why-net-promoter/know>. You’ll see how over time 
customers view and will recommend your brand.

Bernadine Bröcker, CEO, Vastari <https://www.vastari.com/>

A business model isn’t just a box-ticking exercise
It needs to ooze passion, drive, inspiration, as well as ticking the boxes. 
Make sure you think of all commercial and strategic angles, but also make sure 
that any potential investor or partner can also read how inspired you are in 
making this business a reality.

Resources

Arts Council England: Starting a business 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1432830203310/ACE-starting-a-business.pdf> (pdf)


Barclays: Writing a small business plan 
<http://www.barclays.co.uk/Startupsupport/Writingasmallbusinessplan/P1242559649359>

Business is GREAT: Writing a business plans 
<http://www.greatbusiness.gov.uk/writing-a-business-plan/>

Chartered Global Management Accountant essential tools booklet 
<http://www.cgma.org/Resources/Tools/essential-tools/DownloadableDocuments/Essential%20Tools%20for%20Management%20Accountants.pdf>
 (pdf)

Creative Industry Finance business planning workshops 
<https://www.creativeindustryfinance.org.uk/news/we-are-now-offering-workshops-for-registered-applicants>

Gov.uk: Write a business plan <https://www.gov.uk/write-business-plan>

ICAEW: Writing a business plan 
<http://www.icaew.com/~/media/Files/Library/collections/online-resources/briefings/start-up-briefings/01Buspla.pdf>
 (pdf)

Nesta Creative Enterprise Toolkit 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/creative-enterprise-toolkit>

Peter Thiel: sample pitch deck 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/127461241/Peter-Thiel-Good-Pitch-Deck-Example#scribd>

The Prince’s Trust business plan pack 
<http://www.princes-trust.org.uk/pdf/the-princes-trust-business-plan-guide-may-2014.pdf>
 (pdf)

RBS online business planner 
<http://www.business.rbs.co.uk/afb/public/rbs/!ut/p/c5/rZDLkqJAEEW_xQ9oqwqqSlgiL1EoEBCFDYG0MvISugyh-frRmM30RLS9mcxdnrgRJy9IwGPb7H4pstvl2mY1OICEpnIUIGipGEqmKUHLo5YfPE8QPnj8F3cjkUJLdgPiUyoEcPFDeg8OEKdB-dlZUzX5JRyZUzI3WFiDo9cOK5Xppo-MVwUK4c1l2m5gFYXO44ZyGUXGVldsLmrYmf0xgd-MAn8wWYPkcmzmQ97M4ZwQiIggCrJMEJaR8PBMvuT_-TNEr7kuvubPnp78hX0MksX3_giE_7HJL11AgqBAF5hKGGMoYAL2fjzZGrcKXVHTbntyawut7pJPMz-JN0PFl3bspYjwkuHGkZr4czd61WEdXU3tLE-rmNl9biyHLq_ZNrvHG0_52PREUWvUWOP76LlOmBuuptGmP6YfWXIyKC8uWXvbczvcCKnZYfW-lQKnYTyyzwVdy-oK-VAvj0HVepxk3rGvjHPFcf721on20kz6fc_1eqh08v7rpHi7NnciwFbX5gS6Zne3yVr3JSSJxWz2G9mR-gM!/dl3/d3/L2dBISEvZ0FBIS9nQSEh/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 