
A crisis meeting involving local charities, councils, youth clubs and other 
agencies was convened by the Cabinet Office on Thursday in an attempt to 
provide support for thousands of the most vulnerable children left without a 
lifeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/kids-company-closure-6000-children-have-lost-support>
 following the closure of Kids Company.

Representatives of about 40 organisations met government officials and Kids 
Company chairAlan Yentob <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> in 
south London to formulate plans to help minors affected by the charity’s 
closure.

BBC denies Alan Yentob influenced Newsnight's Kids Company report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/05/bbc-denies-alan-yentob-influenced-newsnight-kids-company-report>
The Guardian understands that the Cabinet Office will circulate a memo to 
organisations who attended the meeting on Friday, but that no clear plan of 
action has been agreed as to how to best look after those stranded by the
organisation’s dramatic termination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/kids-company-founder-camila-batmanghelidjh-confirms-charity-closure>
.

Richard Curtis, founder of The Root of It <http://www.rootofit.com/>, an 
organisation that works to raise standards in special needs services in 
schools, said: “If there is not something put in place very quickly, it’s very 
likely that things will start to deteriorate in those areas with those families 
that Kids Company has been supporting.Over the next few days a way forward will 
be identified by the Cabinet Office with local authorities and the other 
organisations who were present.”

The meeting occurred on the same day the charity’s founder, Camila 
Batmanghelidjh <https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh>, 
lashed out at ministers, civil servants and the press, claiming the 
organisation was the victim of a “trial by media”. During a plethora of media 
appearances early on Thursday, Batmanghelidjh made claims that elements of the 
government had turned on her because she is “outspoken”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fkids-company-founder-says-abuse-allegations-are-invalid-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438867574146%2FKP_382782_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20Company%20founder%20says%20abuse%20allegations%20are%20invalid%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fkids-company-founder-says-abuse-allegations-are-invalid-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20Company%20founder%20says%20abuse%20allegations%20are%20invalid%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fkids-company-founder-says-abuse-allegations-are-invalid-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F6%2F1438867574146%2FKP_382782_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Camila Batmanghelidjh says people should be more worried about the impact on 
the children rather than the ‘media circus’ surrounding the collapse of the 
charity 
When Kids Company closed this week, the charity had 36,000 children on its 
books. Several thousands of these are considered to be in need of immediate 
support. UK Youth, a national charity, said it was “working closely” with the 
government to fill the gap left by Kids Company.

But the three main local authorities where Kids Company has its bases – 
Bristol, Lambeth and Southwark – are expected to take the brunt of the fallout. 
Local authorities have a legal duty to safeguard vulnerable children living in 
their area.

The Guardian view on the fall of Kids Company: a social policy morality tale | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/05/the-guardian-view-on-the-fall-of-kids-company-a-social-policy-morality-tale>
However, Lambeth, which is expected to pick up the largest proportion of 
children formerly under the care of Kids Company, has its own problems in 
managing its children’s services department. In May its service was rated as 
inadequate by Ofsted, andinspectors were damning in their report 
<http://reports.ofsted.gov.uk/local-authorities/lambeth>. “There are widespread 
or serious failures in the delivery of services for looked-after children which 
result in their welfare not being safeguarded and promoted,” they wrote.


The government’s emergency meeting followed emotionally charged scenes on 
Wednesday outside the Kids Company centre in Peckham, south London, where the 
charity was founded 19 years ago.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and parents waving placards 
protested against the closure, while staff left the centre in tears, exchanging 
hugs with families they had worked with.

Kids Company had a string of celebrity backers, including rock band Coldplay 
and artist Damien Hirst, and was lauded by the prime minister,David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, as the embodiment of “the 
big society”.
 