
The Nationals will elect a new leader on Thursday evening and Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> is expected to 
reshuffle his cabinet over the course of the weekend, after Warren Truss 
brought forward his exit from the ministry.

The junior Coalition party has scheduled a meeting at 8pm in Canberra to 
select Truss’s successor, puttingBarnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce> in the box seat to 
become leader and deputy prime minister.

Nationals sources said they expected Joyce, currently the party’s deputy 
leader, to be elected unopposed because it was clear that he had the numbers to 
win.

Trade minister Andrew Robb to retire from politics as Truss considers future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/trade-minister-andrew-robb-to-retire-from-politics-as-truss-considers-future>
Truss was poised to announce plans to resign from the ministry on 17 March but 
sources said his departure was now linked to the timing of Turnbull’s broader 
reshuffle. The Nationals expect that reshuffle to occur this weekend.

“Just a few moments ago I informed my Nationals colleagues that I intend to 
retire from federal parliament at the next election,” Truss, the MP for the 
Queensland seat of Wide Bay, told parliament on Thursday.

“I’ll stand down as leader of the Nationals and deputy prime minister at a 
convenient time for the government, probably within the next few days.”

Truss said it had been an honour to serve as the leader of the Nationals, 
noting that when he assumed the position after the 2007 election “nobody wanted 
the job, including me”.

“I’m pleased to say that now things are different and everyone wants the job 
and I am particularly proud and pleased that whoever is elected as my 
successor, and whoever becomes the new deputy leader, if there’s to be a new 
deputy leader, that I will be proud to serve under any of them.”

Truss serves as the minister for infrastructure and regional development. With 
the trade minister, Andrew Robb, alsoconfirming his plans to retire at the next 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/trade-minister-andrew-robb-to-retire-from-politics-as-truss-considers-future>
, government insiders had been concerned about the ministerial and Coalition 
uncertainty dragging on too long in an election year.

Robb, who is a Victorian MP, told parliament the government was “in very good 
shape” and it was the right time for him “to hand over the baton”.

In a tribute speech in parliament, Turnbull praised Truss and Robb as “two 
remarkable men who have made such a difference for Australia”.

“All of us are a little sad that that they have announced that they are not 
going to run again,” the prime minister said.

In a message possibly intended for the next Nationals leader, Turnbull said 
Truss’s leadership had been a source of “great stability and great generosity” 
because he was committed to the strength of the Coalition.

“He understands the importance of the National party’s distinct identity, but 
the reality that we are so much stronger when we are working closely together,” 
Turnbull said.

Joyce, one of many other MPs to address the parliament, agreed that Truss had 
“personified decency, self-control, attention to detail, leadership, strength”.

Michael McCormack, an assistant minister who had been considering running for 
the Nationals leadership, said Joyce was Truss’s likely successor.

The former prime minister Tony Abbott said Truss had personified “grown-up, 
adult government” and ensured “a decade of Coalition harmony”.

Abbott praised Robb for settling free trade agreements with China, South Korea 
and Japan and signing the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

“As the prime minister has observed, he is the best trade minister the country 
has ever had, no ifs, no buts, the record is there to demonstrate,” Abbott said.

“You know, in this parliament, we are very good at saying the right thing, but 
we are not always nearly so good at doing the right thing. Both the member for 
Wide Bay [Truss] and the member for Goldstein [Robb] have done the right thing, 
in every way. Our country is better for their public life.”


The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said he wanted to acknowledge Truss and Robb’s 
service to the parliament and the nation.

Turnbull had been waiting for certainty over Truss’s exit before embarking on 
a reshuffle, even after two departures from the frontbench late last year.


Nothing will change after the Stuart Robert furore dies down. It never does | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/11/nothing-will-change-after-the-stuart-robert-furore-dies-down-it-never-does>
Jamie Briggs resigned as the minister for cities and the built environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/jamie-briggs-resigns-federal-minister-cities>
 after “inappropriate” conduct towards a staffer during an official visit to 
Hong Kong and Mal Brough stood aside as special minister of state pending a 
police investigation into his alleged role in the downfall of Peter Slipper.

Turnbull was also set to decide on the future of the human services and 
veterans’ affairs minister, Stuart Robert, who hasfaced questions over a 
“private” 2014 trip to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/peta-credlin-was-told-about-stuart-roberts-china-travel-plans-committee-hears>
 when he was assistant defence minister to witness a mining deal and meet with 
a Chinese vice minister.

Amid the uncertainty, the Nationals have also been pushing for an increase in 
their representation in cabinet.

Joyce, the deputy Nationals leader and agriculture minister, has long 
expressed an interest in succeeding Truss in the top job and is considered to 
have the numbers to win the contest. McCormack also signalled an interest, but 
a longer timeframe would have given him more time to build support.
 