
The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, will attempt to 
push past the controversies and internal tensions of the past parliamentary 
week with a long-anticipated refresh of his frontbench over the weekend.


The prime minister and the new Nationals leader, Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, were in discussions 
on Friday night about the allocation of new portfolios for the junior coalition 
partner in the revamp.

The Nationals will take three cabinet spots, with Joyce said to favour 
remaining in his agriculture ministry.

The new Nationals deputy leader, Fiona Nash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/fiona-nash>, who will move into the 
cabinet, told the ABC on Friday night she would discuss her specific portfolio 
options with Joyce once his deliberations with the prime minister had concluded.

The Queensland Liberal Steve Ciobo is widely tipped to take the trade 
portfolio after the decision this week by the trade minister,Andrew Robb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-robb>, to retire at the 
forthcoming election and step back into an “envoy” role for the remainder of 
his time as a parliamentarian.

There is an expectation in government ranks that the Nationals MP Darren 
Chester, who missed out on a leadership position on Thursday, and the Victorian 
Liberal MP Dan Tehan, are likely to enter the outer ministry in the revamp.

There was also some internal speculation on Friday that Turnbull could elevate 
the NSW Liberal MP Angus Taylor, who faces pre-selection headaches in his seat 
of Hume.

Stuart Robert loses job as minister after China trip furore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
The reshuffle, expected to be unveiled by the prime minister in Sydney on 
Saturday afternoon, comes as Turnbull on Fridaymoved against the human services 
minister, Stuart Robert, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/12/stuart-robert-loses-job-as-minister-following-china-trip-furore>
 after days of political bombardment by the Labor opposition.

Robert was dumped from the ministry for acting inconsistently with the 
government’s statement of ministerial standards after he undertook a 
controversial visit to Beijing. Robert accompanied a political donor, Paul 
Marks, on a business trip, and then met a Chinese government minister, 
reportedly in the presence of executives from Nimrod Resources.

Robert’s exit from the ministry on Friday follows the departure late last year 
of the then cities minister, Jamie Briggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/jamie-briggs-resigns-federal-minister-cities>
, after an incident with a public servant in a Hong Kong bar and a decision 
that the then special minister of state, Mal Brough,should step aside for the 
duration of the Australian Federal Police investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/29/mal-brough-steps-aside-as-minister-while-police-investigate-slipper-affair>
 into his conduct during the James Ashby controversy.

The dumping of Robert and the recent process of internal deliberations over 
tax policy have exposed residual government tensions hanging over from the 
leadership change from Tony Abbott to Malcolm Turnbull.
 