
This week’s best city stories from around the web talk about marijuana zones 
in California, a forgotten waterway under the streets of Auckland, a mushroom 
farm in Camden and mime-artist-assisted traffic control in Bogotá. We’d love to 
hear your responses to these stories, and any others you’ve read recently, both 
onGuardian Cities <https://www.theguardian.com/cities> and elsewhere. Just 
share your thoughts in the comments below.

Pot city

The practice of land-use zoning (everything from residential neighbourhoods to 
heavy industry and retail) is well known to cities, especially in the US. But 
one city in California is due to see a highly (pun intended) unexpected 
addition to this: a marijuana zone. AsNext City reports 
<https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/california-city-arcata-innovation-zone-marijuana>
, the small city of Arcata has just become the first jurisdiction in the US to 
officially embrace the production of the plant in a proposed “medical marijuana 
innovation zone”.

“City officials believe it would be the country’s first-ever land use 
designation specifically meant to promote and regulate the production of 
marijuana and cannabis-related products,” writes Josh Stephens. Areas on the 
edge of the town are being earmarked for the activity, due to concerns that the 
smell could disturb residents.

The ups and downs of LA

Speaking of California, Aaron Renn this week wrote a piece about the double 
life of Los Angeles: at once a glamorous, luxurious entertainment city and a 
metropolis suffering from failing urban infrastructure and socio-economic 
inequality. “What we are witnessing is LA changing in the context of the 
two-tier world – divided between rich and poor – that we live in,”Renn writes 
in New Geography 
<http://www.newgeography.com/content/004994-la-s-tale-two-cities>. “This has 
been made worse by a city that has excessively focused on glamour at the 
expense of broad-based opportunity creation.”

Also this week, Refinery 29 has published Jeffrey Milstein’s beautiful aerial 
photos of LA 
<http://www.refinery29.com/jeffrey-milstein-aerial-photos-los-angeles#slide>, 
where luxury neighbourhoods and power plants turn into dazzling and dizzying 
urban patterns.

Lost city waterways


This week we came across Waihorotiu, a beautiful short documentary by Loading 
Docs <http://loadingdocs.net/about/> about an ancient waterway under the 
streets of Auckland. The film uses the history of the Waihorotiu stream to 
explore the relationship between urbanisation and waterways: as the city of 
Auckland grew, Waihorotiu was turned into a sewer and made invisible, cut off 
from its spring and the sea.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F132287269&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F132287269>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F132287269&media=>
 Waihorotiu, directed by Frances Haszard and Louis Olsen 
Bike-friendly Jakarta

New Cities Foundation <http://www.newcitiesfoundation.org/> recently held an 
urban challenge looking for effective solutions to mobility and traffic 
problems in Jakarta, one of the world’s most congested cities. One of the 
winners was Cyclist Urban System, a proposition for “cyclist hubs” across 
Jakarta, where cyclists can park their bikes, change their clothes, buy 
refreshments and repair their bikes. Khairunnisa Kautsar, co-founder of the 
initiative,explains the current situation 
<http://www.newcitiesfoundation.org/transforming-jakarta-into-a-bike-friendly-city>
 for cyclists in Indonesia’s capital:

Some people opt for biking in Jakarta as it can be quicker than navigating the 
city’s busy roads by car. However, others are deterred by the lack of 
facilities for bikers as well as safety hazards ... One major challenge that 
Jakarta’s cyclists face is the noxious emissions from motor vehicles. There is 
also a lack of bike lanes and little shade, which can cause discomfort. These 
factors can put people off cycling. We believe that, if we made an effort to 
improve conditions for cyclists, we could help change the habits of Jakarta’s 
commuters and reduce the reliance of cars on our congested roads.


Bogotá


Writing in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/opinion/the-art-of-changing-a-city.html>, 
former Bogotá mayor Antanas Mockus writes about his experience of continuing 
Enrique Peñalosa’s work of transforming the city into the poster child for 
urbanism that it is today. Mockus’s approach to urban improvements included a 
healthy dose of playfulness. For instance, he decided to replace corrupt 
traffic police officers with mime artists:

The idea was that instead of cops handing out tickets and pocketing fines, 
these performers would “police” drivers’ behaviour by communicating with mime – 
for instance, pretending to be hurt or offended when a vehicle ignored the 
pedestrian right of way in a crosswalk ... People began to obey traffic signals 
and, for the first time, they respected crosswalks.

Mushroom city

And, finally, if it’s mushrooms you’re after, you might want to head to Camden 
(we’re talking about food now, not drugs).Article Number 25 
<http://www.crowdfunder.co.uk/the-alchemists-of-camden>, an urban farming 
organisation, is currently crowdfunding for a mushroom farm in an abandoned 
space in the popular North London neighbourhood to help make the UK capital “a 
more resilient and sustainable city; a city that feeds itself”. The plan is to 
grow the mushrooms in a bed of used coffee grounds, sawdust and straw – and 
perhaps even newspapers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2ylnc1q9Vr0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2ylnc1q9Vr0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2ylnc1q9Vr0&media=>
 Alchemists of Camden by Article Number 25.  