
The British Humanist Association has responded to news that Bangladeshi 
security forces have arrested three men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/briton-touhidur-rahman-arrested-in-bangladesh-over-murders-of-secular-bloggers>
 - including a British citizen - over the murders of two bloggers by calling 
for them to face trial as soon as possible.

The BHA’s chief executive, Andrew Copson, issued a statement saying:

“If there is sound evidence that these individuals, including a Briton, are 
responsible for the brutal, mindless murders of Avijit [Roy] and Ananta [Bijoy 
Das] then they must face trial and justice without delay.

Humanists are living in a culture of fear and intimidation in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>, certain that more lives will be 
taken simply for expressing a view opposing the Islamists.”

According to Major Maksudul Alam of Bangladesh’s Rapid Action Battalion (RAB), 
one of those arrested is Touhidur Rahman, a 58-year-old British citizen of 
Bangladeshi origin.

He is alleged to have been responsible for planning the murders of Roy and Das 
as a member of Ansarullah Bangla Team, a group banned in May over aseries of 
killings of bloggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/two-suspected-islamists-arrested-over-killing-of-secular-bangladesh-blogger>
.

Roy and Das are among four secular bloggers murdered in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> since the start of the year. 
Roy, a US citizen born in Bangladesh, washacked to death in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/american-atheist-blogger-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
. Daswas similarly killed in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/may/13/another-secular-blogger-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
.

Copson said: “The Bangladeshi government must do more to protect all its 
citizens from brutal fundamentalist thugs who would kill another human being 
for daring to think outside the confines of dogmatic religion.

“If it is true that a Briton is responsible, then it is clear that the UK 
government must also do more to combat any culture of impunity developing here 
for Islamists operating globally and visiting their violence on the humanist 
citizens of other states.”

But the International Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU) has cautioned foreign 
journalists to be beware of disinformation 
<http://iheu.org/disinformation-on-bangladesh-blogger-murders-must-be-confronted/>
 about police claims in relation to the murders of the bloggers.

After Das’s killing, Human Rights Watch called on the Bangladeshi government to
 extend police protection to all those who appear on so-called atheist blogger 
hit-lists 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2015/05/12/bangladesh-killing-blogger-blow-free-speech>
. HRW regards the murders as a negation of freedom of speech and press freedom.

Sources: The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/briton-touhidur-rahman-arrested-in-bangladesh-over-murders-of-secular-bloggers>
/BHA by email/IHEU 
<http://iheu.org/disinformation-on-bangladesh-blogger-murders-must-be-confronted/>
/HRW 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2015/05/12/bangladesh-killing-blogger-blow-free-speech>
 