
Props to TVNewser <http://www.mediabistro.com/tvnewser/>'s Steven Krakauer, 
who has aninterview 
<http://www.mediabistro.com/tvnewser/abc/ross_responds_to_vital_questions_about_anthrax_report_90768.asp>
 with Brian Ross of ABC News. Ross is the journalist who in 2001 fuelled 
national fears with his reporting on the anthrax killings, citing unnamed 
sources whofalsely linked the anthrax attacks 
<http://www.salon.com/opinion/greenwald/2008/08/01/anthrax/index.html> to 
Saddam Hussein and Iraq. In light of recent (and still somewhat murky) 
revelations in recent days, Jay Rosen and I asked three questions we hoped ABC 
would address. (Here'smy version 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/aug/04/terrorism.usa>; here's 
Jay's 
<http://journalism.nyu.edu/pubzone/weblogs/pressthink/2008/08/04/abcnews_qs.html>
.)

Read the questions, and then Ross' response to TVNewser.

Essentially, Ross is saying that he was told by sources who believed what they 
were saying at the time; that the White House denied it; that ABC News reported 
that denial; and therefore everyone acted in good faith, including the network. 
The process he describes - three top scientists, and then a fourth, concluding 
that a material found in the anthrax is bentonite, thereby tying the attack to 
Iraq, before discovering, oops, that it wasn't bentonite after all - is 
suspicious all by itself. But let's assume they were making an honest mistake 
and were not playing him all along.

There's another problem, a journalistic one that Ross dismisses: He did not 
tell his viewers that the scientist sources concluded they'd been wrong, and 
that they told him so.

The White House denial was enough, Ross told TVNewser, adding, "From my point 
of view it gave national credibility to have on the record attribution and not 
some anonymous scientists."

Right, those same anonymous scientists who were the basis for his melodramatic 
reporting in the first place - the same sources who spurred him to report, 
sensationally but falsely, that the anthrax was likely coming from Iraq's 
government.

Here's how Jay paraphrases 
<http://journalism.nyu.edu/pubzone/weblogs/pressthink/2008/08/07/ross_replies.html>
 Ross's response:

Q. Did you ever report that your three - sorry, four - sources had changed 
their minds, and that they were wrong the first time?

A. Now why would I do that? These were confidential sources. I had the fire 
department on the record telling me that it was not arson. That's a lot better, 
don't you think?

A news organisation on a mission to keep its audience fully informed would 
have run a separate report saying that its fabulous sources from the original, 
sensational reports were now saying they'd gotten it wrong. This news 
organisation preferred, for whatever reasons, to keep such highly relevant 
information from its audience.

If these events occurred the way Ross says they did - and if ABC has done 
sufficient homework to ensure that they were not part of a scheme to manipulate 
the network - then ABC would be justified in not revealing the sources' names 
now. That assumes a great deal. I hope some other journalists who work for 
other news organisations are probing those questions now, because it's obvious 
to me that ABC will not.
 