 Anthony Howard in 1985. Photograph by Neil Libbert 
Anthony Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-howard>, who died in 
2010, was among the most acute political commentators of his generation, a 
familiar face and voice on television and radio, and a distinguished editor. He 
also had an exceptional ability to encourage young writers.

Now, in his memory, Haymarket Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/haymarket-media-group> has agreed to fund an 
annual bursary of Â£25,000 a year for aspiring journalists under the age of 25 
who want to write about politics and government.

Applicants must propose a subject for a 5,000 word essay for publication in 
2014. The successful candidate will serve three successive internships of 14 
weeks each, starting in October this year, at the publications with which 
Howard was most closely associated - The Times, The Observer and theNew 
Statesman <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-statesman>. The scheme will 
run for five years.

The award will be determined by Robert Harris, Peter Hennessy, Jeremy Isaacs, 
Jeremy Paxman andClaire Tomalin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/claire-tomalin>.

Lord Heseltine, who established Haymarket, was at Oxford with Howard, and they 
became lifelong friends.

Howard began his journalism on the Reynold's News before moving to The Guardian
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian>, the Sunday Times and then The 
Observer, where he served as Washington correspondent during Lyndon Johnson's 
presidency.

He returned to London to the New Statesman, which he edited for six years from 
1972, spotting and encouraging a galaxy of talent, including Martin Amis, 
Julian Barnes, James Fenton andChristopher Hitchens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/christopher-hitchens>.

A spell editing The Listener was followed by a return to The Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theobserver>, as deputy editor, where his 
elegant writing on politics made him a must-read.

He moved to The Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/thetimes> in 1993 as 
obituaries editor, a natural home for a man who was always fascinated by 
people, rather than process.

Applicants should send their proposal, plus a short CV and contact details, to 
anthonyhowardaward@gmail.com <mailto:anthonyhowardaward@gmail.com>. 
Applications will close at 23.59 on Saturday 17 August 2013. Visit
anthonyhowardaward.org.uk <http://anthonyhowardaward.org.uk/> for more details.
 