
Bells, drums, bracelets, bronze statuettes; cornaline and agate beads; a 
Buddha's head, a lingam, a phallic symbol associated with the Hindu deity 
Shiva, lintels, fragments of chiselled bas-reliefs and engraved sandstone 
steles; female divinities, ritual objects, gilded wooden statues … and so the 
list goes on. In all, the first Red List of Cambodian Antiquities at Risk 
published on the internet by theInternational Council of Museums  
<http://icom.museum/>(ICOM) details 46 categories of object.

Despite the measures taken by the Cambodian government to protect its 
2,000-year-old Khmer heritage, the widespread looting and destruction of 
archaeological sites continues.

At present only the immediate vicinity (covering about 230 sq km) of the main 
Angkor <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angkor_Wat> temples – Angkor Wat, Bayon, 
Baphuon, Preah Khan and Ta-Prohm – which Unesco placed on itsWorld Heritage list
 <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list> in 1992, is protected. Angkorian remains 
hidden in the forest extend over a much larger area.

Apart from Angkor, attempts to prevent looting have had little effect. "The 
prehistoric past ofCambodia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia> 
remains largely unexplored and undocumented," ICOM explains on its site. "The 
looting of sites from all periods of Cambodia's past robs the world of the 
chance to understand the unique beginnings and continuous evolution of the 
Khmer civilisation."

Local people have no idea of the antiquities' value nor even the ban on trade. 
This explains why, in 2009, only two thefts – of sandstone statues of the 
Buddha – were reported to Interpol, which keeps track of stolen artefacts for 
its 188 members, including Cambodia.

Recent thefts have not achieved the same media impact as the spectacular raid 
onBanteay Chmar <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banteay_Chhmar> temple, east of 
Angkor, in 1999, when a 50-metre strip of bas-reliefs was cut out and trucked 
through the jungle to Thailand. Fortunately, the loot was intercepted in 
Thailand and returned to Cambodia. ICOM's first Red List of Cambodian 
Antiquities at Risk targets collectors, museums, art dealers, customs and 
police, but also seeks to inform the general public and raise overall awareness.

Although neither of the two recognised trafficking hubs – Thailand and 
Switzerland – have ratified the Unesco convention on illicit trade in cultural 
goods, this development may well make them less attractive.

This article originally appeared in Le Monde <http://www.lemonde.fr/>
 