
Situated between Thailand, Laos and Vietnam, Cambodia is home to an enviable 
combination of ancient culture and exotic landscapes, from lush tropical 
rainforest and mighty rivers - including the Mekong - to rice paddies and 
beaches. Political unrest remains an uncomfortable thorn in Cambodia's side, 
and sporadic outbursts of violence still occur, although less frequently.

The main destination for most travellers is Siem Reap, where you can see the 
huge temple complex of Angkor Wat, built between the 9th and 13th centuries in 
honour of the Khmer kings. Its atmosphere of ancient mystery deepens when you 
discover that, after having been a seat of significant religious and 
administrative power, Angkor Wat was abandoned in the 15th century and the 
entire site was reclaimed by dense forest. It was not until the late 19th 
century that it was rediscovered and the slow process of restoration began.

Cambodia has a population of around 10 million, about 10% of whom are found on 
the banks of the Mekong in Pnhom Penh, the capital city. The city is steeped in 
history: two of the must-sees are the Royal Compound with its famous silver 
pagoda, and Wat Phnom, around which the city was built. There are plenty of 
cheap and atmospheric places for tourists to eat and drink - try the Foreign 
Correspondents club, where legends from the past such as Al Rockoff (the 
photographer played by John Malkovich in The Killing Fields) can still be seen 
sitting at the bar. Visit the Central Market for fruit and vegetables and the 
Russian Market for gold and silver.

The country continues to be haunted by the genocide committed under Pol Pot's 
Khmer Rouge <https://www.theguardian.com/world/khmer-rouge> regime, in which it 
is estimated that two million people were killed and millions of cultural 
artefacts destroyed. Since Pol Pot's death, in 1998, the country has managed to 
regain internal stability and rebuild its tourist industry. Unfortunately, 
however, the legacy of US carpet bombing during the Vietnam war means that 
Cambodia remains one of the world's most heavily landmined countries. It is 
therefore ill-advised to stray very far from the beaten track.

Best sites

· Cambodian Information Centre <http://www.cambodia.org/> A comprehensive 
directory of sites relating to Cambodia.
· Internet Travel Guide - Cambodia <http://www.pmgeiser.ch/cambodia/> Provides 
a factual introduction to the country for travellers.
· Beauty and Darkness: Cambodia in Modern History 
<http://members.aol.com/cambodia/> A look at the country's history, culture and 
politics, focusing on the Khmer Rouge period.
· Phnom Penh Post Online <http://www.phnompenhpost.com/> Up-to-date info on 
current events.
· The Foreign Office travel advice 
<http://www.fco.gov.uk/servlet/Front?pagename=OpenMarket%2FXcelerate%2FShowPage&c=Page&cid=1007029390590&a=KCountryAdvice&aid=1013618385729>

If you only do three things

Be awestruck by Angkor Wat 
<http://travel.theguardian.com/article/2004/jan/22/cambodia> and the ancient 
temple complex, munch on a baguette inBattambang 
<http://home.planet.nl/~bellaart/html/cambodia/btbmain.htm> in one of the 
French shop-houses by the river, soak up the atmosphere and sip an iced coffee 
in Kompong Luong, the floating town onTonlé Sap 
<http://www.terragalleria.com/theravada/tc.ts.html> lake.

News and current affairs

Cambodia's online publications from the world news guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/worldnewsguide/asia/page/0,,622915,00.html>.

Language

Khmer is the official language, spoken by 95% of the population. Chinese and 
Vietnamese are also spoken. French used to be spoken widely until the Pol Pot 
regime, and is spoken now only by the older generation. English is the most 
popular foreign language among the younger generation.

Climate

A tropical monsoon climate, dividing into the cool, dry, north-eastern monsoon 
from November to February and the humid south-western monsoon from May to 
October. The most comfortable months in which to visit are December and 
January, when it is cooler and less humid. By April the heat and humidity are 
stifling, and temperatures often reach 40%C (104%F).

Health

Vaccinations are recommended for typhoid, hepatitis, rabies and Japanese 
encephalitis. Malaria is present throughout the country all year round and 
there is high resistance to chloroquine and sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine, so it is 
best to check current medical advice before you go.

Food

Khmer cuisine is very similar to Thai, but less spicy. Fish in varying forms 
is the staple ingredient. One speciality is grilled freshwater fish wrapped in 
lettuce or spinach and dipped in a nutty fish sauce. (Cambodia is home to the 
largest freshwater lake in south-east Asia.) Cambodians are particularly fond 
of coriander, mint and lemongrass, a pleasant combination that appears in many 
dishes. It is also usual for meals to include a soup of some kind. Like Laos, 
the French colonial influence is best sampled in the freshly baked bread. For 
the sweet tooth, sticky rice cakes and jackfruit pudding are the order of the 
day.

What to buy

Jewellery, antiques and kramas (checked cotton scarves)

Events

January/February Lunar New Year is celebrated by ethnic Chinese and Vietnamese.
April Khmer New Year celebrations bring the country to a halt for three days, 
with plenty of water and talcum powder throwing.May Chat Preah Nengkal, or the 
Royal Ploughing Festival, takes place near the Royal Palace in Phnom Penh.
November Bom Om Tuk is the most important festival in the Khmer calendar, 
celebrating the end of the wet season. This is definitely the best time to 
visit Phnom Penh or Siem Reap.

Embassies and visas

UK: Royal Embassy of Cambodia <http://www.cambodianembassy.org.uk/>, 28-32 
Wellington Road (Wellington Building), St John's Wood, London NW8 9SP (020 7483 
9063)

Cambodia:  British Embassy 
<http://www.britishembassy.gov.uk/servlet/Front?pagename=OpenMarket/Xcelerate/ShowPage&c=Page&cid=1065718172739>
, 27 Street 75, Phnom Penh, Cambodia (+23 427 124 or 428 295)
Visa requirements: You can buy one-month visas on arrival at Pochentong and 
Siem Reap airports, costing US$20 for a tourist visa and US$25 for a business 
visa.

Currency

£1 buys approx. 7,900 Riel. US dollars and Thai baht are widely accepted and 
exchanged, but other currencies are not generally recognised. Acceptance of 
travellers cheques is limited, so they are not recommended.

Timezone

GMT +7

Getting there

There are no direct intercontinental flights to Cambodia - most people fly via 
Bangkok to Phnom Penh or Siem Reap, though you can also fly out of Singapore, 
Kuala Lumpur, Hong Kong, Ho Chi Minh City, Vientiane and Guanghzhou (China). A 
departure tax is levied on international departures at Pochentong airport and 
at Siem Reap airport.

The overland route is more tempting now the road linking Phnom Penh with the 
Thai border at Poipet has been improved. You can also get from Thailand's Trat 
Province to the coastal town of Krong Koh Kong by a series of boats and buses. 
Buses and shared taxis will also get you to Vietnam's entry point at Moc Bai. 
Another huge advantage has been the opening in recent years of the 
Cambodian/Laos border.

Related literature

Brother Enemy, Nayan Chanda Insight into Cambodia and Vietnam's descent into 
war.

Swimming to Cambodia, Spalding Gray Based on his experiences acting in The 
Killing Fields.

River of Time, Jon Swain A British foreign correspondent's chronicle of his 
time covering the war in Indochina during the early 70s.
 