
Camelot, the operator of the National Lottery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lottery>, has hailed the London 2012 Olympics 
for boosting revenue as it reported record sales of £3.53bn in the six months 
to 29 September.

The company said ticket sales grew by 8.1% year-on-year, just over £264m, 
compared to the same period last year.

Camelot managing director Andy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, the former chief executive of 
Channel 4, said the company played a "truly unique role" in the London Games.

Duncan added that almost nine in 10 Team GB athletes received some form of 
lottery funding and that it hit its target of raising £750m from the sale of 
Olympic and Paralympic-themed lottery games.

"This was only made possible by the outstanding contribution of our players 
and they should feel immensely proud that none of it would have happened 
without them," he said.

Camelot said that the lottery has delivered almost £1bn to good causes in the 
six months to 29 September.

In August, Camelot lost a high court legal action seeking to get the gambling 
licence for Richard Desmond's rival Health Lottery revoked.

Desmond has called Camelot as a "bully" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/22/richard-desmond-camelot> for 
seeking to go after the Health Lottery.

At the time of the decision Camelot said that it intended to continue its 
action and lodge papers with the court of appeal.

However, the company subsequently said that despite having grounds to appeal, 
it decided not to lodge papers as it would delay "much needed political action 
to close a loophole" in the Gambling Act that it alleges Desmond is exploiting.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 