
The vicar – Gillean Craig – and the author and former Observer journalist 
Robert Harris gaveAnthony Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anthony-howard> a magnificent send-off at 
Howard's funeral last week at St Mary Abbots in Kensington. Tony, as he was 
known, has deservedly received many tributes in the press and elsewhere. I 
should just like to add a little-known story about our fondly remembered former 
deputy editor, which is not irrelevant to the present political situation.

These days we are told by a right-wing Conservative government that we are all 
in this together, just as it was all about peace and harmony in Margaret 
Thatcher's day, when she infamously cited the putative words of St Francis of 
Assisi ("Where there is discord, may we bring harmony" and so on) on the steps 
of Downing Street.

But Thatcher rewrote history when attributing that prayer to St Francis.

In his address at Howard's funeral, Harris referred to Tony's prodigious 
interest in, and knowledge of, ecclesiastical matters. This reminded me of the 
time my wife and I had visited the church of St Francis in Fiesole, above 
Florence, in the mid-1980s. The economist Wynne Godley was in our party, and 
when we found the prayer attributed to St Francis in the porch, Godley 
suggested that, with all the unemployment and social discontent back in 
Britain, I should highlight the gap between prayer and reality in my column.

When I consulted Tony on return, he smelt a rat. He pointed me in the 
direction of one of the world's leading authorities on St Francis, a Church of 
England dignitary in Ripon, Yorkshire, who, it turned out, had established 
beyond question that the prayer attributed to St Francis was in fact the 
creation of a French clergyman during the first world war. To this day, that 
moving prayer is wrongly attributed.

Now, in The Godfather, Marlon Brando comes out with the mortal line "I spent 
my life trying not to be careless". My objection to our present prime minister 
and chancellor is that they are being careless with the economy and with 
people's livelihoods. From the moment that they started comparing our economic 
position with that of Greece, I myself smelt a rat. Osborne was at it again 
last week, and it is good to see that the much-maligned leader of the 
opposition, Ed Miliband, is beginning to fight back.

The rate at which Cameron and Osborne are doing their own rewriting of history 
is breathtaking. They were all in favour of Labour's public spending plans when 
in opposition; but now, it seems, it was those plans of which they then 
approved that led to the deficit problem, and the world financial crisis had 
nothing to do with it. (Oh, and by the way, we are indebted to the American 
economist Paul Krugmanfor reminding us 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/20/opinion/20krugman.html?_r=1> that in 2006 
George Osborne declared: "Ireland stands as a shining example of the art of the 
possible in long-term economic policymaking. 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/guest_contributors/article733821.ece>
")

This affords us an interesting insight into the chancellor's understanding of 
the possible. Basically, he makes it up as he goes along. As do his colleagues. 
A suspicious aspect of the way they have tried to rationalise and justify their 
trebling of university tuition fees is the argument: "Why should the poor 
subsidise the education of the middle class?" Are they aware of the flank they 
are exposing? Why should the poor subsidise the defence industry? Why should 
anyone pay taxes towards public expenditure of which they disapprove? There is 
a can of worms here, and the coalition has found the tin-opener. It is not for 
nothing that, from time immemorial, HM Treasury has been opposed to the 
doctrine of hypothecation – taxes raised for a specific purpose, as opposed to 
those raised for general purposes. The Treasury knows the thin end of a wedge 
when it sees it.

It also knows that it is on to a good thing with VAT. Who would have thought 
until recently that we would reach a position where the basic rate of income 
tax, and the principal rate of indirect tax, were both 20%?

The government has been reacting to the traditional complaint that indirect 
taxes are regressive – that they impinge more, proportionately, on the poor 
than the rich – by claiming that the reverse is true. They are right in one 
sense, simply because the rich, for obvious reasons, spend a lot more on goods 
subject to VAT than do the poor.

But whatever the intricacies of the distributional argument, the fact is that 
the government is now piling extra deflationary pressure, via the increase in 
VAT and the savage cuts in public spending, on an economy that has already been 
hit by a reduction in real incomes. As the TUC has pointed out, those incomes – 
except for senior executives, whose emoluments seem to know few bounds – are 
rising more slowly than prices. And the recent rise in the price of oil is also 
acting as a severe drag on real incomes.

It is certainly good news that our manufacturing sector seems to be on the 
mend. Unfortunately this is from a low base, after a long period of neglect and 
an overvalued pound. The significant devaluation of sterling since 2007 has 
helped this incipient recovery. The trade figures may still leave a lot to be 
desired, but they would have left even more to be desired if it had not been 
for the recovery of price competitiveness made possible by the flexibility of 
sterling.

A happy new year to all my readers. Remember, we are all in 2011 together.
 