
Sometimes you discover a gobbet of opinion to cut out and keep for future 
reference. Here, from a few days ago, is Matthew Parris, most feted ofTimes 
political observers, former Tory MP, Thatcher aide and EU agnostic,scenting a 
backbench Conservative "fifth column" 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article3978780.ece> bent on 
destroying David Cameron. "For these people the European Union is the Great 
Satan of their political lifetimes. All else is subordinated to fighting this 
evil.

"We are dealing here with a quasi-religious fanaticism, according to which 
even a referendum may be a snare because followers believe – like those 
Marxists with whom they have much in common – that the masses may be deluded 
into 'false consciousness' by a lying autocracy … They will never trust Mr 
Cameron with a referendum … They will not rest until he's gone. And they will 
never say so."

Watch this thesis play out over coming months (as it was on the immigration 
vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jan/30/tory-immigration-rebels-deal-blow-david-cameron-authority>
 last Thursday). Then wonder whether you can't find the same brand of 
quasi-religious fanaticism lurking in what we used to call "the Tory press". 
Before, that is, asking why, with friends like the blue boys of Fleet Street, 
Cameron needs enemies.

Boulton: an easy act to follow?

There's no need for Sky News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> to 
go out looking for Adam Boulton's successor as political editor. They can just 
sit back and see perfect candidates drop into their lap. Take Benedict Brogan, 
deputy editor of theTelegraph, fine analyst, demon political blogger – and 
unaccountably demoted when his editor departed. Time for a little blue Sky 
thinking before the transfer window closes?
 