
David Cameron's government is more obsessive about news management than the 
Tony Blair's New Labour administration was, according to British TV's 
longest-serving political editor.

Adam Boulton, who is stepping down after 25 years as Sky News political editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/13/adam-boulton-step-down-sky-news-political-editor>
, said that covering the present generation of politicians was not as much fun 
as when Blair or Margaret Thatcher was in Downing Street.

Boulton blamed a "lot of mini Alastair Campbells who think it's their job to 
dictate, to try to limit the exposure of their particular protege".

In an interview with the Guardian published on Monday, Boulton said: "I do 
feel there is more news management and less access to politicians and primary 
sources than there used to be. We do our best to get round that, but it is 
frustrating."

Boulton said that with Cameron "we don't even get monthly news conferences" 
and contrasted today's "cautious pre-prepared approach to politics" with 
Thatcher, "who would tell you exactly what she thought".

"[Cameron] prefers to do interviews away from specialist or senior 
correspondents, to do them on breakfast sofas or out in the field."

He added: "I've interviewed Cameron a few times recently. But you always have 
this sense of someone standing there saying you only have three minutes or five 
questions. It's disputed, it should be said, by No 10, but I think it's a fact 
of life."

Boulton said things came to a head when he was about to board a train to Leeds 
to interview the chancellor, George Osborne, only to be told it was for 
economics correspondents only. "This resulted in a row which still simmers to 
this day. I just think that's pathetic," said Boulton. He is staying withSky 
News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> to launch a weeknight news 
and interviews show later this year to compete with the BBC's Newsnight and 
Channel 4 News.
 