
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is hoping 
that Afghan presidential and parliamentary elections in April 2014 will draw 
moderate elements of the Taliban into the democratic process before the 
departure of most Nato troops.

The prime minister expressed the hope after hosting two days of talks at 
Chequers between the Afghans and Pakistanis, including the Afghan president, 
Hamid Karzai, and the Pakistani president,Asif Ali Zardari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>.

The discussions were the third between the countries to be hosted by the UK, 
which regards closer co-operation between the two governments as indispensable 
in preventing a collapse of Afghan authority after Nato leaves. Historically, 
the Afghans have accused the Pakistani security services of backing theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>.

Cameron said the two leaders had agreed "an unprecedented level of 
co-operation", including a new strategic partnership in the autumn. British 
officials claimed the dynamic between the two had visibly improved.

In probably the single most concrete outcome of the talks, the two sides 
agreed to the opening of an office in Qatar's capital, Doha, for negotiations 
between the Taliban and the Afghan High Peace Council.

The council has the job of reaching out to the Taliban and is chaired by 
Salahuddin Rabbani. He replaced his father, the former Afghan president 
Burhanuddin Rabbani, who was assassinated in September 2011 by a suicide 
bomber. Cameron said the agreement should send a clear message to the Taliban.

Last December, CameronÂ announced Britain would withdraw 3,800 of the country's 
9,000 troops from Afghanistan this year. "Now is the time for everyone to 
participate in a peaceful political process inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>," he said. "This should lead to 
a future where all Afghans can participate peacefully in that country's 
political process." He added that the agreement should send a clear message to 
the Taliban.

Before the talks, Karzai said peace required the involvement in talks of 
"external elements involved in creating instability and fighting" in his 
country.

In an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/03/hamid-karzai-frontline-hardship-work>
, Karzai said: "The exit of foreign forces will not bring more violence for 
them to perpetrate against their own people, but a serious, strong, good 
reduction in violence will occur."
 