
It has been a jolly week for the monarchy thanks to the announcement of Prince 
William's engagement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/nov/16/prince-william-kate-middleton-engagement>
. But in one corner of the kingdom a member of the royal family may have 
detected a slightly frosty reception today after the council chairman in Bath 
criticised a decision to invite the Duchess of Cornwall to turn on the 
Christmas lights.

Sarah Bevan, the public face of Bath and North East Somerset council 
<http://www.bathnes.gov.uk/Pages/default.aspx>, was at Camilla's side when she 
turned on the lights and will also host a reception for her tonight.

Bevan did not think it "appropriate" that a royal should be chosen in these 
tough times: "I felt that we should have had somebody who isn't associated with 
pomp and ceremony and wealth."

Bevan, a Liberal Democrat councillor, said she was a fan of the royal family – 
"I do appreciate the job they do and I don't want the monarchy abolished" – but 
did not feel inviting the duchess was sending out the right message when people 
were bracing themselves for job losses and spending cuts.

Bevan claims many citizens feel the same way. "Nobody I have met is over the 
moon about the choice this year," she said.

The Hollywood actor Nicolas Cage turned on the lights last Christmas and Bevan 
claimed someone such asAmy Williams, the Bath athlete who won gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/feb/20/winter-olympics-amy-williams-gold>
 at the Winter Olympics, would have been more popular this time.

Bevan is also smarting that she was not asked to approve the choice. "It was 
presented to me as a fait accompli – they told me it's Camilla, this is the 
protocol, we'll deal with the palace, all you've got to do is turn up and look 
nice."

Bevan said she would be polite and is looking forward, at least, to the former 
Ultravox frontman Midge Ure performing an acoustic set of Christmas songs at 
the event. "That will be nice," she said.
 