
Record labels are leaving billions of pounds in revenue on the table every 
year by only offering music fans "ways to spend less", says Benji Rogers, 
co-founder and CEO of direct-to-fan platformPledgeMusic 
<http://www.pledgemusic.com/>. A recent Nielsen study 
<http://www.billboard.com/biz/articles/news/digital-and-mobile/1551730/nielsen-study-music-industry-could-add-450-million-to>
 supports his claim, concluding that US fans are willing to spend an extra 
$2.6bn a year on premium access to their favourite artists.

"The music industry said 'let's just put a bunch of stuff up on a page or 
let's ask for money'. So much more is possible. You and I are music fans. I 
want to be the one who says 'I was there'," explains Rogers. "What bothers me 
is that some of my favourite bands offer me a sloppy 'buy' button, and two 
weeks later something shows up. Fuck it – I'll stream it."

To illustrate, he has registered a Google alert that says "announces album", 
and every day he gets a list of links saying "so-and-so" announces new album. 
"I'll defy you to find one button that allows you to pre-order that album – 
because it doesn't exist yet," he says. "All it says is that it'll be out in 
January. What am I supposed to do with that? You know that bit in Spinal Tap 
when they say 'you can't promote something that doesn't exist' – the answer is 
that today you can. If you offer the journey of that album, then everybody 
wins."

Offering this journey is what PledgeMusic specialises in. The average pledger, 
based on the past six months, spends $57 per transaction on the site, and for 
that money they don't just get the album and/or merchandise – they get 
exclusive, immediate video updates from the artist, as the record is being 
created.

"Think about it: 22,000 records released every week in the same fucking way," 
exclaims Rogers. "We now launch, put into production and release two to three 
albums per day – and have done for the last year and a half – but each one of 
those has a journey.

"The last piece that can't be stolen and disseminated en masse is the 
experience, because even if you get it later on, it's not in real time. What's 
exciting is what happens now – that's the very nature of Facebook's business, 
of social networking. Musicians are fascinating while they're working. When 
that ends, they're just selling."

He's at pains to clarify that Pledge is not a crowdfunding platform, or a 
direct-to-consumer service. "Crowdfunding is 'please give money, then I will 
do'," he elaborates. "Direct-to-consumer is 'I've done it, here's five ways to 
buy it.' We're in the middle with 'be a part of the making of it' – it truly is 
direct-to-fan."

Crowdfunding platforms such as Kickstarter and Indiegogo offer campaigns that 
last for about 30 days and then they're done. After that the pledgers have to 
wait for months until the album comes. The Pledge platform doesn't show how 
much money is being raised because, Rogers says, that injects a different 
quality into the campaign. "If I say to you 'help me raise $10,000', you'll ask 
'what for?' If I say 'be part of my album' there is no 'what for'," he explains.

Judging by the exponential increase in artists and labels getting on board, as 
well as repeat customers, this approach works. The number of pledgers tend to 
increase with every project, with many fans telling Pledge that this is the way 
they want all their albums delivered from now on.

Juliana Hatfield is currently running her third album project on the site 
<http://www.pledgemusic.com/projects/hatfield>, and she already has 827 pledges 
that have helped her reach 132% of the goal set when launching the campaign.

According to Rogers, Pledge campaigns now exceed their pledge/pre-order goals 
86% of the time, and the average is 30% over target. The company estimates that 
artists using the platform can get 37% more than if they just did a 
crowdfunding campaign, especially if they utilise the expertise of the Pledge 
staff to optimise the use of social media.

I first interviewed Rogers in December 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/dec/10/future-fan-funding>, 
when the company had just launched. It then consisted of five people operating 
in a room in a Covent Garden basement, next to a rehearsal room. Its clients 
were all self-releasing artists and there were less than a handful of campaigns 
launched each week.

Fast forward and PledgeMusic is about to hire its 35th staff member, with 
offices in Boston, Los Angeles, New York, London, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, 
Australia and, soon, Japan.

Both independent and major record labels have also realised how beneficial the 
Pledge platform can be for their artists. Rogers says the company has proven 
that it can double the income a label makes from direct-to-consumer, "with no 
loss or threat to any other aspect of their business".

Earlier this year, Sony Music UK teamed up with PledgeMusic to launch a 
direct-to-fan pre-sale campaign for its Sheffield-based rock act Bring Me the 
Horizon 
<http://prwire.com.au/pr/35073/pledgemusic-teams-up-with-sony-music-australia-rca-records-bring-me-the-horizon-and-raw-power-management>
. The album went to No 3 in the UK album chart, No 1 in Australia and No 11 in 
the US. "Ben Folds Five was our first US top 10," adds Rogers. "We just did our 
first Canadian top 10 with Universal act the Headstones."

Perhaps one of the most glowing endorsements for direct-to-fan crowdfunding is 
thatAmanda Palmer, who last year raised $1.2m on Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/26/amanda-palmer-future-of-music>, 
is now using the Pledge platform 
<http://www.pledgemusic.com/artists/amandapalmer>.

This may be something for Lady Gaga and her label Universal to ponder. Last 
weekit announced that her next album is on its way – arriving in stores in 
November 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/appsblog/2013/jul/12/lady-gaga-artpop-app-release-date>
.

As Rogers put it: "Fans know that it [the making of the album] is going on, 
but that it is being hidden from them – it's almost antagonising."
 