
With the results of the most recent presidential election, Americans are faced 
with all sorts of uncertainty in regards to their health. But there are some 
consumer choices that individuals can make to protect against future illness:
cutting down on sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/07/the-sugar-conspiracy-robert-lustig-john-yudkin>
, for example;exercising daily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/exercise-override-alcohol-risk-diseases-study-suggests>
; and, surprisingly, being careful about how you clean your delicates.


You may not know it, but most dry cleaning isn’t dry at all – and it isn’t 
clean. Instead of water, professional cleaning processes use a liquid solvent 
to dissolve stains on garments. This typically involves a chemical known as 
perc that, while highly effective at getting scuff marks out of clothing, is 
also a known health and environmental hazard.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> organizations, including 
the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) and the International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (IARC), have classified perc as a toxin, but it’s still 
widely used across the industry. In 2012, the EPA classified perc as a “likely 
human carcinogen”, meaning that prolonged exposure to the chemical has been 
linked to an increased risk of cancer.

Perchloroethylene, also known as tetrachloroethylene, PCE or perc for short, 
is a chlorinated hydrocarbon used primarily by the dry cleaning industry, but 
it’s also used as a metal degreaser in industrial cleaning.

Could low-fat be worse for you than whole milk?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/09/low-fat-whole-milk-usda-dietary-guidelines>
In the EPA’s 2012 press release 
<https://www3.epa.gov/airtoxics/hlthef/tet-ethy.html> on the subject, the 
agency warned: “Studies of dry cleaning workers exposed to tetrachloroethylene 
have shown associations between exposure and several types of cancer, 
specifically bladder cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma and multiple myeloma.”

In the same year the IARC, found perc to be “probably carcinogenic to humans” 
based on evidence from epidemiological data and animal studies.

According to the most recent data, the EPA estimates that 28,000 dry cleaners 
in the US use perc. In 2006, the agency significantly tightened its 
requirements for the use of air toxins in dry cleaning. A spokesperson for the 
agency said: “The rule includes a phase-out of perc use at dry cleaners located 
in residential buildings, along with requirements that will reduce perc 
emissions at other dry cleaners.”

The requirement includes the complete phase-out of perc machines in dry 
cleaners located in residential buildings by 2020.New York 
<http://thebrooklynink.com/2016/08/12/54973-brooklyns-dry-cleaners-worry-about-new-regulations/>
,Illinois 
<http://www3.illinois.gov/PressReleases/ShowPressRelease.cfm?SubjectID=1&RecNum=10514>
 and New Jersey are among some of the states to have passed recent legislation 
clamping down on the use of perc. But a decade after the EPA ruling, the only 
state to pass legislation outright banning perc has been California.

The main health risk with perc is not through wearing clothes that have been 
cleaned with it, but rather, exposure through air or soil. The effects of short 
term exposure (breathing in high amounts over a short span of time) include
dizziness, headaches and loss of consciousness 
<https://www3.epa.gov/airtoxics/hlthef/tet-ethy.html>, according to the EPA.

It is long term exposure that can increase the risk of cancer, putting dry 
cleaning workers and people who live in close proximity to shops at the highest 
risk.

A 2009 study in the Journal of Environmental and Public Health found that 
living near a dry cleaner that uses perc increases the risk of developing 
kidney cancer <https://www.hindawi.com/journals/jeph/2009/183920/>. 
Proximity to a dry cleaner does not mean that exposure to perc is a given. Not 
all dry cleaners use perc, and many that do send the clothing off-site to an 
industrial complex away from residential buildings.

Additionally, with correct ventilation and maintenance, the amount that leaks 
into the air can be minimized.

The National Association for Cleaners (NCA), a trade group that looks after 
the business interests of dry cleaners, does not view perc as dangerous. In an 
interview with the Wall Street Journal, director of technical services Alan 
Spielvogel said thelatest perc machines are much safer 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424053111904888304576472240509156636>, and 
that alternatives to perc don’t clean as well. The NCA did not return the 
Guardian’s request for comment.

As a chlorinated hydrocarbon, perc breaks down very slowly in the air so it 
can travel long distances, meaning that in urban areas there are trace amounts 
of it in the air even if there is no dry cleaner nearby. According to air 
samples of urban areas in different parts of the US, the typical background 
level of perc is roughly a couple of micrograms per cubic meter.

The New York Health Department recommendations for a safe level of perc in the 
air is no more than30 micrograms per cubic meter 
<https://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/chemicals/tetrachloroethene/>. 
<https://www.health.ny.gov/environmental/chemicals/tetrachloroethene/> The 
guidelines, however, state that “reasonable and practical actions should be 
taken to reduce perc exposure whenever air levels are above background”.

The agency has a particular concern that indoor levels of perc in the air are 
kept as close to background levels as possible.

Measuring the levels of perc in the air, however, isn’t all that 
straightforward. InNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, the 
authorities do not regularly monitor dry cleaning emissions and generally, 
environmental agencies in other parts of the country only do so when there has 
been a complaint or reason to suspect a contamination.

Earlier this year, a Crains investigation into the use of perc 
<http://www.crainsnewyork.com/article/20160508/SMALLBIZ/160509884/perchloroethylene-used-by-new-york-city-dry-cleaners-under-the-name-perc-has-been-a-concern-for-decades-leading-to-concerns-about-workers-and-environmental-health-risks>
 in the city found that since 2011 the health department received 250 
complaints from dry cleaners and residential laundry rooms about their 
emissions.

Consumers are becoming increasingly aware of the health hazards of perc, as 
well as its environment impact, and are questioning why it’s taking so long for 
the chemical to be phased.

Could sourdough bread be the answer to the gluten sensitivity epidemic?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/23/sourdough-bread-gluten-intolerance-food-health-celiac-disease>
Dr Ivan Rusyn, a committee member for the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering and Medicine, who reviewed the EPA’s risk assessment of perc, said 
that in the grand scheme of how federal agencies work, it’s not been that bad. 
“It’s a very long process to create these human health assessments,” Rusyn said.

The California air board spokesperson said the biggest challenge in phasing 
out perc has been a resistance on the part of dry cleaners who think it’s the 
most effective way to clean clothes.

Tim Maxwell, the president of GreenEarth, a widely used silicone-based 
alternative to perc, echoed that challenge. He also said that the unstructured 
nature of the dry cleaning business, which has been indecline for the last ten 
years <https://americandrycleaner.com/articles/drycleanings-decline-permanent>, 
makes implementing drastic changes difficult.

“Most dry cleaners are mainly small mom-and-pop businesses,” he said. “The 
hardship of replacing that perc machine is anywhere from $40,000 to $100,000 
and that’s very economically challenging.”

GreenEarth is among many of the alternatives to perc, which also include 
water-based cleaning technologies known as wet cleaning, carbon dioxide 
technology and a host of otherchemical cleaning systems 
<https://www.arb.ca.gov/toxics/dryclean/notice2015_alt_solvents.pdf>. While the 
alternatives are thought to be preferable both from a health and environmental 
standpoint, research into these other systems is still in its nascent stages.

Other options for consumers looking to avoid the potential risks associated 
with dry cleaning is to launder clothes at home or in a regular laundromat. 
Despite clothing labels saying otherwise, consumers often find thatclothes 
marked as “dry-clean-only” will come out of a regular wash unscathed (for the 
most part) 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2584600/Is-proof-dry-cleaning-waste-money-Ignore-label-We-CAN-wash-dry-clean-clothes-home-save-fortune.html>
.

 