
You wouldn’t necessarily know it, but right now Africa is facing a food 
crisis. With Brexit, global terror attacks, the war in Syria and the seemingly 
endless string of sporting fixtures vying for our collective attention in 2016 
so far, the fact that up to 50 million people across east and SouthernAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> are at risk of hunger seems to have 
largely escaped mention.

The continent has been wracked by drought following one of the strongest ever 
El Niños. And while a natural phenomenon is the immediate cause, however, 
Africa’s food security has been undermined over recent decades by the rise of 
monocropping – the planting of single-crop tracts across vast swathes of scarce 
arable land.

Starting in the 1960s, the “green revolution” saw industrial farming practices 
transplanted to poorer nations. In the second half of the 20th century, its 
success seemed unassailable: the global harvest of maize, wheat and rice 
trebled from 640 million tonnes in 1961 to almost 1.8 billion tonnes by 2000.

Africa, in particular, embraced new maize varieties with alacrity. Corn now 
covers up to 70% of some African nations’ farmland and accounts for about50% of 
calories 
<http://ruafrica.rutgers.edu/events/media/0405_media/maize_and_grace_jamesmccann.pdf>
 consumed by humans.

Our best shot at cooling the planet might be right under our feet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/10/soil-our-best-shot-at-cooling-the-planet-might-be-right-under-our-feet>
But the enormous cost to the land and people is now becoming clear. A recent 
report <http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4009e.pdf> by the UN’s Food and Agriculture 
Organisation (FAO) summed up the problem bluntly, stating:“Past agricultural 
performance is not indicative of future returns”.

The meticulously-researched document concludes that the green revolution’s 
“quantum leap” in cereal production has come at the price of soil degradation, 
salinisation of irrigated areas, over-extraction of groundwater and the 
build-up of pest resistance. Add climate change into the mix and you have a 
recipe for disaster. WhileAfrica’s population is set to double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/11/population-growth-in-africa-grasping-the-scale-of-the-challenge>
 to 2.4 billion by 2050, the FAO warns that maize yields could fall by nearly 
20% over that period.

The problem is affecting not just quantity, but quality. Lack of rotation and 
over-use of phosphates and nitrates has degraded the nutrient content of the 
soil, leaving 2 billion people globally suffering micronutrient malnutrition, 
many in sub-Saharan Africa.

In fact, soil degradation in Kenya, which I’ve been visiting regularly for 
more than 35 years, is so severe it’s estimated that the productivity of 
cropland in the countrydeclined by 40% 
<http://www.grida.no/publications/rr/food-crisis/page/3567.aspx> between 1981 
and 2003 as the population doubled.

Productive agriculture isn’t just a nice thing to have. For economies such as 
Kenya’s, it’s the essential foundation for everything else, generating 30% of 
GDP and employing more than 60% of the workforce.


Productive agriculture isn’t just a nice thing to have. For economies such as 
Kenya’s, it’s an essential foundation

Kenya is determined to move its economy away from over-reliance on agriculture 
by transforming itself into a regional hi-tech hub (dubbed, somewhat 
inevitably, “Silicon Savannah”) with billion-dollar projects coming down the 
line. But the context is a country in which up to 4 million people still 
receive food aid annually.

But there is an alternative that more and more farmers are exploring. 
Agroecology – an approach which takes into account natural ecosystems and uses 
local knowledge to plant a diversity of crops that boost the sustainability of 
the farming system as a whole – is establishing itself in small pockets across 
Africa.

In east Africa, more than 96,000 farmers have adopted a “push-pull” system for 
dealing with problematicstemborer pests 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stemborer> and striga weed 
<http://striga.aatf-africa.org/>. The system plants maize alongside fodders and 
wild grasses that “push” pests away, or “pull” them towards decoy plants. Their 
maize yields have increased from an average of 1 to 3.5 tonnes per hectare 
without the use of chemical insecticides and with minimal external inputs, 
according toan evaluation 
<https://www.oaklandinstitute.org/sites/oaklandinstitute.org/files/Push_Pull_Kenya.pdf>
 by the Oakland Institute.

Meanwhile, Kenyan farmers are showing how adaptation to climate change can 
benefit them and the wider economy. Numerous initiatives are encouraging a 
switch from single-crop maize to drought-resistant and nutritious sorghum and 
millet, intercropped with legumes. One such scheme in Wote, run by the Kenyan 
government and crop research bodyICRISAT <http://www.icrisat.org/>, has seen 
nearly 400 farmers switch, boosting yields and fetching a better price for 
their crops.

As drought hits Ethiopia again, food aid risks breaking resilience
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/10/drought-ethiopia-food-aid-resilience>
Agroecology isn’t confined to Africa. In fact, there are examples from across 
the global south of farmers embracing new thinking to improve their yields and 
the sustainability of their communities. To cite just one examplefrom Brazil 
<https://foodfirst.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/JA11-The-Scaling-Up-of-Agroecology-Altieri.pdf>
, thousands of hill farmers using mulch to cover crops made up of legumes and 
grasses saw their maize yields jump from 3 to 5 tonnes per hectare without 
using chemical fertiliser.

The big question often asked is: can agroecological farming really feed the 
world, with the global population hurtling towards 9.6 billion by 2050? It’s 
clear that there’s increasing evidence it could.

A landmark 2001 study 
<http://www.agriculturesnetwork.org/magazines/global/coping-with-disaster/reducing-food-poverty-with-sustainable-agriculture#sthash.GQCiFI4y.dpuf>
 by Jules Pretty and Rachel Hine examined 208 projects from 52 countries and 
found yield increases of 50-100% for rain-fed crops like maize. The cases 
studied involved 9 million farmers on around 3% of all of the farmed land in 
Asia, Africa and Latin America and the increases were typically bigger at lower 
yields, indicating greater benefits for the poorest farmers.

To scale these advances even further, however, we need to radically rethink 
the economic and social mechanisms that keep farmers trapped on the treadmill 
of producing for international markets at the expense of themselves and their 
families. Junking the dogma of monocropping is a crucial part of this process.

Henrietta Moore is director of UCL Institute for Global Prosperity

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.





 