
Can men write good heroines? Most of the heroines I write about in my book How 
to Be a Heroine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/08/how-be-heroine-samatha-ellis-review>
 are written by women. And most of the heroines I find most problematic are 
written by men. It's very troubling to go back toHans Christian Andersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hans-christian-andersen>'s The Little Mermaid
 and find that it's a story about a mermaid who gives up her voice for legs to 
get a man. And even as a girl, I was furious withCharles Dickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> for letting Nancy get 
bludgeoned inOliver Twist and, later, outraged that Samuel Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/14/100-best-books-clarissa-samuel-richardson>
 heaped pain and indignity on Clarissa and called her "an Exemplar to her sex" 
as though learning to suffer well made us exemplary.

It's particularly distressing to see how male writers have punished 
their heroines for being sexually adventurous.Leo Tolstoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/leonikolaevichtolstoy>'s Anna Karenina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/rereading-anna-karenina-james-meek>
 throws herself under a train;Gustave Flaubert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gustaveflaubert> makes Emma Bovary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jul/27/classics.asbyatt> pathetic even 
before she poisons herself. It's striking that when Erica Jong wrote about an 
adulteress inFear of Flying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/01/fiction.society>, she gave her a 
happy ending, in which she is reborn in a hotel bathtub, and summons her 
adoring husband back.

But men can write wonderful heroines. Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>'s Juliet is both bold and 
brilliant. She defies her parents, deceives her nurse, marries in secret, 
sleeps with Romeo, plots an ingenious escape and isn't even fazed by death – 
all this and she's only 14. It's just a shame that Shakespeare didn't give her 
a hero worthy of her – it's fickle Romeo's ineptitude that gets Juliet killed. 
But I still love her, and I'd go to the wall for the unruly, cross-dressing 
heroines of Shakespeare's comedies.

Henrik Ibsen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ibsen>'s Nora inspired many 
women to smash down the walls of their own dolls' houses.Daniel Defoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/danieldefoe>'s Moll Flanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jun/16/fortunes-moll-flanders> is a 
shrewd, bawdy wonder. I have a lot of time forJD Salinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jdsalinger>'s restless, questioning Franny 
Glass. AndBuffy the Vampire Slayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/may/03/buffy-the-vampire-slayer-boxset>
 should prove, definitively, that men can write not just heroines but 
superheroines – famously, when asked why he writes strong female characters,
Joss Whedon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joss-whedon> shot back 
"Because you're still asking me that question."

As for the much-maligned Tess, I think Thomas Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy> tied himself in knots trying to 
show the plight of a poor Victorian woman while also making her feisty enough 
to be interesting. The crucial scene in The Chase went through three drafts – 
in the first, Alec tricks Tess into a sham marriage, and consummates it. In the 
second, he drugs and rapes her. But in the final draft Tess isn't duped or 
drugged or raped, she's seduced. She's complicit. And she faces the 
consequences bravely. She could hide her past from Angel, the man she falls in 
love with, but she wants to be honest. And Hardy paints him as a weak hypocrite 
for not respecting that candour. At the end of the novel, when she stabs Alec 
to death, Hardy makes his loyalty even clearer; he calls the bloodstain she 
creates "a gigantic ace of hearts". He's saying she's a winner. The winner of 
the novel. He rewards her with a few pages' grace, as she and a repentant Angel 
have the honeymoon they never had, and at the end she goes to the men who 
arrest her like a goddess.

I'm less keen on Henry James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/henryjames>'s 
Isabel Archer. She says so many inspiring things about liberty and 
independence, and I love the idea of a woman "affronting her destiny", as James 
so memorably put it, but why does she end up so trapped and miserable? Why, 
after she wonderfully says she wants to know "the things one shouldn't do" not 
in order to do them but "So as to choose", do we never see her make a positive 
choice? We see her say no to two men who might have made her happy, but we 
never see her say yes – not to horrid Osmond, not to anything. When I read the 
bits where she seems terrified of sex, of any overwhelming experience, I wonder 
if James just wasn't comfortable with writing a heroine who says yes to life. 
My favourite heroine inThe Portrait of a Lady is the decidedly unladylike 
Henrietta Stackpole.

The most satisfying heroines I've read, by men or women, come from writers who 
pour their hopes and dreams into them, who refuse to sell them short.Truman 
Capote <https://www.theguardian.com/books/truman-capote> put so much of himself 
intoHolly Golightly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/sep/15/holly-golightly-great-gatsby>
 – his memories of growing up dirt poor, and of his mother having to charm 
(and sleep with) men for money, his experience of never quite belonging 
in glamorous high society, and, most of all, the way he had to reinvent himself 
to survive.

EM Forster <https://www.theguardian.com/books/emforster> wrote heroines who 
could do what he couldn't: while he was stuck in the closet, his intrepid 
heroines put love first. He could only dream of pursuing a relationship with an 
Italian hunk, as middle-aged widow Lilia does inWhere Angels Fear to Tread. And 
he longed to be honest about his affections, as Lucy Honeychurch is, 
eventually, inA Room with a View. Instead, like Lucy's awkward cousin Charlotte 
Bartlett, he looked set to remain perpetually loveless. But at the end of that 
novel, Charlotte does something amazing: she sees that Lucy is on course to 
become a miserable spinster like her, and she heroically intervenes to reunite 
her with the man she loves. And perhaps writing Charlotte inspired Forster to 
seize the day when, at 51, he met the love of his life.

If we say men can't write heroines, aren't we saying men can't understand 
women? And if men don't at least attempt the radical empathy of putting 
themselves in our shoes, and trying to understand what it is like to be a 
woman, then how are we ever going to get equality? And anyway, I'd hate to be 
told I couldn't write heroes.
 