
Q We are a family of four with two kids, aged two and five. We needed a new 
boiler so we went to British Gas, which supplied and fitted one. In the two 
months we have had it, it has broken down three times. I am sitting here 
writing this letter in a house that, so far, has had no heating for seven days; 
the "priority service" we are paying for is a joke. We phoned British Gas and 
an engineer came out on a Friday and said the boiler needed new parts (this is 
the third time we have done this). They told us they would come out to us on 
Sunday, some time between 8am and 6pm - some "priority service". On Sunday a 
new engineer came out and told us again that we needed new parts, and that he 
had not been informed of Friday's call. New parts were due to arrive on the 
following Thursday, but instead we got a call saying they hadn't. We were given 
a new call out time - the next day, some time between 8am and 12pm, but were 
told we could not be made a priority as all calls are treated as priority. I 
asked if I would get my petrol money back for shipping my family back and forth 
to a home where my girls would not freeze, and was told they would only 
reimburse me if I got a heater, and then it would only be Â£30. I would love to 
sue for my losses so far. Is there any way I can do this?
RV

A It is tempting to reach for a lawyer, but first try the following:

1. Do not ask for compensation over the phone, only deal with them in writing, 
and keep copies of everything.

2. List the actual costs you have incurred due to the failure of the boiler. 
These will be greater in the winter, for instance, than in the summer. Add in 
all the various amounts such as the waste of your time, phone calls, costs of 
heating from other sources, and an amount for general inconvenience. Do not 
exaggerate, however, in case you get to point 4 and have to go to court.

3. Warn British Gas that if the boiler breaks down again you will want a new 
boiler, not one that is patched up or otherwise repaired. Point out that you 
entered into a contract with British Gas and this is covered by the Sale of 
Goods Act. Section 14 of this act says there is an implied term that the goods 
under the contract are of satisfactory quality (obviously not in this case).

4. Tell British Gas that if it fails to make adequate compensation and provide 
you with a working boiler, you will be going to the small claims court. You 
must, however, carry out this threat - companies reckon they can ignore 99% of 
such letters because the customer does not go through with it.
 