
Sitting at a desk, reading a textbook may feel like one of the least physical 
activities you can undertake, but the results of your studying depend on 
numerous biological factors, including your body clock. Learning and 
intellectual performance are firmly tied to the body’s internal time.

Planet Earth’s rotation – once every 24 hours – is deeply ingrained into human 
physiology, and each internal process, from digestion to muscle strength, waxes 
and wanes on a cycle called a circadian rhythm. A master clock in the brain 
maintains these rhythms and stays attuned to the time outside using morning 
daylight.

Learning is a physical process that involves strengthening certain connections 
among the brain’s neurons. That ability to change the brain varies according to 
time of day; in particular, it’senhanced during the day 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?Db=pubmed&Cmd=ShowDetailView&TermToSearch=15851529>
 and more difficult at night. So how can you use time to your advantage?

Ride the wave

Every day, your body temperature starts low and rises slowly until late in the 
evening, when the wave crests and plunges down again for the night. Your 
internal temperature only varies by about a third of a degree, but that’s 
enough to change the way your body – and, in particular, your brain – works. 
With more heat comes faster chemical reactions.

Thinking is a series of chemical exchanges, so calculation speed, memory 
formation 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.2044-8295.1980.tb01746.x/abstract>
 and accuracy increase as the day goes on andpeak with body temperature 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2869.1992.tb00004.x/abstract>
 and heart rate – usually in the late afternoon. During the night and early 
hours of the morning, even if you’re not sleep deprived,those powers decline 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/mbe.12056/abstract?userIsAuthenticated=false&deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=>
.

The key to learning a new skill? Wanting it badly enough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/30/the-key-to-learning-new-skills-wn>
Know your avian type

Being a morning lark or a night owl is not a choice – you’re born with it. 
Each of us has a chronotype, a tendency to get up early or stay up late, or 
perhaps flit somewhere in the middle. As much as you might force yourself into 
another schedule, your chronotype is largely genetic, and it’saffected by the 
length of your circadian cycle <http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/2001-07804-015>
. A longer cycle leads to a later chronotype.

Age also plays a large role in a person’s chronotype. While young children are 
early birds, adolescents begin to shift into a later phase. In the late teens 
and early 20s, we are the latest sleepers – and latest wakers – that we will 
ever be. After this peak comes a shift back tomorningness 
<https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/morningness>. In fact, researchers proposed 
that whereas the end of puberty is defined as the time when your bones stop 
growing, the end of adolescence is theabrupt biological shift 
<http://www.cell.com/current-biology/abstract/S0960-9822(04)00928-5?_returnURL=http%3A%2F%2Flinkinghub.elsevier.com%2Fretrieve%2Fpii%2FS0960982204009285%3Fshowall%3Dtrue>
 away from late sleeping that occurs around the age of 20.

Being a night owl means hitting your cognitive peak 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02643290701754158> later in the 
day. Unfortunately, it also comes with real problems for students. Research 
shows that morning-active students havehigher academic achievement 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00220973.1980.11011761> and feel 
more immersed and focused 
<http://www.koreascience.or.kr/article/ArticleFullRecord.jsp?cn=CCTHCV_2014_v14n8_319>
 in their studies, whereas night owls struggle with fatigue in the classroom. 
This problem disproportionately affects men and extroverts, who are each more 
likely to be night owls. Not only is extroversion linked to evening 
chronotypes, it also tends to exacerbate the evening-active lifestyle because 
that’s when much of our social activity goes on.

Study at a fixed time

One of the most powerful factors that influenced the evolution of human memory 
was the need to anticipate regular events – such as the appearance of food or 
predators – in the environment. Consequently, memory is closely linked to the 
internal clock, and when we learn things, there is an internal time stamp 
attached to those memories.

The brain can prepare for a bout of intensive focus if it’s required at the 
same time every day. A fixed-time learning session leads to better cognitive 
performance at that time of day, and if it the task is demanding enough, your 
study sessions can evenreset your body clock 
<http://www.jneurosci.org/content/32/35/12115.full>.

If you can't imagine things, how can you learn?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/04/aphantasia-no-visual-imagination-impact-learning>
Keep a sleeping schedule

Decide on a bedtime and a time for waking up, then stick to it. Even on 
weekends, daily routines should remain roughly the same. Staying up much later 
on the weekend and sleeping in on Sunday – as many people do – leads to social 
jet lag. If you normally go to bed at 10.30pm, but on Friday and Saturday you 
stay out until 1.30am, it’s as if you have flown from your home in New York to 
Los Angeles for the weekend.Attention problems 
<http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.4.508#.V1rcZzYrKup>
 tend to follow during the week, even with a full eight hours of sleep every 
single night.

Nap before you’re tired

No matter how good your time-management skills, sometimes assignments pile up 
and deadlines converge, particularly towards the end of term. Few students get 
through their academic careers without pulling some late nights. A common 
approach is to power through the exhaustion at night, then nap the next day to 
recover. But naps are actually better at preventing fatigue than at helping you 
to recover from it. Napping during the day before a late nightwill boost your 
work 
<http://www.sas.upenn.edu/psych/history/orne/dingesetal1987sleep313329.html> 
and learning performance, even if you don’t perceive the difference in yourself.

Take a morning walk before you learn

Within the first half hour after waking, a flood of stress hormones – called 
thecortisol awakening response 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167876008007940> – surges 
through the body. This deluge catapults us out of the grogginess of sleep 
inertia and helps energise us for the day ahead, but it alsoimpairs the 
formation of long-term memories 
<http://www.degruyter.com/dg/viewarticle.fullcontentlink:pdfeventlink/$002fj$002frevneuro.2010.21.1$002frevneuro.2010.21.1.55$002frevneuro.2010.21.1.55.pdf?t:ac=j$002frevneuro.2010.21.1$002frevneuro.2010.21.1.55$002frevneuro.2010.21.1.55.xml>
 (pdf). Anything that’s important to remember should be saved for the second 
hour after waking.

Another obstacle to memory formation is the sleep hormone melatonin. A few 
minutes outside in the morning daylight will clear the melatonin out of the 
bloodstream and lend your brain the clarity it needs to start learning.

Get involved with the Use Your Head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/use-your-head> series by joining 
the discussion on #useyourhead

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 