
Earlier this year, when the headteacher of a Darlington primary school wrote a 
letter warning parents thatthe wearing of pyjamas was not welcome at her school 
gate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/26/headteacher-asks-parents-to-stop-doing-school-run-in-their-pyjamas>
, it felt like the last gasp of a dying age. The dress code is dead, having 
been slowly starved of oxygen by the ubiquity of informality. We are instantly 
on first-name terms, and no one dresses for dinner. A whole new industry around 
athleisure has sprung up, selling clothes you can wear all day Saturday, from 
yoga to dinner.

Hurrah! Right? Actually, I am not so sure. The white tie and starched pinnies 
ofDownton Abbey <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> might 
have been a bind, but at least everyone knew where they stood. Dress codes have 
now been ditched for a kind of rampant individualism, in which dressing for any 
occasion – work, a party, lunch, the gym – is a contest with no rules, an 
every-man-for-himself brawl.

We have switched from a simple model of compliance to a likes-based fashion 
economy. We have ditched a system of dressing that offered security for all in 
favour of one that offers mobility for the talented and ambitious, but that 
allows others to fail quite spectacularly. There are no rules, and the struggle 
is real, man.

There is no harsher test for anything-goes dressing than trial-and-error in 
the fashion industry. Can you really wear sportswear to sit in the front row, 
or pyjamas to a smart party? There is only one way to find out…

Sports casual on the front row
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2d5bde969b30acda78bd278a88252a33c864455%2F0_0_3500_5056%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2d5bde969b30acda78bd278a88252a33c864455%2F0_0_3500_5056%2F3500.jpg>
 Tracksuit, from a selection,chloe.com <http://chloe.com>. Shoes, Jess’s own. 
Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
Tony Soprano <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-sopranos>. Ali G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/01/sacha-baron-cohen-oscars-ali-g-academy>
.Britney Spears <https://www.theguardian.com/music/britneyspears>. These are 
the names I think of when I picture a tracksuit; none of them exactly a 
front-row regular. A tracksuit undoubtedly has a lot going for it. It is 
egalitarian, machine washable, comfy. Unfortunately, the above are all dirty 
words at London fashion week.

Invites to shows don’t come with a dress code, but that doesn’t mean you don’t 
think about what you wear. I have a fashion editor friend who eats lunch 
standing up, between shows, because too much sitting down can give your 
trousers baggy knees. But I am wearing a tracksuit tothe Emilia Wickstead show 
<http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/designers_profile.aspx?designerID=1834>, 
where front row regulars includeAlexa Chung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung>, Yasmin Le Bon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/sep/05/yasmin-le-bon-interview> 
andSamantha Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/samantha-cameron>.

If there’s one thing fashion people worship even more than fancy clothes, it’s 
clothes that baffle the norms. Especially if they are inexplicably, 
eye-wateringly expensive and have catwalk pedigree. This tracksuit was worn on 
the Chloé catwalk in Paris by British Vogue covergirl Edie Campbell, and the 
top half alone is £1,125. I’m a bit nervous when I walk in, because everyone 
else looks sleek and glossy, and I’m basically dressed asAlan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge>; but I honestly don’t 
think I’ve ever had a better reaction to anything I have worn, except possibly 
my wedding dress, and that doesn’t count. A super-chic American Vogue fashion 
editor comes over to tell me I look divine; she strokes me. “This,” says the 
editor of another newspaper’s glossy magazine, pulling me up from my seat, 
holding me at arm’s length and gazing lovingly at my bosom, “is amazing.” After 
the Emilia Wickstead show, we run toJW Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/03/jw-anderson-loewe-interview>, 
where my confidence is boosted even further by the appearance on the catwalk of 
a gold satin, embroidered tracksuit. It’s raining when we come out, and I am 
panicking about the trousers that, being a catwalk sample, are approximately 
double the length of my legs and in danger of getting ruined by wet pavements. 
So I hail a taxi, running across a busy road to jump in, and tell the driver 
where we’re going. “No problem, babe,” he says. “I like your tracksuit.”

Pyjamas to a cocktail party
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3142a2204293803087b256c77793cd84a516dc5e%2F0_0_4032_5056%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3142a2204293803087b256c77793cd84a516dc5e%2F0_0_4032_5056%2F4032.jpg>
Pyjamas 
<http://oliviavonhalle.com/uk/shop/all-collections/lila-dunaway-silk-pyjamas.html>
, £350, oliviavonhalle.com. Earrings, £65,jcrew.com <http://jcrew.com>. Shoes, 
Jess’s own. Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
Mr Porter <http://www.mrporter.com/>’s fifth birthday party is happening in 
the Savile Club <http://www.savileclub.co.uk/> in Mayfair on a Saturday night. 
The invite – the proper kind, on spenny-looking stiff, white card – stipulates 
a dress code: “Very Mr Porter.” Which translates, I think, as: “Make An Effort.”

Last year, American Vogue’s fashion editor Grace Coddington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/23/grace-coddington-the-woman-who-made-fashion-art>
 worepyjamas to the Met Ball 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/grace-coddingtons-met-gala-2015-793245>, 
which is probably the second most dressed-up party in the world after the 
Oscars. Here the greeters are in bowler hats, the gents making the martinis are 
in white tuxedos – and I am in pyjamas.

The thing is, there are pyjamas and there are pyjamas. We talk about being in 
pyjamas when we mean a pair of sweatpants and an old promotional T-shirt, but 
actual pyjamas are something quite different. I have at home a pair of 
monogrammed white cotton pyjamas; they are, in a way, one of the most formal 
looks in my wardrobe. But even those won’t do for cocktail wear. (The 
creasing!) So tonight I am in a jade-green silkOlivia Von Halle 
<http://oliviavonhalle.com/uk/> pair, dressed up with high heels and big 
earrings. It feels a bit strange, at first, as if I am going to a sleepover at 
Buckingham Palace, rather than a party, but being this comfortable is 
revelatory. (I might get into kaftans.)

I get a few double takes, but I also get two compliments over the handbasin in 
the ladies’ loo, including one from a chic woman in aLe Smoking 
<http://www.ysl.com/corporate/saint-laurent-paris/le-smoking-saint-laurent/> 
jacket andGucci <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> loafers, who tells 
me she wishes she was wearing my outfit. This makes me swoon: compliments in 
the ladies’ loo are to my mind worth far more than the hello-you-look-lovely 
stock in trade upstairs. I am chalking this one up as a hit.

Next stop of the night is a dinner Marc Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/marc-jacobs> is giving at Park Chinois 
<https://parkchinois.com/>, a fancy new Chinese restaurant off Berkeley Square. 
It’s only half a mile away, so I walk, much to the bemusement of most 
passersby. (Pyjamas might work after dark; they don’t work outdoors.) When I 
arrive,Beth Ditto <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bethditto> is there in a 
pink wig, and Abbey Clancy is ina jumper and a skirt split to her knickers 
<http://media.gettyimages.com/photos/abbey-clancy-attends-the-marc-jacobs-beauty-dinner-at-the-club-at-picture-id511435452>
, so I’m relieved I’m not in a boring party dress. Also, the soft-shell crab 
and wok-seared lily bulb is completely delicious, and it’s all sharing plates, 
and guess who’s the only woman at the table with an elasticated waistband? Slam 
dunk.

Postscript: buoyed by my Saturday night triumph, I took the pyjamas to Milan, 
where I wore them to a fashion week cocktail party. Big mistake. Nothing has 
ever illustrated so clearly how much more conservative Milan is, compared with 
London. The other guests looked pained by my irritating British “eccentricity”, 
while the waiters were visibly alarmed. Perhaps the British have a particular 
fondness for pyjamas, I don’t know. But this is not a look that travels.

Boudoir chic at the office
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe17f45018cc623988fc477e2e59d78b89f1bdb0%2F0_0_4032_5056%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe17f45018cc623988fc477e2e59d78b89f1bdb0%2F0_0_4032_5056%2F4032.jpg>
 Slip, £55,finerylondon.com <https://www.finerylondon.com/>. Coat, £135, 
cosstores.com <http://cosstores.com>. Shoes, Jess’s own. Photograph: David 
Newby for the Guardian 
Lingerie-looking daywear is one of this season’s major catwalk trends. At the 
Burberry show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/22/burberry-ready-modernise-fashion-without-delay>
, models teamed their spaghetti-strapped ivory silk slip dresses with sandals 
and nylon rucksacks. AtCéline <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/celine>, a 
silk nightie with black lace trim was worn on the catwalk with flat shoes, hoop 
earrings and a handbag big enough for packed lunch and yoga kit. On the cover 
of last month’s British Vogue,Dakota Johnson wore that same dress with a black 
coat slipping off one shoulder 
<http://www.promicabana.de/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Dakota-Johnson-Vogue-Cover.jpg>
. However, Johnson’s left breast is clearly visible in that photo, so I’m 
planning instead to channel former French Vogue editorCarine Roitfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/carine-roitfeld>, who has the knack of 
giving off a boudoir vibe while keeping covered up: the edges of a black silk 
camisole might be visible under a tailored blazer.

I am wearing a dress by Finery <https://www.finerylondon.com> – ivory lace on 
black, which somehow feels marginally more doable for 9am than the other way 
around – under a coat dress by Cos. Any concerns that I might have had in 
advance that I would look and feel inappropriately smouldery are banished the 
moment I get dressed. I don’t feel smouldery at all. I feel slightly absurd. 
Actually, I feel how Cherie Blair lookedthat morning when she opened the door 
in her nightie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/08/cherie-blair-nightie-downing-street-thats-me-in-the-picture>
: unarmoured, like a creature that has lost its shell. I don’t like it one bit.

Where the pyjamas felt louche, the nightie just feels witless. Whenever anyone 
in the office looks at what I’m wearing, I feel the need to explain myself, to 
apologise. This is the exact opposite of what you want from work clothes, which 
is soundlessly to project your professional persona. I am very happy to leave 
the office and get on the tube to meetVictoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> at her shop.

The train is half empty, but a man springs up to offer me his seat as soon as 
I step on, which is a first. When I get to Dover Street, the paparazzi who hang 
around outsideBeckham’s shop <https://www.victoriabeckham.com/shop/> don’t 
blink: in Mayfair, slip-plus-coat-plus-heels apparently passes for daywear. 
Inside, Beckham is wearing a navy tailored coat over a neatly buttoned-up white 
shirt, with loose trousers and flat shoes. Now that I’m in a fashion 
environment, my lingerie look works fine. If you work immersed in fashion 
imagery all day long, catwalk trends soon look completely normal, so neither 
Beckham nor any of her team bat an eyelid that I appear to have come for a 
meeting in my nightie. As always, Beckham’s hair, makeup, nails and general 
poise exist on a stratosphere of grooming I can never even aspire to: despite 
the casual clothes, she looks 50 times as glamorous as anyone else in the room. 
Beckham tells me I look lovely, but while I would love to claim this as a style 
victory, she is probably just being polite. To be honest, her cool, tomboy-chic 
look is making me feel chintzy and twee in my lace. It is a pretty strange 
moment, standing next to Victoria Beckham and feeling like I am the one who is 
really dressed up. Or should that be really undressed? Frankly, I’m confused.

A tiara to the corner shop
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5bd60738401e98f37af32c88aec273a346e633a%2F0_0_4032_5056%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20really%20wear%20pyjamas%20to%20a%C2%A0party%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ffashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5bd60738401e98f37af32c88aec273a346e633a%2F0_0_4032_5056%2F4032.jpg>
 Tiara, £8,claires.co.uk <http://claires.co.uk>. Coat 
<http://shrimps.co.uk/shop/pre-spring/coats/audrey-coat>, £595, shrimps.co.uk. 
Dress 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/products/Self-portrait-Sculpted-strapless-lace-dress-1034181>
, £285, by Self-Portrait, from matchesfashion.com.Boots 
<http://www.topshop.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/ProductDisplay?searchTermScope=3&searchType=ALL&viewAllFlag=false&beginIndex=1&langId=-1&productId=22641769&pageSize=20&searchTerm=TS32P05JBLK&catalogId=33057&productIdentifierproduct=product&geoip=search&x=25&searchTermOperator=LIKE&sort_field=Relevance&y=11&storeId=12556&qubitRefinements=siteId%3DTopShopUK>
, £145, topshop.com Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian 
On the day of a Saint Laurent show that was all slip dresses and crazy-lady 
fur coats, designerHedi Slimane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/hedi-slimane> tweeted a photo of the tiara 
worn by almost every model in the show. It was captioned: “Saint Laurent grunge 
tiara to be worn with anything.” And what Hedi says goes, right? Since then, 
tiaras have become a regular feature on the catwalk. Gigi Hadid wore one in 
Tommy Hilfiger’s show, which had an otherwise nautical theme. Go figure. Tiaras 
are the new sunglasses, or something. Which is how I come to be wearing a tiara 
with aSelf-Portrait <http://www.self-portrait-studio.com/> burgundy lace dress 
and a fluffy, mint-greenShrimps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/20/shrimps-the-faux-fur-label-is-back-for-autumn-winter-2015>
 coat and a pair of Bowie-ish Topshop boots, at the Green Shop grocery store in 
north London. We have chosen this shop to test wearing a tiara to the shops 
because the colourful shelves have a pleasinglyJuergen Teller 
<http://juergenteller.tumblr.com>/Deutschland 83 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/deutschland-83> vibe for a photo, and 
because it is near the office. It’s Saturday, and I have a bit more of an 
audience than I’d bargained for: Arsenal are playing at home today and it’s 
only half an hour until kick-off at the Emirates, so there is a constant stream 
of mostly male shoppers stopping by for their lucky pre-match Twix, and since 
everyone else is in denim and black, accented with red-and-white scarves, I 
stand out even more than I normally would. What happens is: they notice the 
fluffy green coat, and then the sparkly boots, and they’re about to make a 
hilarious comment when they spot the tiara and I can almost see them swallow 
back the aforementioned lols as they think, “Hang on, maybe this is more than a 
walk of shame. Maybe she’s a bit, you know, not quite right?” And they look 
away.

I never get to wear the tiara again, because I leave it in the bathroom at 
home and my nine-year-old daughter nabs it, and you really can’t go around 
taking tiaras away from nine-year-olds. I can’t say I’m gutted about this. But 
I do wear the fluffy green coat and the lace dress to the shops, and this time 
I bump into a fashion publicist friend. There is a thing that fashion people 
do, when they comment on your outfit: they point their finger and give you the 
head-to-toe once-over with it, like a camp fairy godmother commenting on your 
metamorphosis from lizard to footman, or whatever. That’s what I get. “This,” 
my friend pronounces, encompassing coat and dress in a finger waggle, “is
fabulous!”

 * Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Stylist’s assistant: Billie Brand. Hair and 
makeup: Michelle Dacillo, using Bobbi Brown and Bumble and bumble. With thanks 
to the Green Shop, Upper Street, London N1. 
• This article was amended on 16 December 2016. An earlier version referred to 
a photograph of Cherie Blair opening the door to No 10 Downing Street in her 
nightie; that picture was taken at the Blairs’ Islington home.
 