
Q I work in the public sector for a local authority and have been a paid-up 
member ofUnison <http://www.unison.org.uk/> for a number of years. Of late, 
Unison has been advertising the services of theTax Refund Company 
<https://secure.taxbuddies.com/ptsindexUnison.php?userid=9000001835&ref=unison> 
to its members via the regular newsletter. The deal is to complete a Unison tax 
refund claim form and return it to the aforementioned company. They say they 
will establish whether I have paid too much tax over the years, and if so will 
give me 60p for every £1 they claim back on my behalf, retaining the other 40p 
per £1 as their fee. They work on the basis of no tax refund-no fee. I have no 
idea whether I have paid too much tax during my working life over the past 20 
years, so am tempted by their offer. However, I wonder whether there is an 
alternative way of doing this as 40% of any possible over payment could 
potentially be quite a lot of money?
JA 

A As you have been employed by a local authority and paying tax through PAYE 
for a number of years, it is very unlikely you will have any tax refund due to 
you. In any case, you can only go back six years. You may find the effort of 
putting together all your paperwork over that period is daunting - you probably 
will not have kept it all. This offer could make more sense for someone who has 
recently entered or re-entered the labour market.

But if you think there is a chance you have overpaid, you can deal with the 
revenue yourself and not pay anyone 40% of any refund for the privilege. Dare I 
suggest a copy of a book I have written? TheWhich? Tax Handbook 2007/08 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tax-Handbook-2007-Complete-System/dp/1844900398> is 
full of hints and tips on how to reclaim and save tax.
 