
In the middle of a national election campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/03/canada-election-parliament-stephen-harper>
, Canadian artists and activists are calling for shift in the country’s economy 
to a sustainable system weaned off fossil fuels.

The Leap Manifesto <https://leapmanifesto.org/en/the-leap-manifesto/> – a 
wide-ranging document signed by more than 100 prominent progressive Canadians – 
lays out an ambitious plan to end fossil fuel subsidies, increase income taxes 
on corporations and the wealthy, cut military spending and implement a 
progressive carbon tax.


Signatories include actors Donald Sutherland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/donald-sutherland>, Rachel McAdams, and Ellen 
Page; musicians Neil Young, Leonard Cohen, and Alanis Morissette; and writers 
William Gibson and Michael Ondaatje, along with major environmental groups and 
labour unions.


“We start from the premise that Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> is facing the deepest crisis in 
recent memory,” the manifesto states. Calling Canada’s record on climate change 
“a crime against humanity’s future”, it urges a rapid shift over the next two 
decades to a fully sustainable energy economy.


Activist and author Naomi Klein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/naomiklein>, who helped spearhead the 
document, launched the manifesto at a news conference Tuesday in Toronto, 
flanked by a handful of fellow signatories.


Klein said the current situation in Canada is critical but argued that there 
are tools and policies available to address the issues.


“Small steps won’t get us there. We have to move on multiple fronts at once,” 
Klein said.


“My crisis isn’t bigger than your crisis. They’re interconnected, they’re 
overlapping and we can come up with solutions that solve multiple problems at 
once.”


Klein said she’s confident that federal political leaders, campaigning in 
advance of the 19 October election, will be forced to address the manifesto as 
it gains prominence at the grassroots level.


“Since many of our leaders are too busy watching the polls to grasp the 
urgency, or even the potential, of this transformation, leadership is coming 
from outside of electoral politics,” she said.


Tuesday’s launch was accompanied by a major social media push by its celebrity 
backers and other supporters.


Organisers say the ultimate goal is to have thousands of Canadians sign on to 
the economic and environmental manifesto, putting pressure on whichever 
political party forms the next government to take direct and immediate action.


Supporters come from all – though overwhelmingly progressive – political 
backgrounds, and Klein maintained the manifesto was a non-partisan document.


Tom Mulcair and Canada's New Democrat party lead push for change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/07/tom-mulcair-and-canadas-progressive-democrats-lead-push-for-change>
Still, political rivals made hay on social media of the fact that a number of 
signatories are backers of the left-leaning New Democrats (NDP), including 
politicians like former Ontario provincial NDP leader Stephen Lewis, artists 
like film-maker Sarah Polley, and trade union members like Canadian Union of 
Public Employees president Paul Moist.


The NDP has shifted towards the centre since becoming the official federal 
opposition in 2011, embracing economic free trade and promising to maintain a 
balanced federal budget.


In contrast, the manifesto calls for a rejection of austerity measures it says 
have had a negative impact on “low-carbon sectors; like education and 
healthcare”. It also urges an end to trade deals “that interfere with our 
attempts to rebuild local economies, regulate corporations and stop damaging 
extractive projects”.


The manifesto was released on the sidelines of the Toronto international film 
festival, where the documentary This Changes Everything is being screened. It 
was produced by Klein’s husband, film-maker Avi Lewis, and is based onher most 
recent book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/06/dont-look-away-now-the-climate-crisis-needs-you>
, This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs the Climate.

 