
Once again, the Cannes film festival has unveiled a gorgeous list. The only 
disappointments, for some, will be the fact that Paul Thomas Anderson'sThe 
Master <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146341/master> and Terrence 
Malick's new project were not included, reportedly because they were not ready 
in time – although the idea of Malick actually having a new film completed just 
one year after the last head-spinning epic is fantastically improbable: as if 
he had moved up to a Roger Corman level of productivity. Some observers will be 
disappointed that Stoker, by the South Korean director Park Chan-wook has not 
been selected, likewise Wong Kar-wai's The Grand Master – although the festival 
could sneak in a late entry here and there.

The relative absence of women in the list of directors is, however, pretty 
dismal: the competition is an all-male affair, and there are just two women 
film-makers in Un Certain Regard: Sylvie Verheyde, with Confession of a Child 
of the Century, and Catherine Corsini, with Three Worlds.

It's still a mouthwatering selection: new films by Jacques Audiard, Lee 
Daniels, Carlos Reygadas, Andrew Dominik, Abbas Kiarostami, Wes Anderson, Hong 
Sang-soo, and Ken Loach in the main lineup, with Yousry Nasrallah's After the 
Battle tackling the Egyptian revolution and the Arab spring. Bernardo 
Bertolucci's new film Me and You is screening out of competition – a dark 
two-hander, based on a novella by Niccolò Ammaniti, about a young man helping 
his half-sister to beat heroin addiction. Takashi Miike's The Legend of Love 
and Sincerity and Dario Argento's Dracula are showing at midnight screenings – 
events that are bound to be red-hot tickets. The Thai auteur Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul, a Palme-winner for his ghost parableUncle Boonmee Who Can Recall 
His Past Lives 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135882/uncle-bonmee-who-can-recall-his-past-lives>
, has a special screening for his new project, Mekong Hotel. Pablo Trapero's 
new film White Elephant is in Un Certain Regard.

One auteur with a virtual freehold on the competition list is Michael Haneke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-haneke>, the master of challenging 
and confrontationally difficult film-making – the idea of a Haneke film getting 
put into Un Certain Regard, or even rejected outright, is pretty much 
unthinkable. Cannes festivalgoers are steeling themselves for his new work, 
about a woman, played by Isabelle Huppert, and her relationship with her 
elderly parents, Georges and Anne, played by Jean-Louis Trintignant and 
Emmanuelle Riva.
 Michael Haneke, left, with his stars on the set of Amour. Photograph: Denis 
Manin 
The couple are trying to deal with the effects of Anne's recent stroke. The 
film is entitled Amour, or Love, and it should be expected that this purely 
ironic; certainly its audience will be waiting for some single, devastatingly 
shocking moment – but his previous work, the Palme d'Or-winningThe White Ribbon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/130013/white-ribbon>, was not exactly 
like that and appeared to show a softer, even humorous side. Amour intriguingly 
features the British opera singer-turned-actor William Shimell, who appeared in 
Kiarostami's filmCertified Copy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135872/copie-conforme>.

Jacques Audiard's De rouille et d'os, or Rust and Bone, is one of the most 
keenly anticipated titles; adapted from the2005 short story collection by the 
Canadian author Craig Davidson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/short-stories/9780330445863/rust-and-bone>
, it stars Marion Cotillard, and tells the story of a bareknuckle fighter and 
someone losing limbs to an Orca whale being trained in a marine show park. The 
unsubtitled trailer is below, but this perhaps does not quite convey what is 
thought to be the fiercely challenging nature of the movie.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJ18empfevYk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJ18empfevYk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJ18empfevYk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
David Cronenberg has long been a favourite of Cannes, and his new film 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146648/cosmopolis>, an adaptation of Don 
DeLillo's 2003 novella Cosmopolis <http:>, follows a billionaire Wall Street 
trader on his strange, slow and frequently impeded journey through Manhattan in 
a lumberingly unmanoeuvrable stretch limo.

Given the title of one of Cronenberg's best-known works, should we wonder 
about the imminence of a crash? DeLillo's novel was written before the 
financial meltdown, but Cronenberg may wish to create a post-crash 
interpretation, or draw out unsettling auguries already in the text. Robert 
Pattinson appears to have a vaguely vampiric aura in the leading role. 
Cronenberg's previous picture, the psychoanalytic dramaA Dangerous Method 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142798/dangerous-method>, was considered 
to have continued the director's evolutionary progress away from the 
body-horror effects of his early work and towards something more conventional. 
Actually, Cosmopolis looks a little more challenging than that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR-oc9pmaWyM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR-oc9pmaWyM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FR-oc9pmaWyM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Like Someone in Love is another film by the Cannes equivalent of a "made guy". 
Abbas Kiarostami, a Palme d'Or winner for his 1997 filmTaste of Cherry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/34476/taste-of-cherry>, returns with an 
intriguing-looking film set in Japan, his second fiction feature to be shot 
outside Iran. It's the story of a young woman working as a prostitute and her 
relationship with a client. The trailer is up here:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FC_bFyunXmEQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FC_bFyunXmEQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FC_bFyunXmEQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Anything by Kiarostami is a must-see, although I have to say I found some 
tonal uncertainties in his previous film, the Italian-set Certified Copy, with 
Juliette Binoche and William Shimell. It will be fascinating to see how the 
director handles the new cultural challenge he has set himself, and us.

Many festival observers had been asking themselves if Britain would get a 
competition entry, and even wondering about the longshot possibility of a slot 
for Ben Wheatley and his new film, Sightseers. Unfortunately, that doesn't look 
to be happening, or at least not so far. But Ken Loach, the British director to 
whom Cannes is always loyal, is back withThe Angels' Share 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146747/angels-share>, his Scottish comedy 
written by longtime collaborator Paul Laverty. It's about some guys in trouble 
with the law who find themselves involved in the whisky business.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQhQeWhqs1bA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQhQeWhqs1bA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQhQeWhqs1bA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Cannes has been a showcase for Loach's gentler, more comic side recently – in 
the form of his 2009 filmLooking for Eric 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/129188/looking-for-eric>, for instance – 
and this film does seem to be the one offering the most conventionally obvious 
lighter moments in the festival. Loach is perhaps channelling the spirit of 
Alexander Mackendrick's 1949 filmWhisky Galore 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83226/whisky-galore>.

Walter Salles' account of Kerouac's On The Road looks, on the face of it, to 
be similar to hismovie version of Che Guevara's The Motorcycle Diaries 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/101700/motorcycle.diaries>, a road movie 
which is, in the time-honoured manner, an internal journey of self-discovery. 
(However, Che himself might have rejected that Hollywoodised egocentric 
approach to his own journey, which was significantly about the discovery of 
injustice and exploitation in the external world.) Sam Riley and Garrett 
Hedlund are Sal and It, and Kristen Stewart plays Marylou – the female "third 
wheel", perhaps, in this intensely male odyssey.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxLtOnDG8ikI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxLtOnDG8ikI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxLtOnDG8ikI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The 89-year-old Alain Resnais is now a virtual folk memory of Cannes and 
French cinema, and a testament to the extraordinary tenacity and staying power 
of what might be loosely called the "new wave" generation. His new film in 
Competition is Vous n'avez encore rien vu, or You Haven't Seen Anything Yet, a 
loose reworking of Jean Anouilh's Eurydice, about a group of actors gathered in 
the house of a dead dramatist, awaiting the reading of his will. The movie 
features a blue-chip French cast, including Michel Piccoli, Mathieu Amalric, 
Anne Consigny and Lambert Wilson. Resnais's films have looked to me a little 
stately recently, but they have been rapturously received, and the agility and 
wit of Resnais's creativity is a marvel: his presence at Cannes is always a 
treat.

I am excited to see the new film from Thomas Vinterberg, Jagten, or The Hunt, 
in competition at this year's festival. After the sensational impression he 
made with his 1998 filmFesten 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77262/festen>, or The Celebration, a 
touchstone of the fledglingDogme 95 movement 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dogme_95>, Vinterberg arguably did not deliver on 
his promise and has often seemed to be missing in action. His 2010 filmSubmarino
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/138641/submarino> – a very good film 
that featured in Berlin – did not find space in British cinemas. The Hunt stars 
Mads Mikkelsen as a divorced man in a small country town who is accused of 
abusing a child. It sounds like a tough watch, of course, but in all 
probability a rewarding one.

Leos Carax is a mercurial presence in French cinema and in Cannes, and he 
returns with his first feature since the exasperating but diverting Pola X, 
which was in competition back in 1999. Holly Motors stars Denis Levant as DL, a 
man who is able to switch between different "parallel lives". Kylie Minogue has 
a role, playing an actor.

Every year, Cannes festival regulars nervously scan the competition list for 
the film that's going to shock and upset everyone. The main contender has to be 
the new film from the Austrian auteur Ulrich Seidl: Paradies. Like his earlier, 
very controversial filmImport Export 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/118582/import.export>, this film is 
bifurcated, a dramatic diptych with two stories. The first, Sugar Mama, is 
about a middle-aged woman called Teresa who travels to Kenya in the hope of 
finding a younger lover. The second story, called Melanie, is about Teresa's 
overweight teenage daughter, who is packed off to weight-loss camp while Teresa 
is away and finds herself involved with the camp's middle-aged director.

So: another colossal buffet of cinematic prestige from Cannes, a festival so 
spoiled for choice that it can afford to put brilliant and well-known directors 
and heavy-hitters on the sidebars, and one that always promises something new.
 