
Lars von Trier <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> is the best 
director in the world. How do we know? Because he told us so. "I am the best 
director in the world," he declared to the world's press today.

This admittedly did not go down too well with some journalists who had clearly 
beenleft bewildered and angry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/18/cannes-film-festival-ken-loach-lars-von-trier>
 after watching his new horror movie Antichrist at the Cannes film festival. 
Here is a film that wants to bewatched behind splayed fingers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/18/cannes-film-festival-antichrist-lars-von-trier>
.

The Daily Mail demanded – rather testily – that he explained myself. "I don't 
have to justify myself," Von Trier replied. "I make films and I enjoy very much 
making them. You are all my guests, it's not the other way round. I work for 
myself and I do this little film that I'm now kind of fond of and I haven't 
done it for you or the audience so I don't feel I owe anyone an explanation."

It was the "I'm the best director" line which raised the most eyebrows. But 
then this is a director known for his playful, some would say puckish, sense of 
humour.

Asked which current directors he admired he said: "All the others are 
overrated, so that's quite simple. This knowledge I have that I'm the best 
director, I see it as a tool. I'm sure other directors may feel the same but 
maybe they don't say. I'm not sure I am, I just think I am." So that's all 
right, then.

One of the loudest laughs during the first screening was at Von Trier's 
dedication of the film to Andrei Tarkovsky. Von Trier today called Tarkovsky "a 
real god" with whom he had a religious relationship. "I know he saw my very 
first film and hated it very much, which is fine. He's the generation before me 
and I feel related to him. I feel related to Bergman as well, [but] he didn't 
feel related to me."

Antichrist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/antichrist>, with its chapter 
headings such as Grief, Pain and Despair, is never going to be a date movie. 
Some of it is unwatchable for weak hearts such as mine. Yet, I came away 
impressed. I think I may have enjoyed it. But he's got to be joking if he's the 
best director in the world.
 