
6.22pm BST 
 Jerry Lewis at the premiere of Max Rose in Cannes Photograph: Anne-Christine 
Poujoulat/AFP/Getty Images 
And finally, as we cease live blogging for the day, here's a report 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/jerry-lewis-cannes-max-rose> from 
theMax Rose <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155327/max-rose> press 
conference, where Jerry Lewis (now a sprightly 87) has been holding court.

We'll be back tomorrow – join us for reviews of Max Rose 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155327/max-rose>, James Gray's The 
Immigrant <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146662/immigrant>, Jim 
Jarmusch's latestOnly Lovers Left Alive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/apr/26/cannes-2013-jim-jarmusch>, and 
other such film-related doings emanating out of Cannes. Have a good night's 
sleep, and meet us back here tomorrow. Off you go now.

5.31pm BST 
 Alejando Jodorowsky 
An interview 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/alejandro-jodorowsky-film-danza-realidad>
 84-year-old director with Alejandro Jodorowsky now, discussing his filmThe 
Dance of Reality: <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155242/dance-of-reality>

Missing, believed lost, Alejandro Jodorowsky rolls into Cannes like a 
conquering hero. He has a room at the Croisette and a film in the directors' 
fortnight – a rambunctious sidebar away from the Palais. "I am like the rain, I 
go where I'm needed," the director explains. "If I were in the big house, with 
the red carpet and photographers and all the fancy women, I would be ashamed." 
He has always been happier way out on the fringes.More 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/alejandro-jodorowsky-film-danza-realidad>

5.27pm BST 

Alec Baldwin speaks!
 Photograph: Rex Features 
"Where I've ended up, I'm pretty content. I see the people at the top of the 
movie business today and I compare their careers with those at the top 40 years 
ago. I wouldn't trade places with those that dominate today; I don't 
necessarily want what they have. I want the choices they have but I look at 
some of the films they make and think: 'You could get anybody to play those 
parts.'"

Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/alec-baldwin-movies-abandoning-serious-acting-television>

5.23pm BST 

Here's Peter Bradshaw's review of The Golden Cage (La Jaula de Oro) from 
Spanish director Diego Quemada-Diez, a camera assistant on Ken Loach'sCarla's 
Song <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2005/apr/06/1>, Land and Freedom and Bread 
and Roses:

There is something very Loachian in this tough, absorbing, suspenseful drama 
showing in the Un Certain Regard section about three Guatemalan kids trying 
illegally to cross the Mexican border into the US. More 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/golden-cage-jaula-de-oro-review>

Updated at 5.23pm BST

5.13pm BST 

Here's Xan Brooks' Cannes diary 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-film-festival-diary-nebraska>
, featuring speculation on which films Spielberg and co. might be eyeing 
favourably for the Palme d'Or:

What they are thinking is anyone's guess. By this stage last year, the 
consensus had it that Michael Haneke's Amour was the runaway favourite. This 
year we appear to be deep in William Goldman country. Nobody knows anything… 
More 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-film-festival-diary-nebraska>

5.02pm BST 

More Cannes jewel-thievery!

Police say an expensive necklace was stolen overnight in the luxurious resort 
town of Cap d'Antibes, the second jewellery theft on the French Riviera during 
theCannes film festival <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/cannesfilmfestival>.

A police official said on Thursday that the necklace was of "high value" but 
could not put a price on it. She would only speak on condition of anonymity 
because an investigation is under way.More 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/may/23/jewellery-theft-french-riviera-cannes>

3.10pm BST 

Here's a video interview 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/may/23/only-god-forgives-nicolas-winding-refn-video-interview>
 with Nicolas Winding Refn and Vithaya Pansringarm. The director and star of
Only God Forgives 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154519/only-god-forgives> talk to Henry 
Barnes about playing God, staying out of fights and making ultra-violence sexy.

2.25pm BST 

Hard-hitting news alert

Following last week's million-dollar jewel heist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/17/cannes-jewellery-heist-film-festival>
, news reaches us of more nefarious activity on La Croisette.

Somebody has been passing themselves off as Korean hitmaker Psy in order to 
get access to the festival. TheHollywood Reporter says 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/cannes-psy-impersonator-tricks-festival-545834>
:

The fake Psy painted the French town red for two days, enjoying a day at the 
Martinez beach restaurant, and partying at night at the Carlton hotel.

Many partygoers were also duped by the man, with plenty of images popping up 
on Twitter of people posing with the imposter.

THAT'S NOT PSY NAOMIE.

2.18pm BST 
 Photograph: Regis Duvignau/Reuters 
Rivaling Bruce Dern's yellow cardigan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-alexander-payne#block-519df720e4b0371c681f9fee>
 for today's best-knitwear-on-a-senior-gentleman prize at Cannes (an unofficial 
but hotly-contested category existing only on this live blog), here's a 
snazzily-attired Jerry Lewis at the photocall for Max Rose.

12.54pm BST 

Four star review for Nebraska

While Alexander Payne <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-payne> might 
have been downplaying his latest film, it sounds like Nebraska is actually a 
bit of a triumph. Here's Peter Bradshaw's view:

After the glossy and faintly implausible Oscar-bait picture, The Descendants, 
director Alexander Payne has returned to a more natural and personal movie 
language for his new film in the Cannes competition. Nebraska is a bittersweet 
road movie starring Bruce Dern and Will Forte as Woody and David, an elderly 
father and middle-aged son taking an uncomfortable road trip together. Their 
story is laced with pathos, comedy and regret, recalling the classic indie 
cinema of Hal Ashby and Bob Rafelson. Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-nebraska-first-look-review>

12.01pm BST 
 Photograph: Lionel Cironneau/AP 
Not AwkwardFamilyPhotos.com – the movie <http://awkwardfamilyphotos.com/>; in 
fact a shot from theNebraska 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155224/nebraska> photocall. Here we have 
Bruce Dern, resplendent in a yellow cardigan, along with Angela McEwan, 
director Alexander Payne, actors June Squibb and Will Forte.

Updated at 12.03pm BST

10.47am BST 
 The colour of happy … Blue is the Warmest Colour. 
Just in is this review of French film La Vie D'Àdele Chapitres 1 et 2 (Blue is 
the Warmest Colour) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-blue-warmest-colour-review>
 from director Abdellatif Kechiche

A blazingly emotional and explosively sexy film, which reminds you how timidly 
unsexy most films are, although as with all explicit movies, there will be one 
or two airy sophisticates who will affect to be unmoved by it, and claim that 
the sex is "boring". It isn't. Read more 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/23/cannes-2013-blue-warmest-colour-review>

10.35am BST 

Some early reaction to Nebraska from Twitter:

Updated at 10.35am BST

10.31am BST 

Good morning from Cannes, where critics are continuing to reel over Only God 
Forgives <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154519/only-god-forgives>, by 
far the most divisive film at Cannes so far. Booed by some sections of the 
audience during yesterday's screening, its extreme violence drove some to walk 
out of the cinema; others, meanwhile, loved it. Peter Bradshaw gave it a glowing
five star appraisal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/22/cannes-only-good-forgives-ryan-gosling-review>
, and you can see what Xan Brooks made of it in hisvideo review 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2013/may/22/only-god-forgives-refn-video-review>
.

On to today, where the film garnering the most attention is set to be Nebraska 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155224/nebraska>, Alexander Payne's 
follow-up toThe Descendants 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142799/descendants>. Starring Bruce Dern 
and Will Forte as a father and son on a trek from Montana to the title-state, 
Payne himself has seemingly been managing expectations; in a 2012 interview he 
said: "It's just a little comedy. It's nothing fancy. Nothing too ambitious."

False modesty? We'll be finding out later this morning. Also on the way are 
reviews ofBlue is the Warmest Colour 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/cannes-sundance-selects-nabs-blue-527359>
,The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/98911/apprenticeship-of-duddy-kravitz/review>
 and La Jaura De Oro, and also a look at Jerry Lewis's return to the big screen 
inMax Rose <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1439558/> – plus the usual news, 
photos, tweets, and whatever other Cannes-related flotsam and jetsam comes our 
way.
 