
Capitalism took a bashing in 2015: Corbynomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/19/corbynomics-why-we-should-take-it-seriously>
, the rise of anti-austerity partiesPodemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/21/podemos-celebrate-historic-spanish-election-result-pablo-iglesias-video>
 and Syriza, Hillary Clinton slamming our culture of short-termism, COP21
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/dec/10/thousands-defy-paris-protest-ban-call-climate-action-in-pictures>
 and more. Capitalism – and more specifically its failings – is likely to be as 
brashly and uncompromisingly in the headlines this year as it has been over the 
past 12 months.

To prepare you, we’ve put together a reading list of books we’ve loved and 
learned from. It’s not easy to narrow down a list of must-reads to just six, 
but we’ve done our best. Please add your own recommendations in the comments 
below.


1. The Extreme Centre: A Warning 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/274921/s/extreme-centre/>
 by Tariq Ali (2015)

It’s not the extreme left or extreme right we should be concerned about, 
argues Ali, but the inertia at the extreme centre. Read this critique of the 
“indistinguishable political elite” that thrives at the heart of the British 
political system and you – like Ali – will be seeking out alternatives to 
neoliberal politics.

2. The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/big-short.html> by Michael Lewis (2010) 

Lewis’s tale of three small hedge fund managers and a bond salesman who bet 
against the banking system just before the biggest credit bubble in history 
burst – and made a killing – is a fascinating insight into the dark side of 
Wall Street and the deception that led to the financial crash of 2008.

The book has been turned into a film directed and co-written by Adam McKay, 
which comes out in the UK on 22 January 2016.

3. The Dispossessed <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dispossessed.html> by 
Ursula Le Guin (1974)

Revolutionaries have fled the planet Urras, which is mired in poverty and 
ruled by an exploitative wealthy class, and have built themselves a new world 
on the planet Anarres. At the heart of Anarres’ anarchist society is the 
principle of sharing. But progress on the planet is stalling and all is not 
well. It might have been written more than 40 years ago, but that doesn’t stop 
this science fiction classic from exploring issues acutely relevant to us today.

4. Postcapitalism 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316569/> by Paul Mason
 (2015)

Capitalism may have undergone significant changes over the past two centuries, 
but with every cycle of boom and bust it has emerged stronger. Not any more, 
argues Paul Mason, who believes information technology is heralding a 
post-capitalist era. Read this excellent insight into the coming wave of 
automation and why it will revolutionise the way we live and work today.

5. Refusal of Work: The Theory and Practice of Resistance to Work 
<http://www.zedbooks.co.uk/paperback/refusal-of-work> by David Frayne (2015)

A perfect partner to Paul Mason’s Postcapitalism, David Frayne scrutinises the 
emergence of a working culture that sees some condemned to work harder than 
ever while others must cope with unemployment or underemployment. By exploring 
the motivations of those who resist the nine-to-five, Frayne explores the world 
of work that props up present-day capitalism.

6. Capitalism: A Ghost Story 
<http://www.versobooks.com/books/1802-capitalism-a-ghost-story> by Arundhati 
Roy (2014)

Man Booker Prize winner Arundhati Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> makes the case that India 
answers to a handful of megacorporations that run the country . In the era of 
what Roy calls “the privatization of everything”, these companies have made the 
Indian economy one of the fastest growing in the world. There’s only one 
problem – they exploit everything and everyone in its wake. “It’s a dream come 
true for businessmen – to be able to sell what they don’t have to buy,” writes 
Roy.
 