
Captain America marches past $200m

The superhero sequel accomplished two feats that proved its mettle over Easter 
weekend. By staying top for the third weekend in a row,The Winter Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/captain-america-the-winter-soldier-first-look-review>
 has shown a consistent ability to draw crowds, notwithstanding the competing 
claims ofRio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/06/rio-2-carlos-saldanha-jemaine-clement-jesse-eisenberg>
 in the past two sessions. While not exactly a direct rival in terms of 
demographic, there's little doubt that Captain America's drawing power has put 
a dent in the animation's early lustre. The film passed $200m (£118m) on its 
third weekend to reach $201.5m, confirming a healthy upward trajectory in 
comparison with its2011 predecessor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142811/captain-america>, which ended on 
$176.6m.

Transcendence trips up

A rare stumble at the box office for Johnny Depp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/18/transcendence-johnny-depp-2014s-most-unexpected-turkey-film>
 probably says more aboutWarner Bros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/warner-bros>' muted marketing campaign and a 
lack of audience engagement than any waning in the star's appeal. Transcendence 
is the first feature fromChristopher Nolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-nolan>'s cinematographer, Wally 
Pfister, and – after the $11.3m opening weekend – the question now is whether 
he can muster enough goodwill in the industry to direct another movie. Warner 
Bros did not pay the hefty $100m production price tag, rather acquiring rights 
to release the movie; that shifts the burden to the investors, international 
buyers and sales agent Lionsgate International.

Heaven Is for Real shines on debut

No such worries for Heaven Is for Real, the latest in a slew of faith-based 
movies that has stormed the box office and made the most of Easter weekend. 
After the breakout success ofGod's Not Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/god-s-not-dead> and the slower burning Son of 
God <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159165/son-of-god>, Tristar's tale 
arrived in third place on $21.5m over three days, taking $28.5m over five. Greg 
Kinnear and Kelly Reilly star in what is dubbed as the true story of a boy who 
claims to have visited heaven after a near-death experience.

A Haunted House 2 arrives with a whimper

Fifteen months ago the original horror spoof thrilled its US distributor Open 
Road Films with an $18.1m number two debut. The movie went on to gross $40m – 
by which time a sequel had already been greenlit, based partly on the movie's 
international success. The situation is not so promising the second time round:
A Haunted House 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-haunted-house-2> arrived 
on $9.1m. That's not to say it will not reach a solid number in the US and 
internationally in the weeks to come.

Fading Gigolo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/09/fading-gigolo-toronto-review-john-turturro-woody-allen>
 scores for Millennium

It's rare to see Woody Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> in 
a movie he hasn't directed himself. So hats off to John Turturro for doing the 
veteran comic, and kudos to Millennium Entertainment for orchestrating such an 
impressive opening weekend. The rom-com debuted on $198,000 from five theatres, 
resulting in a magnificent $39,600 average. How it fares in the coming weeks 
will be crucial.

North American top 10, 18-20 April 2014

1 Captain America: The Winter Solider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-the-winter-soldier>, $26.6m. 
Total: $201.5m

2 Rio 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rio-2>, $22.5m. Total: $75.4m

3 Heaven Is For Real, $21.5m. Total: $28.5m

4 Transcendence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/transcendence>, $11.2m

5 A Haunted House 2, $9.1m

6 Draft Day <https://www.theguardian.com/film/draft-day>, $5.9m. Total: $19.5m

7 Divergent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/divergent>, $5.8m. Total: $133.9m

8 Oculus <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oculus>, $5.2m. Total: $21.2m

9 Noah <https://www.theguardian.com/film/noah>, $5m. Total: $93.3m

10 God's Not Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/film/god-s-not-dead>, $4.8m. 
Total: $48.3m
 