
Securing a new job in a saturated market is tricky at the best of times. To 
make it harder, moving from the private to the public sector can be complicated 
because the recruitment processes are often very different.

You may be left wondering why your applications don't seem to be hitting the 
mark, despite knowing that you could do the job standing on your head. The 
truth is that to successfully apply for a public sector job you need to 
understand how the system works. Without this, skills and experience alone may 
not be enough.

How is the shortlisting done?

The deciding part of your application often doesn't lie in the detail of the 
form itself, or your accompanying covering letter. Rather, it's likely that 
your "supporting statement" will count the most. This is the document where 
you're asked to give evidence of the skills, experience and knowledge needed 
for the role. To do this well you need to meet each point on the person 
specification, giving examples to support and demonstrate your claims. 
Applicants will receive a tick, cross or perhaps a question mark against each 
of the criteria points, according to the contents of the supporting statement. 
This means you should address every single point mentioned.

How should I format my supporting statement?

Use a layout that makes it crystal clear which criteria you are addressing. 
You can use an order that mirrors the recruiter's requirements â€“ shortlisters 
will like this because it makes it easier to locate the key information they 
need. It could also help your chances of success: under time pressures it can 
be easy to overlook a point which is hidden in the midst of a wordy paragraph. 
It's safer to dedicate a short paragraph or bullet points to each criteria, and 
work through them systematically.

Demonstrating your competencies

You can use your supporting statement to prove you have the required skills. 
Team work, using initiative and client-awareness, are usually desirable, but 
there are many other attributes they may be looking for too.

Think back to the Star technique, which is outlined in this blog about 
interviews, but which you can also use in job applications 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/star-technique-competency-based-interview>
. Focus your evidence on one specific example that you can break down into 
detail, rather than talking more generally about a range of situations. It is 
not enough, for example, to respond to a competency requirement, such as 
flexibility, by saying: "I take an adaptable and pragmatic approach to my 
work." You need to prove it through a real-life example.

And finally, the good news

Completing applications like this may seem frustratingly time-consuming, but 
it does come with its benefits. You may not realise it, but completing your 
supporting statement has already helped you prepare for the next stage of the 
process: interviews often focus on many of the same criteria points. It's 
essential, therefore, that you keep a copy of both your supporting statement 
and the person specification and use them as tools in your interview 
preparation. Topics that come up for discussion should be reasonably easy to 
predict and the interview should be structured so that the same questions are 
asked to all candidates.

Success is not just about what you know or even what you've done. It's also 
about how you prove it.

Hannah Morton-Hedges is a careers adviser and runs Momentum Careers Advice 
<http://www.momentumcareersadvice.com/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly Careers update 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>.
 