
January is a popular time in recruitment as many people resolve to get onto 
the career ladder or make big changes in their professional lives.

But choosing your ideal career is a huge challenge 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/find-your-ideal-career> and 
there's no set way of doing it. From writing personal job advertisements to 
properly considering your personal preferences, ambitions, career goals and 
values – it's hard to know where to start. If you've never had a job before, 
how do you know what kind of working environment and hours would suit you? And 
what about all those annoying parts to any job that no one tells you about 
before you start?

It's not any easier for people considering a career change either. While 
returning to work after the new year can remind you of all the reasons you 
don't like it, thinking about changing is easier than doing it. If you are 
serious about switching career, it will require careful planning and a fair 
dose of courage to take the plunge.

Assessing your current work situation is the key to success, according to Ros 
Toynbee, director ofThe Career Coach <http://www.thecareercoach.co.uk/>.You'll 
probably need to realign your CV and highlight your transferable skills too.

To make matters even more tricky, prospective employers can often be wary 
about employing career changers,according to Corinne Mills 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/career-crossroads-move-work-new-direction>. She 
says: "They may be concerned about your lack of experience, your motives for 
career change or your commitment to your new career."

So, if 2014 is going to be the year you get a job or change career – whether 
it's a different type of role in the same company, or a career in a completely 
new sector – help is at hand. Join our live Q&A for advice, ideas and tips from 
our panel of experts onThursday 16 January from 1pm-3pm. We'll be talking about:

• Assessing your career goals and ambitions

• How to find a job that suits you

• Tips on writing a CV for your new career

• How impress prospective employers

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you cancreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?returnUrl=http%3A%2F%2Fcareers.theguardian.com%2Fgraduate-schemes-application-process-live-chat>
, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, 
you can tweet us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email 
your questions toKate Hodge <mailto:kate.hodge@theguardian.com> who can post 
them on the Q&A.

Our panel

Jim Reilly FBILD is director of recruitment and youth marketing at BigChoice 
Group <http://www.bigchoicegroup.com/>. The company is one the world's biggest 
publishers of content for the youth, student and graduate sectors. Jim has 
previously worked in graduate recruitment and learning and development events 
and publications for over eight years.

Sarah Archer is a qualified career coach and co-founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>. Much of her work is coaching people who want 
to change career and find fulfilling work. She worked previously as an HR 
Director and facilitated her own career change eight years ago.

Anne Shackleton is a careers adviser at Newcastle University 
<http://www.ncl.ac.uk/careers/>. She helps students of all disciplines on daily 
drop-in, runs advice workshops and provides practice interviews.

Hannah Morton-Hedges has 10 years' experience as a careers adviser and now runs
Momentum Careers Advice <http://www.momentumcareersadvice.com/>. Previously, 
she was an in-house recruiter for major blue-chip companies, recruiting from 
graduate to senior executive level.

Clare Whitmell is a Guardian contributor and a qualified business 
communication trainer. Clare specialises in writing and presentation skills 
coaching. She also blogs about CV writing and job-hunting tips on
JobMarketSuccess.com <http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/>.

Dr Tracy Johnson is a careers adviser at the University of Bristol Careers 
Services, and is the owner ofBrainbox Coaching 
<http://www.brainboxcoaching.co.uk/>, supporting individuals and organisations 
with professional development training. She is the author of Working in 
Science: A Practical Guide to Science Careers for Graduates and co-author of 
the forthcoming The Coaching Gurus.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 