
Carey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan> has expressed 
disbelief that the story of women’s rights activists in the forthcoming drama 
Suffragette has never been told before on the big screen, and attacked the 
“sexist film industry” which could not find a place for the story.

The dark side of Carey Mulligan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/18/dark-side-carey-mulligan-interview>
Suffragette stars Mulligan as working-class housewife Maud, who defies her 
husband (Ben Whishaw) and risks losing custody of her children in the struggle 
for universal suffrage.Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> has a small but vital role as 
the suffragette leader Emmeline Pankhurst, the co-founder of the Women’s Social 
and Political Union which undertook hunger strikes and advocated property 
destruction in the name of women’s rights in pre-first world war Britain.

Interviewed by Reader’s Digest, Mulligan said Hollywood was generally only 
interested in stories about men, leaving vital episodes in the lives of women 
“largely untold”.

“I don’t think it’s an oversight at all,” said the Westminster-born actor, 30. 
“I think we have a sexist film industry, and stories about women are largely 
untold. This is one that’s fallen by the wayside because of that. I think a lot 
of people have sat around tables in various production offices and decided it 
wasn’t financially viable.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444301821716%2FKP_524078_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffragette%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffragette%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444301821716%2FKP_524078_crop_640x480.jpg>
Suffragette review: historical drama tub-thumps hard despite having your vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/05/suffragette-review-historical-drama-tub-thumps-hard-despite-having-your-vote>
The Oscar-nominated star of An Education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/29/an-education-review> also 
revealed why she took an 18-month break from acting after filming 2011’sShame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/12/shame-film-review-fassbender>, 
for director Steve McQueen, and 2013’sThe Great Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/14/great-gatsby-review-cannes>, for 
Baz Luhrmann.

“That was mainly because there wasn’t anything that interesting to work on,” 
she said. “You either make a lot of compromises and play roles you’re not very 
keen on, or you have to wait. I’ve been incredibly lucky in getting the jobs 
I’ve done, and I did enough work in the earlier part of my career to allow me 
to sit around for a bit. But that’s a privileged position – not many people get 
to do that.”

Suffragette, directed by Brick Lane’s Sarah Gavron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/nov/16/drama.worldcinema> and based on a 
screenplay by The Iron Lady’sAbi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan>, is due to open the London film 
festival on 7 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/03/suffragette-to-open-2015-london-film-festival-carey-mulligan-meryl-streep>
 ahead of a nationwide UK release on 12 October. The film, which hits US 
cinemas on limited release on 23 October, also stars Helena Bonham Carter, 
Anne-Marie Duff and Brendan Gleeson.
 