
What do David Blunkett, Sacha Baron Cohen and Alan Bennett all have in common? 
You might be surprised to hear that all three studied history at university – 
and the fact that they have such different careers shows just how versatile the 
degree is.

Studying humanities degrees isn't like medicine – there often isn't a job 
waiting for you at the end of your three years. But the skills you learn on 
these courses allow you to try your hand at a number of different careers. 
Newcastle University's website says:

"The skills you develop as a historian are highly regarded by employers in 
many sectors. You will learn to critically evaluate evidence, organise ideas 
and present a coherent argument. You will assess problems in the light of 
considerable amounts of information and will present complex material 
accurately, clearly and convincingly, both orally and on paper."

We took to Twitter this week to see what types of jobs people had gone into 
following a history degree. It soon became apparent just how diverse the job 
market was, for example:
Mikaela Morley (@mickie1988) 
@guardiancareers <https://twitter.com/guardiancareers> Working in finance 
based in a purchase ledger department. History opens the doors for almost 
anything.#historycareer <https://twitter.com/search/%23historycareer>
 <https://twitter.com/mickie1988/status/245507027714076672> September 11, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/mickie1988/status/245507027714076672> 
And @BronCarrB <https://twitter.com/BronCarrB> shows how she has used her 
degree to dabble in a number of professions:
Bronwen Carr (@BronCarrB) 
@guardiancareers <https://twitter.com/guardiancareers> #historycareer 
<https://twitter.com/search/%23historycareer> - theatre director and teacher.
 <https://twitter.com/BronCarrB/status/245457538764664832> September 11, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/BronCarrB/status/245457538764664832> 
So if you would like to know more about what your options are, join us this 
Thursday from 1pm to 3pm as we discuss potential careers for history graduates. 
You can leave your comments and questions now or join us live on Thursday. 
Alternatively, you can tweet us@GuardianCareers 
<http://www.twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email Chris Mandle 
<mailto:chris.mandle.casual@guardian.co.uk> and we'll post your questions for 
you.

Arthur Burns is Professor of Modern British History at Kings College London. 
He studied for both his undergraduate degree and doctorate at Balliol College, 
University of Oxford.

Thomas de Freitas is managing director and director of specialist markets, 
Communicate. Armed with a degree in Ancient History from UCL, Thomas joined 
Communicate in 2008 to set up the specialist markets desk. Within this 
division, he has successfully established permanent and interim solutions for 
treasury and tax recruitment.

Meryn McLaren is a Graduate Teaching Assistant at Kings College London and 
freelance researcher for an education and employment charity. She graduated 
with a degree in History with German from Bristol University and went on to 
study an MSc in Public Policy at UCL and a PhD in Modern German History at 
Sheffield.

Michael Wood is a Candidate Recruitment Manager with Capita Education 
Resourcing. He joined Capita Education Resourcing in January 2012 with 
responsibility for increasing the quality and numbers of candidates available 
throughout the business.

Ravi Soni is a careers adviser for the National Careers Service, a free and 
impartial adult advisory service providing information, advice and guidance on 
learning, training and work opportunities.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 