
With the Baftas behind us and the Oscars fast approaching, many of you may be 
thinking about the film and television industry as a career option.

In fact, research shows that more than half of young people consider a career 
in TV or film at some point, but few make the dream a reality.Many are actively 
discouraged from TV and film because of perceptions 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/poor-careers-advice-failing-creative-industries>
 about how competitive the industry is, and how important family connections 
are to professional success. Young people said they didn't know what skills 
were needed for the jobs or how to demonstrate them.

The same research also demonstrated that, although thousands of students 
enroll on media courses, only 9% of aspiring film professionals believe they 
have been given excellent careers advice.

For those with disabilities, there can be other big challenges to tackle – as 
deaf film-maker Ted Evansdiscussed recently 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/deaf-filmmaker-ted-evans-paralympics>. He said: 
"You will instantly find yourself faced with obstacles and through experiencing 
them, you will learn how to improve."

Yet the the UK's film and TV industry is always in need of fresh talent. Joe 
Mahoney, managing director ofProductionBase <http://www.productionbase.co.uk/>, 
told the Guardian <http://careers.theguardian.com/tv-industry-careers-advice>: 
"Finding that entry-level job can be hard and time consuming but don't get fed 
up – telly is a great industry to work in, very rewarding and you'll get to 
work with some amazing people that may change your life."

So, if you're thinking about a career in TV or film but don't know where to 
start or how to get ahead, join our live chat onThursday 21 February from 1pm 
to 3pm. We'll be discussing:

• Important qualifications and training

• The required skills and experience – and how to demonstrate them

• How to stand out in job applications

• Career progression help and advice

Taking part in our Q&As is easier than ever. You can create a free Guardian 
account, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, you 
can tweet us on@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email 
your questions to Martin Williams 
<mailto:martin.williams.casual@theguardian.com>.


Our panel

Don Kong coordinates trainee schemes at the BBC Academy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/academy/> and manages @BBCTrainees 
<https://twitter.com/BBCTrainees> on Twitter, providing information on schemes 
and opportunities both within the BBC and beyond, as well as general advice on 
getting ahead in the media.

Tim Hunter joined BAFTA <http://www.bafta.org/> as head of learning and events 
in 2008. Since then he has overseen the expansion of the Academy's education 
offer into to a nation-wide yearly calendar of 250 distinctive learning events, 
underpinned by high quality learning resources, delivered to a broad online 
audience throughBAFTA Guru <http://www.bafta.org/guru>.

As talent scheme manager at ITV, Marsha Witter is responsible for pre-entry 
level talent initiatives like apprenticeships and work experience programmes. 
Her remit includes working with departments to identify opportunities, through 
to scheme promotion and recruitment, supporting candidates with their career 
development.

Michael Berliner <https://twitter.com/michaelberliner> is an award-winning 
short film producer through his companyPico Pictures 
<http://www.picopictures.co.uk/>. He was named one of Moviescope Magazine's 
producers to watch last year, is currently preparing to shoot a BBC Three 
comedy pilot.

Nicky Ball is the national crew and facilities manager for Creative England 
<http://www.creativeengland.co.uk/>. She oversees a database of over 2000 
regional crew and works closely with BAFTA on a new initiative BAFTACrew. Nicky 
has more than 14 years of crewing/training experience in film and TV.

Prior to joining ProductionBase <http://www.productionbase.co.uk/>, Joe Mahoney
 worked at BBC in a number of areas before becoming senior commissioning editor 
of BBC DVD. Later, he became head of commercial development at Channel 4, 
setting up 4DVD and managing its magazines, book imprint and licensing 
businesses.

Ben Pugh is a London-based film producer who, together with business partner 
Rory Aitkens, produced Shifty <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shifty_%28film%29>, 
which was nominated for a BAFTA. They have a slate of feature films and 
television projects at their production company Between The Eyes.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 