
If the stallholders from the duff end of Portobello Road infiltrated the 
rather more rarified Borough, it would feel similar to St Elmo market in Buenos 
Aires. Its Victorian grandeur is crumbling, the marble counters cracked and 
stained, the flow of fresh produce clogged by dusty bric-a-brac, like effluent 
silting up a river. Diego points to a stall and tells me that when he was a kid 
and came here with his mother, there would be 50 crates of live chickens. She 
would choose one and - constricted gurgling accompanied by finger across throat 
- it would be ready to take home. The chickens have gone and although there are 
a few greengrocers and butchers left, they occupy a tiny ghetto among the old 
telephones, stuffed cats, broken toys, and used mate shells.

"Todo bicho que camina va a parar al asador." Anything that walks ends up on 
the grill. It is a euphemism that summarises the Argentinian attitude to 
culinary and sexual encounters - I have no preference, as long as it's meat.

La Brigada is opposite the market. The menu is bound in hairy hide, branded 
"LB". Drawings of cattle border the page. From shelves slightly above the 
diners' head height, model bulls peer down on the plates. The napkins are 
embroidered with horns. There is a theme. We start with empanadas: similar to a 
Gregg's Steak Bake, but with rich, short pastry and beef filling that has been 
cooked for at least five hours. Other than bitter greens and a few chips, there 
are no vegetables. The waiter brings sweetbreads, wild boar sausage and a 
selection of beef cuts. He slices with a spoon. Blood leaks in pools on the 
plate. It rushes to my head. I'm giddy and elated. I won't eat meat again for a 
month. Not after the last course. Criadilla. Mountain oysters. Bull testes. I 
imagine they'll be at least the size of a lemon. I'm surprised that they're not 
much bigger than my own. We ask the waiter if he likes them. He laughs 
jovially. No. I pierce one with my fork. Clear liquid seeps from the pricks 
with a spunky stink. I cut off a quarter. Pop it in. Chew. It tastes like a bag 
of green pennies. It's not good. Everything that walks may end up on the grill, 
but that doesn't mean you should eat its balls.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand.
 