
Carol Birch <https://www.theguardian.com/books/carol-birch> bumped into the 
subject of her 12th novel,Orphans of the Carnival, in a second-hand bookshop. 
“I saw this book on the shelf that said ‘tragic story of Victorian ape woman’. 
I recognised her because I’d been fascinated by a picture of her in my teens. 
Some things just get into your mind and jiggle about in there.” The story of 
Julia Pastrana is certainly hard to forget. An indigenous Mexican, she was born 
in 1834 with hair all over her body and thickened lips and gums, which made her 
jaw jut out. In an age of freak shows and scientific curiosity, she was 
presented as “Bear Woman”, “Baboon Lady”, “The Wonder of the World”: a hybrid 
of woman and beast providing the missing link between humans and apes. “The 
eyes of this lusus natura beam with intelligence, while its jaws, jagged fangs 
and ears are terrifically hideous,” ran one newspaper report. “This semi-human 
being is perfectly docile, and speaks the Spanish language.”

In fact she spoke three languages, as well as being a talented singer and 
dancer; and toured the world, confounding audiences with the contrast between 
her accomplishments and her appearance. Her manager, Theodore Lent, ensured her 
loyalty by marrying her, and she gave birth to a son who appeared to have 
inherited her condition; but the baby lived for only a couple of days, and 
Julia died shortly after. Her brief life was eventful enough, but her afterlife 
was extraordinary. Lent had his family embalmed, and continued to exhibit them, 
displayed upright, in a glass cabinet. Contemporary photos show a small, 
curvaceous woman in a jaunty frock, her hair carefully curled and dressed; and 
next to her, mounted on a pole, her tiny son, his features arranged into the 
blank smile of a wooden doll.

The bodies were displayed in travelling exhibitions into the 1970s and 
eventually came to rest in a storehouse in Oslo, where teenagers broke in and, 
thinking Julia was a mannequin, managed to tear off her arm. The remains of the 
baby had degraded beyond repair, and were thrown out with the rubbish. “I was 
very, very moved by the baby,” says Birch. “We talk about Julia a lot, and the 
baby was just – nothing. But he wasn’t nothing. I wanted to reclaim him.”
Orphans of the Carnival does indeed reclaim the baby, in a way that is both 
tender and shocking, as Birch interweaves Julia’s story with that of Rose, a 
1980s drifter who shrinks from human relationships but has a limitless sympathy 
for the odds and ends of the material world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcarol-birch-interview-orphans-of-the-carnival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781ea9f7e1f4048dcf27fc91d3408d740218030c%2F0_0_1337_1600%2F1337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carol%20Birch%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20amazed%20at%20how%20people%20come%20through%20extreme%20things%20%E2%80%93%20at%20the%20strength%20of%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcarol-birch-interview-orphans-of-the-carnival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carol%20Birch%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20amazed%20at%20how%20people%20come%20through%20extreme%20things%20%E2%80%93%20at%20the%20strength%20of%20people%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcarol-birch-interview-orphans-of-the-carnival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F781ea9f7e1f4048dcf27fc91d3408d740218030c%2F0_0_1337_1600%2F1337.jpg>
 Julia Pastrana 
The book also taps into the ongoing debate over repatriation of museum 
exhibits and specimens. “Most people are outraged at what happened to Julia 
after she died,” Birch continues. “But you look atthe mummies in the British 
Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/19/ancient-lives-new-discoveries-egyptian-mummies-british-museum>
, orLindow man 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=808672&partId=1>
, and is that as outrageous? Is it simply time that makes the difference? 
That’s what I’m playing around with.”

Birch was already working on the book when a campaign by a Mexican-American 
artist to have Julia’s remains repatriated came to fruition; her body was 
finally buried near her birthplace in 2013, more than 150 years after her 
death. “I always find that when I have a book coming out things happen, 
synchronicity happens. It was almost as if something was in the air.”

Birch was born in Manchester in 1951; her parents met while working in a 
foundry during the war. Her father was a jazz musician, so there was a lot of 
music around, as there is throughout her books. “Songs stick in my head, I 
carry them about. I don’t think you should underestimate the power of cheap 
music.” She grew up with an older sister who went on to become a primary school 
teacher: “I owe a lot to her creative mind. Our play was very important.”

As a child and teenager, Birch was always “scribbling in school exercise books 
and shoving them under the bed”. Her first literary loves wereJames Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce> and Emily Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/emilybronte>, Bob Dylan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> and John Steinbeck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnsteinbeck>; she took English and 
American studies at Keele University, but didn’t set her mind to writing 
properly until she was 30. That year, “two close friends and my dad died. Your 
mortality hits you and you think, are you going to do this or are you just 
going to play around?” Before that, “I was working, trying to make a living – 
and lazy. Could have spent time writing that I spent down the pub.”

What gave her the time and space was a move to the west of Ireland with her 
first husband, an artist, in flight from Thatcher’s Britain. “Seventies London 
was quite free and easy, you could get a place to live, get a job, cheap 
clothes down the market. In the 80s things were getting harder. We went over to 
see some friends in Ireland and realised that you could actually buy wrecks for 
next to nothing. We bought a little tumbledown ruin, and lived there for about 
eight years.” The writing “didn’t work at first, but I just stuck at it. I 
slogged and got lots of rejections for a long time.”

Birch’s first novel, Life at the Palace, was published in 1988. Charting 
marginal lives in the kind of “grim flats” she’d recently escaped from, it won 
an award; as did her second,The Fog Line (“probably my least favourite”). This 
initial success was followed by a slump, with one manuscript, about the mother 
of a murdered child, considered “too dark” to publish. “Spending a long time on 
that and finding nobody wanted to do it – that was a bit of a knock.” It was 
the feminist publisher Virago who “pulled me out of the wilderness”, and in the 
noughties she published a clutch of excellent novels with them – or as she puts 
it, with characteristic understatement: “They did OK, they bubbled along”.

In fact, Turn Again Home  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jul/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
was longlisted for the Man Booker prize in 2003. The story of three generations 
of a Manchester family, it drew on Birch’s own history. “Some family members 
didn’t see it as I had seen it, of course, but it was alright in the end, no 
enmities made.” In her review, the future poet laureateCarol Ann Duffy hailed 
the book 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/3597545/Rescuing-the-North-from-cliche.html>
 as an attempt to “reclaim the north from cliche”, but as Birch ruefully points 
out, “Even when you try and write asyou see the north, people still interpret 
it asthey see the north. Somebody actually put, ‘this is a clogs and shawls 
novel’. There’s not a clog or a shawl in it!” Now living in Lancaster, where 
she’s brought up two sons with her second husband, a philosophy teacher, she 
thinks the region still remains “unknown to a lot of people”.

With The Naming of Eliza Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview18>
 in 2005, Birch’s historical imagination really let fly. The novel reaches back 
through the generations to explore the intertwined loves and hates of a 
close-knit Irish community, with an almost visionary account of extremes of 
hunger and desperation at the time of the potato famine.Scapegallows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/03/featuresreviews.guardianreview26>
 breathed life into the sketchy history of Margaret Catchpole, an 18th-century 
Suffolk woman involved with smugglers who twice avoided a sentence of death and 
was eventually transported to Australia, where she worked as a midwife. Birch 
pored over her letters to England, “written in such archaic beautiful antique 
handwriting. She wasn’t completely literary, so they took a lot of deciphering. 
Sometimes you can see that as she’s writing, she’s sitting by a keg of 
something and getting a little bit more pissed as she goes on, and the writing 
gets bigger. The real woman is really coming through.”

But it was the Victorian seafaring extravaganza Jamrach’s Menagerie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/05/jamrachs-menagerie-carol-birch-review>
 and its shortlisting for the Man Booker prize in 2011 that gave her “a baptism 
of fire” more than two decades after she was first published. This was the year 
when the judging panel called for “readable” books that “zipped along”, 
prompting outrage in the literary establishment and endless column inches 
debating quality versus populism. “We were the dumbed-down list,” says Birch 
drily. Julian Barnes, the eventual winner, didn’t get involved with the 
publicity (“I don’t blame him, he didn’t have to”). “But the other five of us 
were all kind of new to it. We were all taking the flak together. We’d get 
together for our next event and say ‘Ah, bloody hell, did you see that 
article?!’”


The public side of publishing will always feel “bizarre” to her. “You spend 
most of your time sitting doing your own thing in your own head, probably not 
very healthy, probably quite neurotic, but then suddenly you have to go out and
be there and be on … there is a part of me that says I wish they’d all just sod 
off and I could go back to writing in an exercise book when I was 14.”

Readers adored Jamrach’s Menagerie; when I go up to the bar of the Lancaster 
pub where we’re chatting, a young woman, nearly tongue-tied with enthusiasm, 
tells me as much. It seemed to confirm Birch as a historical novelist, but 
while she accepts that of her novels, “the historical stuff is what’s got 
through, not the other stuff”, she doesn’t want to “be put in that box”. In 
fact she’s working at the moment on something contemporary, though won’t say 
what.

“I could spend the rest of my time looking for interesting little historical 
stories and doing aJamrach again and again but it would become formulaic. It’s 
a hell of a long bloody process there in your room doing this thing while 
everyone’s out having fun and you’re stuck with your backache and desk, so it’s 
got to be something that fires you up a little bit.”

Birch has followed her passions all through her career, though it hasn’t 
stopped people putting her in those boxes – whether working-class boho, 
northern saga or historical adventure. For critic and author DJ Taylor, who 
considers her “one of the most under-rated British writers of the past quarter 
century”, it’s her very diversity that, as with Hilary Mantel beforeWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/02/wolf-hall-hilary-mantel>, has 
obscured her achievements. “She writes in a variety of fictional genres – some 
of them deeply unfashionable – and leaves large gaps between publication. This 
makes it hard for the reader to grasp her essential qualities, which include an 
extraordinarily deft and evocative writing style and an abiding interest in the 
problem of women who are being ground down by devious men.”

But Birch is resistant to any feminist interpretations: “I don’t see them as 
being ground down, it’s a mutual thing … If I think in terms of this kind of 
‘ist’ or that kind of ‘ism’ then I’ll lose the characters. Character comes 
first.” What does link her characters, from the impetuous horse thief Catchpole 
inScapegallows through young Jaffy Brown setting sail for the South Pacific in 
Jamrach’s Menagerie to Julia Pastrana in Orphans of the Carnival maintaining 
her dignity in the face of fear and ridicule, is an intrepid taste for 
adventure and a stoical endurance of adversity. As Birch merrily admits, she is 
drawn to “heavy subjects: starvation, famine, suffering and death and so on. I 
like to go through all that and bring out some positive things if I can.”

Though Birch is firm about the obligations to the real person behind the 
fiction – “you owe it to them to find out what you can” – with Julia, despite 
the highly coloured details of her life, there was “more to imagine” than most. 
“Julia was set apart so that anyone who met her had to go through the barrier 
of what she looked like. Everyone she meets, the first thing they see – it’s 
not her.” She is careful in the book not to dwell on her “luxuriant hairiness”, 
exploring instead the inner reality of “what must it be like to be someone 
whose face scares people. From what I gather, she handled it remarkably well. 
She seemed to be a strong character.”

“I have this amazement at how so many times people do come through extreme 
things,” she concludes. “I think, ‘My God, if I’d gone through that I’d be a 
gibbering wreck,’ and then you see these people who have stayed sane, become 
wise. I’m just amazed at the strength of people.”

• Orphans of the Carnival is out from Canongate on 1 September.
 