
Exhibition of the week: Caro at Chatsworth

I'll be looking at this exhibition in depth in a Guardian video to be launched 
next week, so I won't anticipate. I'll simply say that anyone anywhere near the 
beautiful countryside of Derbyshire this spring should take the chance to see 
this exhibition, not least for its stupendous setting.Chatsworth 
<http://www.chatsworth.org/> is one step beyond other stately homes. The seat 
of the Duke of Devonshire and an aristocratic dynasty that goes back to Tudor 
times, the house has a history that includes such figures asGeorgiana, Duchess 
of Devonshire <http://www.amanda-foreman.com/images-georgiana.shtml> and 
today's dowagerduchess, Deborah Mitford 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/gallery/2010/sep/13/duchess-devonshire-deborah-mitford>
. Famous characters aside, it's a jaw-dropping wonderland set in a superb 
landscape that was sculpted especially to show it off byno less a designer than 
Capability Brown <http://www.capability-brown.org.uk/life/life.htm>. Now I see 
what was so capable about him. The gardens surrounding the house are a magical 
blend of rococo fantasy – including theCascade 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/kev747/6411120069/>, a fast-flowing river carved 
by hand in a hillside on top of which is a lake created to power the park's 
waterworks – and the 19th-century garden engineering ofJoseph Paxton 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/paxton_joseph.shtml>. The Rockery
 <http://www.flickr.com/photos/dynamicus/3341799160/> is made of gigantic 
boulders in genuinely terrifying arrangements, with a full-scale waterfall: a
sublime landscape rather than a gentle feature 
<http://www.gardenzine.co.uk/chatsworth.html>. Nearby, a colossal fountain 
soars up from a lake around whichthe sculptor Anthony Caro  
<http://www.anthonycaro.org/> shows this well-selected and artfully positioned 
survey of his works from the 1960s to this decade. They frame views of 
classical statues and the newly restored facade of the house itself. Caro's 
exhibition sets off the strange and prodigious art of Chatsworth's gardens.

• Chatsworth House 
<http://www.chatsworth.org/whats-on/events/caro-at-chatsworth>, Derbyshire, 
from 28 March until 1 July

Also opening

Gillian Wearing <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gillian-wearing>
There was always a humane wit and poetic realism about Wearing that made her 
early work hugely attractive. How good does she look now?
• Whitechapel Art Gallery 
<http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/exhibitions/gillian-wearing>, London, 28 
March until 17 June

Printed in Norfolk: Coracle Publications
Artists' books by Gustav Metzger and Kurt Schwitters and the work of artist 
poet Ian Hamilton Finlay feature in this retrospective of an important small 
press.
• The Gallery at Nuca <http://www.nuca.ac.uk/thegallery>, until 21 April

Michael Canning
Eerie and surreally beautiful modern flower paintings whose precision 
paradoxically leaves everything uncertain.
• Waterhouse & Dodd <http://www.waterhousedodd.com/michael-canning>, London, 
until 20 April

Secret Egypt
Want to know where the archaeology of Egypt ends and modern myth begins? Find 
out the facts behind the Hammer films, and while you are here check out a 
superb permanent collection of Roman antiquities.
• Tullie House 
<http://www.tulliehouse.co.uk/secret-egypt-unravelling-truth-myth-0>, Carlisle, 
until 10 June

Masterpiece of the week
 Mirror, mirror … Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres's Madame Moitessier (1856). 
Photograph: National Gallery 
Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, Madame Moitessier, 1856 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/jean-auguste-dominique-ingres-madame-moitessier>
The reflection of Madame Moitessier in a mirror behind her transforms this 
painting from a simple portrait into a reflection on the nature of beauty. For 
Ingres, beauty is eternal and unchanging. It isthe source – the essential truth 
of life 
<http://www.musee-orsay.fr/fr/collections/oeuvres-commentees/peinture/commentaire_id/la-source-461.html?tx_commentaire_pi1%5BpidLi%5D=509&tx_commentaire_pi1%5Bfrom%5D=841&cHash=0d87f23eb0>
. He is a classicist who believes in the perfection of an ancient Greek ideal 
of beauty, reflected in theproportions of temples and the harmonies of music 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/cultures/europe/ancient_greece.aspx>. In 
the philosophy of Plato, this ideal truth is not carnal but intangible. The 
world of the mirror in Ingres's painting is like the philosophical utopia of
Plato <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato/>: in that perfect place beyond 
the glass, forms are pure and true, and the stilled beauty of Madame Moitessier 
is set free from everyday bourgeois life to be revealed as something absolute. 
Ingres dwells on this woman's beauty not just as a random accident of good 
looks, but a revelation of the underlying order of the universe. Nothing could 
contrast more with theimpressionists who, soon, would plunge French art into 
the randomness of the everyday 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/claude-oscar-monet-the-beach-at-trouville>
.
• National Gallery <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/>, London

Image of the week
 Heat and dust … Bernard Pieterse's shot of a South African desert – a youth 
winner at the 2012 Sony world photography awards. Photograph: Bernard Pieterse 
What we learned this week

How to sketch a David Cameron caricature 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/picture/2012/mar/23/how-to-draw-david-cameron-caricature>

How great your art is 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/interactive/2012/mar/21/share-your-art-gallery>

Whether tiffs ensue when artist sweethearts join forces 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/mar/20/artist-sweethearts-team-up-love>

That violent LS Lowry robbers have been jailed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/mar/22/ls-lowry-paintings-robbery>

Exactly what the start of spring looks like 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/mar/19/spring-begins-with-botticelli?intcmp=239>

Lastly

Follow us on Twitter <https://twitter.com/#!/gdnartanddesign>

Like us on Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/guardianculture>

Check out our Tumblr 
<http://guardian.tumblr.com/post/17368367835/new-guardian-art-and-design-tumblr>

Sign up for our Art Weekly newsletter 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/signup/2011/jul/08/art-weekly-newsletter-sign-up>

Farshid Moussavi will be in conversation with Rowan Moore at the Guardian's 
Open Weekend.Find out more and book tickets here. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/open-weekend/2>
 