
We’ve all seen them – or perhaps we are them – the people boarding the plane 
or trying to check in with excessive carry-on luggage. They’ll have a bag on 
wheels AND a backpack. Laptop cases, plastic bags and satchels dangle off both 
arms. They’ll board early and fill the overhead lockers with their jackets and 
backpacks, their stripy hessian bags and boxes of donuts. And you, you with 
your elegant little carry-on, will have to stow your bag in the hold or squash 
it under the seat in front.

Plane passengers may need to buy new suitcases in plan to shrink carry-on size
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/10/plane-passengers-may-need-to-buy-new-suitcases-in-plan-to-shrink-carry-on-size>
William Boot, the protagonist of Evelyn Waugh’s brilliant novel Scoop, was an 
early prototype of the excess baggage passenger. Boot, an accidental foreign 
correspondent, is overzealous with his packing. He just can’t keep his baggage 
down (he packs cleft sticks and canoes), which requires servants to travel 
around behind him to help him carry it all.

What motivates today’s Boots to clog up the precious space in the overhead 
lockers? Are they trying to circumvent the baggage fees of budget airlines, or 
perhaps they’re traumatised by past experiences of baggage lost in transit, or 
maybe they’re just incapable of packing lightly?

Whatever the reason, the airline industry this week announced they would be 
re-examining their requirements for carry-on luggage, with the dimensions for 
many airlines shrinking.

The airlines’ trade body, the International Air Transport Association (IATA), 
unveiled a new best-size guideline 
<http://www.iata.org/pressroom/pr/Pages/2015-06-09-02.aspx> for carry-on bags 
at 55cm (21.5in) tall by 35cm (13.5in) wide and 20cm (7.5in) deep. That’s 21% 
smaller than the size currently permitted byAmerican Airlines 
<http://www.aa.com/i18n/travelInformation/baggage/carry-on-baggage.jsp>, Delta 
Air Lines 
<http://www.delta.com/content/www/en_US/traveling-with-us/baggage/during-your-trip/carry-on.html>
 andUnited Airlines 
<http://www.united.com/CMS/en-US/travel/Pages/BaggageCarry-On.aspx> and smaller 
than the 56cm x 36cm x 23cm maximum size Qantas and Virgin allow on 
international flights.

Eight major international airlines have already decided to adopt the new 
rules: Air China, Avianca, Azul, Cathay Pacific, China Southern, Emirates, 
Lufthansa and Qatar. There are more to follow, IATA promises.

The guideline is designed to allow every passenger in a plane of 120 seats to 
put their luggage in the overhead compartments. Currently,20 passengers 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/4ad5be98dc724cdbbdd84fd16313df9e/airlines-want-smaller-carry-bags-free-overhead-bins>
 per flight have to check their bags because overhead compartments are full.

Australian low-cost carriers Jetstar and Tigerair enforce strict 7kg limits on 
carry-on. If you are over, expect to pay a penalty per kilogram.

Tiger told the Sydney Morning Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/aviation/tigerair-to-crack-down-on-oversize-cabin-baggage-20140911-10fo60.html>
 last year they “had been encouraging passengers to adhere to the baggage 
allowances since the start of the year by positioning extra staff at departure 
gates to issue warnings to people who exceeded the carry-on limits”.

In my experience, these staff will point you towards the nearest bin where you 
can turf your excess baggage if you’re not prepared to pay the fees.

While it’s easy to moan about the baggage police, there are ways around the 
new, smaller cabin baggage dimensions. Here are my top tips:

1) Pack light

It’s the simplest, yet most difficult commandment. Packing light is good in 
theory, but it is only human to plan for every contingency.

Let’s say you’re packing for a holiday in Noosa. It’ll be sunny. You’ll only 
need a couple of pairs of short and some T-shirts, swimwear, undies, something 
neat for dinner and some toiletries. But what if it rains? Or if you wake up 
and actually feel like wearing the blue dress, not the red dress, but have left 
the blue dress at home? And what about the three volumes of Knausgaard that 
you’d been planning to read on the beach?

The person who packs lightly is decisive. They don’t give a toss if the people 
of Noosa see them in the same outfit four days running. Or if they have nothing 
to read. All they need is a change of underwear and maybe an extra pair of 
shoes. But how to get to that cool, confident place where you are a light 
packer?

British writer AA Gill reckons you have to be posh and rich to have the right 
mindset to pack light.

As he put it in one of his travel columns: “One of the greatest mysteries of a 
traveller’s life is why is it that the amount of luggage carried is in inverse 
proportion to the net worth of the traveller. The richest people travel with 
the least … Tourist [economy class] is made of families and students shoving 
vast suitcases, like slaves building a Samsonite pyramid.”

Why? “The poor travel with everything, because that’s all they own. The rich 
man gets what he needs at the other end.”

So stop being poor and frightened, OK?

2) Wear your carry-on

They can’t stop you from wearing four jumpers, a skirt over jeans, seven 
scarfs and five T-shirts. You might have trouble walking, may not fit in your 
seat and the sweatiness from all the layers will make you a prime candidate for 
the “explosives test” – but hey you have a teeny-tiny backpack that fits neatly 
under your seat. You are International Air Transport Association approved.

Another alternative is to wear a big jacket with multiple pockets and carry 
everything you need on you (ie scrunch up your clothes into balls and put them 
in your pocket).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fcarry-on-carefree-how-to-reduce-your-excess-baggage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b561bbb303f51d837c37a8ebd726892a797dbbf%2F0_0_632_619%2F632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carry-on%2C%20carefree%3A%20how%20to%20reduce%20your%20excess%20baggage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fcarry-on-carefree-how-to-reduce-your-excess-baggage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carry-on%2C%20carefree%3A%20how%20to%20reduce%20your%20excess%20baggage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fcarry-on-carefree-how-to-reduce-your-excess-baggage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b561bbb303f51d837c37a8ebd726892a797dbbf%2F0_0_632_619%2F632.jpg>
 Brigid Delaney wearing several scarves from her carry-on luggage before 
boarding a Tigerair flight at an airport in Melbourne, Australia, in 2014. 
Delaney wore the scarves to reduce the weight of her carry-on luggage and 
thereby avoid a $200 luggage fee. Photograph: Brigid Delaney for the Guardian 
3) Pack like Didion 

It’s 1979 and American reporter Joan Didion is going on the road. Her packing 
list, published in her collection of essays, The White Album, has become 
legendary. Didion kept her packing list taped inside her closet door for when 
she had to leave home at a moment’s notice.
 Joan Didion in 1977: a light packer. Photograph: AP 
“The list enabled me to pack, without thinking, for any piece I was likely to 
do. Notice the deliberate anonymity of costume: in a skirt, a leotard and 
stockings, I could pass on either side of the culture. Notice the mohair throw 
for trunk-line flights (ie no blankets) and for the motel room in which the air 
conditioning could not be turned off. Notice the bourbon for the same motel 
room,” wrote Didion.

There are Tumblrs devoted to her list, and recently an American Elle reporter 
packed like Didion 
<http://www.elle.com/fashion/personal-style/reviews/a27236/joan-didions-iconic-packing-list/>
 for a trip to LA. The result? “All in all, following Joan Didion’s packing 
list [below] was difficult – to say the least. The lack of options, while 
refreshing (and in line with my yearning for a uniform in high school), made me 
feel decidedly naked the entire weekend.” (Didion did not include any underwear 
on her list).

TO PACK AND WEAR:
2 skirts
2 jerseys or leotards
1 pullover sweater
2 pair shoes
Stockings
Bra
Nightgown, robe slippers
Cigarettes
Bourbon

BAG WITH: 
Shampoo
Toothbrush and paste
Basis soap
Razor
Deodorant
Aspirin
Prescriptions
Tampax
Face cream
Powder
Baby oil

TO CARRY:
Mohair throw
Typewriter
2 legal pads and pens
Files
House key

Didion’s carry-on – apart from the typewriter – is light enough to fulfil the 
new requirements as laid down by the International Air Transport Association.

Even better, these days you can substitute typewriter, two legal pads and pens 
and files for a light laptop. Not a writer? Even better. Replace her kit with a 
Kindle and your carry-on will be even lighter. You can use the extra room to 
pack underpants.

If you’re a guy, ditch the leotards for T-shirts, pack two pairs of trousers, 
one shirt and a pair of shorts.
 