
Guardian US today announced that Carrie Fisher will contribute a regular 
advice column to the site. Fisher, star of films including the Star Wars 
trilogy, Star Wars: the Force Awakens, and When Harry Met Sally, will address 
readers’ questions and dilemmas and offer her unique perspective on life. Her 
first column has been published today and readers can email questions for 
future columns tocarrie.fisher.advice@theguardian.com 
<mailto:carrie.fisher.advice@theguardian.com>.

Fisher, who has openly discussed her diagnosis of bipolar disorder and her 
battles with addiction, is also the author of a semi-autobiographical novel, 
Postcards from the Edge, and a play and non-fiction book, Wishful Drinking, 
which tackle some of the issues she has faced. Her new column will build on the 
honest and open approach she has taken to her own struggles, and will offer 
Guardian readers advice and guidance on how to navigate everything from 
heartbreak to addiction, to mental illness and gender equality.

Merope Mills, west coast editor, Guardian US, commented: “It’s fantastic to 
welcome Carrie Fisher to Guardian US. Her brutal honesty and willingness to 
share her own experiences perfectly positions her to provide advice to our 
readers. We look forward to her tackling our readers’ problems in her own 
indomitable way!”

Fisher is the latest addition to the Guardian’s growing stable of 
entertainment-industry focused writers based on the west coast. Her advice 
column will sit alongside theSecret Actress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/the-secret-actress> - an anonymous column 
penned by a Hollywood A-lister which lifts the lid on the TV and film industry.

In addition, the Guardian’s LA-based team, comprising of humorist and writer, 
Dave Schilling <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dave-schilling>, 
entertainment writer,Nigel Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nigel-m-smith>, and LA correspondent, Rory 
Carroll <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rorycarroll>, will shortly be 
joined byLanre Bakare <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lanre-bakare>, who 
assumes the role of arts editor, west coast, in September. Bakare, currently 
deputy arts editor, based in New York, will further develop a team of writers 
to cover news, interviews and trend pieces on everything from the golden age of 
television, to the gender imbalance in Hollywood, as well as covering the big 
showbiz events of the year live.

Mills continued: “We’re building a world-class team of entertainment writers 
and editors in LA enabling the Guardian to shine a spotlight on the fascinating 
themes and debates that originate in Tinseltown, as well as offering more 
reviews, analysis and comment about the creative output in California.”

Carrie Fisher’s first column for Guardian US can be read here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/10/carrie-fisher-advice-from-the-dark-side-column>
.

Media inquiries


t: +1 646.937.5878

e: pressoffice@theguardian.com

About Guardian News & Media

Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/>
 which, with 150 million unique browsers a month, is one of the largest 
English-speaking quality newspaper websites in the world. Since launching its 
US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from 
outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian’s total 
digital audience.

The Guardian is most recently renowned for its Pulitzer Prize and Emmy-winning 
revelations based on the disclosures made by whistleblower Edward Snowden. In 
2014, the Guardian was named newspaper and website of the year at the Society 
of Editors UK Press Awards and is the most trusted news source in the UK (Ofcom 
digital media report, 2014).
 