
The former billionaire financier Sir Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/allen-stanford> has been given a 
court-appointed public defender to fight charges of orchestrating a $7bn 
(Â£4.2bn) fraud after a US judge ruled he had insufficient funds to pay for his 
own lawyer.

Stanford, best known in Britain as a sports impresario who bankrolled cricket's
Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/twenty20> tournaments, is in a 
Texas jail pending trial on charges of defrauding investors of billions of 
dollars of savings.

A prominent Texan lawyer, Dick DeGuerin, had been representing Stanford. But 
DeGuerin told a judge at a hearing in Houston that he wanted to withdraw, 
largely because there was no guarantee he would be paid.

Unshaven and wearing an orange prison jumpsuit in court, Stanford said he 
wanted to replace DeGuerin with Robert Luskin, a top Washington lawyer who 
defended President Bush's adviser, Karl Rove, against accusations that he was 
involved in leaking the identity of a CIA spy.

But judge David Hittner asked whether Luskin might run into the same problem, 
as Stanford's assets have been frozen by a liquidator. The judge asked him: "Do 
you have sufficient funds to retain an attorney to represent you?"

Stanford replied: "I don't know the answer to that, your honour."

The judge said he would take that as a "no" and appointed the federal public 
defender's office in Houston to take on the case. "The man needs an attorney, 
he's got an attorney," said Hittner. "We're going to get this case to trial."

The US justice department has accused Stanford of using misleading 
advertising, false claims about returns and inaccurate statements about his 
investment strategy to lure thousands of Americans into purchasing so-called 
certificates of deposit, which purported to be low-risk savings instruments.

According to prosecutors, Stanford siphoned the proceeds offshore and used 
some of the money to finance a lavish lifestyle of private jets, Caribbean 
retreats and international cricket events.

Stanford, 59, has been in poor health. He spent five days in hospital last 
month undergoing treatment for an aneurysm in his leg, which caused an 
accelerated heartbeat, before returning to jail. The judge has refused him bail 
on the grounds that he amounts to a flight risk, owning homes in Antigua and 
the US Virgin Islands.

A senior lieutenant in Stanford's business empire, former finance chief James 
Davis, has pleaded guilty and is helping prosecutors build a case against the 
tycoon. Adding to Stanford's predicament, a Las Vegas casino, the Bellagio, is 
suing him for $258,480 in gambling debts.
 