Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4amMvs-_-GU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4amMvs-_-GU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4amMvs-_-GU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
I spent some of the early 90s in squats and fields dancing to acid house and 
early hardcore, and I spent the last few months chasing up some of the people 
who organised those parties for this Sunday's Observer Music Monthly, to trace 
the rise and fall of the free-party movement. I wanted to diagnose outwards 
from Castlemorton, the UK's largest free-party festival, and an acknowledged 
turning point in the state's tolerance of the travelling soundsystem movement.
The video above captures the whole Castlemorton affair: battered bus convoys 
(0:40), daisy-shirted ravers (2:02), the dyed hair and dreadlocks (2:43), the 
free-market theory as applied to whistles and light-sticks (3:21), Vicks 
inhalers (4:15) and the music (3:43 - Assassinator's Do It Now - bad tune). 
Plus, it ends with a naked man jumping off a cliff. Good times.

Swiftly, the police and the state moved in to put a stop to the free-party 
movement. Castlemorton dominated the BBC News two nights in a row, and the 
profile of these kids having fun was far too high to let them get away with it. 
A dedicated police unit was later supported by the Criminal Justice and Public 
Order Act 1994, section 63 (1) (b), which outlawed "sounds wholly or 
predominantly characterised by the emission of a succession of repetitive 
beats". The entire crew of one soundsystem, Spiral Tribe, were arrested, and 
other soundsystems fled across Europe. Maybe it wasn't Castlemorton, though, 
which drew free-party soundsystems to the attention of the authorities: maybe 
it was Normski's fault.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4rbde8Kkfek%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4rbde8Kkfek%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F4rbde8Kkfek%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

A few months earlier, Spiral Tribe's profile had already risen to the point 
where they were interviewed by Normski in a squatted Rotterdam library, for 
broadcast on his Dance Energy show (above). Sebastian, a Spiral member who I 
spoke with for OMM is featured in a younger, eager, incarnation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7OOew1UAT3k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7OOew1UAT3k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7OOew1UAT3k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

All jokes aside, the tension between the state and hedonistic travellers in 
this country has a long and sometimes brutal history. Back in June 1985, the 
"Peace Convoy", a caravan of 140 vehicles, descended on Stonehenge for the 
intended 14th Stonehenge free festival (above). There, an already ongoing 
rivalry with police exploded into the "Battle of the Beanfield". This was cited 
by a couple of the people I spoke with, including Joe Rush who now co-runs the 
Mutoid Waste Company soundsystem and was a member of the "Peace Convoy" at the 
time, as a major escalation in the long-running and sometimes violent tensions 
between, on one side, travellers, free-party organisers and ravers, and on the 
other, the police and the state.

According to some I spoke with, tensions have now eased and compromises have 
been made, to allow some soundsystems to hold legally licensed events. "In the 
Thatcher years, the battle lines were drawn," Mutoid Waste's Joe Rush told me. 
"Now it's more relaxed." Maybe it was back then, too, although we didn't know 
it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ff5RLNdWQPps%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ff5RLNdWQPps%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ff5RLNdWQPps%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

This footage (above) from a 1988 Sunrise party in a field shows a long-haired 
raver who looks suspiciously like the current leader of the opposition (0:08). 
Even though his attendance is categorically denied by the Tories, it's not as 
far-fetched a possibility as it sounds: Paul Staines, now an influential 
rightwing blogger, was back then Sunrise's PR officer. To promote the cause of 
his parties, Staines even invented a new explanation for the term "acid house" 
– that "acid", on the streets of Chicago where house music was born, meant 
stolen, and was a reference to the sample-based music, and not a reference to 
drugs at all, honest – a made-up fact that was passed off as truth until two 
Chicago-born musicians laughed him off a stage.

Read Tim Guest's story of the free-party scene, and interviews with the 
survivors of the scene, in this Sunday's OMM.
 