
From Dusk Till Dawn 

Robert Rodriguez’s small-screen spinoff (pictured, right) from the 
Tarantino-penned fantasy horror flick of the same name returns for a second 
season. Prepare for more mysterious visions, blood cults, shady oil money and 
gruesome, stylish violence. Expect the fearsome Gecko twins to continue their 
rampage through a twisted, supernatural America.


Netflix <https://www.netflix.com/gb/>

Experimenting With Megan Amram

Everyone knows that Amy Poehler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> can basically do no wrong. 
Right? But this new venture on her Amy Smart Girls web platform might prove 
divisive. In the first of a series of comedy science shorts, Parks And 
Recreation writer Megan Amram clearly envisages her character as a satirical 
riposte to stereotyping. But sadly, Amram seems too deeply in love with her own 
attempted parody to do anything other than talk over the top of her guest – who 
happens to be the distinguished professor of aeronautics, Beverley J McKeon. A 
misfire but probably still worth persevering with, given the calibre of those 
involved.

amysmartgirls.com <http://amysmartgirls.com/>


True Blood
 True Blood. Photograph: LACEY TERRELL/Other 
Because of the decline that characterised its later seasons, it’s easy to 
forget how singular and excitingTrue Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-blood> (pictured, inset) seemed 
back in 2008. Alan Ball’s vampire drama was preposterous but thrillingly so, 
working as a decent allegory for the gay rights struggle and an evocative 
snapshot of old, weird America as well as a sexy, pacy fantasy. Things drifted 
badly after Ball’s departure as showrunner but the whole series is now 
available to view on Sky, so revisit the early years and remember it how it was.

Sky Box Sets 
<https://buy.sky.com/hd-upgrades/campaign/tv-box-sets?DCMP=knc-GOOGLE-ec-UPG-OD-sky+box+sets&gclid=CIeu09fFtccCFSXJtAodIp4E6A>

Pitchfork TV: Over/Under

Ghostface Killah on Obama and foot massages. Mac DeMarco on threesomes and 
wasabi. St Vincent on babies and winking. This simple interview format – 
musical types decide whether things are overrated or underrated – works really 
well, revealing character, prompting humour, and leaving you feeling as if 
you’ve learned a lot more about them than if they’d just been droning on about 
their new album for 10 minutes.

pitchfork.com <http://pitchfork.com>

Modern Toss – Orchestral Disturbance No 1 in E Flat Major

Very possibly the pick of this year’s Proms, this iPlayer-only composition 
from the Modern Toss lads is a daringmusique concrète offering evoking the 
later works of Pierre Schaeffer – but Schaeffer if he were into swannee 
whistles, cockney piano and airhorns. Very silly – but we bet you’ll end up 
watching it more than once.

BBC iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer>
 