
Arrested Development 

Snap judgments on the first few episodes of Mitch Hurwitz's revived sitcom 
were less than positive, with suggestions that the show was missing its usual 
sharpness. However, after a slow start, season four ofArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> hits its stride 
at the halfway mark, as the show's out-of-order narrative structure starts to 
bear fruit and the callbacks and sight gags begin to hit home. Phew! Catch all 
15 episodes over on Netflix.

Netflix 
<https://signup.netflix.com/?ca_source=gaw&ca_nw=g&ca_dev=c&ca_pl=&ca_pos=1t1&ca_cid=12623861&ca_agid=4385794326&ca_caid=87919326&ca_adid=14889815646&ca_chid=2001681&mqso=80034807&awmatchtype=e&awnetwork=g&awcreative=14889815646&awkeyword=netflix&awposition=1t1&awexpid=>

The History Of Psychedelia 

David Quantick is "Simon Schama on acid" as he recounts the colourful history 
of the psychedelic movement in a Radio 2 four-parter. Starting with the 
invention of LSD, we are taken on a trip through time, space and music, from 
the swirling sights and sounds of the 60s, to the kaleidoscopic dance scene of 
today. It seems that the effects of psychedelia have been long lasting, and 
that we are yet to experience any sort of comedown.

BBC iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/>

Shameless

It's been a decade since David Threlfall's iconic waster Frank Gallagher 
swaggered on to our screens, effin' and blindin', fag dangling precariously out 
of his gob. But, 11 series in, we've waved goodbye to the Chatsworth estate 
(or, true to Gallagher style, given it the finger), though Frank's legacy lives 
on in William H Macy, who plays him in the American version of the show, which 
has just been renewed for a fourth season. All 139 episodes of the original are 
available to watch on 4oD.

4oD <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/4od>

Hannibal

Much of the praise doled out to Bryan Fuller's revival of the Lecter saga has 
focused on its visual flair, even in its grisliest moments (human porcini, 
anyone?). Yet there's much to enjoy in the performances from the main players, 
particularly Mads Mikkelsen in the title role. Sky viewers looking to tuck in 
can do so over on their Go service.

Sky Go <http://go.sky.com/vod/page/default/home.do>

The Chef's Protege 

It's the last week of this cookery contest, in which heavyweight cuisiniers 
Michel Roux Jr, Theo Randall and Tom Kitchin lead the search for future 
culinary stars, training them up and pitting them against each other for a 
MasterChef-style cook-off. Except, unlike that show, the focus is on nurture, 
not nastiness. The entire first series is up on BBC iPlayer.

BBC iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/>

Strange Hill High

This comedy from Simpsons writer Josh Weinstein is another fine excuse for 
parents and non-parents to flick over to CBBC, with plenty of witty one-liners 
and a strong voice cast (Richard Ayoade, Doc Brown). Get acquainted over on the 
iPlayer.

BBC iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/>
 