
A "breach of protocol" may have unintentionally exposed 84 Atlanta-based 
employees of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to 
anthrax, the agency confirmed on Friday.

Last Friday, dozens of scientists and staff working in lower-security 
clearance labs in Atlanta were notified that they may have been exposed to live 
bacteria, after bioterrorism researchers at the agency mistakenly sent the 
potentially deadly pathogen to their colleagues.

"This was simply a breach of protocol," said CDC spokesman Benjamin Haynes in 
an email on Friday. "The protocol calls for inactive anthrax to be slided and 
observed after 48 hours to see if spores develop. This particular sample was 
checked and sent to lower-level labs after 24 hours."

The lower-security clearance labs are not equipped to handle the live anthrax 
bacteria. And employees, believing the samples to be harmless, were not wearing 
the proper protective gear for handling the active bacteria, the CDC said. The 
two staff members most closely involved with the incident received immediate 
medical attention on 13 June, when the exposure was discovered, Haynes said.

He said that as of Thursday afternoon, the agency's Occupational Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Clinic had seen 54 of the 84 
employees who were notified. Among them, all but two of the scientists who 
visited the clinic were taking oral antibiotic treatment, and roughly half had 
opted for the anthrax vaccine.

Anthrax <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anthrax> is the most likely agent 
to be used in a biological attack because it only takes a small amount to 
infect a large number of people, according to the CDC website. All types of 
anthrax, if untreated, have the potential to spread throughout the body and 
cause severe illness and even death.

"Based on most of the potential exposure scenarios, the risk of infection is 
very low," the CDC's statement said.

It adds: "Out of an abundance of caution, CDC is taking aggressive steps to 
protect the health of all involved, including providing protective courses of 
antibiotics for potentially exposed staff."

All known workers who may have been exposed were notified and advised to visit 
the agency's clinic or their personal physician. They are being offered 
antibiotics, the first line of defense against anthrax, as well as anthrax 
vaccinations, Haynes said. Anthrax is not contagious, and therefore it is 
believed that other CDC staff, family members and the general public are not at 
risk of exposure.


He said none of the employees who have been contacted are showing signs or 
symptoms of having anthrax, although it can take days or even months to appear.


Scientists in the CDC's Bioterror Rapid Response and Advanced Technology lab 
were trying out a new protocol for inactivating anthrax, using chemicals 
instead of radiation. The lab's procedure, however, did not properly inactivate 
the samples, which were then sent to the lower labs. An investigation is in 
progress.

On 12 June, a day before the exposure was discovered, the CDC tweeted a link 
to an animated video explaining what to do in the event of an anthrax exposure 
– not knowing then, of course, it was their own scientists who needed the 
advice.

CDC_eHealth (@CDC_eHealth) 
Ever wondered what you’d need to do if you were exposed to anthrax? Watch this 
new animation to find out:http://t.co/p4lnCU8x15 <http://t.co/p4lnCU8x15>.
 <https://twitter.com/CDC_eHealth/statuses/477179146674524160> June 12, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/CDC_eHealth/statuses/477179146674524160> 
Reuters contributed to this report.

• This article was amended on 23 June 2014 because an earlier version referred 
to anthrax as a virus. This has been corrected.

 