
Former boxing promoter Kellie Maloney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/18/celebrity-big-brother-kellie-maloney-fee-row>
,Benefits Street's White Dee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/17/benefits-street-white-dee-debate-channel-4>
 and Hollywood actor Gary Busey were among the figures who headed into the
Celebrity Big Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jan/27/celebrity-big-brother-best-season>
 house on Monday night for the latest series of the long-running reality show.

They feature in the lineup of 14 people taking part in the Channel 5 show over 
the coming weeks, the seventh celebrity version of the format since its switch 
from Channel 4 in 2011, and 14th overall. There have been 33 series ofBig 
Brother <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> in its various 
incarnations the UK altogether, including the non-celebrity version.

Others entering the Big Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> house for the latest 
series including former British Olympic boxing champion Audley Harrison and 
George Gilbey, one of the stars of Channel 4's TV watching documentary series
Gogglebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/may/23/gogglebox-channel-4-june-leon-bernicoff>
, in which he features with his mother and stepfather.

Maloney – who is favourite to win the show, according to bookmaker William 
Hill, at 2/1 – had success handling the career of world heavyweight title 
holder Lennox Lewis among others, but withdrew from the sport last year.It 
emerged this month that she has been undergoing gender reassignment and now 
lives as a woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/10/kellie-maloney-boxing-transgender>
.

Maloney, 61, drew broad support from the boxing world, including Lewis, after 
disclosing that she had undergone hormone therapy, hair removal electrolysis, 
voice coaching and specialist counselling for the past two years.

Second favourite – at 4/1 – is Dee, real name Deirdre Kelly, who rose to 
prominence in the Channel 4 documentary series Benefits Street and has a 
burgeoning media career speaking about welfare issues, including a scheduled 
appearance at the Conservative party conference. 

Busey, 70, whose credits include Lethal Weapon, Big Wednesday and Point Break, 
has previously appeared in US reality shows Celebrity Wife Swap and TheCelebrity
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> Apprentice.

He will be joined in the Channel 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive> Celebrity Big Brother house by 
former Strictly Come Dancing professional dancer James Jordan; Edele Lynch, who 
found fame in the Irish girl group B*Witched; and David McIntosh, who had a TV 
career as Tornado in the Sky1 revival of Gladiators.

The series features an array of wannabes who have featured in reality-TV 
shows: Stephanie Pratt from reality shows The Hills and Made in Chelsea, Lauren 
Goodger who has featured in ITV2's The Only Way Is Essex and Ricci Guarnaccio 
from Geordie Shore.

Also taking part are veteran US actor Leslie Jordan, who had a recurring role 
in sitcom Will & Grace, ex-Emmerdale actress Claire King – known for her role 
as Kim Tate, and Angélique "Frenchy" Morgan, who has appeared in a number of US 
reality shows.

The previous series of Celebrity Big Brother – hosted by Emma Willis – was won 
by comedian Jim Davidson. The launch comes just three days after the most 
recent run of the normal Big Brother came to a close.
 