
In her BBC sitcom Absolutely Fabulous, Jennifer Saunders was never slow to 
rope in famous chums to add an in-jokey authenticity to her portrait of the 
fag-end of the high life.The forthcoming movie version promises to be a similar 
model of celebrity democracy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dj3ZWhlmexw>, 
with a cast that runs from A-list to Z-list. Where else would you find Kate 
Moss rubbing shoulders with Judith Chalmers? Or Alexa Chung and Daisy Lowe 
cosying up to Christopher Biggins? If a bomb had dropped on set, it would have 
been goodbye to Hello! magazine. Heat might have frozen over.

No big-budget comedy is complete until the producers have milked their 
contacts book dry for star cameos. Overkill was part of the gag in the third 
Austin Powers film (Tom Cruise, Gwyneth Paltrow, Kevin Spacey, Steven 
Spielberg) and the second Anchorman (Will Smith, Marion Cotillard, Liam Neeson, 
Kanye West). But this trick had worn thin by the time of Zoolander 2. A 
devilishly funny opening sequence shows Justin Bieber being gunned down; he 
reaches for his phone, takes a selfie, selects a filter, posts it on Instagram 
– and then expires. The remainder of the film suggested that its makers had 
inserted a star cameo whenever inspiration was flagging. Unfortunately, Anna 
Wintour and Susan Boyle proved to be no substitute for decent jokes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fcelebrity-cameos-absolutely-fabulous-has-the-joke-worn-thin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F757b41aafafacaf65f4f8aeec281e0c621ee5e1d%2F119_199_3268_1961%2F3268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrity%20cameos%3A%20has%20the%20joke%20worn%20thin%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fcelebrity-cameos-absolutely-fabulous-has-the-joke-worn-thin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrity%20cameos%3A%20has%20the%20joke%20worn%20thin%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fcelebrity-cameos-absolutely-fabulous-has-the-joke-worn-thin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F757b41aafafacaf65f4f8aeec281e0c621ee5e1d%2F119_199_3268_1961%2F3268.jpg>
 There were so many celebrities in the new Absolutely Fabulous film that if a 
bomb had dropped on set, it would have been goodbye to Hello! magazine … Joanna 
Lumley and Jennifer Saunders. Photograph: Fox Searchlight Pictures/Photoshot 
The idea of the celebrity appearance as a punchline in itself originated on 
television in the late 1980s with The Dame Edna Experience, in which real stars 
were grilled and gushed over by Barry Humphries’ acidic alter ego. To squirm on 
Dame Edna’s sofa, as the likes of Germaine Greer, Mel Gibsonand Sean Connery did
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ysINNySRAo>, was to advertise oneself as a 
good sport. The same was true of anyone who appeared on The Larry Sanders Show, 
starring and created by the late Garry Shandling, which went behind the scenes 
of a fictional late-night chat show. The idea caught on, with A-listers mocking 
themselves on Curb Your Enthusiasm, Extras, 30 Rock and Life’s Too Short.

The 2013 film This Is the End squeezed abundant laughs from the sight of stars 
either parodying their public persona (James Franco coming over all bromantic 
with Seth Rogen), or going against the grain of it (that nice Michael Cera 
playing himself as a coked-up sex pest). But if modern movies rely too heavily 
on the celebrity cameo, blame Judd Apatow. He began his career as a writer on 
The Larry Sanders Show and now fills his movies (such as Knocked Up and 
Trainwreck) with so many pop-cultural cameos that his work will be virtually 
meaningless to audiences within 10 years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDj3ZWhlmexw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDj3ZWhlmexw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDj3ZWhlmexw&media=>
 Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie trailer 
Celebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> walk-ons used 
to mean something. In Annie Hall, Woody Allen silences a bore who has been 
pontificating about Marshall McLuhan by producing the real McLuhan out of thin 
air. (The media theorist was Allen’s third choice after Fellini and Buñuel 
turned him down.) A year earlier in 1976, Mel Brooks’s Silent Movie featured 
the wittiest cameo in film history when it gave the only spoken word in the 
script (“Non!”) to the mime artist Marcel Marceau.

Cameos don’t always have to be played for laughs. Buster Keaton is poignant as 
one of the “waxworks” from the silent era playing cards in Sunset Boulevard. 
And the cameo-as-homage has a noble history. Jean-Luc Godard doffed his cap to 
Sam Fuller (director of Shock Corridor) and Fritz Lang (Metropolis, M) by 
casting them in Pierrot Le Fou and Le Mépris respectively. Jonathan Demme 
repaid his mentor, the B-movie king Roger Corman, with cameos in most of his 
movies,including The Silence of the Lambs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U7U8Ks3ncRU>. And it was splendidly perverse 
of John Landis to put highbrow auteurs such as Gillo Pontecorvo (The Battle of 
Algiers) and Costa-Gavras (Z) in his dumbest movie, The Stupids. Those sorts of 
cameos blur the line between viewer and trainspotter: identify each face and 
your cinephile credentials will be incontestable.
 Benedict Cumberbatch and Ben Stiller in Zoolander 2. Photograph: handout 
At the bottom of the pile is the vanity cameo, which serves no purpose other 
than to flatter the subject. In this category are those US TV presenters such 
as Larry King, Conan O’Brien and Jay Leno, who spend more time playing 
themselves than being themselves. Salman Rushdie and Jeffrey Archer looked 
spectacularly awkward in thechallenging roles of Salman Rushdie and Jeffrey 
Archer in Bridget Jones’s Diary <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tcIaT5D4Iwc>.

At least a cameo is small enough to be surgically removed if necessary. The 
Spice Girls’ movie, Spice World, underwent a last-minute snip when unsavoury 
revelations emerged about one of its guest stars, Gary Glitter. Meanwhile, look 
closely at Casino Royale and you will see Richard Branson being stopped at 
airport security. Unless you’re watching it onBritish Airways, that is, which 
carries a version on its in-flight entertainment system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/apr/24/theairlineindustry.business> from 
which their competitor’s cameo is mysteriously absent.
 