
The Channel 4 chairman, Lord Burns, has defended executive salaries at Channel 
4, after a £731,000 payment to former chief executiveAndy Duncan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan> pushed total boardroom pay at 
the broadcaster to nearly £4m in 2009.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> paid a total of £3.851m 
in salaries, bonuses and benefits to 14 executive and non-executive board 
members last year, a rise of nearly 13% compared with 2008's £3.418m.

Nearly half of that – just under £1.5m – went to Duncan, who left in November 
2009.The broadcaster made a pre-tax profit of £300,000 last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/23/channel-4-annual-report-digital-tv>
 in what it described as the toughest advertising market in its 28-year history,
as it published its 2009 annual report today 
<http://www.channel4.com/about4/annualreport.html>.

"It's important to stick to contractual arrangements," Burns said. "That's 
life."

However, he implied it was unlikely Channel 4's executive salaries will be 
reach the same level again. "I think the marketplace has changed since those 
salaries and arrangements were put in place. They must go back two or three 
years," he said.

"We are a business that has to compete for talent," Burns added. He said 
broadcasters generally were "top heavy" but also pointed out "the senior 
management [at Channel 4] did take voluntary pay reductions [in 2008]".

Duncan and Kevin Lygo, Channel 4's outgoing director of television and 
content, reduced their salaries in 2008 and the former chief executive also 
agreed to waive half of a £450,000 long-term loyalty bonus.

Lygo, who is leaving Channel 4 to become managing director of ITV Studios, saw 
his total remuneration decrease to £785,000 last year from £1.136m in 2008.

His pay package was made up of a £644,000 salary, £128,000 bonus and £13,000 
in benefits.

Duncan left Channel 4 in November 2009 with a final remuneration package of 
just under £1.5m,as MediaGuardian.co.uk revealed earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/23/andy-duncan-pay-channel-4>.

That was made up of £731,000 pay in lieu of notice, £514,000 in salary and 
fees, £11,000 in benefits and £225,000 as part of Duncan's long-term loyalty 
scheme.

Duncan was eligible for £450,000 under the scheme last year, but waived 50% of 
the payment. In 2008 Duncan received a total of £684,000.

The new Channel 4 chief executive, David Abraham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-abraham>, is being paid a basic salary 
of £490,000 but could be paid a bonus of up to 50%, which could take his total 
pay to £735,00.

Abraham said today that Channel 4 has had "a great start to the year" with 
advertising revenue up 8% in the first quarter of 2010 compared with the same 
period last year, from £679m to £731m.

He announced a management shakeup earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/21/channel-4-david-abraham> which 
will lead to a "reduction in the number of higher-paid staff". Channel 4 is 
planning to cut 25% of its 48 senior managers.

The Channel 4 sales director, Andy Barnes, took home a total of £513,000, up 
by £1,000 on 2008. Barnes had a salary of £400,000, a £100,000 bonus and 
benefits of £13,000.

Anne Bulford, the Channel 4 group finance director who took over as acting 
chief executive in October, had a total remuneration package of £450,000, up 
from £335,000 in 2008. This consisted of a £338,000 salary, £99,000 bonus and 
£13,000 benefits.

Jon Gisby, the Channel 4 new media director, saw his total pay rise from 
£263,000 in 2008 to £318,000 last year. Gisby had a salary of £250,000, a 
£55,000 bonus and £13,000 benefits.

Nathalie Schwarz, who resigned as Channel 4 director of new business in March 
last year, was paid £70,000 in 2009.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 