
Lord Puttnam, the Oscar-winning producer behind some of the most successful 
British films of the 1970s and 80s, including Chariots of Fire and Bugsy 
Malone, is to return to movie-making after a substantial gap, with a film about 
the Arctic 30, a group of environmental activists seized by Russian troops last 
year.

Speaking in Cannes, David Puttnam, 74, said that, despite a long career as an 
environmental activist, as well as chairing the committee which oversaw the 
2005 climate change bill, he had become increasingly convinced the best way for 
him to influence thinking was through cinema.


“I’m quite elderly,” he said. “There’s only going to be one more movie. [But] 
reluctantly, and rather late in life, I’ve had to come to terms with the fact 
that the only professional tool I have at my disposal is that of a one-time 
producer.”

Along with collaborators including the writer and actor Emma Thompson and 
producer Hani Farsi, Puttnam will oversee the adaptation of Greenpeace press 
officer Ben Stewart’s account of the Arctic 30 incident, entitledDon’t Trust, 
Don’t Fear, Don’t Beg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/29/dont-trust-dont-fear-dont-beg-ben-stewart-review-greenpeace-arctic-30>
. That book takes its title from advice given to the group by fellow prisoners 
at the Murmansk detention centre, where they were held on charges of piracy.

In September 2013, 30 men and women travelled to the Arctic to attach a pod to 
a floating rig to prevent the extraction of oil. Before they could do so, their 
boat was boarded from the air by Russian troops and towed to Murmansk. The 
group were freed after two months in jail, as the Kremlin came under increasing 
international pressure ahead of the Sochi Winter Olympics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fchariots-of-ice-lord-puttnam-returns-to-film-with-arctic-30-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431883619400%2F78cc069b-b0f1-4396-a9cb-8e2fb0387d83-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chariots%20of%20ice%3A%20Lord%20Puttnam%20returns%20to%20film%20with%20Arctic%2030%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fchariots-of-ice-lord-puttnam-returns-to-film-with-arctic-30-movie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chariots%20of%20ice%3A%20Lord%20Puttnam%20returns%20to%20film%20with%20Arctic%2030%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fchariots-of-ice-lord-puttnam-returns-to-film-with-arctic-30-movie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F17%2F1431883619400%2F78cc069b-b0f1-4396-a9cb-8e2fb0387d83-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Greenpeace ship Arctic Sunrise under arrest and docked in the port of 
Murmansk in November 2013. Photograph: Dmitri Sharomov/AFP/Getty Images 
That politicians and lobbyists had proved unable to galvanise the public about 
impending ecological catastrophe was, Puttnam said, “a little” disillusioning.

“The left has failed to conquer the language of conservation,” he said. 
“Weirdly, historically, it was always been the right who have led the charge.”

He hopes cinema might manage to make the connection. “Its job is to turn 
complex arguments into relatively simple human relationships,” he said. “You 
begin to feel the things that otherwise you’re forced to think.”

The trick to battling apathy, said Puttnam, was to try to bypass biology. 
“Human beings are a little bit like boiled frogs. We are attuned to reacting 
magnificently to immediate disaster. But we’re terrible at long-term problems,” 
he said.

Arctic 30 will aim to avoid polemic and excite a younger generation about the 
potential of political protest.


“My grandchildren are funny and lovely, but the idea that someone of their 
generation would sacrifice something is sort of unthinkable to them,” Puttnam 
said. “It’s not part of the frame of reference. My idea is that my 
granddaughters would walk out of the premiere saying: ‘Gramps, Jesus! What can 
I do to help?’ That’s my dream.”

The exact nature of Thompson’s involvement in the project has yet to be 
determined, but the writer and actor – who travelled to the Arctic with
Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> last year – is, 
according to Puttnam, eager to flag that “the hero of the film is the integrity 
of the Arctic itself”.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Femma-thompson-arctic-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F9%2F1410301130597%2FEmma-Thompson-in-the-Arct-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emma%20Thompson%20in%20the%20Arctic%20with%20Greenpeace%3A%20'There%20are%20more%20good-looking%20men%20on%20this%20boat%20than%20any%20place%20I%20have%20ever%20been'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Femma-thompson-arctic-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emma%20Thompson%20in%20the%20Arctic%20with%20Greenpeace%3A%20%27There%20are%20more%20good-looking%20men%20on%20this%20boat%20than%20any%20place%20I%20have%20ever%20been%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F10%2Femma-thompson-arctic-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F9%2F1410301130597%2FEmma-Thompson-in-the-Arct-017.jpg>
 Greenpeace’s Save the Arctic campaign 
Puttnam and Farsi declare themselves unconcerned about any possible Kremlin 
backlash to the film, which they say will be at pains to point out two of the 
30 were Russian. And with the announcement by Shell last Monday that it is to
resume gas and oil drilling in the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/11/shell-arctic-drilling-alaska-oil-gas>
, they sense a “new villain” on the horizon. “It’s not just Russia,” says 
Farsi. “By the time the film is released, we’re going to shame everybody.”

Only a smattering of fiction films have tackled environmental matters in the 
past. Puttnam highlights Christopher Nolan’s 2014 sci-fi epic Interstellar, 
which offered a vision of a world in which the Earth has to be abandoned, as 
perhaps the most ambitious to date. However, the words “climate change” are not 
spoken in the film, something Puttnam suspects was down to studio 
encouragement: “That’s a turn-off.”


The success of Nolan’s film, which took £428m globally, also points to a 
worsening hypocrisy in the British film industry, thinks Puttnam, who is 
currently chair of the Film Distributors’ Association. Films such as 
Interstellar and Matthew Vaughn’s Kingsman: The Secret Service prop up the box 
office but their directors rarely join the likes of Mike Leigh and Ken Loach on 
the lists of the most respected. “The industry pretends to be one of a 
different type of cultural dignity and integrity,” he said.

Of the 1,641 films released in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> last year – about four times 
the number made when Puttnam was first producing – only 41 took a profit. “More 
and more films making less and less money,” he said. “And yet some films making 
more money than God.”

Such a situation, said Puttnam, resulted in a “cultural hypocrisy” unique to 
the film industry, which, he points out, prefers to declare its gross, 
including VAT, rather than post-tax profits.

“We’re our own worst enemies. Because we need to get enthusiasm and convince 
ourselves it’s a hugely successful business we shout numbers that are actually 
not real.”
 