
"In 1972 I went out to LA for the first time in my life to do a record with 
Gram Parsons <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hqpRTuARCE>, and I didn't really 
know what I was in for. He gave me a cassette of some stuff he wanted me to 
listen to, and on it was a song called Born Again. I had no idea who these 
people were; in fact I thought one of them was a girl! I went to Gram and he 
laughed and said: 'That's Charlie and Ira Louvin.'

"Well, I just could not get enough of that sound. I'd always loved the Everly 
Brothers, but there was something scary and washed in the blood about the sound 
of the Louvin Brothers. It's got that sibling sound, something about the 
physiology of it. I loved the way they would hit a unison note then jump off 
into a harmony, or vice versa, and switch lead back and forth. I became an 
instant fan. The joy of duet singing really started for me through listening to 
them, and there's such a wealth of material there. Gram played me what he had 
and I'd go out and try and find a copy of Satan Is Real â€“ that was like the 
Holy Grail! I had my Hot Band and we would just sit around with our guitars and 
singRunning Wild <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dmFvlzr7P-w> and Born Again 
and Christian Life, which Gram had already done with the Byrds.

"In 1975 I recorded the Louvin Brothers' If I Could Only Win Your Love, which 
another friend turned me on to, and it became very successful for me. I was
invited to perform it on a Country Music Association award show 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zLQu5Vidl6o> and I requested that Charlie sing 
with me.

For me it was a no-brainer, and he aced it! I was so thrilled to sing with 
him. In fact, when I was inducted into theCountry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/country> Music Hall of Fame in 2008 I asked 
Charlie to officially induct me, because really that song was what started it 
all for me as far as the mainstream was concerned.

"It seems odd to me that I'm in the Hall of Fame with someone who I just bow 
down before. It had to be difficult to lose not only his brother but his 
singing partner so early on [Ira died in a car accident in 1965] but Charlie 
still loves to sing and he's going great. When you got the bug and the craving 
to sing you just have to keep on singing. He's still going strong, and it's 
wonderful."

Key recording: Tragic Songs of Life (Capitol, 1956)
 