
Curved lines and coloured tiles have made Antoni Gaudí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi> one of the world’s 
best-known architects, and millions of people flock to Spain each year to visit 
his buildings. Now, nearly a century after his death, Chile is set to become 
home to Gaudí’s first completed project outside his native country.

The Chilean president, Michelle Bachelet, has said the city of Rancagua, about 
50 miles south of Santiago, will begin building a chapel this year based on a 
series of sketches Gaudí completed in 1915 and then sent to a Chilean friar. 
“This announcement delights us, as this is a long-standing project,” she said 
last month.

The project began when the friar, Angélico Aranda, wrote to Gaudí in 1922 
asking him to design a chapel for Rancagua. “I wish to build something original 
– very original – and I thought of you,” Aranda said in his letter to the 
architect, whom he had met in Barcelona years earlier. He asked Gaudí to 
provide “some plans as only you know how to do”.

The letter arrived in Spain while Gaudí was building Barcelona’s Sagrada 
Família basilica. Aranda’s request reminded him of a chapel he had designed 
years before for the rear section of the Sagrada Família apse, and he sent the 
never-implemented sketches to Aranda. “This project will serve as a spiritual 
fraternity betweenSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> and America,” 
Gaudí explained in the accompanying letter. Aranda, in return, vowed to pay for 
the work “with prayers”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDmOWrCbWE1s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDmOWrCbWE1s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDmOWrCbWE1s&media=>
 Computer simulation of the project. (Christian Matzner Architects) 
Nearly 100 years later, Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> is now 
set to begin building Gaudí’s Our Lady of the Angels chapel. Standing 30 metres 
tall, the chapel will be part of the Gaudí Cultural and Spiritual Centre, which 
will also include two large plazas, an arts school and a cultural centre.

The project will reportedly cost more than $7m (£4.6m). As she announced the 
funding, Bachelet said she was confident the centre would become a major 
regional attraction. “We have no doubt it will be a tremendous asset to the 
city of Rancagua,” she said.

As a tribute to Gaudí’s wish to link Spain and America, the chapel will be 
located on the Barcelona-Rancagua axis and decorated with 20 oculi carved from 
stone in Barcelona. The main tower will be covered with deep-blue lapis lazuli 
from Chile and capped with a copper cross, while the chapel’s crypt will house 
the remains of Aranda.

Work on the chapel is due to begin in the second half of this year and it is 
expected to be open to the public by 2017.
 