
It distresses me to say this, because she's one of my favourite authors, but 
I'm going to do it anyway: I disagree with Anne Fine. The former children's 
laureate thinks that "realism has gone too far in literature for children", and 
that the depressing endings of the books of today "do little to inspire 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/specials/edinburgh/article6808533.ece>
".

Now, Fine has long been against the more extreme end of children's writing, 
saying that "all of the publishers who have touched this novel should be deeply 
ashamed of themselves"of Melvin Burgess's Doing It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/mar/29/featuresreviews.guardianreview24>
, and more recentlyasking of Margo Lanagan's Tender Morsels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/05/tender-morsels-childrens-novel-sex>
 "whether a children's publisher does not sometimes have a responsibility to 
stop and say that although a shocking new book will make money, and even be 
popular, it does not have what the Americans call 'redeeming social 
importance'".

While I have a feeling that her comments at the Edinburgh international book 
festival have been blown a little out of proportion – she's not advocating a 
return to "the sort of fiction that is no longer credible – books with a 
Blyton-ish view of things" – some of the best modern children's books I've read 
recently have been the most realistic, dealing with tough issues, from knife 
crime to death. Patrick Ness's The Knife of Never Letting Go sees its 
protagonist grappling with the reality of stabbing someone to death. Gritty, 
dirty and upsetting, there's no glamour here: "And I punch the knife into his 
chest. It crunches as it goes in, turning to the side as it hits a bone and I 
pull back my arm and I stab him again."

Jenny Downham's Before I Die, the story of a teenage girl dying of cancer, had 
me crying on the tube – it's not even remotely sentimental, though: Tessa wants 
to experience everything life has to offer before she dies, from sex to drugs.
Siobhan Dowd's Solace of the Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/14/solace-of-road-siobhan-dowd>, 
about a runaway teenage foster child desperate for love, is heartbreakingly 
poignant, but definitely realistic. And I read Tender Morsels last week and was 
blown away by it: a retelling of the Snow White and Rose Red fairytale, dealing 
– obliquely, not explicitly, with incest and rape – I thought it was brilliant, 
a dreamy, surreal, Angela Carter-esque take on the story.Meg Rosoff puts it far 
better than I could 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/01/tender-morsels-margo-lanagan-review>
.

These books are aimed at the young adult market. Some readers will be aware of 
the issues these books are dealing with, in which case, reading about them in 
fiction will be a way of understanding them, coming to terms with them, doing 
something about them. Some will not – but books are there to educate about the 
world, to explain difficult issues, to widen understanding.

The books I read and loved when I was a child were often the ones that 
troubled and disturbed me, while opening my eyes to a world I didn't know and 
kick-starting my imagination.Robert C O'Brien's Z For Zachariah 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z_for_Zachariah> is incredibly bleak, set after a 
nuclear holocaust, where a male survivor attempts to force a young girl to 
marry him. Even the ending is uncertain – Ann sets off into the nuclear 
wasteland with no particular hope of finding other life. And going younger 
still, how about Charlotte's Web (tears for days)? Watership Down (had to be 
hidden at the top of the cupboard)? Any of Roald Dahl?

Children's fiction needs to engage with the issues that concern and worry its 
readers, otherwise it becomes irrelevant to them. Sure, there's a need for 
happy endings and jolly jaunts, but there is also a need to address the darker 
side of life.

Anyway, the reason I don't feel too bad about disagreeing with Fine is that 
she herself isn't one to shy away from realism.Step By Wicked Step 
<http://www.annefine.co.uk/books/step.php>, about the difficulties of 
step-families, is excellent;The Road of
Bones <http://www.annefine.co.uk/books/roadofbones.php>, about a totalitarian 
state, ditto. And as forMadame Doubtfire 
<http://www.annefine.co.uk/books/doubtfire.php> and its cross-dressing dad … 
well. It's a far cry from being Blyton-esque, that's for sure.
 