
If Chips Moman had done nothing more than revive the becalmed recording career 
ofElvis Presley <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley> in the late 
1960s, he would have earned his place in history. By selecting In the Ghetto, 
Suspicious Minds, Don’t Cry Daddy and Kentucky Rain for sessions held at his 
own Memphis studio, he gave fresh impetus to the final phase of the singer’s 
professional life.

But Moman, who has died aged 79, had a much more extensive string of 
achievements. As a guitarist, he decorated the closing bars of Aretha 
Franklin’s epochal I Never Loved a Man (The Way I Love You) with eloquent 
country-soul phrases. As a producer, he instructed the 16-year-oldAlex Chilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/mar/18/alex-chilton-obituary> to sing 
“aeroplane” rather than “airplane” on the first line of the Box Tops’ The 
Letter. As a composer, he co-wrote (with Dan Penn) The Dark End of the Street, 
a definitive and much-covered deep-soul ballad. The artists he worked with 
included Neil Diamond,Johnny Cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/13/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
, Willie Nelson and Tammy Wynette.

For the Presley sessions in January 1969 he broke with the usual practice by 
introducing songs in which Elvis, his manager and his song publisher had no 
financial interest, and by actively supervising the sessions, persuading the 
singer to go over each song many times in search of the best result. Presley’s 
positive response won the admiration of Moman’s elite corps of session 
musicians, who had turned up in expectation of a decent payday but little 
musical reward.

In the Ghetto took Presley into the US top three for the first time in four 
years. But it was Suspicious Minds, released in the autumn, that gave him his 
first No 1 hit since 1962, although Moman hated the false ending that had been 
added in a Las Vegas studio after it proved to be a success in Elvis’s stage 
show. Moman’s refusal to cede a portion of the song’s copyright to Presley’s 
manager and publisher created such bad blood that the partnership between the 
singer and the producer was never repeated, despite its artistic and commercial 
success.

Born in LaGrange, Georgia, to Mildred and Abraham, who had worked in a local 
textile mill before buying a farm, Moman left home as a teenager to live with 
relatives inMemphis <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/memphis>. There he 
played guitar with several prominent rockabilly singers, including Warren Smith 
and the Burnette brothers, and earned his nickname through a love of gambling. 
In 1956 he accompanied Johnny and Dorsey Burnette to Los Angeles, where he also 
played with Gene Vincent and began to learn about recording technology at the 
famous Gold Star studio.

That knowledge stood him in good stead when, back in Memphis to recover from a 
car accident in 1958, he began an involvement with Jim Stewart andEstelle Axton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/feb/28/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
, the founders of a small local record label initially known as Satellite but 
soon rechristened Stax.

As well as taking part in the sessions that produced hits for Carla Thomas 
(Gee Whiz) and the Mar-Keys (Last Night), Moman also set up the fledgling 
company’s studio in an abandoned cinema, the Capitol Theatre, on East McLemore 
Avenue.

By the time Otis Redding, Sam & Dave and many others used that hallowed space 
to make their great hits, Moman was gone, following a financial dispute with 
Stewart. He believed he was entitled to a third of the proceeds from the 
company’s initial successes, but was forced to walk away with a $3,000 
settlement.

After a year in Nashville, he returned to Memphis to open his own facility, 
American Sound Studio, gathering around him a clique of gifted musicians 
including the guitarist Reggie Young, the pianistBobby Emmons 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/legendary-musician-bobby-emmons-dead-at-72-20150224>
, the bass guitarist Tommy Cogbill and the drummer Gene Chrisman. Soon the hits 
were pouring out of the building at 827 Thomas Street, including the Box Tops’ 
Cry Like a Baby, Merrilee Rush’s Angel of the Morning, Sandy Posey’s Born a 
Woman and Single Girl,James Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jan/12/guardianobituaries.richardwilliams>
’s Dark End of the Street,Wilson Pickett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/jan/20/usa.world>’s I’m a Midnight 
Mover, BJ Thomas’s Raindrops Keep Fallin’ on My Head, Neil Diamond’s Sweet 
Caroline, the Gentrys’ Keep on Dancing andDusty Springfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/mar/04/libbybrooks>’s classic album Dusty 
in Memphis, which included Son of a Preacher Man.

Not all of these artists were actually produced by Moman, but each benefited 
from the ambience he had created and which lasted until the studio’s closure in 
1972. The tensions following the murder of Martin Luther King at the Lorraine 
Motel four years earlier had begun the disintegration of the creative 
collaboration between black and white musicians on which the international 
success of the Memphis scene had been built.

Moman moved first to Atlanta and then to Nashville, where he let his country 
music instincts take over. His later hits included Nelson’s Always on My Mind 
and Thomas’s (Hey Won’t You Play) Another Somebody Done Somebody Wrong Song, 
which secured the Grammy award for best country song of 1975 for Moman and his 
co-writer, Larry Butler.

In the 90s he returned home to LaGrange. A first marriage to the songwriter 
Toni Wine had ended in divorce. He is survived by his wife, the former Jane 
Calhoun, and by a son, Casey, and a daughter, Monique.

• Lincoln Wayne “Chips” Moman, record producer, songwriter and guitarist, born 
12 June 1937; died 13 June 2016
 