
West London has been filled in the past week with publishers offering first 
hints about new books from literary stars including Ian McEwan, Orhan Pamuk and
Karl Ove Knausgaard <https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-ove-knausgard>, but 
the talk of the London book fair is a former management consultant who has 
landed a series of deals worth millions of pounds.

This is a dream – it's obviously what every writer wants, and I'm overwhelmed

Chloé Esposito, who gave up her job last summer to take the Faber Academy 
<http://www.faberacademy.co.uk/> writing course, has signed deals with 
publishers around the world for a trilogy of books, which according to the 
author are filled with “loads of sex and violence”. The three novels, Mad, Bad 
and Dangerous to Know, tell the story of a twin who assumes her dead sister’s 
life, and have racked up deals in at least eight international territories, 
including Michael Joseph in the UK, which are understood to total more than 
£2m. Esposito is also in talks with Hollywood about a film adaptation.

“It’s my first novel but I’ve written hundreds previously, although I’ve never 
finished them,” said Esposito. “In July last year I stopped work to focus on my 
daughter, my novel, and to make sure my home wasn’t a bombsite ... This is a 
dream – it’s obviously what every writer wants, and I’m overwhelmed by how well 
it’s going. I’m waiting to wake up.”

Her agent, Simon Trewin at WME, said he hadn’t seen “momentum around a book 
like this for a long time”.

“It’s a thriller with a high concept,” said Trewin, “a pair of twins, one 
who’s living a charmed life, and one who’s living in London with a Bridget 
Jones-like existence, hating her job and her flat share ... Someone described 
it as American Psycho for theGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/03/gone-girl-phenomenon-gillian-flynn>
 generation, or The Talented Mr Ripley meetsTrainwreck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/aug/13/trainwreck-video-review>.”

The London book fair has also seen HarperCollins imprint Harlequin sign a 
fiction deal with the 2015 Great BritishBake Off winner Nadiya Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/12/bake-off-winner-nadiya-hussain-muslims-britain>
, as well as a flurry of interest around a serial killer thriller from the 
formerparamedic Daniel Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/08/ex-paramedic-wins-three-book-and-tv-deal-for-detective-thriller>
. Ragdoll has been acquired by Orion in the UK for six figures, and is 
attracting a mass of bids from around the world.

Hutchinson have also signed up the Syrian anti-IS activist Mohammed, who has 
been telling the world about life in Raqqa 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-35728424> via Radio 4’s Today programme. 
The Raqqa Diaries, which were written, encrypted and sent to a third country 
before being translated, will be published later this year.

The international publishing event has also seen the usual series of 
announcements giving details of forthcoming novels from literary big-hitters.
Ian McEwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/28/ian-mcewan-first-love-last-rites-40-years-since-publication>
’s Nutshell, called “a classic story of murder and deceit, told by a narrator 
with a perspective and voice unlike any in recent literature” by publisher 
Jonathan Cape, will come out in September, while Faber has acquired a new novel 
by the Nobel laureateOrhan Pamuk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/09/orhan-pamuk-interview-a-strangeness-in-my-mind>
, called The Red-Haired Woman. Set in the mid-1980s in Istanbul, Pamuk’s story 
of a well-digger and his apprentice looking for water on barren land will be 
published in September 2017.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flondon-book-fair-deals-chloe-esposito-mad-bad-dangerous-to-know-nadiya-hussain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1e07b5ff6ef17f9814ee0edda11195d898aaf9%2F0_0_7304_5478%2Fmaster%2F7304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chlo%C3%A9%20Esposito%20'bad%20twin'%20trilogy%20bags%20over%20%C2%A32m%20at%20London%20book%20fair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flondon-book-fair-deals-chloe-esposito-mad-bad-dangerous-to-know-nadiya-hussain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chlo%C3%A9%20Esposito%20%27bad%20twin%27%20trilogy%20bags%20over%20%C2%A32m%20at%20London%20book%20fair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Flondon-book-fair-deals-chloe-esposito-mad-bad-dangerous-to-know-nadiya-hussain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1e07b5ff6ef17f9814ee0edda11195d898aaf9%2F0_0_7304_5478%2Fmaster%2F7304.jpg>
 Karl Ove Knausgaard … reflections on football, art, life and politics. 
Photograph: Sam Barker 
An English translation of Karl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/01/karl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark>
’s latest work Home and Away, a collection of letters between the Norwegian 
author and his fellow writer Fredrik Ekelund discussing football, life, art and 
politics, will be published in November by Harvill Secker.

The fair also saw details revealed about a new novel from Booker winner James 
Kelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/29/james-kelman-why-is-my-work-so-upsetting>
, American road trip novel Dirt Road, acquired by Canongate; and Costa winner
Sebastian Barry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sebastian-barry>’s mid-19th 
century America-set Days Without End was acquired by Faber.

And an English-language edition of an authorised sequel to Antoine de 
Saint-Exupéry’sThe Little Prince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/01/little-prince-return-multimedia>
, AG Roemmers’s The Return of the Young Prince, was acquired by Oneworld, for 
publication in September. Already released in 17 languages with more than a 
million copies in print, publisher Juliet Mabey said it “perfectly captures the 
magical feel of Saint-Exupéry’s classic text in a worthy sequel to that 
phenomenal bestseller”.
 