
Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> has been ordered by the 
advertising watchdog to ensure future sales promotions do not mislead consumers 
about how much they could save, just days after the supermarket chain agreed to 
change potentially confusing pricing after public criticism by the government’s 
competition regulator.

The Leeds-based grocer gave a written commitment to alter its promotions – 
including controversial multibuy deals – after theCompetition and Markets 
Authority (CMA) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/groceries-promotions-to-be-clearer-for-shoppers>
 singled it out during an investigation into pricing tactics, triggered by a
super-complain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/21/uk-supermarkets-dupe-shoppers-out-of-hundreds-of-millions-says-which>
t by consumer group Which?

But in an embarrassing further ruling, the Advertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> (ASA) said Asda’s online sales 
promotion for itsChoco Squares cereal 
<http://www.mysupermarket.co.uk/asda-compare-prices/Breakfast_Cereals/ASDA_Chosen_by_You_Choco_Squares_375g.html>
, which appeared from mid-July 2015 for two months, was misleading and should 
not be repeated in any format.

The promotion offered three boxes of cereal for £3 in a mix and match multibuy 
when individual boxes cost £1.38 each. But a member of the public, who noted 
that the price of the product was increased from 97p per box to £1.38 before 
the promotion, challenged whether the advert was misleading.

Which? claimed in its complaint last April that the major supermarkets were 
pushing illusory savings and fooling shoppers into choosing products they might 
not have bought if they knew the full facts. That was reflected in the CMA 
investigation, which found there were “areas of poor practice that could 
confuse or mislead shoppers”.

Asda <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> said its Choco Squares cereal 
was priced at 97p per box between January 2015 and 5 July 2015 and at £1.38 
from 6 July 2015. On 7 July, the product was included in a mix and match 
multibuy offer of three packs for £3. The price was then changed again to £1.20 
on 9 September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fchoco-squares-deal-contravened-advertising-rules-asda-told%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01a5a7e0b658faa9dffb4376d0ab41a8dcec281%2F1_0_2559_1536%2F2559.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choco%20Squares%20deal%20contravened%20advertising%20rules%2C%20Asda%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fchoco-squares-deal-contravened-advertising-rules-asda-told%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choco%20Squares%20deal%20contravened%20advertising%20rules%2C%20Asda%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fchoco-squares-deal-contravened-advertising-rules-asda-told%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01a5a7e0b658faa9dffb4376d0ab41a8dcec281%2F1_0_2559_1536%2F2559.jpg>
 Asda’s Choco Squares offer. Photograph: Twitter 
Asda said customers would have paid £4.14 for three boxes if the product not 
been included in the three-for-£3 offer at the time of the promotion. The 
inclusion of Choco Squares in the offer meant, it claimed, customers would have 
saved £1.14 for the same number of products.

But the ASA upheld the complaint and said the promotion was in breach of 
advertising regulations. “Because the ad suggested the usual selling price of 
their Choco Squares was £1.38, and implied a saving could be achieved against 
the usual selling price when that was not the case (indeed, when the multibuy 
unit price was more expensive than the usual selling price), we concluded that 
it was misleading,” the watchdog said.

“The advert must not appear again in its current form. We told Asda Stores Ltd 
to ensure their future promotions did not mislead about the savings consumers 
could achieve.”

An Asda spokesperson said: “In 2015, the normal selling price of this product 
was £1.38 which was the lowest price available from any supermarket and 
represented great value for customers both as a three-for-£3 multibuy or a 
single unit purchase.”
 