
CHOLERA MANIA.
We mention with deep regret, the intelligence communicated to us yesterday by 
very respectable authority, that the country people between Tullamore and 
Ballinasloe assembled in great numbers on Monday night last, and proceeded to 
cut down the banks of the grand canal, running to the latter town. They 
accomplished this object in five or six places, in such a manner as to 
interrupt all communication by the canal.

We understand they were impelled to this rash and indefensible act of outrage, 
by the impression now very prevalent among them, thatit was owing to the 
communication by water that cholera was carried throughout the interior of the 
country with such rapidity; and, of course, they hoped to prevent the further 
and continued dissemination of the fatal malady among them by this means.

[And these are the sort of people whom certain wise and practical politicians 
propose to invest with a preponderating influence in elections all over the 
kingdom, by establishing a scheme of universal suffrage.–Ed. Guard. 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Edward_Taylor>]

The link between cholera and contaminated water was first made in 1854.

THE ATTACK ON HIS MAJESTY AT ASCOT RACES.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fcholera-mania-water-king-william-iv-ascot-attack-1832%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d211a8afd8a6cf9faf383a1963927dd18ff979e%2F0_244_1400_1027%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cholera%20mania%2C%20plus%20king%20attacked%20at%20Ascot%3A%20archive%2C%2030%20June%201832&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fcholera-mania-water-king-william-iv-ascot-attack-1832%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cholera%20mania%2C%20plus%20king%20attacked%20at%20Ascot%3A%20archive%2C%2030%20June%201832&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fcholera-mania-water-king-william-iv-ascot-attack-1832%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d211a8afd8a6cf9faf383a1963927dd18ff979e%2F0_244_1400_1027%2F1400.jpg>
 King William IV (1765-1837) was attacked by a stone-thrower at Ascot. 
Photograph: Hulton Getty 
Wednesday being the day appointed for the examination of Dennis Collins, the 
man who threw the stone at the king atAscot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ascot> races, a numerous bench of 
magistrates assembled in their room at Reading gaol, and about two o’clock Mr. 
Maule, the solicitor for the treasury, having arrived, the prisoner was ordered 
to be brought in.

When the evidence had been gone through, the prisoner acknowledged the truth 
of the charge, and owned that he committed a great fault in throwing the stones 
at the king. After which the magistrates immediately signed the warrant for the 
prisoner’s committal, and the witnesses were bound over to give evidence on his 
trial for high treason.

The bill for abolishing the punishment of death in cases of forgery enacts the 
repeal of that punishment for all such offences. Every person, after the 
passing of this act, convicted of any offence made punishable with death by the 
[lst] of the present king, shall be transported for life, or any term of years 
not less than seven, or be imprisoned, with or without hard labour, for any 
time not exceeding four years, nor less than two; the court may direct solitary 
confinement for any portion of such imprisonment.

In order to prevent justice from being defeated by clerical or verbal 
inaccuracies in all informations or indictments for forgery, or in any manner 
uttering any instrument, it shall not be necessary to set forth any copy or fac 
simile of such instrument, but it shall be sufficient to describe the same in 
such manner as would sustain an indictment for stealing.

Read the original Miscellany column 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/06/cholera_mania_king_attacked_Ascot_30_June_1832.jpeg>
 