
Oxford’s residents have a history of taking a stand. Over the years the city 
has been home to the likes of Emily Wilding Davison, Percy Bysshe Shelley, Tony 
Benn and John Ruskin. During the English civil war, it had associations with 
the radical Levellers movement, two of whose members were executed near 
Gloucester Green. The city’s Ruskin College has long been a symbol of workers’ 
education, as well as hosting the inaugural Women’s Liberation Movement 
conference in 1970. But as Oxford celebrated its radical history last year, 
theatre-makerChris Goode <http://chrisgoodeandcompany.co.uk/about/> and the 
Oxford Playhouse <http://www.oxfordplayhouse.com/> were more interested in what 
it means to be radical today.

Commissioned for the Playhouse’s Radical Thinking season, the show Stand – now 
on atBattersea Arts Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/battersea-arts-centre> in London – 
celebrates the ordinary and extraordinary ways in which local people are 
standing up for what they believe in. For some, that means activism in a 
familiar form: campaigning, demonstrations, occupations. For others, it’s 
simply about being a parent. In the show, Goode has captured and told six of 
these stories.

The Oxford <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/oxford> Playhouse asked its 
community a simple question: when was a moment you stood up for something you 
believe in? “I feel like the callout set the bar quite high,” Goode reflects. 
“There’s something nicely self-selecting about it, because it means that the 
people who want to talk really want to talk.” Having chosen his six 
storytellers, Goode interviewed them all over a couple of weeks, gathering the 
material that would later be performed by his cast of six actors.

The stories they found were as varied as the people sharing them. There’s a 
climate campaigner, a woman who works with refugees, a mother, an activist who 
campaigned to save the alternative community at Oxford’s Jericho boatyard, one 
of the founders of theReclaim Shakespeare Company 
<http://bp-or-not-bp.org/about/>, and a man in his 80s who has spent most of 
his life protesting against animal testing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchris-goode-stand-oxford-playhouse-battersea-arts-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429633812669%2Ffc42dd3c-d20f-4965-97b2-5c1f17c530bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Goode%E2%80%99s%20Stand%3A%20Oxford's%20everyday%20activists%20inspire%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchris-goode-stand-oxford-playhouse-battersea-arts-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Goode%E2%80%99s%20Stand%3A%20Oxford%27s%20everyday%20activists%20inspire%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchris-goode-stand-oxford-playhouse-battersea-arts-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429633812669%2Ffc42dd3c-d20f-4965-97b2-5c1f17c530bb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Six of the best … Stand 
Isn’t there a danger, though, that these eclectic narratives just end up 
serving a structure imposed by the theatre-makers? Goode’s answer to that 
question is to be constantly confronting it. “I just think being really aware 
is half of the task,” he says. “You have to let go of your agenda quite often, 
because it has to be about the people rather than about the issues that you’re 
trying to articulate.” All of the interviewees speak, for example, about their 
childhoods, offering a portrait of their personalities as much as their acts. 
“I think one of the virtues of Stand is that you see everyone in quite high 
resolution,” says Goode. “Hopefully you get a real sense of the details of 
people’s lives, so that they’re not just mouthpieces for certain points of 
view.”

That said, Goode admits that he and his team always had the aim of inspiring 
their audiences, with the hope that they in turn will go on to stand up for 
their own causes. “I felt like there had to be that call to action embedded in 
the show,” Goode explains, “quite gently, but definitely there.” For that call 
to action to be heard, though, the show has to connect with audiences who might 
feel worlds away from the activists sharing their stories – “you have to feel 
like you’ve been listening to people like you,” as Goode puts it. That’s where 
the human detail comes in.

“One of the really nice things about the people we found is that they were all 
really quick to talk about themselves in ways that pointed at moments where 
they’d failed, moments when things had gone in an unexpected direction – 
moments of daftness,” says Goode. Activism has its fair share of the ridiculous 
alongside the serious – “bizarre situations where they’re superglued to 
something or they’re wearing a costume in a peculiar place”. And what Stand’s 
storytellers all share, like so many of us, is a guilty feeling that they could 
be doing more: “Even among really hardcore activists, there’s always someone 
who’s more hardcore.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchris-goode-stand-oxford-playhouse-battersea-arts-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429634400655%2Ff8b96a1e-4f60-4e26-840f-e69e6d9005a9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Goode%E2%80%99s%20Stand%3A%20Oxford's%20everyday%20activists%20inspire%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchris-goode-stand-oxford-playhouse-battersea-arts-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Goode%E2%80%99s%20Stand%3A%20Oxford%27s%20everyday%20activists%20inspire%20audiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchris-goode-stand-oxford-playhouse-battersea-arts-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F21%2F1429634400655%2Ff8b96a1e-4f60-4e26-840f-e69e6d9005a9-1020x612.jpeg>
 People power … Stand. Photograph: Richard Davenport 
Stand was also an opportunity to present people’s courage in a new light. 
“People don’t often see themselves in that way,” says Goode, “they don’t see 
their own bravery.” One example is Jan Thomas, who wanted to celebrate her 
adopted daughter’s small stand against injustice, but found to her surprise 
that Goode was more interested in her story as a mother. “I felt I had done 
nothing special,” she tells me. Since taking part in the project, though, she 
has been bolder in taking a stand, joining some of her fellow participants in 
their campaigning activities. “After seeing Stand and meeting the others I 
resolved to be much more active in standing up for the things I believe in.”

A big part of the project has been about engaging new audiences with the work 
of the Playhouse, not least through performing the show in a local community 
centre. “I think there’s a perception around Oxford Playhouse, as there is 
around a lot of venues and organisations of that scale, that they’re slightly 
fortressed,” suggests Goode. “It felt really important to them as well as to us 
that this was a way of opening up some different doors.” Producers Hannah Bevan 
and Michelle Walker describe Stand as unlike any other show the Playhouse has 
ever worked on, adding that “to be bombarded with audience responses ever since 
the show opened about how joyful and inspiring they found it was nothing short 
of a dream”.

“I’ve never done anything with quite such a strong local focus,” adds Goode, 
questioning how that might translate to audiences during its London run at BAC. 
“There’s definitely a strength in that specificity, but I don’t know whether 
it’s a crucial strength yet.”

Just days after Goode and I spoke, Battersea Arts Centre’s Grand Hall was hit 
by a devastating fire, followed by an overwhelming show of support for a venue 
with a radical history of its own. It seems that in Battersea, as in Oxford, 
there continues to be a tradition of standing up for what matters.

• Stand 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/35466/see_whats_on/whats_on/shows/stand> is at 
Battersea Arts Centre, London, until 9 May. Box office: 020 7223 2223.
 