
Countryside Alliance urges BBC to sack Chris Packham in conservation row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/07/countryside-alliance-bbc-sack-chris-packham>
Even though it started over a hen harrier – and there will be those of us, 
shamingly,who don’t know what one of those looks like 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/05/is-rspb-blame-loss-englands-rare-hen-harriers>
 – there was something quintessential about the row that broke out this week 
between Chris Packham, hero of Springwatch, and the Countryside Alliance, 
champions of blood sports. Packham wrote a column in the BBC’s Wildlife 
magazine in which he criticised wildlife charities for being too meek. Frankly, 
it could have been said by anybody, of whatever political stamp, about any 
charity; they’re all way too meek about everything. But he was making a 
specific point, which he elaborated to me, on his garden bench near 
Southampton, looking out on to a view so perfect that I had the sense of 
imminent disaster. “The way the wildlife NGOs evolved is that they were 
instigated by people who had split interests. They were interested in country 
pursuits – shooting, hunting, fishing, farming – and also natural history. And 
they were brilliant natural historians with a genuine desire to protect that 
legacy. We should no longer be sleeping with these people, but we should be in 
constructive dialogue with them. We need to move on.”

Or, if I can precis that: “Conservationists might sometimes – and ought to – 
disagree with people who go around killing things.” It’s just about as 
uncontroversial as an opinion gets (in my opinion). The Countryside Alliance 
responded that he should be fired by the BBC, on the basis that, said chief 
executive Tim Bonner: “This is the clearest possible abuse of the position the
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has given Chris Packham, and as it 
is an ongoing behaviour, rather than an isolated incident, it is difficult to 
see how the situation can change.” This is textbook modern politics: person on 
the progressive side says a plausible, not particularly controversial thing; 
person of a more authoritarian bent responds hysterically, withad hominem 
attack and wild exaggeration of the original position; anybody not intricately 
connected to the argument, or without the time and inclination to become so, 
just assumes both sides are mad and slopes off; the entire conversation has 
been debased, enough mud slung that nobody’s features are distinguishable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fchris-packham-interview-countryside-alliance-bbc-foxhunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441982401723%2F7f4d520e-fb92-4cf7-bea1-64f7d537a149-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Packham%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20has%20a%20psychopathic%20element%2C%20taking%20pleasure%20from%20killing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fchris-packham-interview-countryside-alliance-bbc-foxhunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Packham%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20has%20a%20psychopathic%20element%2C%20taking%20pleasure%20from%20killing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fchris-packham-interview-countryside-alliance-bbc-foxhunting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441982401723%2F7f4d520e-fb92-4cf7-bea1-64f7d537a149-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Packham with a badger at the Secret World Wildlife Rescue centre featured on 
BBC2’s The Burrowers 
Packham is not angry; he is very insistent on this point. He is very open in 
an endearing, nerdy way, and describes himself the way he describes badger poo 
or the mighty goshawk, with precision and care, as a kind of respectful 
observer. It’s just not in his nature: “If I’m angry personally, say with my 
stepdaughter, or my partner – there’s always friction in human relationships – 
I never speak about it. I wait until the anger has passed, and then I’ll speak 
about it.” And yet, you could forgive him for sounding a little bit … erm … 
frustrated. “What’s insidious and what’s contrived, and potentially dangerous, 
is the attempt to brand me as someone who’s spouting blatantly political 
propaganda, and someone who’s an animal rights extremist. When I’m accused of 
spreading propaganda on the BBC, that simply isn’t true, for two reasons. One, 
I wouldn’t compromise its values when I believe in them so strongly myself, and 
two, because I don’t need to use propaganda. I will use scientifically 
researched fact as the basis for proper argument. People who use propaganda are 
people who need to pervert the truth. I don’t need to. And they’ve called me 
this week an animal rights extremist, which is very clearly not true, either. 
These tags, if they can get them to stick …”

He tails off; everybody knows what happens if these tags stick to you. One 
minute you have a TV career, the next you can’t get arrested. He’s already had 
his wilderness years – between 1995, when The Really Wild Show ended, and 2009, 
when he was brought back to the BBC to presentSpringwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/springwatch>. I don’t know if you’d 
call it “wilderness” exactly, but he spent long enough as an independent 
film-maker, only appearing intermittently himself, to have a sense of purpose 
unconnected to his public profile. It would be the most almighty triumph for 
the voices of unreason, were the BBC ever to succumb to the pressure of sacking 
a conservationist because a pressure group had made him sound like an 1980s 
renegade who breaks into mink farms and hates respectability.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchris-packham-bbc-countryside-alliance-audio&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441723301356%2FKP_461213_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Packham%20using%20BBC%20to%20promote%20extreme%20agenda%2C%20says%20Countryside%20Alliance%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchris-packham-bbc-countryside-alliance-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Packham%20using%20BBC%20to%20promote%20extreme%20agenda%2C%20says%20Countryside%20Alliance%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fchris-packham-bbc-countryside-alliance-audio&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441723301356%2FKP_461213_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Chris Packham using BBC to promote extreme agenda, says Countryside Alliance – 
audio 
In fact, there is little danger of that: the BBC has a body called Editorial 
Policy, which has agreed with Packham already what he can say without 
compromising its impartiality. While he will notify them if he’s doing a hen 
harrier campaign event – to draw attention to their illegal killing – it’s not 
as though he is constantly on eggshells. “There’s a constant dialogue between 
us, which means we’re sticking to the rules that we’ve evolved over time. As 
long as I don’t break them, I’ve no reason to suspect that I’ve done anything 
wrong. I’m embarrassed that they have to do work on my behalf to defend what I 
do. I feel guilty that they’re being forced to waste their time. But it isn’t a 
lot of time, because basically, as long as I behave myself, they can send out 
the same statement they sent out before, which is that I’m behaving myself.”

Chris Packham slams 'shameful' silence of Britain's conservation charities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/01/chris-packham-slams-shameful-silence-of-britains-conservation-charities>
I wonder if he ever feels constrained by the BBC’s own interpretation of 
impartiality, which in my view is often not so much impartial as just making 
sure that, whenever anyone says anything sensible, there’s some idiot in the 
opposite corner to contradict them. I was thinking specifically of climate 
change, but there, Packham says, the policy has changed. “Once we were, 
whatever it is, 97.524% happy that we are responsible for exacerbating climate 
change, we no longer had to have a voice of opposition. It’s interesting, when 
you have a debate, how far to the wrong end do you get before you don’t have to 
listen?” But he is much more patient than me about the need for the sceptics in 
the first place. “Better over-cautious than not. I would rather sit and curse 
at someone who is very clearly wrong, and have the opportunity to do that, than 
feel that I was being blindfolded by some doctrine where there was no voice of 
opposition. I prefer the comfort of that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fchris-packham-interview-countryside-alliance-bbc-foxhunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441982504990%2Fd71d9cb6-d7e6-4e03-bd96-b4ba358b5b81-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Packham%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20has%20a%20psychopathic%20element%2C%20taking%20pleasure%20from%20killing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fchris-packham-interview-countryside-alliance-bbc-foxhunting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Packham%3A%20%E2%80%98It%20has%20a%20psychopathic%20element%2C%20taking%20pleasure%20from%20killing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fchris-packham-interview-countryside-alliance-bbc-foxhunting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441982504990%2Fd71d9cb6-d7e6-4e03-bd96-b4ba358b5b81-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Packham with Spook the Barn Owl at the Natural History Museum in 1989. 
Photograph: Associated Newspapers /Rex 
At this point in our conversation, Packham’s 12-year-old poodle leapt off the 
bench, banging his head on the way, objecting pointlessly to some sheep he’s 
lived next to every day of his life. There are horses at the back of Packham’s 
property and badgers, too, that he feeds every night. He showed me one of their 
poos, elegantly replacing the word “poo” with “stuff”, and said he could tell 
it came from a badger, not a dog, because of the rosehip in it. He once rigged 
up a night-time camera to watch fox cubs playing without disturbing them. 
Before he even went to university – he graduated in 1983 from Southampton, with 
a degree in zoology – he had been commissioned by the Natural Conservancy 
Council to conduct a study of badgers in the New Forest, and how they were 
affected by foxhunting. In a way, the caricature that would offend me, if I 
were him, is the one where he’s just a TV presenter, so by definition his views 
are quite shallow.

Plenty of people love animals, but you don’t meet very many who see them as 
equals, whose interest in mammals and their habits is so profound. And if you 
think that’s intense, you should get him on birds. “If you were to ask me on a 
superficial level, I prefer birds to mammals. I like feathers better than fur, 
I think eggs are neater than placental matter, I like things that fly rather 
than things that walk, and for me – this is a subjective thing – they’re a more 
beautiful organism. But what you get to the point of understanding is that no 
species exists in isolation, and the true beauty is the way that it interacts 
with all of the other species in its community.” He gestures to his 
ridiculously beautiful view, over a rectangle of carefully planted wild 
flowers, in muted mauves, to attract the bees. “The beauty of this is not those 
oak trees or the goshawk that’s probably in there hunting something at the 
moment, which is an extraordinary bird, and a powerful, gripping presence, a 
real enigma. It’s the relationship between the goshawk and the oak tree that is 
more beautiful. And that’s what switches you on to conservation, the fragility 
of this system. It’s not all about the rarity or abundance of these species, 
it’s about how the rarity is impacting on the community and its health.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJqZgoELarR0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJqZgoELarR0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJqZgoELarR0&media=>
It is strange, once you upturn one rock in conservationism, to see how many 
fights there are in the landscape, new and old. A new one is the badger cull, 
incompetently executed on poor advice. I almost don’t want to bring it up, once 
I’ve heard his long history with the badger, but I do, and he describes the 
situation soberly. “There are economic reasons against it – it costs £7,000 to 
kill a badger. There are welfare reasons – we know that they suffer. But I 
stick to the fact that the scientific data we have [says] that culling is 
ineffective in dealing with bovine TB. I don’t need to stray from that. This is 
the wrong thing to do because the science says it’s the wrong thing to do. 
Whatever party is in government, that’s not going to affect the science.”

The BBC should treasure Chris Packham, not sack him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/09/bbc-chris-packham-countryside-alliance>
Foxhunting, incredibly, has resurfaced as an issue, and here, Packham looks 
genuinely pained. “I don’t understand it, I suppose. That’s the bottom line. To 
me, it has to have a psychopathic element, if you’re taking pleasure from 
killing things, just for that pleasure. If you’re going to eat it, if you’re 
culling an animal that is otherwise damaging the environment because it’s too 
abundant, I have no problem with killing animals. But if you have no reason but 
pleasure, then that surely is psychopathic.” But he is adamant that the list of 
things he doesn’t object to is a lot longer than people give him credit for. He 
only minds some forms of shooting: driven grouse shooting; woodcocks, which are 
on a very fast decline; hen harriers, which are a protected species. He is an 
ally, not an enemy, of British farming. “I’ve always stood up for British 
farmers. They govern 86% of this land surface. I want to be working with the 
farming fraternity all of my life – to brand me as anti-farming is the most 
ludicrous thing.” Perhaps most surprising is his take on climate change.

“Of course, I fear the impacts of climate change, but I know that life and 
humans are hugely adaptable. It’s a process that we are forcing unnaturally, 
but the tenacity of life means we will adapt to it. Human population is more 
immediately dangerous, because that’s a question of resources running out. You 
can’t adapt to a lack of food, a lack of water. There’s nothing you can do to 
get round that.” In fact, he doesn’t go for big, named threats, doom-calling, 
dread-provoking, but two things trouble him: “The biggest handicap that 
conservation faces is that we humans still consider ourselves to be separate 
from the rest of life, and the rest of life is merely there to support us. It 
is infantile arrogance. How can anyone think we’re in some way abiotic? It’s 
nonsense. If I were to say, for instance, there was a parity of importance 
between myself and something living out in the woods, people wouldn’t 
understand that because we’re conditioned culturally and socially to think that 
we are the most important thing.” And on a personal note: “Look, on my watch, 
most of the habitats and species in the UK have gone through considerable 
decline. I’m embarrassed and I feel dejected and impotent on that account. I’ve 
failed to achieve what I wanted to do.” You can see the dejection momentarily 
on his lively, weirdly young-looking face (he’s 52, looks 39), but it passes. 
“So obviously I’m going to try harder while I still have the time.”
 