
The hair is as wild as a brushfire, but everything else about Christopher 
Walken <https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-walken> is softer, 
friendlier, more amused than anticipated – a domestic cat to the killer of his 
onscreen persona. At his house, in a town in rural Connecticut two hours north 
of Manhattan, he puts on the coffee while Georgianne, his wife of 48 years, 
laments the journey I’ve made out of the city. Walken turned 73 this year and 
walks a little stiffly, but his cat-like blue eyes dart with undimmed vigour. 
He has, over the last 50 years, made more than 100 films, some terrible, some 
great, and when asked about any of them merely indicates his surroundings – the 
oriental rugs, the beautiful flagstone flooring, the extensive grounds with its 
trees and barn – and remarks, “I have a nice house.” His dry smile does the 
rest.

Actually, what he says is, “I have. A nice house.” If one were accurately to 
punctuate Walken’s speech, a typical sentence would look like something written 
byDavid Mamet <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/davidmamet> on a rough day. 
Walken calls this a result of having grown up in Queens, New York, among people 
for whom English was a second language, including his German father (his mother 
was from Glasgow). This may sound too cute to be true, but is stylistically of 
a piece with his ponderous, unflappable manner and what appears to be his 
perpetual state of amused incredulity.

In any case, it is fun waiting to see how a Walken sentence will turn out. 
When I ask how he prepared for his role in Jon Favreau’s new film ofThe Jungle 
Book <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-jungle-book>, in which Walken plays 
King Louie, he says, “In this case, there were songs. So I had to learn them. 
They sent me a – DVD. So I was walking around the house. You know. Singing it.”

Can he sing?

“Not much.”

The movie, which co-stars Bill Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bill-murray> as Baloo and Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> as Shere Khan, was fun to the 
extent that it got Walken out of the house, and he liked hanging out with 
Murray (“I don’t really know him”), but don’t expect anything more effusive 
than that. For as long as Walken has been acting, his career decisions have 
always boiled down to this: “I just take the next best thing. That’s my 
criteria.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1857df09fb8930fa18e22f5080f442163a90e1e5%2F0_10_858_515%2F858.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1857df09fb8930fa18e22f5080f442163a90e1e5%2F0_10_858_515%2F858.jpg>
 In Annie Hall with Diane Keaton, 1977. Photograph: LMK 
His modesty is a kind of tough-guy act, a lack of vanity so aggressive it 
makes him almost wholly resistant to criticism. It is also, correctly, 
calculated to charm. Walken has more experience of pre-fame life than many of 
his peers – he was 35 when he madeThe Deer Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/19/deer-hunter-action-scene>, his 
breakthrough role, prior to which he had never made more than $11,000 a year 
from acting, including one dreadful period when he was out of work for two 
straight years. Compared to this, anything that happens in the course of these, 
his successful years, is small potatoes.

Which isn’t to say the job doesn’t occasionally terrify him. Before The Jungle 
Book, Walken’s most recentpublic appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/04/liveblogging-peter-pan-live>
 in the US was asCaptain Hook in the NBC live production of Peter Pan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/14/christopher-walken-to-play-hook-nbc-live-peter-pan>
 (Allison Williams, from the TV show Girls, was in the title role), an absurd 
juggernaut which Walken describes as less an acting job and “more like a stunt. 
A daredevil thing. Jumping over trucks in a motorcycle.”

Performing in three-and-a-half hours of live TV sounds like most people’s idea 
of a nightmare, I suggest.

“Well. You’re right. They rehearsed it like a play, a musical. I didn’t really 
understand what was going on until a couple of days before we did it. The idea 
that it was live. And that it was costumes and people flying – the logistics of 
it were amazing. I’ve never done anything like that. And. You really do have to 
have a big dose of luck. And not only that, but it’s a classic. Everybody has 
their favourite Peter Pan.”

The production as a whole invited a certain amount of mockery, and the New 
York Times, in a mostly kind review,said of Walken 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/06/arts/television/nbcs-peter-pan-live-starring-allison-williams-and-christopher-walken.html?_r=0>
, “his voice was faint and he seemed at times to be rummaging for the next 
line”.

“I didn’t go into that,” he says. “I don’t have a computer. I don’t check 
stuff.”

You don’t have a computer?

“My wife has one. I don’t have a cell phone.”

How does your agent get in touch with you?

“They call the house.”

On the landline?

“Yeah.” There is an extremely long pause. “And I have a fax machine.”

***

If Christopher Walken had been born 40 years earlier, there is a good chance 
he would have been a much bigger and more mainstream movie star. By his own 
assessment he is best suited to musicals, a brilliant dancer whose turn in the
Fatboy Slim video, Weapon Of Choice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wCDIYvFmgW8>, 16 years ago, is still the 
defining image many of us have of him. If he isn’t much of a singer (but then, 
neither was Gene Kelly) he has the languid charm of an old-school MGM hero.

Languor, it turns out, also lends itself to playing psychopaths. One of 
Walken’s first successful roles was asDuane 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGPcSd7DDLk>, Diane Keaton’s unnerving brother 
in Woody Allen’s Annie Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall>, 
setting the stage for the rest of his career. It sometimes baffles him that he 
is perceived as a bogeyman by millions of movie-goers, although he allows that 
something about his appearance is suggestive of villainy. “I don’t need to be 
made to look evil,” he once famously said. “I can do that on my own.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eaa3640f35020ccb23e22ebadd6349a5b0df5fa%2F0_3_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eaa3640f35020ccb23e22ebadd6349a5b0df5fa%2F0_3_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
 As Nick in The Deer Hunter. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Looking at him now, avuncular in the sunroom, one can squint and still see it, 
a deadpan look around the eyes; a certain baldness of expression that suggests 
the churn of human emotion is a far-distant thing. Walken has exaggerated this 
look to great effect in psychotic roles such asCaptain Koons in Pulp Fiction 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OVxl__61vKI>, Max Schreck in Batman Returns 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xLnPWTQ8lSs> and Vincenzo Coccotti in True 
Romance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S3yon2GyoiM>. Sometimes he sends 
himself up, as with his role as the Headless Horseman in Sleepy Hollow. At 
other times, as with Nick Chevotarevich in The Deer Hunter, he acts with great 
psychological realism.

Walken likes to say he doesn’t do anything much to get into role and he has an 
obvious disdain for the pretentious end of his profession. (“No matter what 
character I’m playing, it’s me,” he has said.) Then again, he has also said 
that if there is a way into a script, it is through the rhythm of the words. 
But what happens when a script is so bad there is no rhythm?

“Yeah,” he says. “There’s a lot of bad scripts. You just try to – I do the 
same thing with all scripts; I just read it over and over. And occasionally 
I’ll say to [the director] I just don’t want to say that. And then you figure 
it out. Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn’t. I’ve made movies that have 
had very sketchy scripts, and everybody recognised that. And if you have very 
good actors, and they play together, it can be OK.”

Give me an example.

“I made a movie called the King Of New York 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z4bprq-BYi0>, where they had good actors [
David Caruso <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000325/?ref_=tt_cl_t2> and Laurence 
Fishburne <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000401/?ref_=tt_cl_t3> co-starred] and 
they would say we worked our dialogue out amongst ourselves. And it worked out 
fine. And then sometimes it doesn’t work.” In which case, he says, the movie 
might never appear. “Even on DVD.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0713503cb3a09721ab76d31887e1b323620fec1%2F0_53_1923_1154%2F1923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0713503cb3a09721ab76d31887e1b323620fec1%2F0_53_1923_1154%2F1923.jpg>
 Dancing in Fatboy Slim’s video Weapon Of Choice. Photograph: PA 
If Walken is sanguine about these failures, it is because he has been acting 
for so long it is less a career to him than a background condition. His mother, 
he says, was “a fan”. She read the movie magazines. His father ran a bakery in 
Astoria, Queens – seven days a week, dawn till dusk, a taciturn, hardworking 
man with no great interest in his wife’s plans for his sons.

Walken was called Ronnie, then, and still is, by his wife and family; he 
adopted the name Christopher years later, on a whim. It was his mother who 
enrolled Walken and his two brothers in dance class, dragged them into the city 
and put them up for parts in live TV shows. “They used a lot of kids. All the 
programmes were very family-oriented. My mother knew that, and we’d get on the 
train and go to Manhattan.” I assume he was too young to be scared?

“Oh no, I was terrified!” Walken grows suddenly animated. “If I was given a 
line, I would usually forget it.”

At the weekend, he helped his father in the bakery, and “when I got my 
driver’s licence, I delivered cakes”. Walken is a rough contemporary of Donald 
Trump, also from Queens – although Trump is from Jamaica Estates, a much posher 
neighbourhood than immigrant Astoria. I wonder what Walken sees when he regards 
Trump; something the rest of us don’t, perhaps. “His speech pattern is very 
much that particular part of New York,” he says. “I never met him as a kid, but 
he could’ve been one of those kids that I grew up with.”

Always hustling?

“Sure. Even the hair. He’s recognisable to me. I hope that Hillary Clinton is 
the next president. When I watch the Republicans, I don’t know how they ever – 
I’ve never seen such a group. Now they’re yelling at each other about their 
wives? It’s crazy. It’s high school. ‘Little Marco and Lyin’ Ted?’ ‘You’re a 
bully!’ It’s not even high school. It’s like seven-year-olds.”

After Walken himself graduated from high school, he started college, but 
dropped out after the first year to appear in an off-Broadway play. He won’t 
admit to having any particular role models, or being motivated by much in the 
way of self-belief.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11139c2a3585e687b9aebb22d34f45c01ea66f5c%2F181_79_2595_3521%2F2595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11139c2a3585e687b9aebb22d34f45c01ea66f5c%2F181_79_2595_3521%2F2595.jpg>
 With his wife, Georgianne. Photograph: Matteo Prandoni/BF 
ANYC.com/Rex/Shutterstock 
“I never did think I was good at it. I just thought that it was the only thing 
I knew anything about. And I was in musicals. I’d been dancing my whole life, 
so I graduated to the chorus of a musical, and then someone said, they’re 
auditioning for this play, and I went, and I got that. It’s always been a bit 
of an accident. I’ve never been much good at making opportunities, but I’m 
pretty good at seizing them.”

Why does he think that is?

“Just being kind of nervy, I think. And saying, I don’t know how to do that, 
but I’ll go do it anyway. Somebody once said that life has to do with showing 
up. Being afraid is fine. But go up anyway.”

Does he believe in the philosophy of saying yes to everything?

“You can’t say yes to everything. But I have an old friend, an older actor, 
who used to say to me: ‘Be brave.’”

What he is describing is surely an expression of self-confidence, but Walken 
says it’s more finely calibrated than that. “I’m confident in my predilection – 
I don’t know what that word is – to engage. To say, just go ahead and do that. 
And you know, I’ve made a lot of mistakes and fallen down, and I’ve been lousy 
in lots of things. But I’m not sorry that I did them, because I made a living 
and I have a nice house and I stayed busy. There’s a certain discipline that 
goes with taking a job. Whereas, if I sat around and ate ice-cream, nothing 
happens.”

Work begets work?

“Yes. And you learn something. And also the business that I’m in, if I miss 
the mark, there are no particular consequences. You get a bad review, or people 
tell you you weren’t very good in that? Well, all right. But I did it. I had to 
do it.”

***

Walken met Georgianne on a touring production of West Side Story in 1963. He 
played Riff, one of the gang members, and she played his girlfriend. They 
married a few years later, when he was 25, and got an apartment on Manhattan’s 
Upper West Side.

For the next 10 years, Walken slogged around the city, attending auditions and 
taking bit parts in plays and the occasional movie. If it was grim, he didn’t 
notice, he says, because he has always known “how to live well”. Even during 
those two years when he was claiming unemployment cheques, they enjoyed a good 
life on a tiny income – impossible in today’s New York. “You’d go to Safeway on 
Columbus Avenue and buy a big bag of chicken thighs. And I’d get a jug of Gallo 
red burgundy and mix it with juice and we’d have sangria. We lived simply, but 
we lived well.”

Somebody said that children are a miracle. It never happened for us. We never 
talk about it

When he was about 30, he walked into the Public Theatre and asked to speak to 
Joe Papp <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Papp>, its legendary founder and 
director. “And I said to him, you know, I can’t get arrested. He said, don’t 
worry, I’m going to put you in three plays. You’re OK for the next six months. 
And that’s what happened.” True to his word, Papp put Walken in three 
productions and he enjoyed his longest spell in employment for years.

Weren’t you demoralised during those long stretches of unemployment?

“But I was busy. I would be doing workshops, I was a regular at the Actors 
Studio <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actors_Studio>. They always had something 
for you to do. I’d be in some off-Broadway thing. Readings. Not to mention just 
trudging around going to auditions. I may have been working harder than I was 
when I actually had work.”

But of course, he wasn’t making any money. When someone told him to go and 
audition for a film calledThe Deer Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-deer-hunter>, a movie set in the Vietnam 
war, Walken turned up as usual with no great hopes nor any idea that being cast 
as a young soldier, brutalised to the point of insanity in a film co-starring 
Meryl Streep, would change his life. He won the 1979 Oscar for best supporting 
actor, and then the wild years began.

“And it was a wonderful thing,” he says. “I started to get good parts. To get 
paid better. But it never was massive. I never had paparazzi chasing me.”

Walken became a habitual party-goer at Studio 54. “I lived in New York. I was 
out and about.”

Did you feel yourself becoming a jerk?

“Absolutely. I’ve spent a lot of time being a jerk.”

Weren’t you already married by then?

“Sure. I was married when I was 25. But we lived in New York and I was – sure. 
I was very socially active. Partying.” He says, “But after a while you can’t do 
that any more. If you’re lucky, anyway. I think some time in my late 40s, I 
thought, well, you have to be taking care of yourself now.” By then, Georgianne 
had progressed beyond acting and dancing to a highly successful career as a 
casting agent; she would, ultimately, be thecasting director 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0907467/bio?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm> responsible for 
shows such as The Sopranos and Entourage. And so the couple moved out to 
Connecticut, to a beautiful old house at the end of a long private driveway, 
where the loudest noise in the neighbourhood is the birds.

What’s curious, is that Walken, for all his bravado about failure and success, 
has always been terrified of a wide range of quotidian things – driving, 
swimming, horses – to the point almost of phobia. “I don’t mind dangerous 
psychic things,” he says. “But dangerous physical things are – I don’t even go 
into crowds. I don’t go to the airport.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eaf020a4280bd351adbe59881d9a87d5b428932%2F0_0_6108_7230%2F6108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christopher%20Walken%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20need%20to%20be%20made%20to%20look%20evil%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchristopher-walken-i-dont-need-to-be-made-to-look-evil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6eaf020a4280bd351adbe59881d9a87d5b428932%2F0_0_6108_7230%2F6108.jpg>
 ‘Every birthday’s a big thing.’ Photograph: Benedict Evans for the Guardian. 
Grooming: Jessica Ortiz at the Wall Group 
He won’t drive any farther than the local newsagent on a Sunday. He will only 
fly for work when it is absolutely unavoidable. And he would never live in LA, 
because of the dangers of the freeway. Walken puts all this down to having 
grown up in New York. “You know, if people grow up in big cities, they don’t do 
a lot of things. I can’t drive in traffic – I get very nervous. I can’t really 
play any games. I can’t swim. People who grow up in New York City don’t really 
play baseball. There’s no place to do it. So you learn to tap dance.”

But it must be more than that; plenty of native New Yorkers don’t have a 
breakdown at the prospect of driving on the freeway. You might call it a 
manifestation of control-freakery – the fear of being in anything that someone 
else is in charge of – except Walken says it’s the opposite. He is, if 
anything, not controlling enough.

“I have a lack of control. The times I’ve had to be on a horse, I’ve always 
been told, ‘You’ve got to take control of the horse. The horse can feel your 
authority.’ Forget about it. The horse had no respect for me. They always run 
away with me.”

He has made a lot of westerns, none of which have been happy experiences. In 
Michael Cimino’sHeaven’s Gate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/01/heavens-gate-review>, Walken had 
to ride a horse practically every day for eight months. “The horse never got to 
like me,” he says. InA View To A Kill 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0090264/fullcredits>, the James Bond movie in 
which he played the classic Bond villain, Max Zorin, “you see me racing on a 
horse. That was a stuffed horse. On a trolley. With tyres. And they towed it 
behind a truck.”

The Jungle Book review – spectacular revival of Disney's family favourite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/12/the-jungle-book-review> 
One imagines that, given Walken’s predilection to dwell on his own 
self-destruction, growing older may not have been easy.

“Yes! Every birthday’s a big thing. There’s a certain shock to it. I’m in 
here, and then I’ll see a picture of myself and, you know, I’m old. And stuff 
happens. My hands get sore.”

It would surely be harder without the hair.

“The hair helps. And also I think that I have pretty good genes.” His mother 
died at 104 and his father at almost 100. Did Walken ever think about passing 
his genes on?

“It never happened. Somebody once said that children are a miracle. I think 
that’s true. Not everybody has them.”

There is a long pause.

“I don’t mind. My brothers have kids. I’ve always had kids around. And my 
wife, frankly – we never talk about it – but I notice she dotes a bit on my 
nephews and nieces. She’s always buying them stuff. She’s a little bit of a hen 
about the kids. Yeah.”

When he looks back on his own childhood, he sees the foundations of a good 
life. Unlike some children of stage mothers, Walken is grateful his mother 
pushed him along, because, “What else would I have done?” His father remained 
something of an enigma, a Walken trait by all accounts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5mkm22yO-bs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5mkm22yO-bs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5mkm22yO-bs&media=>
 The official Jungle Book trailer 
He tells me a story that sums up his father’s unflashy fortitude, something 
Walken admires and might be said to have emulated. “My father was of a 
generation where everybody smoked,” he says. “He smoked in the bakery – there 
were no laws then. I’ll never forget, one day my brother said to me, ‘Have you 
noticed that the ashtrays in the house are empty?’ And over the next few days I 
looked, because there were always butts. And the ashtrays were clean. And I was 
watching him and he wasn’t smoking. And he never said a word, he just quit. 
Nobody ever brought it up. Just one day, he stopped smoking.”

And that was in character?

“Yes. He was very quiet. He never said much. He worked very hard. He would 
never announce anything.”

Over-analysing is not Walken’s style, either. When asked why his marriage has 
lasted so long, he says, “lucky”, and knocks on wood. “Luck is a very important 
thing.”

He doesn’t go into the city very often these days, but when he does, he is 
always recognised on the street and is rather nostalgic for the era when people 
merely asked for his autograph. Now, they throw their arms around him and 
demand a photograph. He thinks about this for a moment then says slowly, 
“Selfies.”

It must be burdensome, I suggest, because he is obliged to smile, a remark 
Walken greets with the driest twitch of the mouth and a wintry look in the eyes.

“Or something,” he says.

• The Jungle Book <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-jungle-book> is out 
now.
 