
Chris Morris expects AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> to be an aggressive leader 
in Test cricket, even if his first address to the South Africa squad since 
taking over from Hashim Amla was just “the usual captain’s talk”.

De Villiers will captain South Africa for the final two Tests against England 
after Amla stood down at the end of the draw in Cape Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/06/hashim-amla-resigns-captain-south-africa-second-test-england>
. But despite four years in charge of the one-day setup, the 31-year-old’s 
approach represents something of an unknown quantity, having never captained in 
first-class cricket before.

Morris made his Test debut in Cape Town and could be part of a four-man pace 
attack as South Africa look to level the series in Thursday’s third Test at the 
Wanderers. The all-rounder expects the De Villiers method to be one of setting 
the standard for the players through his own performance on the field.

He said: “I like the way AB does things. He expects the best from everybody 
because he gives the best. You will never see AB not diving or not chasing down 
a ball. It rubs off on guys. It’s going to be a little bit of a change but then 
I’d only been with Hash for one Test.

“We had a nice team chat yesterday, but it wasn’t much different to what 
Hashim would have said; the usual captain’s talk. We all know what we have to 
do but it’s going to be a really tough task for us because this is a bloody 
good England side. We’re in a must-win situation if we want to win the series.”

South Africa's captaincy switch is a gamble that could work against England | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/12/south-africa-captaincy-switch-gamble-the-spin-cricket>
Asked what the lessons he had taken from his first taste of Test cricket in 
the stalemate at Newlands, Morris joked: “Don’t bowl to Ben Stokes,” reflecting 
on theEngland all-rounder’s 258 from 198 balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/03/ben-stokes-258-england-south-africa-jonny-bairstow>
, 81 of which came off Morris’s bowling.

“Sometimes you’ve got to take it on the chin and say the guy played an 
unbelievable knock. I’ve never come across that in my career before and I hope 
I never do again,” he said. “I told him that if he ever does that again he must 
hang up his boots and say he’s the best ever. I’ve never seen anything like it. 
It was a baptism of fire.”

The 28-year-old’s debut did feature two stunning one-handed catches in the 
slips, as well as 69 with the bat and a beauty to remove Joe Root during 
England’s wobble on the fifth day.

“We will take a bit of confidence from that last day, we bowled nicely to our 
field and plans,” he said. “Hopefully we can bring that into this game and see 
what happens in the next five days.”

Morris, who played seven years of cricket at the Wanderers for the Highveld 
Lions, expects the seamers to dominate in the third Test, with the uncapped 
fast bowler Hardus Viljoen, fresh from taking 20 wickets in two first-class 
matches on the ground this season, pushing hard for selection along with the 
fit-again Kyle Abbott.

De Villiers and coach Russell Domingo, in their first Test together, must 
decide whether the spinner Dane Piedt or a batsman should be sacrificed if they 
are to accommodate the extra quick.
 