
The Church of Scientology has started contacting film critics who have 
reviewed Alex Gibney’s documentary Going Clear:Scientology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/scientology> and the Prison of Belief.

In the film, Gibney outlines the inception and growth of the religion founded 
by L Ron Hubbard in 1953, which features an exotic mythology and unusual 
spirituality based around transcending earlier trauma. Gibney interviews 
defectors from the religion, including Crash director Paul Haggis, and paints 
its significant figures, like Tom Cruise and leader David Miscavige, in a 
negative light.

Reviewers of the film, from Us Weekly 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/church-of-scientology-slams-going-clear-documentary-entirely-false-2015271>
 toBuzzfeed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/adambvary/going-clear-doesnt-have-much-new-about-scientology-but-thats#.rkxMnq1bD>
 andthe Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/01/26/going-clear-scientology-movie_n_6546316.html>
, have received an emailwhich reads 
<http://www.hitfix.com/in-contention/church-of-scientology-responds-to-going-clear-thinks-only-men-write-reviews>
:

The above article concerning Going Clear, Alex Gibney’s film, was posted 
without contacting the Church for comment. As a result, your article reflects 
the film which is filled with bald faced lies. I ask that you include a 
statement from the Church in your article. There is another side to the story 
which has to be told. Do not be the mouthpiece for Alex Gibney’s propaganda.

Sundance 2015 review: Going Clear – Scientology film preaches to converted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/26/sundance-2015-review-going-clear-scientology-documentary-alex-gibney>
The spokeswoman, Karin Pouw, also included an official Church of Scientology 
statement on the documentary, reading in part: “The accusations made in the 
film are entirely false and alleged without ever asking the Church... Gibney’s 
sources are the usual collection of obsessive, disgruntled former Church 
members kicked out as long as 30 years ago for malfeasance, who have a 
documented history of making up lies about the Church for money.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Going Clear 
It follows a major online campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/28/church-of-scientology-alex-gibney-documentary-going-clear-campaign>
 by the Church to discredit Gibney, the director of Enron: The Smartest Guys in 
the Room, Taxi to the Dark Side, and Finding Fela. Various articles on the 
Scientology website Freedom have been written, individually debunking those 
involved, and a new hashtag-strewn Twitter account,Freedom Media Ethics 
<https://twitter.com/FreedomEthics>, has been set up in an attempt to make 
their campaign viral.

Responding to the Church’s tactics, Gibney told Flavorwire 
<http://flavorwire.com/?p=502163>: “Anytime someone writes something — film 
criticism or social criticism — about Scientology, the Church of Scientology 
counter-attacks by smearing critics. But a careful investigation of the 
church’s claims will reveal that most of the misdeeds by critics (Rathbun, et 
al) were committed on behalf of the Church of Scientology! As you saw in the 
film, these people are now repenting and the Church of Scientology wants to 
punish them for it.” Gibney said his requests for interviews with Scientology 
members were denied; the Church claims they offered interviews with family 
members of the defectors.

The film will be screened on US TV network HBO in March – last year the 
network’s president of documentaries, Sheila Nevins, said they had “probably 
160 lawyers” working with them on the film.
 