
Cigarettes Will Kill You is a crucial document of the Australian alternative 
music scene, but more importantly a twisted love song that those who grew up in 
the 90s have kept close to their hearts for nearly 20 years.


Its writer Ben Lee had recently left Noise Addict, the band he joined as a 
13-year-old. The song, released in 1998, was the first in a slew of solo tracks 
that he would release to commercial acclaim, and remained one of his best.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiJAorQM7sL8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiJAorQM7sL8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiJAorQM7sL8&media=>
Devastatingly sad and perfectly executed, it would become a signpost for where 
alternative rock would head in the new millennium. You can hear shades of Lee’s 
renewed brand of melancholy, with its emphasis on electronic production and 
keyboards, on many other great Australian hits that came after it, including 
Eskimo Joe’sFrom The Sea <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KzAUyjmedCA> and 
Grinspoon’sChemical Heart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=58mXxWuUqYw>.

A good pop song typically contains one memorable instrument or hook that leads 
to instant recall among listeners. Cigarettes Will Kill You boasts three: 
moving piano chords, a slightly off-kilter, hip-hop inspired drum groove, and 
Lee’s chorus lyric. The song’s smooth breaks and stabbing left-hand ostinatos 
that propel them forward make for unlikely bedfellows. But like everything 
about Lee’s incongruous career, it seems to work.

By the time this song became a hit for Ben Lee, he was already an industry 
veteran with two albums, four EPs and an internationally signed band, Noise 
Addict, trailing dust behind him. He was also only 20 years old.

Australian rock music was split down the middle in the 90s, between locals who 
wanted to keep the pub rock spirit alive and a new breed who were happy to 
sound American if it let them tour over there. Lee, who lived overseas but 
couldn’t shake his thick accent, sat somewhere in the middle. But once he 
opened that mouth of his on the killer chorus, there was no doubting where this 
Bondi boy was from.

Lee was not the first songwriter to rue the day he met someone that broke his 
heart, but he was refreshingly frank about it. Cigarettes Will Kill You, 
inspired by The Verve’sThe Drugs Don’t Work 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ToQ0n3itoII> (despite having nothing at all to 
do with cancer sticks) concerned itself mostly with calling out an injurious 
lover. Every line Lee sang in the verses sounded like a snarl, made all the 
more potent given that many of his metaphors (“You love to watch me bake / You 
serve me up with cake / And that’s your big mistake”) were about food.

Even though its strength is derived from anger (“You offer a la carte / You 
didn’t have the heart”), the most memorable parts of the song are marked by 
beauty. It’s those close-knit harmonies that drop in on the lust-filled chorus 
opener “and I / want a TV embrace”, and the upper octaves that sound out the 
bridge. It showcased Lee not just as a punk with a good ear, but also having a 
knack for melody that would serve him well into the next decade.

Stephen Pavlovic, who went on to found one of Australia’s most influential 
record labels, Modular Records, is known for his golden ears and consistently 
picking winners. Ben Lee was his first ever signing, after he famously saw 
Noise Addict play at a library book sale. Cigarettes Will Kill You was proof of 
concept then, and remains so now. It’s simple, wry and memorable; four 
descending bass notes, a jilted lover bashing out minor chords and one too many 
references (“You left me burned and seared”) to cooking.

The east coast of Australia has had its fair share of child prodigies. From 
“Tiny Tina Arena” busting out ballads on live TV before she’d hit puberty to 
Daniel Johns touring the US as a 15-year-old, we’re pretty good at picking them 
young. But few have undergone an adolescence as tumultuous as Lee; jaded by 18, 
chart-topper at 20 and being called a “precocious cunt” by Bernard Fanning 
before he was even legally allowed to drink in his adopted home of New York 
City.

That Lee has had at least three career turnarounds in his relatively short 
life is no accident. Every time it seems like he’s gone too far into the 
wilderness, he pulls another great melody from God knows where and kicks into 
gear again. He’s been reborn as a life coach for unhappy people (Catch My 
Disease <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bqQkjGXkmQQ>, We’re All In This 
Together <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mTeZcHWHeW4>), introspective sex guru 
(Birds and Bees <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QvynRWRz5AQ>), and recently 
wrotean entire album 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/album/ayahuasca-welcome-to-the-work/id622432347> 
about the benefits of getting high from the psychedelic Peruvian brewayahuasca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/shortcuts/2014/apr/28/ayahuasca-celebrities-usage-hallucinogenic-substance-death-british-teenager-colombia>
. Each of them has allowed him a few more years to live out this song’s 
refrain: “I wish I could say that everyone was wrong.”
 