
The Latin America cinema revival

After the awards had been dished out at the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> last September, a 
dim-bulb journalist asked jury president Alfonso Cuarón if he might be accused 
of regional bias for handing the top honours to “films from your continent”. 
His geography was off – Cuarón is Mexican, and had just crowned two films from 
South America – but his gauche point did nonetheless highlight the current 
robustness of the Latin American film scene. Venice’s surpriseGolden Lion winner
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/venice-film-festival-2015-golden-lion-goes-to-venezuelas-from-afar>
 was Venezuelan queer thrillerFrom Afar 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGxY3tu9mDg>, a startling debut for director 
Lorenzo Vigas that did indeed get a leg-up from the New Mexican Cinema 
movement: recent Cannes prizewinner Michel Franco and Oscar-nominated 
screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga are among its producers.

A more practised auteur took the runner-up spot: Argentinian director Pablo 
Trapero hits a career high withThe Clan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T7QG6n86GDg>, a riveting underworld saga based 
on the true story of the notorious Puccio family that fully deserves the 
Scorsese comparisons it has earned from critics. It will inevitably be 
confused, however, withThe Club <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e8c2DYoF7lA>, 
an exercise in dark artistry from a different Pablo: Chilean provocateur 
Larraín, who rocked February’s Berlin film festival with this punchy allegory 
for abuse within the Catholic church.

Both have been submitted for the best foreign language film Oscar, alongside a 
number of other recent festival hits from down south: Brazil’s wry, 
class-conflict dramaThe Second Mother 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNjwuQcvGms>; Colombia’s dazzling historical 
Amazon epicEmbrace of the Serpent <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ff7TcnqHUc>
; and Guatemala’s hypnotically beautiful Mayan fableIxcanul 
<http://cineuropa.org/vd.aspx?t=video&l=en&did=294111>. The region’s cinematic 
history is, of course, studded with such crossover successes asCity of God 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ioUE_5wpg_E> and The Secret in Their Eyes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QROjc2DGdhM>, but rarely have so many of its 
individual national cinemas hit their stride at once.
Guy Lodge
 A cinema camera drone. Photograph: PR 
Drones

They’ve been used in The Dark Knight Rises 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g8evyE9TuYk>, the Harry Potter movies, and Sam 
Mendes hired one to film the rooftop motorbike chase at the start ofSkyfall 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6kw1UVovByw>. For the past few years, 
enterprising directors have been using drones to shoot aerial footage manned 
aircraft could never hope to catch.

It’s easy to see why drones are attractive to filmmakers. Compared to a 
helicopter, they are more flexible, quick to set up and relatively safe to use. 
They are also much cheaper: hiring a helicopter for a day in Hollywood costs 
upwards of $25,000, whereas the daily rate for a camera drone is as little as 
$5,000.

So why are drones not yet ubiquitous in the industry? For one, there are 
restrictions on their use in the US, although the law is expected to change. 
There are also limits to what can be achieved: wonky footage remains an issue. 
Industry-standard drones such as theAerial MOB <http://aerialmob.com/> can 
carry 22lb cameras and travel up to 40mph, but low battery life reduces shoot 
times to a matter of minutes. However, the technology is developing quickly and 
industry experts believe drones could have a revolutionary effect on filmmaking 
equivalent to the introduction of the Steadicam in the 70s.
Killian Fox
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445529862785%2Fce712519-76d7-4e0d-9434-7c24fd3d4585-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445529862785%2Fce712519-76d7-4e0d-9434-7c24fd3d4585-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Idris Elba in Beasts of No Nation. Photograph: AP 
Streaming services take on the studios

First they came for our video shops. Now online streaming services have their 
sights set on our cinemas. Having conquered television, leading on-demand 
outlets have shifted into the distribution and production of original feature 
films. Unsurprisingly, Netflix is making the fastest strides on this new 
terrain. Only two years ago, they entered the distribution game by acquiring 
Jehane Noujaim’s festival-hot political documentaryThe Square 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=twB2zAOzsKE>, scoring an Oscar nomination in 
the process.

The real game-changer, however, is Cary Fukunaga’s child-soldier drama Beasts 
of No Nation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oRsaclO0VbU>, starring Idris 
Elba, which the company picked up for $12m last year. After unveiling it to 
great acclaim at the Venice film festival, Netflix released it simultaneously 
online and in cinemas earlier this month – prompting a boycott from several 
cinema chains who considered it a violation of the traditional 90-day window of 
big-screen exclusivity.

They’ll have to get used to it. Amazon is following suit with its Amazon 
Studios division, recently landing Spike Lee’s upcoming racial satireChi-Raq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/16/spike-lee-chiraq-amazon-first-original-movie>
 as its first in-house production, and hiring formerVariety film critic Scott 
Foundas as a development executive.

Brits are getting in on the act too. Rising filmmaker Charlie Lyne 
self-distributed his debut featureBeyond Clueless 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DEz8pdxslYU> last year. For his follow-up, 
however, he accepted a commission for the BBC’s iPlayer service;Fear Itself 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0351g0z> premiered as an upload on 18 October.

“With Beyond Clueless, practical considerations meant a staggered release was 
really the only option, so I became the person I hated,” says Lyne. “The 
iPlayer model is a huge step in the right direction. Millions of people had 
simultaneous access to something I only finished editing six days before. It’s 
kind of incredible.”
GL 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445529946313%2F0809117d-4672-41f8-8555-5ef67f394abd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445529946313%2F0809117d-4672-41f8-8555-5ef67f394abd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alicia Vikander, photographed in New York last June. Photograph: Amy 
Sussman/Invision/AP 
The continued rise of the ever versatile Alicia Vikander

Within the film industry, the phrase “four-quadrant movie” is used to describe 
a film that appeals to a range of demographics – male and female, over and 
under 25 – that are usually served separately. If that’s a fairly ghastly bit 
of corporate-speak, the notion of a “four-quadrant movie star” sounds 
positively dehumanising. Yet Alicia Vikander may prove to be one: the 
27-year-old Swede has perhaps been this year’s most ubiquitous actor.

This year alone, we’ve seen her fiercely shouldering a British war epic in 
Testament of Youth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e3e2nNNJ7-4>, slyly walking 
the human-android divide in cool indie sci-fiEx Machina 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PI8XBKb6DQk>, gamely channelling 60s ingenue 
chic in slick summer trifleThe Man from U.N.C.L.E. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-x08iNZ8Mfc>, and doing Russian-accented femme 
fatale duty inSon of a Gun <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SxDKu-1mJXk>. She’s 
far from done: in the next three months, she’ll be seen opposite Bradley Cooper 
inBurnt <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IiGJlUVQDGk> and ex-boyfriend Michael 
Fassbender inThe Light Between Oceans, while she positively steals The Danish 
Girl <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d88APYIGkjk> from its putative star Eddie 
Redmayne. Her tender, determined performance in the latter as Gerda Wegener, 
the conflicted wife of pioneering transgender painter Lili Elbe, is widely 
expected to earn Vikander her first Oscar nomination – yet it’s open to 
question whether it’s even her best work of the year.

The rest of 2016 brings (at least) two suitably contrasting roles: the female 
lead in Tom Stoppard’s historical romanceTulip Fever, and a prominent part 
opposite Matt Damon in Paul Greengrass’s revival of the Jason Bourne franchise. 
It’s been a rapid climb for an actor largely unknown to international audiences 
before 2012, when striking turns in Danish Oscar nomineeA Royal Affair 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3sh8LjfXvKI> and Joe Wright’s Anna Karenina 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rPGLRO3fZnQ> marked her as one to watch; three 
years on, she’s the one to see.
GL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530059290%2Faef36685-6a42-4110-a8a8-711d7e433c56-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530059290%2Faef36685-6a42-4110-a8a8-711d7e433c56-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Comedy duo Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele. Photograph: Jason Kempin/Getty 
Images 
TV comedians on the big screen

When Judd Apatow’s Trainwreck <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y_KP9x80Z9Q> 
hit the $100m mark in the US, Amy Schumer’s movie stardom was sealed . Rarely, 
however, has a major studio film been sold on a riskier choice of leading lady 
– and from her own first-time screenplay, to boot. BeforeTrainwreck, Schumer’s 
most prominent big-screen role had been far down the cast list in 2012’sSeeking 
a Friend for the End of the World <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pW_OyiUgW88>
; her breakthrough was secured on the strength of her hit Comedy Central sketch 
showInside Amy Schumer. Chris Pratt, meanwhile, used the profile gained from 
playing lovable schlub Andy Dwyer inParks and Recreation to emerge as an 
unlikely action hero inGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B16Bo47KS2g> and Jurassic World 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RFinNxS5KN4>. 

With the Hollywood star system in flux and TV in its much-vaunted golden age, 
small-screen comedy (via standup, in many cases) has never been a more viable 
platform for potential film headliners. Who’s next? Keegan-Michael Key and 
Jordan Peele currently seem the likeliest lads: the quicksilver duo, from 
Emmy-nominated sketch showKey & Peele, will be hoping to inherit their Comedy 
Central cohort’s good fortune when their first film outing,Keanu, is released 
next spring.
GL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530182990%2F118720a1-e3ae-4718-90db-43e521dd1ee6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530182990%2F118720a1-e3ae-4718-90db-43e521dd1ee6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Josh Brolin in the Coen brothers’ Hail, Caesar! Photograph: Splash News/Corbis 
Hail, Caesar!

Seconds after the trailer for Joel and Ethan Coens’ Hail, Caesar! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kMqeoW3XRa0> debuted, dozens of sailor-suited 
Channing Tatum gifs were plastered all over the internet. But this ain’tMagic 
Mike <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D07XjD5L_e8> 3: we’re in for an A-List 
Hollywood satire set during the golden age of the 1950s, with Josh Brolin as a 
studio fixer sent to retrieve George Clooney’s kidnapped movie star. The cast 
also includes Ralph Fiennes, Scarlett Johansson, Tilda Swinton and, of course, 
the Coens’ staple, Frances McDormand.
Catherine Bray
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530308099%2F6f24f030-16ab-4462-ab5c-b49e19baf8d9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530308099%2F6f24f030-16ab-4462-ab5c-b49e19baf8d9-1020x612.jpeg>
 Ilya Naishuller and Sharlto Copley in Hardcore. Photograph: PR 
Hardcore action

Funded on Indiegogo by more than 2,000 backers, Hardcore 
<https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/hardcore-the-first-ever-action-pov-feature-film#/>
 is the world’s first first-person POV action movie, shot entirely from the 
hero’s perspective using modified GoPro cameras. Filmed in Moscow with an 
international cast, it will, promises writer and director Ilya Naishuller, 
provide filmgoers with something they have never seen before: “This leads to 
the ultimate experience, as you the audience become one with the hero.”
CB
 JR shooting virtual reality short, Walking New York. Photograph: PR 
Virtual reality: a personal experience

I have to admit it: I was sceptical. A big part of me was hoping French artist 
JR’s much-vaunted VR shortWalking New York wouldn’t live up to the hype. When 
you watch a film made for the new generation of virtual reality headsets, 
whether it’s Oculus Rift, Google Cardboard or some as-yet-unheard of device, 
we’re basically talking wearable tech not unlike the imaginings of science 
fiction decades before the future arrived. I strapped on an unwieldy set of 
massive goggles with headphones and briefly flashed back to the orthopaedic 
head brace I wore as a dorky teenager.

You quickly forget all that though, as you’re transported into the scene of 
your director’s choosing; in my case, horrifyingly hanging out of a helicopter 
at penthouse height in New York. This will sound like an exaggeration, but it’s 
not: my palms began to sweat instantly. I desperately wanted to hold on to 
something. Unlike in scary movies where you can glance to one side to reassure 
yourself it’s only a movie, the virtual realities of one of these babies is 
all-encompassing. The surround sound helps too. The filmmaking possibilities 
are endless and, frankly, terrifying.
CB
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530611980%2Ff9960b6e-072e-43eb-a996-333f78e529a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530611980%2Ff9960b6e-072e-43eb-a996-333f78e529a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Emory Cohen at the Toronto film festival earlier this year. Photograph: Rex 
Emory Cohen

If Emory Cohen is tired yet of hearing the words “young Marlon Brando”, he has 
the good grace not to say so. Yet critics have applied them copiously to the 
25-year-old New Yorker’s vastly appealing performance in John Crowley’s 
Oscar-tipped period romanceBrooklyn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iWgCwrJ5Jzc>. As a gawky Italian-American 
plumber who woos Saoirse Ronan’s shy Irish shopgirl, Cohen does indeed carry 
himself with the slouchy magnetism of a 1950s method star. He’s a warmly 
unconventional romantic lead – not what one would have expected from his 
striking breakthrough turn as Bradley Cooper’s troubled teenage son inThe Place 
Beyond the Pines <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zz5jTy_lukk>.

“Everyone’s inspired by Brando,” Cohen says from London’s East End, where he’s 
shootingWar Machine, a Brad Pitt-starring Afghanistan war satire, with Animal 
Kingdom <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jXrQ1TY5a-U> director David Michôd. 
“When I started acting, my dad showed meOn the Waterfront 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xSImMMMf5nA> and I thought: ‘That’s the 
coolest guy I’ve ever seen.’ But I can’t get lost in the mental neuroses of 
comparison. I’m just trying to be Emory Cohen.”

With Brooklyn out in November, and a further half-dozen independent films in 
the pipeline – “I’m shying away from getting lost in really bad movies for 
really good money” – the name should soon stick.
GL 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530708068%2F9ab3e243-9354-476a-a267-e1a1128d4106-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530708068%2F9ab3e243-9354-476a-a267-e1a1128d4106-2060x1236.jpeg>
 John Boyega with his Star Wars co-star Daisy Ridley. Photograph: Lucy Young/Rex
John Boyega: the new stormtrooper

Friday 18 December 2015 is the day that Peckham lad John Boyega is officially 
no longer a rising star, but a bona-fide fixture of the A-list firmament. On 
that day,Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sGbxmsDFVnE> will be released to a ravening 
fanbase anxious to meet Boyega’s character, Finn, whom the actor describes as 
“quirky and charismatic and funny. For me, he was the best character in the 
script.”

Boyega seems humbly aware of the scale of the release, tweeting 
<https://twitter.com/johnboyega/status/631554781794807808>: “From seven months 
of auditioning to being a part of the most highly anticipated movie of the 
year. #justwow.” But he’s not letting it faze him, and he’s particularly 
unruffled by the racism his casting brought to the fore, as the hashtag 
#blackstormtrooper trended on Twitter to both positive and negative comment.

He calmly shrugged off the ugly reaction: “I’m in the movie, what are you 
going to do about it? You either enjoy it or you don’t. I’m not saying get used 
to the future, but what is already happening. People of colour and women are 
increasingly being shown on-screen. For things to be whitewashed just doesn’t 
make sense.”
CB
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530794856%2F11a968e1-0179-4a44-b5f3-927d454bf5e7-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530794856%2F11a968e1-0179-4a44-b5f3-927d454bf5e7-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Amy Winehouse in the documentary, Amy. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex 
After Amy: The rise of the ‘super-doc’

When Asif Kapadia’s documentary about Amy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy> Winehouse played at Cannes this year, 
the response was off-the-charts ecstatic. But film festival raves so often 
evaporate, post-festival, leaving distributors with a critically acclaimed film 
but no audience.

This was emphatically not the case with Amy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A97-pQJD6Hw>, which leapt out of the gate with 
the biggest- ever opening weekend for a British documentary in the UK, and has 
since become one of the biggest documentaries of all time, tallying over $20m 
worldwide. Did Kapadia have any idea of the kind of unprecedented traction the 
film would achieve? “When you make a film about someone, you become very aware 
of them. So when I was makingAmy, I became very attuned to her music being 
everywhere, and I started to have an inkling that if we could get this right, 
this could become something special. So you hope, but you never really know. We 
were asking ourselves ‘will people want to see something this sad?’ and the 
answer turned out to be yes.”

So has the enormous success of Amy increased pressure on other filmmakers to 
deliver multiple-million grossing documentaries? Actually, Kapadia thinks it 
may be helping people get their films funded: “I meet a lot of people who tell 
me they’ve gone into financier meetings and said, ‘It’s going to beSenna, it’s 
going to beAmy’, and then they get given money. Before Amy came out, there were 
distributors saying theatrical docs were dead. Some of them told me ‘All eyes 
are on you to see howAmy does’, so I think it’s probably healthy for filmmaking 
that it worked as well as it did.”

Look to see more directors aiming for “super-doc status”, with full theatrical 
releases where there might once have been only a limited roll-out.
CB 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530908936%2Fe96ec27e-02ef-47ad-a7b2-d8cfcec3eaa2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445530908936%2Fe96ec27e-02ef-47ad-a7b2-d8cfcec3eaa2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Steven Spielberg, who is to direct a live-action movie of Roald Dahl’s The 
BFG. Photograph: BEImage/Rex 
Spielberg and The BFG

Hollywood has been on form where family films are concerned lately, with Frozen
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbQm5doF_Uc> and Inside Out 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_MC3XuMvsDI> proving that children can handle 
complex themes, sometimes better than their parents if the emotionally ravaged 
grownups we spotted leavingToy Story 3 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JcpWXaA2qeg> are anything to go by.

So here’s hoping that one of Roald Dahl’s most beloved creations, The BFG, has 
finally found his dream director inSteven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg>, with the honour of playing 
the big friendly giant going to Mark Rylance. Dahl’s grandson, Luke Kelly, 
endorses the choice, saying: “I’ve had the privilege of seeing Mark perform, 
and the thought of watching him transform into ‘the only nice and jumbly giant 
in Giant Country’ is absolutely phizz-whizzing.”

Dahl’s’ books are notoriously difficult to get right on the big screen, but in 
the hands of the man who brought usE.T. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=taMnCjzKgd8>, that signature Dahl mix of glee 
and terror should be adaptation catnip.
CB
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531049490%2Fcb91d9d0-f7dc-413e-81da-4cf0f1e3698d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531049490%2Fcb91d9d0-f7dc-413e-81da-4cf0f1e3698d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Susanne Wuest in the Austrian horror movie Goodnight Mommy. Photograph: Allstar
Independent horror

In terms of quality and originality, the horror genre waxes and wanes over 
time. Right now it’s waxing pretty brightly, thanks to a new breed of 
filmmakers – among them Jennifer Kent (The Babadook 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szaLnKNWC-U>), James Ward Byrkit (Coherence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sEceDz1Rodc>) and Veronika Franz and Severin 
Fiala (Goodnight Mommy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7u3GCfr0U94>) – who are 
steering clear of the cliches that haunt the genre at every turn.

Some of these films feel utterly of their time. Revenge horror Unfriended 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lgj4GjqCFlY> (director Levan “Leo” Gabriadze) 
takes place entirely online and deploys its supernatural shocks within the 
familiar frame of a group Skype chat. Others hark back to a golden age of 
American horror cinema:The Babadook recalls 70s classics such as The Omen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V7CEbd7ffNw>, while David Robert Mitchell’s 
much-laudedIt Follows <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HkZYbOH0ujw> evokes the 
glassy suburban dread of the originalHalloween 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZUwajlB-vc> movie, right down to its 
unnerving electronic score.

These movies are consciously setting themselves apart from the bloated 
CGI-fests and franchise cash-ins that have dulled horror’s edge over the past 
decade. They may not be breaking radically new ground, but by making their work 
leaner, bleaker and often weirder, this new generation of directors is 
returning a sense of urgency – and genuine eeriness – to the genre.
KF

YouTube dissects the movies

If you’re a movie fan, there are many reasons to hang out on video-sharing 
websites such as Youtube or Vimeo, which contain more short films, trailers, 
classic scenes and mashups than you could watch in a lifetime. One particular 
virtue of these sites is the space they open up for film analysis. Movie buffs 
have been uploading commentaries on their favourite films for years, but only 
now is theYouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> film essay 
becoming an artform in its own right.

Dig around and you’ll find a few really good examples – smart, perceptive 
cinephiles such as Darren Foley (Must See Films 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/foleyd87>) and Josh Bradley (Movies I Love), 
whose videos tease out hidden subtexts inBlue Velvet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bWr4JvAWF20> or the films of Paul Thomas 
Anderson.

But the best of these essayists has to be Tony Zhou, whose series Every Frame 
A Painting <https://www.youtube.com/user/everyframeapainting> launched in April 
2014. A film editor based in San Francisco, Zhou brings a wealth of technical 
expertise to bear on subjects as diverse as chairs in cinema and movement in 
the films of Akira Kurosawa. He understands how to entertain as well as 
educate, and his playful, hyper-literate videos, which never overshoot the 
10-minute mark, are often as absorbing as the movies they dissect.
KF
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531199475%2Fae96cd5c-ff05-4fac-b5f5-20f0fd9435a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531199475%2Fae96cd5c-ff05-4fac-b5f5-20f0fd9435a6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fabien Riggall, founder and director of Secret Cinema. Photograph: Rebecca 
Reid/eyevine 
Secret Cinema: Q&A with founder Fabien Riggall

To what do you attribute Secret Cinema’s success?
Secret Cinema stumbled across where we’re going culturally. Cinema, music, art 
and theatre are converging. They’re becoming something where you aren’t just 
passively entertained, you become part of it and contribute to the story.

Where do you think the future of cinema is heading?
Going to the cinema has become too automated. They should reinvent themselves 
because they’re communal spaces. People want something special.

Do you think virtual reality will play a part?
Although I’m interested in the idea of making films that incorporate that 
technology, like Chris Milk does, to think that the future is about sitting 
down with a gigantic VR headset box on your head is terrifying. The future of 
cinema, I think, is more about the spectacular and romantic. People will start 
investing in more beautiful cinemas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531458350%2Fd764924e-0586-454c-bfe1-af274a367dc0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531458350%2Fd764924e-0586-454c-bfe1-af274a367dc0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Michael Caine and Harvey Keitel in Youth. Photograph: Studiocanal/Allstar 
Growing strength of the grey pound

Over the past few years, the notion that cinemas are the preserve of the 
15-to-24 demographic has been met with some robust challenges. The film that 
generated most opinion pieces wasThe Best Exotic Marigold Hotel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dDY89LYxK0w>. When it hit the box office in 
2012, taking £83m worldwide (having cost just £6.2m to make), commentators 
heralding the rise of the “grey pound” wondered if more older people buying 
cinema tickets would mean fewer superheroes gracing our screens each year.

The superheroes haven’t left us yet, but it appears that studios are becoming 
increasingly confident about funding intelligent, well-crafted films in which 
older actors take centre stage rather than hovering in the periphery. Recently 
we’ve had Andrew Haigh’s mesmerising45 Years 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qXAnjA9tAnQ>, starring Charlotte Rampling and 
Tom Courtenay as a couple dealing with a ghost from the past in the runup to 
their 45th wedding anniversary. Also likely to do well is Paolo Sorrentino’s
Youth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SN6mB_31uPA>, in which Michael Caine and 
Harvey Keitel,above, reflect on their lives in a Swiss spa, and Jane Fonda 
makes a riveting cameo. We can also look forward toGrandma 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXk1St0MDN8>, where Lily Tomlin plays a 
hell-raising poet on a road trip with her pregnant teenage granddaughter.

These films do not appeal exclusively to older audiences: 45 Years received 
glowing reviews across the board. Nor are older audiences only interested in 
films about people their age – arthouse movies in general tend to do 
particularly well with audiences over 45, who also show strong support for 
British independent movies. The growing strength of the grey pound may not kill 
off the superhero just yet, but if it’s encouraging filmmakers to produce more 
thoughtful films, with older actors in the lead roles, it’s worth celebrating.
KF
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531555170%2Fc79a2f6a-4a92-45b1-a73a-538bde7ad448-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531555170%2Fc79a2f6a-4a92-45b1-a73a-538bde7ad448-680x1020.jpeg>
 Kitana Kiki Rodriguez in Tangerine. Photograph: Chris Bergoch/Everett 
Collection/Rex 
Tangerine dials in a smart future for film

Sean Baker’s fifth feature film traces a day in the life of two transgender 
sex workers in Hollywood, but that’s not the only reasonTangerine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALSwWTb88ZU> received so much attention when 
it premiered at Sundance earlier this year. Audiences were also intrigued 
because the movie, which is 88 minutes long, was shot entirely on three 
smartphones.

As with many innovative approaches, Baker’s decision to shoot this way was 
mainly down to budgetary constraints – he wanted to save money on cameras and 
crew and ended up creating a distinctive visual style that suits his lurid, 
sun-blasted milieu. Saving money was also the motivation behind his other 
enterprising uses of technology: Baker used Vine and Instagram to cast some of 
his actors and found a key element in the movie’s score by trawling around the 
audio distribution platform SoundCloud.
KF

Charlie Kaufman turns his mind to animation

Charlie Kaufman, the surreal postmodernist behind Being John Malkovich 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=icysehz-OVc> and Eternal Sunshine Of The 
Spotless Mind <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yE-f1alkq9I>, returns with 
Anomalisa <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NYbKJfls6WM>. The stop-motion 
romance was a big hit at the Toronto film festival and has been described by 
Kaufman as “one of the highest points of my professional career”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532776582%2F0c9c4a9d-30b9-4784-993f-2178b996413a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532776582%2F0c9c4a9d-30b9-4784-993f-2178b996413a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Samuel L Jackson in The Hateful Eight. Photograph: The Weinstein 
Company/Allstar 
Return of 70mm

Quentin Tarantino’s gritty new western, The Hateful Eight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gnRbXn4-Yis>, has been shot in 70mm. The 
rarely used film stock – which framed such grandiose epics asBen Hur, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4hrbRDAOF4k> back in 1959 – should give the 
film an authentically epic feel. It will also feature composer Ennio 
Morricone’s first score for a western in 40 years, and sees Channing Tatum and 
Kurt Russell join Samuel L Jackson, Tim Roth and Michael Madsen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531717265%2F5a15f46a-409e-4a56-9c22-c08a7e310fde-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531717265%2F5a15f46a-409e-4a56-9c22-c08a7e310fde-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A still from Remainder, directed by video artist Omer Fast. Photograph: 
Capital Pictures 
Art forms converge

This season, film, art and literature rub shoulders with fevered abandon. For 
starters, there’sRemainder, a feature film by Israeli video artist Omer Fast, 
whose work often deals with reconstruction, reenactment and the ambivalent 
nature of screen images. He’s the ideal candidate to adaptRemainder, the 2005 
novel by British writer Tom McCarthy, whose Satin Island was shortlisted for 
this year’s Man Booker prize. Tom Sturridge plays a man who, following a 
bizarre accident, sets about staging an elaborate recreation of images from his 
memory. Fast’s elegant, enigmatic film is a conceptual baffler that’s never 
quite what you think it is.

Then there’s Innocence of Memories 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S_D5VLHhO6Q>, bringing alive the world of 
Nobel-winning Turkish novelist Orhan Pamuk. Three years ago, Pamuk opened a 
museum in Istanbul – essentially, a walk-through supplement to his novelThe 
Museum of Innocence. Now both book and museum are the basis of a film by 
British director Grant Gee – neither an adaptation nor a conventional 
documentary, more a portrait of Pamuk’s imagination and of the city that 
inspires him. The film is released in January, in time for a Somerset House 
exhibition devoted to Pamuk’s museum.

In 2012, Canadian director Guy Maddin pitched camp for a month in Paris’s 
Pompidou Centre to shoot his imagined versions of lost and apocryphal films 
from the dusty pages of cinema history. Next year, the results go online as
Seances <http://guy-maddin.com/projects/seances/>, a website that will 
spontaneously generate new combinations of Maddin’s footage – whileThe 
Forbidden Room <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uDbLTwzj_IU> brings his febrile 
pastiche to the big screen in a two-hour package of stories within stories, 
with an all-star art-house cast including Charlotte Rampling, Mathieu Amalric 
and Udo Kier.
Jonathan Romney
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531860219%2F1a1f65bb-8b1c-420e-a8b0-27f9dc67cabc-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445531860219%2F1a1f65bb-8b1c-420e-a8b0-27f9dc67cabc-1020x612.jpeg>
 A still from the award-winning Mustang, directed by Deniz Gamze Ergüven. 
Photograph: PR 
The new Virgin Suicides

It sounds like a western, but it’s not. Still, if the title Mustang 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rU9JAN8LtIk> puts you in mind of wild horses, 
that’s certainly the spirit of this feature by Turkish director Deniz Gamze 
Ergüven, which won top prize in this year’s directors’ fortnight sidebar at the 
Cannes film festival.

Ergüven makes a provocative debut with this story of five young sisters in a 
Turkish coastal town, whose carefree attitude leads to their grandmother and 
uncle imposing a draconian regime. She follows their revolt in a film that has 
sparked debate about the state of female freedom in Turkey.

However, as much as it is a polemical piece, Mustang is also an exuberantly 
stylish celebration of female solidarity against repression, and a terrific 
showcase for its young ensemble cast. The co-writer is up-and-coming French 
director Alice Winocour, whose own thrillerDisorder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_Yrq9xZNgCo> – starring Diane Kruger and 
Matthias Schoenaerts – is a taut genre pleasure to watch out for.
JR

Son of Saul
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532004364%2Fab751930-e70b-4138-bf3a-24c661ce5dc2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532004364%2Fab751930-e70b-4138-bf3a-24c661ce5dc2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ryan Reynolds suits up as Marvel antihero Deadpool. Photograph: 20th Century 
Fox/Allstar 
The most controversial film in Cannes this year, Hungarian drama Son of Saul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/may/20/son-of-saul-auschwitz-1944-video-trailer>
 has been dubbed “the anti-Schindler’s List 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dwfIf1WMhgc>”. László Nemes’s intensely 
powerful, troubling, brilliantly directed first feature is a sobering 
reinvention of Holocaust cinema, depicting Auschwitz through the eyes of a 
prisoner forced to assist in the exterminations.
JR

Remember them? It’s the comeback kids

Quentin Tarantino has been facilitating star comebacks ever since he put John 
Travolta in a mullet forPulp Fiction 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wZBfmBvvotE>. In his forthcoming The Hateful 
Eight <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gnRbXn4-Yis>, he does the same for 
Jennifer Jason Leigh. The once-unavoidable star of films by Robert Altman and 
David Cronenberg has been keeping a low profile. That’s about to change as she 
sports voluminous furs and a black eye to play fugitive Daisy Domergue in 
Tarantino’s snowbound western – though the fact that she doesn’t speak in the 
trailer suggests a characteristically juicy performance is being kept under 
wraps. Conversely, Leigh can be heard, but not seen, inAnomalisa 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NYbKJfls6WM>, a collaboration between Charlie 
Kaufman and animator Duke Johnsoncorrect. Leigh gives a funny, touching 
voice-only performance as ingénue Lisa, and the scene in which she sings Girls 
Just Wanna Have Fun twice (once in Italian) should really have won her the best 
actress award at the Venice film festival.

Also on the way back up is Ryan Reynolds. His profile took a battering with 
2011’sGreen Lantern <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8NWGl_A3b60> correct 
superhero movie, but this season suggests we should start taking him seriously 
again. In November he’s terrific as a silver-tongued poker-circuit chancer who 
teams up with a perennial loser (Ben Mendelsohn) inMississippi Grind 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ooca5idaNSk>, a low-life gambling movie by 
Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck that captures a 1970s mood of downbeat Americana to 
perfection. Then he can be seen in February as wisecracking, nihilistic 
anti-superheroDeadpool 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FyKWUTwSYAs&oref=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFyKWUTwSYAs&has_verified=1>
, the new not-for-kids Marvel spinoff; its cheerfully profane trailer has been 
causing enthusiastic ripples among comic fans hungry for something a little 
grittier than the norm.
JR
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532126503%2F4db310f6-cf46-45c2-b29d-b8f5105c664f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532126503%2F4db310f6-cf46-45c2-b29d-b8f5105c664f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Laurie Anderson at the Venice film festival screening of Heart of a Dog 
earlier this year. Photograph: Joel Ryan/AP 
Heart of a Dog

Artist, singer and multimedia experimenter Laurie Anderson has directed a very 
personal essay film, inspired by the life and death of her pet – a rat terrier 
named Lolabelle. Mixing animation, surveillance imagery, “dog-cam” imagery and 
Anderson family home movies,Heart of a Dog 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Ly_3i-jyes> is a tender, witty, constantly 
surprising philosophical inquiry into, among other themes, memory, mourning, 
data storage, Anderson’s own childhood, and the world as seen variously by 
Buddhists, Ludwig Wittgenstein and canines.

It’s a tender, poetic film, its discursive drift united by Anderson’s 
unmistakably quizzical voiceover. And, while he is only seen and heard at the 
very end, this is also a tender valedictory to Anderson’s late husband Lou 
Reed, to whom the film is dedicated.

Heart of a Dog also introduces a charismatic and multi-talented star in the 
form of Lolabelle – no ordinary terrier, but an accomplished painter, sculptor 
and experimental keyboard player.
JR
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532285377%2Fdb4f3591-575f-4a9c-8ee1-b4b2ac851e7e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cinema%E2%80%99s%20hot%2025%3A%20what%20will%20you%20be%20watching%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Fcinemas-hot-25-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F22%2F1445532285377%2Fdb4f3591-575f-4a9c-8ee1-b4b2ac851e7e-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Meryl Streep, who is to play the ‘world’s worst soprano’, Florence Foster 
Jenkins. Photograph: Splash News/Corbis 
Streep’s shocking soprano

Florence Foster Jenkins (1868-1944) was an American socialite and a great 
opera singer – at least, in her own mind. Recordings of hertoothache-inducing 
renditions <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DMu9PKWthLE> of Mozart et al made 
her the first kitsch anti-star, with people flocking to her concerts for laughs 
– while Jenkins continued in the delusion that she was a divine talent.

Now she is to be played by Meryl Streep, whose performances are never anything 
but bang on key. Streep is supported by Hugh Grant inFlorence Foster Jenkins, 
directed by Stephen Frears. However, French director Xavier Giannoli has got in 
first withMarguerite <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b5unnZLgwE4>, about a 
thinly-disguised version of Jenkins, to be released here in March. It stars a 
name unfamiliar in the UK, but hugely popular across the Channel, Catherine 
Frotcorrect, roughly speaking France’s Imelda Staunton. In this duel of the 
dodgy divas, many champagne flutes will be shattered by top Cs before the 
winner emerges.
JR
 