
 A 62-storey skyscraper – on the site of a previously planned building known 
as the Pinnacle or “Helter Skelter” – is to grace London’s skyline despite the 
uncertainty caused in the commercial property market by the vote for Brexit.

Now known as 22 Bishopsgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/17/city-of-london-to-get-new-skyscraper-as-the-pinnacle-gets-planning-permission>
 – its address near Liverpool Street station – the building will be the tallest 
in London’s financial district and is being developed by AXA Investment 
Managers Real Assets. The building will be 278 metres tall, 10 metres lower 
than the original design that was first outlined almost 10 years ago.


In the days before the 23 June referendum, Bloomberg quoted AXA IM’s chief 
executive, Pierre Vaquier, as saying options may have to be revisited if the 
vote was to leave the EU. “We have not launched the project because we want to 
see the results of the Brexit [vote],” Vaquier said in June.

But he said on Wednesday that the French-owned fund management firm was taking 
a long-term view. “The decision to proceed underscores our confidence in the 
progressive and attractive development that we will deliver at 22, coupled with 
the anticipated breadth of demand from local and global occupiers for easily 
accessible space in a prime location in the City ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, as one of the leading global centres 
for international business, that will respond to their future business needs.”

AXA IM was part of a consortium that paid £300m for the site in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/19/londons-half-built-pinnacle-set-to-reach-new-heights>
. Construction came to a halt five years ago – a shell known as the Stump was 
left behind – but AXA IM said it had continued with the foundations and 
expected to complete the building in 2019. A contractor is expected to be 
appointed in the coming weeks.

Chris Hayward, chairman of planning and transport at the City of
 London Corporation said: “This decision to continue with what is a key 
development in the City of London’s eastern cluster demonstrates the high level 
of investor confidence in London’s future growth.”
 