
Tucked away on a dead-end street in Kabul, behind blast walls and gun-toting 
guards, sits a cornerstone of Afghanistan’s nascent democracy.


In a first-floor radio studio, Humayoon Daneshyar flicks on the microphone and 
delivers his intro, a jab at the government officials among his listeners. 
“Today we will talk about the thing we don’t have: electricity!” he says, to 
chuckles from his producers.

The tone of Daneshyar’s morning show on Arman FM <http://www.arman.fm/> is 
colloquial, as evidenced when a listener calls in to berate the president,
Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/26/ashraf-ghani-new-president-tackle-corruption>
, for not being able to restore electricity to Kabul a month after the Taliban 
blew up two pylons in Baghlan. “Mr G, what happened to our electricity?” the 
caller asks.

Arman FM is Afghanistan’s first private commercial radio station. It is part of
Moby Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/03/afghan-elections-candiates-ghani-abdullah-ethnic-tensions>
, the country’s largest media company, which forms the backbone of what has 
been nothing short of a 15-year media revolution.

In 2003, Daneshyar had an idea for a show that would change the way Afghans 
listened to the radio. Today,Safay Shaher (Clean Your City) is one of 
Afghanistan’s most popular shows. An estimated 10 million people listen for an 
hour from 7am, five days a week, though numbers are hard to assess since many 
listen on public transport and in offices.

Daneshyar’s idea was simple. He wanted to hold politicians to account in the 
most direct way possible. “I wanted to broadcast the problems of the people,” 
he tells the Guardian.

Listeners call in to complain about everything from deteriorating security and 
shoddy rubbish collection to corrupt police. Daneshyar and his co-host then 
call the relevant official to demand answers. Whether it is the presidential 
spokesman, police investigators or army generals, almost everyone answers. Most 
are probably already listening to the show.

 “Once, an official wasn’t picking up. So I said on the radio that perhaps he 
had resigned. That got him on the phone!” Daneshyar says with a grin.

Though listeners call the show from across the country, Kabul’s electricity 
supply <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/03/afghanistan.military> has 
been an overarching concern for weeks, and a humiliating situation for the 
government. Every day that residents wake up to dark television screens and 
cold water is a reminder of the Taliban’s growing reach and the government’s 
apparent inability to do anything about it.

“In America, they have windmills; here, if one cable is cut, the entire Kabul 
is without power,” one caller says.

Moby owns about 70% of the Afghan media, including Tolo, which is home to 
popular entertainment shows and the country’s first 24-hour news channel. The 
free press is one of the biggest accomplishments since 2001, driven equally by 
international aid money and an army of courageous young talent. But the media 
is also under threat.

The media watchdog, Nai, said 36 journalists had been killed 
<http://data.nai.org.af/> since 2001, and hundreds more had been attacked. In 
January, a Taliban suicide bomberkilled seven Tolo employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/20/car-bomb-explodes-near-russian-embassy-in-kabul>
 in Kabul, afterthreatening to “eliminate” journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/oct/14/taliban-threaten-afghan-tv-journalists-with-elimination>
 working for Tolo and 1TV.


However, officials and warlords are just as threatening to journalists as 
militants, according to a2015 Human Rights Watch report 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/01/21/stop-reporting-or-well-kill-your-family/threats-media-freedom-afghanistan>
.

“The past year, it has become worse,” says Daneshyar. “One year ago, we could 
travel freely across the country. But now security is getting worse in all 34 
provinces.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fclean-your-city-the-afghan-radio-show-speaking-truth-to-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6e02635711060fe68d0a83fc226e1e28ea1d4c%2F0_204_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clean%20Your%20City%3A%20the%20Afghan%20radio%20show%20speaking%20truth%20to%20power&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fclean-your-city-the-afghan-radio-show-speaking-truth-to-power%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clean%20Your%20City%3A%20the%20Afghan%20radio%20show%20speaking%20truth%20to%20power&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fclean-your-city-the-afghan-radio-show-speaking-truth-to-power%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6e02635711060fe68d0a83fc226e1e28ea1d4c%2F0_204_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Humayoon Daneshyar in the Arman FM studio in Kabul. Photograph: Sune Engel 
Rasmussen for the Guardian 
The mood in the radio studio, however, is unfailingly buoyant. Daneshyar’s 
producer, Sima Safa, plays a recorded voice message left by a regular caller 
with a knack for imitating the president. He proclaims, in the voice of Ghani, 
that the government has struck a deal with the Taliban to cut electricity to 
Kabul.

While its tone is jovial, the show helped expose one of the most notorious 
criminal cases of recent memory. In 2014, a caller reported thegang rape of 
four women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/07/afghanistan-execute-five-men-gang-rape>
 in a Kabul suburb. Police officials denied the incident, so the hosts shrugged 
it off as rumours, but the calls kept coming until one day a doctor phoned the 
presenter Massood Sanjer and said he had treated four women in a “very bad 
condition”.

Tolo News, the sister TV channel, went to Paghman, a district of Kabul, to 
interview victims and witnesses despite government pressure to drop the story, 
says Sanjer, who is also Moby’s director of broadcasting.

“We didn’t hold the story, we broadcasted it,” he says. Within 24 hours, 
police had arrested five men. Two months later, they were hanged.

“If someone hadn’t called, the government would have hidden it. So a show like 
this really helps society to be informed, and to let the government be 
accountable,” Sanjer says.

Daneshyar finishes his show by calling the spokesman of Breshna Sherkat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/24/kandahar-city-usaid-afghanistan-power-project-jeopardy-sigar>
, the national power supplier, who promises the power will be reconnected by 
midday. Whether he would have said so without this nudge, nobody knows. Hours 
later, though, the power is back on.
 