
Sir Cliff Richard <https://www.theguardian.com/music/cliff-richard> is 
launching legal actions against the BBC and South Yorkshire police following 
the live broadcast of a raid by officers on his home over historical sexual 
abuse allegations.

Confirming the move on his official website <http://www.cliffrichard.org/>, 
the singer said: “My life was effectively turned upside down, and my 
reputation, worldwide, was unnecessarily damaged.”

Richard added: “In the absence of satisfactory answers, a court will determine 
whether or not their behaviour was justified and proportionate. I would not 
want the same to happen to others whether in the public eye or not.”

The singer was told by police last month that there would be no charges and 
the investigation had been dropped.

Neither the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> nor the South 
Yorkshire force has commented on the threat of legal action.

In August 2014, live images were broadcast from BBC cameras, with a helicopter 
hovering overhead as police raided Richard’s Berkshire home. The singer was in 
Portugal at the time.

In his statement, Richard said: “Whilst the police of course need to properly 
investigate allegations made to them, it is clear to me that questions need to 
be answered by both the police and the BBC about their initial handling of my 
matter, which has rightly been condemned from so many quarters, including the 
home affairs select committee, the broader press, and, even the police 
themselves.

“I chose not to comment during the active investigation for obvious reasons, 
but having suffered the experience that I have, I firmly believe that privacy 
should be respected and that police guidelines are there to be followed. That 
means that save in exceptional circumstances people should never be named 
unless and until they are charged. As everybody has accepted there were no such 
‘exceptional circumstances’ in my case.”

Cliff Richard will not face charges over sexual abuse claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/cliff-richard-will-not-face-charges-over-sexual-abuse-claims>
In an interview last month with Susanna Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/jun/22/cliff-richard-considers-legal-action-over-press-police-collusion-video>
 on ITV’s Good Morning Britain, Richard said there must have been illegal 
collusion between police and media. “I’ve never known, I don’t think, 
investigations take place with lighting and cameras and special angles for the 
helicopter – it just seemed ridiculous,” he told her.

In another ITV interview with Gloria Hunniford, Richard said the shock of 
turning on the television in Portugal to see the film of the raid on his home 
had left him “on my knees weeping in my kitchen”. Tony Blair was among those 
who phoned “straight away” to offer comfort and support, together with Sir 
Elton John and the late Cilla Black, he revealed.

Initial letters from the law firm Simkins were sent last Friday detailing 
Richard’s claim that the actions of the BBC and police caused him “unnecessary 
damage” by striking a deal to film the raid. The damage, the letters say, was 
“foreseeable and unjustified”.

He will be seeking more than £1m in damages and costs, the Mail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> claimed.

An independent police review in February 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/24/bbc-and-police-heavily-criticised-over-sir-cliff-richard-raid-coverage>
 sharply criticised the agreement in 2014 between the force and the BBC, when 
the broadcaster agreed to a one-month delay reporting on the allegations of 
historical sex abuse in return for advance notification of the raid. The 
parliamentary home affairs committee had already condemned the force’s handling 
of the case as “utterly inept”, but said the BBC was “within its rights to run 
the story”.

 * This article was corrected on 11 July 2016. Richard is being represented by 
the law firm Simkins, not Kingsley Napley as stated in a previous version.


 