
Earlier this month, an outbreak of anthrax 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/anthrax-outbreak-1.3707132> in northern 
Russia caused the death of a 12-year-old boy and his grandmother and put 90 
people in the hospital. These deadly spores – which had not been seen in the 
Arctic since 1941 – also spread to 2,300 caribou. Russian troopstrained in 
biological warfare 
<https://psmag.com/for-climate-scientists-the-siberian-anthrax-outbreak-is-a-sign-of-whats-to-come-5b73e88cdf12#.chfv7nu4y>
 were dispatched to the Yamalo-Nenets region to evacuate hundreds of the 
indigenous, nomadic people and quarantine the disease.


Americans are likely to associate anthrax with the mysterious white powder 
that was mailed to news media and US Senate offices in the weeks following 11 
September 2001. The bacteria – usually sequestered in biological weapons labs – 
killed five people and infected 17 others in themost devastating bioterrorism 
attack 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/02/19/AR2010021902369.html>
 in US history.

But in Russia, the spread of illness was not the result of bioterrorism; it 
was a result of global warming. Record-high temperatures meltedArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> permafrost and released deadly 
anthrax spores from a thawing carcass of a caribou that had been infected 75 
years ago and had stayed frozen in limbo until now. This all suggests that it 
may not be easy to predict which populations will be most vulnerable to the 
health impacts of climate change.

In 2013, the National Academy of Sciences hosted a forum on the influence of 
global environmental change on infectious diseases. In hiskeynote speech 
<http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/~/media/Files/Activity%20Files/PublicHealth/MicrobialThreats/2013-SEP-24/September2013Presentations/12Patz.pdf>
, Dr Jonathan Patz stood in front of a large slide of a mosquito and warned: 
“Global warming’s greatest threat may also be the smallest.” The forum focused 
on many causes of disease, from fungi, bacteria, viruses and mold spores, to 
vectors like bats and mosquitoes. Climate change can exacerbate the spread of 
infectious disease by changing the behavior, lifespans and regions of diseases 
and their carriers.

This can sometimes be hard to prove directly. It can be challenging, for 
example, to isolate the avenues by which climate change drives emerging 
infections in warm climates where travel, trade, land use and dense urban 
living can all lead to the spread of disease. At other times, the signal is 
bright. Looking way up north in the Arctic – where there are far fewer people, 
less travel and trade, and fewer infectious diseases – the signal that climate 
change is a source of disease outbreaks is clear.

It is usually so cold in the tundra that the ground is perennially frozen in 
deep layers that can date back 3m years. But the usual circumstances no longer 
apply at the top of the world. The Arctic is warming twice as fast as the rest 
of the globe. In fact, the area of the anthrax outbreak was18F (10C) hotter 
than average 
<http://time.com/4438396/russia-anthrax-siberia-outbreak-infected-spores/>, 
with temperatures reaching95F 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/anthrax-outbreak-climate-change-arctic-circle-russia>
 (35C). In addition to releasing ancient microbes, melting layers of permafrost 
also release methane, a greenhouse gas 30 times more potent than carbon 
dioxide, that in turn causes further warming.

It is not just animal carcasses that are thawing. Indigenous groups living in 
the tundra do not bury their dead deep underground, opting instead for wooden 
coffins arranged in above-ground cemeteries. This raises the potential for 
infections to spread from this source as well.

Could some of the severe infectious diseases that have threatened the planet 
in the past be reactivated as our northernmost regions thaw? It’s not just 
climate scientists that are concerned about the health threats of a warming 
world. Public health experts and physicians are also speaking out. The Lancet 
Commissionreleased a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/23/climate-change-threatens-50-years-of-progress-in-global-health-study-says>
 in 2015 asserting that climate change could reverse the last 50 years of 
public health advances.

As risk is added to risk, the signals of our changing climate underscore the 
urgent need to put climate change solutions in place. Even more than we know, 
our health may depend on it.
 