
At the end of last winter I noticed this tree: a slim, high horse chestnut 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/common-non-native-trees/horse-chestnut/>
 on the edge of my town. In summer its leaves gave it an hourglass shape. 
September ignited it. October, I showed my daughter its spikyconker 
<http://hellopoetry.com/words/200792/conker/poems/> capsules and the flawless 
autumn-shine of what was inside. In November’s first weeks I saw more of the 
sky through its branches each visit, its presence emaciating, the clarity of 
its skeleton crisping with every wintering day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclimbers-view-horse-chestnut-tree-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cd036af2999749f109844083c4e0bc02e73ebf2%2F0_0_4416_3312%2Fmaster%2F4416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climber%E2%80%99s%20view%20of%20a%20horse%20chestnut%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclimbers-view-horse-chestnut-tree-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climber%E2%80%99s%20view%20of%20a%20horse%20chestnut%20tree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fclimbers-view-horse-chestnut-tree-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cd036af2999749f109844083c4e0bc02e73ebf2%2F0_0_4416_3312%2Fmaster%2F4416.jpg>
 A tree smells warm even on a cold day. Photograph: Simon Ingram 
Now it’s naked of leaves, and I notice what I saw last winter: the strange 
trunk architecture, split like a tuning fork. My eyes trace each. One trunk 
lean and spurless, the other suggesting possibility. Suddenly I’m regarding 
this tree like a climber might suss a rock route, “on sight”. I find myself 
wondering how high I could climb into it, and which would give first: the 
route, or my nerve.

Winter trees are as near to rock as trees get. But trees are not like rock. 
Scale one, you scale something 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/29/uk.adventure> with the 
subtle compliance and tactility of a living thing, versus rock’s unrelenting 
austerity. Close, it smells warm even on a day that started with frost. Rock 
you grasp, fighting its cold indifference; trees you take hold of, hoist 
yourself into, embrace, balance on.

Why our hearts go out to Sherwood's ancient oak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/15/why-hearts-sherwoods-1000-year-oak-country-diary>
Rockfaces can be hundreds of times higher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/sep/30/healthandwellbeing.features>
, but here even a little height feels giddying from this novel take. I find 
myself craving a weighty ridge, instead of this teetering organic scaffold. 
Would leaves help? Probably not. The unnerving view is below my feet, not the 
outlook from the branches.

Danger asserts. Not like mountain danger, with its macho 
justification-cliches: like, the closer you are to death, the more alive you 
feel. Climb a tree in winter and you’re clinging to a thing that itself feels 
barely clinging to life. Prescient, this.According to recent media reports 
<http://conkertreescience.blogspot.co.uk/>, between leaf moth and bleeding 
canker disease, horse chestnuts could face extinction.

I climb down, and look up. From ground level it looks like just a tree looks. 
But a strange thought about the wilted leaves at my feet: I’ve climbed into 
where they fell from. I hope this tree lives to shed many more leaves. The odd 
climber, too.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 