
I had thought that the BBC’s Autumnwatch 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0079t1p> might not recover from the loss of 
Kate Humble, but I now realise that there has been a gain in strength.

One of the recent shows featured the strangely named edible dormouse 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/nature/life/Edible_dormouse>, which is not as cute as it 
looks. If you haven’t been following, the best way to conjure up the truly 
daunting edible dormouse situation is that there used to be a few of them but 
now there are zillions, threatening to eat the entire country.

The problem partly arises from the fact that an edible dormouse doesn’t look 
like that kind of creature. It is very cute, even after it has tripled in 
weight, which it can do at the drop of a hat.

With the cane toad <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cane_toads_in_Australia>, 
the Australians at least had the excuse that they knew it was uglier than sin. 
They just thought it might do some good. But the British have no such let-out 
from responsibility. They (and by they I mean all of us who live anywhere near 
the Chilterns, which includes Edinburgh if you think about it) just took one 
look at the dormouse and fell, clunk. Cuddly or what?

In the relevant show, the dormouse experts who had taken Lucy Cooke into 
dormouse territory had to keep reminding her that the tiny animal was not 
necessarily nice just because it looked like a film star. Kate Humble used to 
be harder to remind about that kind of awkward fact. Faced with animal 
pulchritude, she would coo. The animal would coo back.

Clive James: ‘I am continually reminded of what a misery guts I have been’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/22/clive-james-continually-reminded-what-a-misery-guts>
Lucy has a harder head, and the band of edible dormouse wranglers who had 
taken her out on the trail were able to get their message across, partly by 
evoking, with their grim expressions, a picture of whole swaths of Britain 
reduced to territory in which nothing but teeming thousands of edible dormice 
reign supreme, consuming a whole village for lunch.

A fabulous show, and all the more so because Chris Packham 
<http://www.chrispackham.co.uk/> is now wearing a zip-up sweater rather like 
the one I wear to bed. He is still too young for old age, but one can’t 
begrudge the fact that he has been given some of its rewards, such as the right 
to sit by the fire. One assumes that the fire is blazing inside some nice warm 
studio, whereas the lake which his subordinateMartin Hughes-Games 
<https://twitter.com/martinhgames?lang=en> stands in the middle of is 
definitely a lake. Martin has a special night-vision scanner which he holds up 
to his eyes while saying that the deer are probably over there, near those 
trees. Almost invariably they aren’t. An edible dormouse ate them.
 