
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has not yet 
been elected president, so my plans to leave the planet are still on hold. 
I might have to leave soon anyway, but I would rather not have to book my seat 
on the rocket just because some baroque narcissist in the Oval Office had 
declared atomic war on North Korea, or South Dakota, or whatever target took 
his fancy when the hottest patootie in the West Wing typing pool swerved away 
from the outstretched plea of his tiny hands.

If Trump loses, we will still not be free of his extravagantly coiffed shadow, 
because the analysis will begin as to why he lost. Nobody sane will ascribe 
Hillary’s victory to her own command of language. If either of them commands 
the language, Trump does, by sticking a short finger in its ribs and walking 
forwards until it walks backwards.

Subjected to such treatment, Hillary was rightly praised for her poise, but 
she should have told him at least once to go screw himself. As things turned 
out, the figure who really had Trump’s number wasAlec Baldwin on Saturday Night 
Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/oct/09/alec-baldwin-takes-on-trump-on-saturday-night-live-video>
. Baldwin has the wrong mouth to be Trump – Baldwin’s mouth looks like a mouth 
– but in all other respects, he was a terrifying simulacrum of the terrifying 
reality, in which, no matter how much ordnance Hillary hit him with, Trump kept 
on walking forwards, likethe robot Gort in The Day the Earth Stood Still 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cXLPFqdLPKY>.

Clive James: ‘I am continually reminded of what a misery guts I have been’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/22/clive-james-continually-reminded-what-a-misery-guts>
In pursuit of his aching pout, Baldwin kept on dialling up the inexorability, 
thereby tapping into any sane person’s deepest fear about the Donald: that he 
was built in a fully automated factory whose android engineers had studied no 
human being except a bilious infant in a cot. Those of us who used to be 
children ourselves can often only fleetingly remember that “I want” was once 
not just an imperative, it was an explanation. The world was something that 
might withhold the breast from us, unless we could threaten it with nuclear war.

But if Trump doesn’t get what he wants, the reason may well have been Michelle 
Obama.Her speech condemning him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/14/michelle-obama-full-speech-trump-video>
 was in the rhetorical league of Cicero flaying Catiline, and with better 
reason. For those few sweet moments of bathing in her reflected glory, her 
husband looked again to have been chosen wisely.

Add what she did to Trump to what Obama did to Osama bin Laden, and the 
outgoing administration might be remembered as having been a great one after 
all. The same might one day be said of Hillary’s administration. Asthe 
long-time Republican PJ O’Rourke has been explaining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/31/pj-orourke-says-blame-the-elites-for-trump-and-brexit-and-vote-for-clinton>
 so patiently when asked, we don’t have to agree with her policies to see that 
she’s got Trump beat.
 