
The BBC’s lavish, sexy, heart-rending, head-spinning and generally 
not-half-bad adaptation of Tolstoy’s vast novelWar And Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace> finished last weekend, 
so this weekend there is nothing to do except discuss whether Natasha was 
credible when she fell so suddenly for the odious Anatole Kuragin, and to start 
waiting until someone adapts it again. At my age, I doubt that I’ll live to see 
the next attempt, but I’m definitely thinking about reading the book one more 
time. It really is that good: good enough to get involved with again, even if 
it’s the last thing you do.

On a shelf near where I sit writing this, there are half a dozen different 
editions of the book, and I’ve been reading one or other of them for half my 
life. Despite the heaps of evidence that Tolstoy was in reality half crackers, 
you would swear from the pages of War And Peace that he was God’s stenographer. 
AsIsaac Babel <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Babel> said, if the world 
could write by itself, it would write like Tolstoy. So why bother with the 
screen adaptations at all? Well, there’s the sheer fun of watching thousands of 
clever people pouring millions into doing the impossible. And sometimes they 
can add a dimension to the studies of character, even though they always 
subtract a dimension from the battlefield spectacle, no matter how much they 
spend.

Man or woman, we have to be in love with Natasha, because she is life
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa604312b8ae3fb39de0fbf845306e45002c7671%2F0_0_4254_2924%2F4254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa604312b8ae3fb39de0fbf845306e45002c7671%2F0_0_4254_2924%2F4254.jpg>
 Lily James as Natasha in the BBC adaptation. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/BBC 
In the 1967, state-funded, Soviet film version directed by Sergei Bondarchuk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4SVC_9V8K5Y>, the armies were played by the 
Red Army, plus 900 horses borrowed from the Ministry of Agriculture. The 
lavishness out-lavished King Vidor’s 1956 American-Italian version, thus 
fulfilling the political aim: it was the Soviet reply in a cultural exchange of 
missiles with the west. But nowadays the CGI tricks can do an even better job 
of filling the screen to the horizon, and Bondarchuk’s ball scenes, teeming 
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k30OO5_nEWY>with costumes donated by all the 
museums of Russia, can be matched even in the eyes of those of us who saw his 
movie back there, at the height of the cold war, and thought: hell, they might 
win.

Sweeping scope, however, is only the second biggest thing that Tolstoy was 
offering. He was also concerned with the psychology of his principal 
characters, and your screenwriter, director and production staff have to do 
something about that: principally, one hopes, by not making a nonsense of the 
casting. If they can get that aspect right, the screen can be filled with 
closeup scenes that will be better than you can imagine.

Tolstoy’s gift is to draw upon what’s already in your head. But in your head 
there might be no Pierre Bezhukov except the dolt you see in the mirror, and 
over him you will always cast a gloss, usually by imagining you are really the 
broodingly taciturn Andrei Bolkonsky. On the page, Tolstoy’s limitation is you. 
On screen, the writer and director can get you into less restricted territory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d72e7e0e9388ba032fbf60a171a637cbb7ad105%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d72e7e0e9388ba032fbf60a171a637cbb7ad105%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
 Paul Dano as Pierre. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/BBC 
After Pierre (played in the BBC adaptation by the American actor Paul Dano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-dano>, with a faultless mastery of the 
whole range of dithering) came into his gigantic inheritance and set off to 
inspect his holdings with a view to spreading justice and thereby improving the 
world, there was one little scene that perfectly sums up his character. 
Noticing a woodpile stacked against a hut, and two or three bits of wood still 
lying around the chopping block, Pierre picks up the two or three bits and adds 
them to the pile. Then he dusts his hands and lies down, plainly to dream about 
the sanctity of honest labour.

Paul Dano on acting, love and embarrassing parents: 'They have way too many 
pictures of me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/paul-dano-acting-love-war-and-peace>
In half a minute you have had it proved to you that Pierre’s ineffectual 
sensitivity will always sabotage his ideals. From both the adapter,Andrew Davies
 <https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2006/may/07/magazine.features7>, and 
the director, Tom Harper, this is sterling work: I marvelled at it, and forgave 
Davies his earlier, almost fatal boldness in making Pierre’s bad choice of 
wife, Hélène (Tuppence Middleton), a livelier character than Natasha (Lily 
James). Besides, Natasha revved up nicely in the later stages, and I quite saw 
how her impatience to get her sex life started might have impelled her to seek 
initiation elsewhere when Andrei (James Norton) so strangely obeyed his mad 
father and put off the marriage for a year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d67e6e61f5f8d99094625222289d603308536fc%2F0_0_4262_2842%2F4262.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d67e6e61f5f8d99094625222289d603308536fc%2F0_0_4262_2842%2F4262.jpg>
 James Norton as Andrei. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC 
It was quite believable that Natasha thought a year was an eternity. Harder to 
believe was that she found Anatole an acceptable substitute as an object for 
her hot-blooded longings. From certain angles, he might have had a facial bone 
structure not notably inferior to that of the current Duke of Cambridge, but 
his general demeanour was of some well-connected lout who had failed the 
intelligence test for entry to the Bullingdon club.

Still, the near-success of Anatole’s ravishing foray against Natasha’s virtue 
worked repellently well as further proof of the insinuating malignity of 
Anatole’s sister, the dreaded Hélène. Perhaps Davies had not made such a 
mistake after all in giving Hélène an active brain, instead of the head of bone 
she was given by Tolstoy. On the page, her greatest mental feat is to adore her 
own arm. I’m sure Tom Harper would have liked to film that, too, but Davies had 
sent the subplot in another direction: while Hélène may very well be in love 
mainly with herself, she is also compelled to fling herself beneath the 
sinister Dolokhov, and her dumb brother, and possibly any Welsh-born 
scriptwriter attached to theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> who 
might be passing through Russia at the time.

The new screen version cast Jessie Buckley as a Cinderella who blossomed into 
one of the loveliest women on the screen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b3c285e04d412be03cd8c970ead4d634509514f%2F0_0_4268_2845%2F4268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b3c285e04d412be03cd8c970ead4d634509514f%2F0_0_4268_2845%2F4268.jpg>
 Jessie Buckley as Marya. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC 
People who accuse Davies of being too interested in sex, however, should 
remember that Tolstoy himself was capable of conceiving a whole epic in the 
form of a beauty contest. That, partly, is what War And Peace is: and although 
it is often more, it is never less. Tolstoy, to paint his Veronese-sized 
picture of thedvoriantsvo (the Russian upper class), was looking back to a time 
when he was not yet born; but when he was writing the book, the noble marriage 
market was still going on all around him and he knew all about it. Above all, 
he knew that it wasn’t just a stock market, it was a meat market. Female beauty 
was a currency. In his text he was ruthless about having old Bolkonsky tell his 
daughter Marya that she was no looker and that nobody would want to marry her. 
(The new screen version was less ruthless in casting Jessie Buckley as a 
Cinderella who gradually blossomed into one of the loveliest women on the 
screen.) Finally, Tolstoy says, personality counts most; but initially, he 
admits, sexual attraction rules.

It follows that any screen version must be concerned with appearances. The 
King Vidor version still has power becauseAudrey Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/19/cult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic>
, even though already 10 years too old to be a teenager, was a credible 
Natasha. It was incredible that she should be passionate about Andrei, but that 
was because the studio had put the wrong actor into Andrei’s boots and tight 
pants. (Critics who called Mel Ferrer a block of wood were underrating the 
charisma of a block of wood.) And the miscasting of Andrei made it easier when 
she finally discovered her love of Pierre, who was even more wildly miscast: 
the incurable ditherer was played by Henry Fonda, the coolest man in creation. 
(Though he was given a pair of prop specs to wear in order to denote 
uncertainty, he moved, as always, with the grace of a stalking leopard.) She 
would have been crazy about him from the jump, and the story would have lasted 
20 minutes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWgC38YZzQ-c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWgC38YZzQ-c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWgC38YZzQ-c&media=>
 The trailer for the 1956 film starring Audrey Hepburn, Henry Fonda and Mel 
Ferrer 
Every scene of the story in which Natasha appears is a key scene, but the 
supreme key scene is Natasha at the ball, where we must believe that she will 
die if not asked to dance, and we must cheer like football fans when Andrei 
crosses the floor to take her hand. In the Bondarchuk version, she is a bit of 
a pudding, but there is a voiceover to give us her thoughts. If he had been 
able to cast his daughter Natalya (she later played the indestructible revenant 
wife made of neutrinos in Tarkovsky’s Solaris), his Natasha might have been 
more electrifying.

Whichever gender we may be, we have to be in love with Natasha ourselves, 
because she is life, about whose fleeting nature Tolstoy had been preoccupied 
since he first dodged bullets among the bastions at Sebastopol. So not only 
must Natasha be a knockout, she must have the imaginative hunger of, well, of a 
novelist. Merely to be bursting with young vitality won’t do the trick. When the
20-part 1972 BBC
version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EAPe8KT-WYM> hit the screen, as a 
fledgling TV critic I was cruel toMorag Hood 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0393506/?ref_=tt_cl_t2> when I said that her 
performance made me want to throw a tarpaulin over her and peg down the 
corners. I should have blamed the director, who had obviously told her to 
bounce up and down at all times in order to convey exuberance. But Natasha is 
more than just an explosion of vigour, just as Andrei is more than a grim face. 
In that same production,Alan Dobie 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0229668/?ref_=tt_cl_t3> as Andrei was grim enough 
to send you to sleep, butAnthony Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> was a perfect Pierre: a real 
tribute to his acting, because his default mode is to be in command, like 
Hannibal Lecter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSYXbz49zD0c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSYXbz49zD0c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSYXbz49zD0c&media=>
 Clémence Poésy and Alexander Beyer in the 2007 adaptation 
One could go on talking about the actors, because acting is where text meets 
image, and each reminds you about the blessed existence of the other. Whether 
they can ever be fully reconciled is a moot point, but in real life there is no 
stopping the argument, to which we bring any weapon we can. I would have liked 
to bring in the 2007 Russian-Italian-French four-part version that was shown 
everywhere in Europe except here, but you probably won’t have seen it. (If you 
want to, you can 
 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=war+and+peace+2007+episode+1&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&gfe_rd=cr&ei=iVezVvGKHpK6cobcjtgC#q=war+and+peace+2007&tbm=vid>
piece it together from four chunks on YouTube, although you might have to wade 
through Portuguese subtitles while you strain to hear the dialogue, spoken in 
English but not always by the actors on screen.) The production makesMalcolm 
McDowell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/nov/01/2> play old Bolkonsky as 
outright nasty, which I think works better than makingJim Broadbent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jim-broadbent>, in our version, play him 
as lovably gaga. Tolstoy wrote him as both, but a screen version has to scale 
down the psychological complexity.

Hence it must choose carefully the personae of incarnation, and it is with all 
respect to Lily James that I call the wonderfully named French actorClémence 
Poésy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/oct/06/clemence-poesy-scandi-crime-the-tunnel>
, in the 2007 version, a Natasha from heaven – which is where Tolstoy thought 
he always was when he was struck by beauty, although he was equally prone to 
regarding lust as a glimpse of hell. He not only thought he was in love with 
any Natasha he met. He thought hewas Natasha; just as he wished he was Andrei, 
feared he might be Pierre, remembered when he was Nikolai, and had his moments 
of wondering whether he might be Anatole, not to mention Dolokhov.

Tolstoy’s greatest book is the way it is because he thought he was everybody. 
He had pretensions to philosophy – screen versions sensibly leave all that out 
– but his universality was not just intellectual, it was instinctive. No human 
feeling was unknown to him, but looking at the pictures can give you only some 
of that: you have to read the words.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F277048596334b8418c04fa6634183e4c099b2660%2F0_0_4233_2939%2F4233.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clive%20James%3A%20how%20did%20the%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20War%20And%20Peace%20measure%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F13%2Fclive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F277048596334b8418c04fa6634183e4c099b2660%2F0_0_4233_2939%2F4233.jpg>
 Tom Burke as Dolokhov. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/BBC 
And so, with my expectations of further life as tenuous as those of old 
Bolkonsky falling off his horse, I search my shelf for the copy to read yet 
again. Two are in Russian, and one of those is the Soviet four-volume edition 
from 1962, the year of the Cuban missile crisis. Long ago I taught myself 
Russian by reading it with a dictionary alongside. By now I have forgotten the 
entire language; but learning it wasn’t as hard as you might think, because 
when Russian literature all began at once in the 19th century, the European 
fairy stories were all transcribed into the local language by the great 
writers, so The Three Bears is by Tolstoy.

But no, the old translation into English by Louise and Aylmer Maude (it was 
usefully updated in 2010) will still do fine. Wade once more through the 
society gossip of the opening salon and you will soon meet them all again: the 
dazzling children and their dying parents, and all of them even more magnetic 
than you saw them on screen, because they are taking you back into the epic of 
your own life.

• The BBC’s latest War And Peace is available as a download 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p039wcdk/products>, or on DVD 
<http://www.bbcshop.com/pre-orders/war+peace-dvd/invt/bbcdvd4074> or Blu-Ray 
<http://www.bbcshop.com/box-sets/war+peace-blu-ray/invt/bbcbd0329>.

To read more articles like this, get your copy of Weekend magazine, free this 
Saturday with the Guardian. Clickhere 
<http://imvoucher.uk/Templates/go/register.aspx?utm_source=Email&utm_medium=Email%20&utm_term=Jan%20campaign%20&utm_campaign=Jan%20campaign>
 for £1 off the newspaper.

 