
Some 125 years after selling its first life insurance product, the 
Co-operative is to pull out of the business, axing 750 sales experts.

In a move that infuriated the union Unite, Co-op is to copy the model used by 
Britannia,with which it merged in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/21/britannia-cooperative-banks-building-societies>
, to use French insurer Axa to provide its insurance products in future.

At the same, the Co-op is in talks to sell its £15bn life insurance fund and 
its Co-operative Asset Management arm to Royal London.

The announcements were made on Friday by Co-operative Financial Services, the 
financial services arm of the Co-operative group.

David Fleming, Unite national officer, said: "Unite has expressed to 
Co-operative Financial Services (CFS) disagreement with the decision to cease 
to provide life assurance products. The 750 employees potentially affected by 
this news will be deeply concerned and upset. Unite has already made clear that 
the decision to cease to be a provider of life assurance products is a very sad 
and monumental moment in the history of CFS, formerly known to many as 
Co-operativeInsurance <https://www.theguardian.com/money/insurance> Society, 
and the whole of the co-operative movement.

"Unite is now pushing for redeployment options wherever possible and, where 
this is not possible, for all involved to be treated fairly during the 
process," Fleming said.

The decision was taken after a 20-month review and comes as CFS ploughs £700m 
into its banking operations. It currently has 90 Co-op Bank branches and 248 
from Britannia and intends to look at ways of selling more financial products 
through the 3,500-strong network of Co-op corner shops up and down the country.

Neville Richardson, chief executive of CFS, said: "We understand that such 
news may be difficult for impacted colleagues and we have not reached this 
outcome lightly. However, we were faced with rising regulatory costs in a 
business which was increasingly becoming sub-scale. This move supports our 
strategy to focus our specific attention on our banking and general insurance 
areas, where we have a growing and strongly differentiated competitive 
position."

Axa will now provide financial advice across the CFS businesses and 82 Co-op 
staff currently working in branches will move over toAxa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa>. But the 670 employed in its 
"field-based advisory team" will lose their jobs. While they were no longer 
collecting insurance premiums, they provided financial advice in customers' 
homes.

Co-op is not alone in altering the way it sells insurance products. Barclays 
has shut its financial planning arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jan/26/barclays-to-shed-1000-jobs>, 
saying customers were increasing buying products online rather than in branches.

The CFS will maintain its general insurance arm.
 