
The pension funds of millions of people across the world, including teachers, 
public sector workers, health staff and academics in the UK and US, are heavily 
exposed to the plummeting coal sector, a Guardian analysis has revealed.

It has also found that just a dozen people, including the owner of Chelsea FC, 
Roman Abramovich <https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, own coal 
reserves equivalent to the annual carbon emissions of China, the world’s 
biggest polluter. The UN, which advocates a shift to clean energy, has more 
than $100m (£65m) invested in coal through its own pension fund.

Roman Abramovich among 'dirty dozen' people with biggest stakes in coal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/15/roman-abramovich-among-dirty-dozen-people-with-biggest-stakes-in-coal>
The Guardian examined the ownership of the biggest 50 publicly traded coal 
companies, ranked by the reserves of the fossil fuel they hold. If burned, 
these reserves would produce the equivalent of more than 10 years of global 
emissions. This alone couldpush the planet past beyond the 2C of climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/keep-it-in-the-ground-blog/2015/mar/25/what-numbers-tell-about-how-much-fossil-fuel-reserves-cant-burn>
 deemed dangerous by the world’s governments.

A fast-growing, global fossil fuel divestment <http://gofossilfree.org/> 
movement,backed by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/01/guardian-media-group-to-divest-its-800m-fund-from-fossil-fuels>
’s Keep it in the Ground campaign, is having particular success in persuading 
investors to dump coal stocks. The world’s largest sovereign wealth fund, held 
by Norway, decided earlier this month tosell off more than $8bn of coal assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/05/norways-pension-fund-to-divest-8bn-from-coal-a-new-analysis-shows>
.

The World Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/speech/2014/01/23/world-bank-group-president-jim-yong-kim-remarks-at-davos-press-conference>
 and theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/13/mark-carney-fossil-fuel-reserves-burned-carbon-bubble>
 have both warned that global action to cut carbon emissions could render 
fossil fuel reserves worthless, as analyses show most must remain in the 
ground. Coal, the most polluting fuel, is particularly at risk and investment 
bank Goldman Sachs declared in January the fuel had reached “retirement age”. A 
crunch UN summit in December is tasked with agreeing aninternational climate 
change deal <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/global-climate-talks>.

The coal price has crashed by 60% since 2011, as gas, renewable energy and 
climate policies have damaged demand. Tom Sanzillo, a former New York State 
comptroller who oversaw a $156bn pension fund, said: “Coal is arguably the 
worst performing sector in the whole world. Pension funds, which have a 
fiduciary duty to make money, have no business owning any of these companies. 
It is not a prospective risk, it is a now risk.”

“The coal sector is falling into a financial death spiral,” said Mark 
Campanale, founder of theCarbon Tracker Initiative 
<http://www.carbontracker.org/>, which has pioneered analysis of the financial 
risks of fossil fuels. “The members of university, healthcare and UN pension 
funds are smart and informed people; they will be shocked to discover just how 
far exposed their funds are to coal investment risk.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcoal-crash-how-pension-funds-face-huge-risk-from-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434036842407%2F392cf788-5c0d-45f1-aad2-7f686a486ac7-1396x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coal%20crash%3A%20how%20pension%20funds%20face%20huge%20risk%20from%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcoal-crash-how-pension-funds-face-huge-risk-from-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coal%20crash%3A%20how%20pension%20funds%20face%20huge%20risk%20from%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcoal-crash-how-pension-funds-face-huge-risk-from-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434036842407%2F392cf788-5c0d-45f1-aad2-7f686a486ac7-1396x2040.jpeg>
 Workers prepare a Soviet-made rotary dredge at the Beryozovsky opencast 
colliery, near the Siberian town of Sharypovo in Krasnoyarsk region, Russia. 
Photograph: Ilya Naymushin/Reuters 
The Guardian analysis has uncovered large coal holdings by some of the world’s 
largest pension funds, with the largest held by South Africa’sPublic Investment 
Corporation <http://www.pic.gov.za/> (PIC), which provides government pensions 
for millions. It has an $8bn stake which represents a huge 6.1% of all its 
funds: most large funds have significantly less than 1%.

Other pension funds with significant coal stakes include: APG 
<http://www.apg.nl/en> ($1.7bn), which provides pensions for one in five 
families in the Netherlands;TIAA-CREF 
<https://www.tiaa-cref.org/public/index.html> ($838), the US pensions giant 
which serves 5 million teachers and theCanadian Pension Plan Investment Board 
<http://www.cppib.com/en/home.html> (CPPIB - $590m), which provide the 
country’s state pension for 18 million people.

In the UK, the £48bn Universities Superannuation Scheme 
<http://www.uss.co.uk/Pages/default.aspx> (USS), which provides pensions for 
330,000 university and college staff, has a substantial stake in the top 50 
coal companies, as do six local authority pensions funds includingWest Yorkshire
 <http://www.wypf.org.uk/>. In the US, 25 public sector pension funds have 
investments in the the top 50 coal companies, spread from California to 
Alabama, Ohio and New York.

The analysis used data from Reuters retrieved on 25 April 2015 to determine 
the ownership of the top 50 publicly traded coal companies, as ranked byFossil 
Free Indexes <http://fossilfreeindexes.com/research/the-carbon-underground/> on 
the basis of the coal reserves held by each company.

A spokesman for APG, one of the largest pension funds in the world, said: “We 
have declined several new coal investments in the past year and reduced our 
exposure in a number of coal companies. We expect that our exposure to coal 
will decline over time.” PIC, TIAA-CREF, CPPIB and the UN pension fund did not 
respond to requests for comment.

A spokeswoman for USS, one of the UK’s biggest pension funds, said it been 
working for more than a decade to have climate change recognised as a risk 
factor by institutional investors. It has $322m invested in mining companies 
Anglo American, Glencore and Rio Tinto, but argues coal is a minor part of 
their business. However, the three companies have combined coal reserves are 
almost equivalent to the entire world’s annual carbon emissions.

The Guardian’s analysis of individuals with large stakes in top 50 coal 
companies was led by Vinod Shantilal Adani, whose $900m stake in Indian coal 
giantAdani Enterprises <http://www.adani.com/>, means he owns coal reserves 
that will produce 2GT of carbon dioxide when burned, the same as all of India’s 
1.2 billion people produce in a year.

Second is Abramovich, whose $766m stake in steel and mining company Evraz 
<https://www.evraz.com/> gives him a large share in Russia’s largest coal mine 
and the equivalent of 1.5GT of carbon emissions, not far short of the annual 
output of Russia itself. Another of the seven Russian oligarchs in the “dirty 
dozen” list is Suleiman Kerimov, with investments equivalent to 0.922GT of CO2. 
Kerimov is known for hiring stars including Beyonce and Shakira to sing at his 
parties and for owning one of the world’s largest privateyachts 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yachts>.

Many of the largest stakes in the top 50 coal companies are held by asset 
management companies and BlackRock, the world’s biggest asset manager, leads 
this list with $24.6bn. But the Guardian analysis shows thatBlackRock 
<http://www.blackrock.com/>’s holding represents 0.65% of its total assets, a 
proportion that is over 50 times greater than the world’s second biggest asset 
manager,Allianz <https://www.allianz.com/en/>. 

Also heavily invested in coal is the largest manager of UK pension assets, 
Legal & General <http://www.legalandgeneral.com/>. Whilst L&G are the 24th 
biggest asset manager in the world, they have the fourth largest coal stake, 
with $3.3bn in the top 50 companies, representing 0.51% of its total assets. 
Coal is similarly high in the funds held by Aberdeen Asset Management.

South Africa’s private investment companies, like the government pension fund, 
are very heavily invested in coal.Allan Gray <http://www.allangray.com/>, the 
nation’s largest privately owned asset manager has $3.2bn in the top 50 coal 
companies, representing a 8.0% of all the assets it manages. It has a large 
stake inSasol <http://www.sasol.com/>, which owns six coal mines in South 
Africa.

Among these asset managers, only Allianz responded to requests for comment. 
Managing director Karsten Löffler said: “We take the move to alternative energy 
sources and climate protection very seriously. It is in our interest to assist 
the energy sector, which drives forward the global economy, with an orderly 
transition to an environmentally-friendly economy.”
graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/06/coal_pension_funds-zip/giv-21277IWLiNjkI0i4I>
Some large insurance companies also have substantial stakes in the top 50 coal 
companies, including the state-owned giant Life Insurance Corporation of India 
which has $5.6bn invested. French company Axa has a big insurance business and 
the group has $2.6bn invested in the top 50 coal companies, but recently 
committed to sell a fifth of those coal assets. In March, the Bank of England 
warned thatinsurance companies could suffer a “huge hit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/03/bank-of-england-warns-of-financial-risk-from-fossil-fuel-investments>
 if their investments in fossil fuel companies are rendered worthless by action 
to tackle climate change.

Joining BlackRock and South Africa’s PIC in the top five coal investors 
overall are the government of India ($46.5bn), via its interest in its 
state-owned coal and power station companies, Valepar, the majority owner of 
Brazilian mining giant Vale, and the Aluminium Corporation ofChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, which owns $9bn of Rio Tinto shares. 


Campanale said coal companies faced serious challenges: “Sometime soon, the 
coal chairmen will be facing their own ‘Sepp Blatter moment’. They may be in 
power, but institutional support is withering away. Investors are realising the 
business models and future assumptions of big coal are fundamentally flawed.”

Sanzillo, now at the US-based Institute for Energy Economics and Financial 
Analysis <http://ieefa.org/>, said there was no real prospect of recovery for 
an industry whose the main market measure, the Stowe index, had fallen by 75% 
since 2012. “Coal is not making money, not talking to you, there’s no turn 
around strategy and there’s an international climate conversation of which they 
want no part – so you divest.”



Pension funds

Dozens of pension funds around the world are invested in the top 50 publicly 
traded coal companies, according to a Guardian analysis. South Africa’s Public 
Investment Corporation Limited (PIC), which provides pensions for many of the 
nation’s public sector workers, has the largest stake with $8bn invested.

This is largely due to a $5.6bn stake in Sasol, which owns six coal mines in 
South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, but whose share 
price has fallen 40% in a year. Overall PIC’s coal investments represent a 7.5% 
of all its assets.

“They have put a political constraint on their investment which should not be 
there – it is definitely an overexposure,” said Tom Sanzillo, a former New York 
State comptroller who oversaw a $156bn pension fund. He said those responsible 
for the fund needed to act: “The fiduciaries need to say: ‘We are losing money 
and we want out’.”

The second highest stake among pension funds in the top 50 coal companies is 
owned by Dutch pensions giant APG, which provides pension for one in five 
families in the Netherlands, including teachers, public sector workers and 
medical staff. It has $1.7bn invested in 26 of the coal companies but is 
reducing its coal exposure.

TIAA-CREF, the US pensions firm which serves 5 million teachers, doctors and 
academics, has $838m in 30 of the top 50 coal companies, while the Canadian 
Pension Plan Investment Board, which provide the country’s state pension for 18 
million people, has $590m invested the companies. The pension fund with the 
fifth biggest stake in the top 50 coal companies is another Dutch provider, 
PGGM, which serves 1.5m people and has $399m in the coal firms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcoal-crash-how-pension-funds-face-huge-risk-from-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434364401671%2F08cd0f14-d46d-4492-94e4-ddc8fda51ade-2060x1397.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coal%20crash%3A%20how%20pension%20funds%20face%20huge%20risk%20from%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcoal-crash-how-pension-funds-face-huge-risk-from-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coal%20crash%3A%20how%20pension%20funds%20face%20huge%20risk%20from%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fcoal-crash-how-pension-funds-face-huge-risk-from-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F15%2F1434364401671%2F08cd0f14-d46d-4492-94e4-ddc8fda51ade-2060x1397.jpeg>
 Coal is moved on a conveyor belt at the PT Bukit Asam open pit coal mine in 
Tanjung Enim, South Sumatra province, Indonesia. Photograph: Dadang Tri/Getty 
Images 
The United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund also invests in the top 50 coal 
companies – $106m – despite the clear message sent to investors made by 
secretary generalBan Ki-Moon in November 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/02/rapid-carbon-emission-cuts-severe-impact-climate-change-ipcc-report>
: “Please reduce your investments in the coal- and fossil fuel-based economy 
and [move] to renewable energy.”

Seven UK public sector pension funds have investments in the top 50 coal 
companies, led by the Universities Superannuation Scheme (USS) with $322m. The 
USS provides pensions for 330,000 university and college staff.

The West Yorkshire Pension Fund has a particularly high proportion of assets 
in the top 50 coal companies, with its $215m stake comprising 1.3% of all its 
assets. Other UK public sector pension funds with stakes in the top 50 coal 
companies are West Midlands, South Yorkshire, East Riding, Nottinghamshire and 
Lincolnshire pension funds.

In the US, 25 public sector pension funds have investments in the the top 50 
coal companies, spread from California to Alabama, Ohio and New York. The giant 
California Public Employees’ Retirement System (Calpers) is the largest, with 
$298m invested, including stakes in companies that have used the controversial 
mountain-top removal method to mine coal, including Arch Coal, Alpha Natural 
Resources and ConsolEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>.

The Teacher Retirement System of Texas is the next largest US public sector 
pension fund investing in the top 50 coal companies, with $105m.
graph 2 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/06/coal_asset_management-zip/giv-21277ZKmYdAamHcU6>
Asset managers

The world’s 10 biggest asset management companies have widely varying stakes 
in the top 50 coal companies, according to a Guardian analysis.

BlackRock, the world’s largest asset management firm has $24.5bn, representing 
about 0.65% of all its assets. But the company with the second largest assets 
under management, Allianz, has just 0.012% of its funds invested in the 50 
biggest coal companies, more than 50 times less than BlackRock.

Vanguard, the third largest asset management company, is like BlackRock 
relatively heavily invested in the top 50 coal companies, with 0.277%. Among 
the rest of the 10 biggest asset-holding companies, State Street Global, Axa and
JP Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jpmorgan> have about twice the 
exposure to the top 50 coal companies of Fidelity, Bank of New York Mellon, BNP 
Paribas and Deutsche Bank.

A spokesman for US-based Vanguard said 70% of its funds simply tracked 
indices. He said the Vanguard staff actively managing the other 30% “are 
charged with producing the highest investment returns possible. We do not 
require, or even expect, our advisers to make investment decisions based on 
social or political issues.”

Axa recently announced it will sell off €500m ($550m) of stocks from the 
€500bn fund it directly controls, targeting the companies whose business is 
more than 50% coal. But a spokesman said: “Given the dependency of many people 
and sectors of the world’s economy on coal, Axa is not a proponent of what is 
being called a “disorderly withdrawal from coal”. He saidAxa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa> would also increase its green 
investments to €3bn by 2020.

A spokesman for BNP Paribas said: “We are not a major investor in coal 
companies worldwide. We are fully aware that our financing and investment 
activities can have significant social and environmental consequences.” 
BlackRock, State Street Global and JP Morgan did not respond to requests for 
comment.

The Guardian’s analysis used data from Reuters retrieved on 25 April 2015 to 
determine the ownership of the top 50 publicly traded coal companies, as ranked 
byFossil Free Indexes 
<http://fossilfreeindexes.com/research/the-carbon-underground/> on the basis of 
the coal reserves held by each company.










 