
If the Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> bows 
to backbench pressure to lift the lifetime superannuation contributions cap 
from $500,000 to $750,000 it could cost the budget more than the existing 
regime, parliamentary budget office (PBO) analysis has shown.

The analysis, conducted for the Greens in November – before the Coalition 
proposed changes – modelled three options for lifetime caps on non-concessional 
superannuation contributions: $500,000, $600,000 and $800,000.


It found for $600,000 and $800,000, the amount saved by the government would 
be wiped out by more contributions being tipped into superannuation accounts to 
take advantage of the tax benefits.


“Under options 2 ($600,000) and 3 ($800,000), the additional contributions 
from the one-off contributors would be expected to exceed the reduction in 
contributions from regular contributors,” the PBO said.


“In these options, a net increase in superannuation funds under management 
would be expected, resulting in an increase in concessionally taxed 
superannuation earnings (and a corresponding decrease in capital income 
attracting personal income tax).”


Scott Morrison rejects backbench call for $1m non-concessional super cap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/22/scott-morrison-rejects-backbench-call-for-1m-non-concessional-super-cap>
The PBO found that under the current proposed $500,000 cap there would be a 
decrease in the amount of super contributions, meaning more money would be 
taxed at higher personal income rates instead of lower superannuation rates.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, has said a 
$500,000 cap would save the budget $550m over four years.

The PBO also found raising the lifetime cap above $500,000 would affect a 
“relatively small proportion of individuals”. 


“Of those aged 55 or over in 2013-14, just 12% of non-concessional 
contributions were made by individuals who had contributed more than $500,000, 
and only 6% were made by individuals who had contributed more than $800,000,” 
the analysis said.

As the costing was completed in November 2015 – before the government’s 
proposed changes to superannuation announced in the 2016 budget – the analysis 
assumed the policy would start in July 2016 and would apply to contributions 
made after 1 July 2006.

The Coalition’s current policy, as announced in the budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/superannuation-coalition-tighter-tax-concessions-budget-wealthiest>
, would start in July 2017 and the lifetime cap is backdated to 2007.

“Advice from the parliamentary budget offices suggests that increasing the 
lifetime cap could actually see the government lose revenue,” Greens MPAdam 
Bandt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> told Guardian 
Australia.


“It beggars belief that the government could put forward a measure that could 
cost the budget money and make the superannuation system less fair.


“I am concerned that the government is intent on giving even more money to 
high-income earners just to appease hard-right conservative backbenchers.”


Morrison has consistently argued that the government’s proposals to cut back 
generous superannuation concessions for high-income earners are fair, 
particularly given the Coalition is making cuts to family tax benefits 
affecting low-income earners.

But some Coalition backbenchers, primarily supporters of the former prime 
minister, Tony Abbott, have criticised the policy, saying it lost votes at the 
election. They include the former Abbott government minister Eric Abetz and the 
Queensland MP George Christensen.


As a result, Morrison has been trying to broker a compromise and there have 
beenreports 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/treasury/liberal-mps-warm-to-scott-morrisons-super-tradeoff/news-story/d9033993a8542eb165b5728e89eb7be2>
 he is considering raising the cap to $750,000 after briefings with the 
backbench.


Labor supports superannuation reform but remains opposed to backdating the 
lifetime cap policy to 2007.


Labor’s finance spokesman, Jim Chalmers, said Labor would not commit until it 
saw the Coalition’s superannuation legislation.


Super reforms are good policy. The Coalition’s integrity is at stake if it 
rejects them | Ian Yates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/super-reforms-are-good-policy-the-coalitions-integrity-is-at-stake-if-it-rejects-them>
“We’ll wait and see what the government puts on the table at the end of the 
day,” Chalmers told the ABC. “People know that we’re up for a proper 
conversation about the tax concessions at the top end of superannuation.”

The Greens have yet to announce their final position on the Coalition’s 
superannuation policy, but do not consider backdating contributions to be 
retrospective.


“We don’t necessarily accept the characterisation of the government proposals 
as retrospective,” Bandt said. “To say you’ll still get a tax break but it 
might be less than anticipated in the future is not necessarily retrospective.”

The Coalition requires nine votes from other parties or independents in the 
Senate to pass any policy change and the Greens have been considered most 
likely to support the changes, given their stance on the retrospectivity.


But the Greens are increasingly concerned the government will water down the 
proposals.

“Treasurer Scott Morrison must come clean and release any advice from Treasury 
about whether an increased lifetime cap would save any money at all, or in fact 
come at a cost to the budget,” Bandt said.

“The government is looking in the wrong place for super reforms. There are 
billions of dollars in potential revenue available by reining in the generous 
concessions given to the very wealthy when they contribute to super in the 
first place.”
 