
Anyone who has ever watched Prime Minister’s Questions, heard a budget speech 
or listened to a party manifesto will be familiar with the ritualistic slogan 
speak used to deliver policy positions in easy, bite-sized measures. It is this 
overly simplistic delivery that prevents engagement with the actual policies of 
our political administration. It writes us out of our own story through 
generalisation. No one can interact meaningfully with a monocultural, 
political-performance factory, riddled with pretence and convention, because it 
means nothing. When words are so cleverly disengaged from their meaning to 
prevent reaction or counterpoint, it remains impossible to fully understand how 
such soundbites might relate to the reality of living.

Theatre: the nation’s debating chamber
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/06/political-theatre-nations-debating-chamber>
When Rosana Cade, Laura Bradshaw and I set out to make a show to highlight our 
disenchantment with this state of affairs, we decided to use words from actual 
Tory party conference speeches. In our piece, Cock and Bull, the material of 
party rhetoric is composed, patterned, repeated and developed until we exhaust 
both the words themselves and our capability to say them.

The process began with watching all the speeches from the 2014 Conservative 
party conference. In full. I had never heard so much political speak 
back-to-back before and, reaching the end moments of the conference, I felt 
overwhelmed by the presentation of mostly white, male, middle-aged, privileged 
voices, stuck in the blatant repetitions of catchphrase, motto and tag line.

We are the party of hard-working people! Returning fairness to the system! Fix 
the roof while the sun is shining!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fcock-and-bull-political-slogans-rosana-cade-laura-bradshaw-nic-green%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1472e6576f6ed37edfda0e6652b9cce0e443117c%2F38_638_4306_2583%2F4306.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cock%20and%20Bull%3A%20how%20we%20turned%20Tory%20conference%20speeches%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fcock-and-bull-political-slogans-rosana-cade-laura-bradshaw-nic-green%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cock%20and%20Bull%3A%20how%20we%20turned%20Tory%20conference%20speeches%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fcock-and-bull-political-slogans-rosana-cade-laura-bradshaw-nic-green%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1472e6576f6ed37edfda0e6652b9cce0e443117c%2F38_638_4306_2583%2F4306.jpg>
 George Osborne at the Conservative party annual conference at Manchester 
Central in 2015. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
I was first invited to create Cock and Bull by the Arches 
<http://www.thearches.co.uk/> venue (sadly now closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/10/arches-glasgow-theatre-closure>
) in Glasgow. I wanted to create a piece for the eve of the 2015 general 
election, responding to what I was hearing from the voices in power. I wanted 
to find a space for the frustrations and alienation that I and so many were 
feeling. With the ballots opening hours after the performance, we thought of it 
as a potential exorcism of sorts – spitting, chanting and drawling these words 
out of our bodies. The audience was energised and optimistic, teetering on the 
brink of potential shift. Many of the Scottish left were still wounded by the 
outcome of the independence referendum, but rejuvenated by the hope for change 
at the ballots the following day. The morning did indeed bring about a shift in 
Scotland (with Conservative votes almost non-existent), but on turning on the 
radio I cried at the news of a Tory victory.

Making this work had only reinforced how polarised I felt in relation to these 
men in navy suits, telling me repeatedly of a “land of opportunity for all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/02/david-camerons-speech-at-the-conservative-conference-politics-live-blog>
”, which most of us will never see.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fcock-and-bull-political-slogans-rosana-cade-laura-bradshaw-nic-green%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd58683c37494c0e1755506bf61af3720b3a295d2%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cock%20and%20Bull%3A%20how%20we%20turned%20Tory%20conference%20speeches%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fcock-and-bull-political-slogans-rosana-cade-laura-bradshaw-nic-green%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cock%20and%20Bull%3A%20how%20we%20turned%20Tory%20conference%20speeches%20into%20theatre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fcock-and-bull-political-slogans-rosana-cade-laura-bradshaw-nic-green%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd58683c37494c0e1755506bf61af3720b3a295d2%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘I felt overwhelmed by the presentation of mostly white, male, middle-aged, 
privileged voices.’ Photograph: Julia-Kristina Bauer 
A year on, we are not on the brink of another general election, and this 
month’s polls tolda different story of the Conservatives in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2016/may/09/scottish-tories-benefit-and-labour-flounder-as-snp-vote-shifts-to-cities>
. The context for this work is changing all the time, and so must the piece. 
However, at its core, it remains about trying to find a way through a system 
that you feel does not represent you. What do you do when you feel your voice 
goes unheard?


I can recall times where I have witnessed voices used to undermine or silence 
others with seeming effortlessness. In many instances I have seen this done by 
men who wished to exert their intellect or privilege (a phenomenon brilliantly 
captured in Rebecca Solnit’s essayMen Explain Things to Me 
<https://www.guernicamag.com/daily/rebecca-solnit-men-explain-things-to-me/> or 
characterised inDavid Cameron’s famous “Calm down, dear” moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/apr/27/david-cameron-calm-down-dear>
). While a tool for beauty and transcendence, with the means to communicate our 
deepest and most vulnerable selves, the voice can also be a dangerous and 
damaging weapon.

If Cock and Bull is a kind of exorcism, then we are purging an inner-life 
possessed by the very darkest of shadows: repeated alienation, 
misrepresentation and disenchantment. This feels more meaningful, empowering 
and effective than many of the crosses I have drawn on ballot papers in recent 
years.

 * Cock and Bull <http://www.artsadmin.co.uk/events/3867> is at Toynbee 
Studios, London, 20-21 May. Box office: 020-7650 2350.
 