
What links the suspected murder of China-based British businessman, Neil 
Heywood, with thepart-publication of long-hidden colonial files  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/apr/18/britain-destroyed-records-colonial-crimes>
from the last decade of the British empire? Why, Foreign Office and M16 
secrecy, of course. Throw in Wednesday morning's news that Jack Straw is being 
sued by a Libyanover his alleged role in extraordinary rendition  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/apr/18/jack-straw-libya-rendition>and 
the link is irresistible.

When I bumped into Labour's Denis MacShane on Tuesday, the MP was confident 
that he would seriously embarrass William Hague over the Heywood affair when he 
challenged him later that afternoon over the slow way in which the alleged 
crime emerged. You can catch it atcolumn 171 in Hansard  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201212/cmhansrd/cm120417/debtext/120417-0001.htm#12041733000021>
– though the foreign secretary seems to have survived unscathed.

Hague is reportedly asking the Beijing embassy, its spooks and diplomats, why 
it didn't flag up the gossip about light drinker Heywood's suspicious death and 
rapid cremation – the cause attributed to alcoholic excess – rather sooner. 
Straw, who last year denied in public that the then-Labour government had 
connived in any form of rendition, must be asking the FCO why he is being 
accused of having signed something which suggests otherwise.

In other words, the spirit of Yes Minister's Sir Humphrey lives on.

Of course, Foreign Office officials and the espionage community across the 
Thames at Vauxhall Cross are going to try to avoid making waves with mighty 
China over the death of a businessman operating in the shadows with powerful 
local friends. It's easy to imagine officials wanting to hush up thetroublesome 
murder of Russian exile Alexander Litvenenko 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/alexander-litvinenko> if he hadn't been 
poisoned so conspicuously with polonium in a London hotel. Hush things up and 
burn the files – or risk costly lawsuits, not all of them noble ones? It's not 
hard to follow their train of thought.

So what should we make of those surviving archives which are finally being 
released from the government's high-security centre in Buckinghamshire to the 
clutches of historians eager to get hold of them in the National Archive, close 
to Kew Gardens on the Thames in west London?

Tony Badger, Master of Clare College, Cambridge, who is overseeing the 
transfer, says that most of the colonial records were weeded and burned, that 
the rest should have been published under the old 30-year rule in the 80s and 
that the whole affair is "embarrassing, scandalous".

And so it is. It may be mere gossip, no less enjoyable for that, that British 
and US officials – ie the state department and FCO – fretted thatBarack Obama 
Snr was just the type of Kenyan scholarship student 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/apr/18/barack-obama-father-colonial-list> to 
"fall into the wrong hands" in America and emerge "anti-American and 
anti-white". Since his own dad, Onyanga Obama, wasdetained and possibly 
tortured during the Mau Mau emergency 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2008/dec/03/obama-grandfather-tortured 
here>, that's hardly surprising – as I have written before. President Obama 
seems content to overlook the offence; he has more important things to worry 
about.

But the mistreatment of the 1,500 citizens of Diego Garcia 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/apr/18/archives-diego-garcia>, exiled in the 
1960s to create the huge Indian Ocean military base so crucial to American 
global power projection, cannot be but a poignant story, heartlessly cruel and 
probably avoidable. Again, the initial injustice and expediency has been 
compounded by secrecy and obstruction.

Kenya, Cyprus, the Malayan emergency in which British colonial forces 
inflicted a rare defeat on a communist-led jungle insurgency 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/18/colonial-office-eliminations-malayan-insurgency>
 – the files which have survived will still provide plenty of useful insights. 
Malaya fascinated the Americans, who tried and failed to repeat its 
counter-guerilla techniques (remember "secure hamlets"?) in Vietnam a decade 
later.

Yet context usually provides some mitigation for such actions, occasionally 
justification, which it is wise not to dismiss out of hand. Nothing reported in 
Wednesday's newspapers about British excesses would at first glance match what 
the Belgians did for decades in the Congo – Europe's worst colonial scandal, 
the Germans in what is now Namibia or the French in Algeria, the legacy of 
whose imperial retreat lives on.

That's no excuse, but it is context. So is the atmosphere of the 1950s which I 
dimly remember, when Stalin's armies occupied the eastern half of Europe and 
word was slowly emerging of the scale of atrocity committed during and after 
the Terror and the second world war – 5 million Stalin victims in addition to 
the 20 million Russian dead at the hands of the Germans.

With China in Mao's hands we were all scared of what the "red menace" might be 
about to do to the rest of us. Paranoia was particularly acute in the United 
States of theMcCarthy era <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/McCarthyism>, when bad 
things were done in the name of liberty, but often mixed up with race. Ed 
Pilkington reported only this week on the 40-yearsolitary confinement of two 
black Americans 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/16/angola-prison-forty-years-solitary-confinement>
 caught up in the tail-end of that madness and still protesting their innocence.

But just because it is easy with hindsight to condemn or mock the excesses of 
the time doesn't mean our parents and grandparents weren't right to be nervous 
– or even that the often-brutal suppression of the Malayan insurgency didn't do 
modern Malaysia, conspicuously prosperous and relatively open, a historic 
favour. Just think about neighbouring Burma.

The cold war was often frightening and always corrosive, but it did have a 
point. Whether its peaceful ending in the collapse of the Soviet Union and its 
bloc after 1989 has ushered in better times or merely a relatively benign 
interlude remains to be seen. Edward Lucas's new book Deception (Bloomsbury, 
£20) suggests we are foolish to underestimate the continuing threat to Britain 
posed by Russian espionage – often conducted not by goons and oligarchs, but by 
modern young Russians with PhDs and nice accents. US worries about cyberwarfare 
focus on China,as Nick Hopkins reports 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/apr/16/militarisation-of-cyberspace-power-struggle>
.

As Julian Assange's WikiLeaks exercise showed, though many readers were too 
indignant to notice, the cable traffic it revealed tended to expose more of the 
double-talk of the states Washington has to deal with than outright US perfidy. 
But thecondemnation of Britain's failings  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/apr/18/colonial-papers-fco-transparency-myth>
by Harvard professor and author of Britain's Gulag (Holt/Cape),Caroline Elkins 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caroline_Elkins>, does warrant a gentle riposte.

Her history of Britain's suppression of the Kenyan Mau Mau revolt – very 
brutal too in its own way – won a Pulitzer prize, though Oxford's David 
Anderson covered much of the same bloody ground in his Histories of the Hanged: 
Britain's Dirty War in Kenya and the End of Empire (Weidenfeld and Nicholson) 
in the same year of publication.

Most of this ugly stuff is known, it's often the context which is forgotten. 
Poison gas tests in an isolated corner of Botswana 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2012/apr/18/britain-poison-gas-tests-botswana>? 
They never actually happened, but Britain feared the Germans might use it first 
– as they did in 1915.

But Americans should always resist the easy temptation to take too much moral 
high ground over the Brits. They have their Kenyas and their Diego Garcias too 
and are usually as selectively amnesiac as we are. Thus, the predominantly 
black, southern city of Washington DC boasts a haunting Holocaust Museum. But 
when I looked at the bench on which Jews were not allowed to sit, I thought of 
the countless benches in the American south on which – in the same decade – 
African Americans were not allowed to sit either.

As for Native Americans, when I lived in the US I was often struck by how 
small were the newspaper archives discussing their continuing plight and 
problems, compared with those of African Americans. Some might see the whole 
country as their Diego Garcia.

So almost the last thing I did before returning to Britain was visit the Pine 
Ridge reservation – home of theWounded Knee Massacre of 1890 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wounded_Knee_Massacre>. It is not a pretty sight. 
History is moving on and the west is slowly being judged for its failings as 
well as its achievements.

From here on others will be writing their own accounts of the past 500 years 
of European expansionism, now over. Some of them, I dare say, will be 
committing atrocities of their own against the weak too.
 