
Global epidemics have catastrophic consequences, but, with the right mobile 
data analytics, future disease infection rates could be combated and loss of 
life reduced.

In a connected world where global mobile data traffic grew by a staggering 70% 
last year 
<http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.html>
, mobile is a megatrend that can be harnessed for the greater good.

Given the outbreaks of avian flu 
<http://www.bmj.com/press-releases/2013/08/06/first-probable-person-person-transmission-new-bird-flu-virus-china>
 in recent weeks across Asia, it's clear pandemics remain a real and persistent 
threat. We believe that mobile data can be used to better understand human 
mobility during a pandemic, to build realistic models of how infectious 
diseases spread, and to illustrate the impact that government intervention can 
have on the containment of a pandemic.

In an attempt to understand more about the spread of such epidemics through 
society, Enrique Frias-Martinez and Vanessa Frias-Martinez from my research 
team recently carried out a scientific study that investigates the reality of 
developing such a strategy. Its aim was to use this big data gathered from 
anonymised and encrypted records to identify a methodology which could be used 
as a blueprint today.

In 2009, the flu pandemic commonly referred to as swine flu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/swine-flu> was a global influenza epidemic 
involving the H1N1 virus, thought to have broken out in Mexico. It went on to 
kill about250,000 people around the world 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/06/26/us-swineflu-idUSBRE85O1DF20120626>, 
although many estimates place the true figure much higher. In an attempt to 
contain or at least slow down the spread of the disease, the Mexican government 
took various actions aimed at limiting the movement of its citizens around the 
country. These included the forced closures of large and popular public spaces 
such as airports and universities.

Using anonymised call detail records, Enrique and Vanessa were able to 
estimate the number of people visiting three sample locations – a hospital, an 
airport, and a university campus – in one of the worst affected areas. This 
provided visibility of the population's presence in areas subjected to 
governmental closure orders. At the university campus, call activity levels 
dropped significantly indicating that students and teachers followed the advice 
and stayed away. Interestingly, analysis showed that the airport received twice 
as many visitor numbers as usual, suggesting that governmental advice was 
ignored, potentially due to people attempting to leave the region.

The next step was to emulate human behaviour via computer models, replicating 
about two million people infected with the H1N1 virus. The progress of the 
disease was then simulated and the impact of government alerts measured on the 
transmission of the disease. Comparative analysis with these models showed that 
the government's decision to shut down key infrastructure was successful. The 
simulations revealed that the government's intervention reduced population 
mobility by an estimated 30%, while the peak of the epidemic was postponed by 
almost two days and the number of infections dropped by 10%.

This work underlines the value of evaluating hypothetical scenarios using big 
data. It's well within reach for public institutions around the world to 
implement such tools and measure the impact on society of their actions. The 
social benefits are clear to see – governments could model in real time how 
public policy measures, such as restricting the use of public transport, affect 
mobility flows and disease infection rates.

And there's no reason why this methodology could not be applied to other cases 
such as crop disease, mass migration and other pandemic threats. These are 
threats that we can't prevent but can at least, with today's technology, better 
understand, model and hopefully control.

Nuria Oliver is the scientific director, user and media intelligence at 
Telefónica Digital <http://blog.digital.telefonica.com/>.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 