
Title: Live <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uw8dW9Hyno0>

Year: 1991

The set-up: I doubt that Rowan Atkinson has ever called himself a standup 
comic. When he started out in comedy in the 70s, although he toured for a time 
(withAngus Deayton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2012/feb/03/angus-deayton-affair> as 
his straight man), what he was practising was revue – that daft sketch 
tradition, very Oxbridge in origin and style, which gave usBeyond the Fringe 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/beyondthefringe/>, Monty Python 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/montypython/>, Not the Nine O'Clock News 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/notthenineoclock/> and The Day Today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/daytoday/>. Revue is now basically a corpse 
outside universities, though it still twitches entertainingly in troupes such as
Pappy's <http://www.pappyscomedy.com/>.

And when you watch this 1991 re-recording of some of Atkinson's early 
sketches, co-written withBen Elton <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/ben-elton>
 andRichard Curtis <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/richard-curtis> and 
performed with Deayton, they do look old-fashioned. We've lost the habit of 
watching comics acting playlets – as the waiter in a Tandoori restaurant, say, 
talking to an imagined group of rowdy diners. And this is a pity, because like 
on the radio, it creates some holes in what we know, wherein lie the jokes – 
such as when the waiter says: "If you'd like to take a seat? Yes, or perhaps on 
the chair."

There's also an ebullient kind of schoolboy silliness here too, which yields 
good stuff if you're prepared to listen. Yes, it's laboured and fusty in the 
extreme to watch a schoolmaster taking the register in a class made up entirely 
of children with rude words for surnames. But you try to stop yourself 
sniggering at "Come on! Has anyone seen Myprick?"

Funny how? Atkinson is essentially a comic character actor, with two 
characters to choose from. When he's talking, he is virtually always 
Blackadder: sleek, withering, sardonic, devious and so much in love with his 
script that he lingers over favourite words,especially those with a juicy B or 
P in them <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BLTR8qYWJbQ>. (This technique is also 
said to be part of how he manages his stammer.) In this show, among other 
roles, we see him as Satan terribly politely welcoming new arrivals to hell, as 
a lascivious vicar, and asa magnificently bitter father of the bride 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uw8dW9Hyno0#t=43m22s>.

When he isn't talking, he is virtually always Mr Bean: dopey, infantile, broad 
and also devious. In this mode, we see him act out a guide to dating, being 
bored in church, and as the victim of a mischievous invisible man. Indeed the 
church sketch, and others,went on to become a Bean routine 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bh__g-ZZ6WA>.

How it came about that Britain's favourite performer of scripted wordplay and 
its leading mime artist are the same man is beyond me. I even suspect that 
Atkinson has two almost wholly separate fanbases, a Blackadder one generally in 
middle-class England, and a Bean one all over the world. Both should take 
another look over the fence, however. As a Blackadderite I despised Bean for 
years, but I underestimated it. The invisible man sketch for instance, 
contrived though it is, shows such skill that it wins you over. And Atkinson's
Beanish turn during the Olympic opening ceremony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h17gIW9paO0> was magnificent.

You may find this stuff beneath you, of course, and perhaps it is. Atkinson 
himself might not even argue.As he has said 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2003/mar/30/features.review> – and you can hear 
that droll sardonic voice enunciating it: "I'm certainly not aware of 
suppressing more sophisticated ambitions."

Comic cousins: Lee Evans 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/sep/15/lee-evans-review>, Peter Cook 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/peter-cook>, Marcel Marceau 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/marcelmarceau>, Monty Python.

Steal this: "Gerald is the kind of man we used to describe at school as 'a 
complete prick'."
 