
We did our first stand up gig at a comedy night in Hull called Hullarity 
recently. I say 'we' – 'The Johns' are two orphaned Scottish brothers, 
performed by Matt Sutton and Joe England, and I write and direct it with them 
(and press the laptop buttons on the night). The show featured a song, a bare 
arse and a piss bag. The best comment was from a woman in the front row, who 
said: "I've seen too much".

It went down well, as did our films, 'The Johns' 10 uses of oats'. But the 
fact that the live set was probably better received than the films got us 
thinking.

We've been doing online films for the last couple of years. Online is a great 
way to get material out there and find an audience. Recently there's been a 
massive increase in the amount of comedy online. For example,E4's The Midnight 
Beast <http://www.e4.com/themidnightbeast/>, was picked up online. 
Commissioners and producers see the huge number of hits and think it is bound 
to be good if it's been watched so many times.

In his keynote speech at the latest Just for Laughs comedy festival, American 
stand-up comedian, Oswalt Patton, said 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/justforlaughscomedy> that new digital technology – 
coupled with YouTube, Twitter and podcasts – allowed comedians to create their 
own audiences. For him, online is a massive opportunity for comedians to forge 
their own careers without the involvement of the traditional gatekeepers. He 
told the assembled audience of TV executives: "We don't need you".

But you can't hear the laughs online. It would be a mistake for comedians and 
producers to think that because of online, live comedy no longer matters. 
Stewart Leewrote an article in the Financial Times last year against online 
comedy 'content' 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/a8066bc2-6b9e-11e0-93f8-00144feab49a.html#axzz28FHappra>
 and the way it reduced everything down to soundbites at the expense of form in 
a longer set. Hull stand-up and newcomer, Lucy Beaumont, headlined Hullarity 
and has just been signed by comedy talent agency and production companyAvalon 
<http://www.avalonuk.com/>, who represent the likes of Frank Skinner and Chris 
Addison. She's done a couple of online films, but she is also out pretty much 
every night gigging on the circuit. There is a view that doing comedy live is a 
route to TV or radio because that's generally where the money is. But the most 
important reason for gigging intensively like that, is to use it as a training 
ground for learning the craft and honing skills.

When I tried to write some funny stuff, I put on my own live sketch show. It 
was only after listening to a room full of people laugh at something I'd 
written that I had the confidence to think it might be worth a try. If online 
was big then, I may have just concentrated on making comedy films and missed 
that chance. I wouldn't have got a small break into radio if a producer hadn't 
seen something I'd written performed live. It was the same the other night in 
Hull; all three of us felt that the gig went well – better than expected – and 
it's inspired us to do more.

So, the trick is to do both (check out the British Comedy Guide 
<http://www.comedy.co.uk/website_links/> for some useful sites promoting online 
and live). Online films are one way of being funny. Live is another. Do both. 
Whatever the form, the most important thing is to keep doing it, and if it's 
making somebody somewhere laugh then it's worth it.

You can see more of Tom's work on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/thejohnscomedy> or online here 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/KetsMixedBag/videos?sort=p&view=0>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 