
More than 100 people gathered in front of the Islamic Arts museum in Istanbul 
on Friday to commemorate the massacre of Armenians during the last days of the 
Ottoman empire.

Now a popular tourist attraction, 100 years ago the building served as the 
Ottoman police headquarters and was where the first 250 Armenian intellectuals 
were incarcerated before their deportation on 24 April 1915.


The commemoration, organised by Turkish and international human rights 
organisations, was one of a series of events taking place in Istanbul to mark 
the centenary of theArmenian genocide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenian-genocide> during which more than 
1.5 million Armenians were killed, according to historians’ estimates.

The Armenian genocide – the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/16/the-armenian-genocide-the-guardian-briefing>
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> insists the toll has been 
inflated and rejects that the killings were an act of genocide, arguing that 
the Armenians died as a result of civil war and general unrest during the first 
world war. On the eve of the centennial, the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip 
Erdoğan, reiterated his view that the country’s ancestors never committed 
genocide.

But at the commemoration in front of the museum, participants did not shy away 
from using the term.

“This is the first time I have the opportunity to attend the memorials,” said 
25-year-old university student Mustafa Polat, a Kurd from Diyarbakir. “I wanted 
to be here to remind the world of this genocide. The truth is clear, this was a 
crime against humanity that Kurds were also a part of. One doesn’t need to be 
Armenian or politically educated to recognise this genocide, it’s enough to 
have a conscience.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Farmenian-genocide-100-years-on-trauma-blood-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429884844555%2FKP_196615_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Armenian%20genocide%20100%20years%20on%3A%20'We%20were%20raised%20with%20this%20trauma.%20It's%20in%20our%20blood'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Farmenian-genocide-100-years-on-trauma-blood-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Armenian%20genocide%20100%20years%20on%3A%20%27We%20were%20raised%20with%20this%20trauma.%20It%27s%20in%20our%20blood%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Farmenian-genocide-100-years-on-trauma-blood-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429884844555%2FKP_196615_crop_640x360.jpg>
 After 50 years living in Switzerland, 67-year-old Armenian Bogos Tomasian 
returns to his village near the town of Mutki in Turkey to commemorate the 
centenary of the Armenian genocide. 
On the “Walk to Remember” through the district of Sultanahmet the group almost 
vanished among the throngs of tourists and groups of Anzac Day visitors looking 
for their buses to Gallipoli.

Only a few shyly carried folded posters that read: “Recognise the Genocide”. 
Some held red carnations or violet crocuses, a stand-in for the purple 
forget-me-nots that symbolise the centenary elsewhere.

There were no slogans and no chants. Riot police accompanied the hurried march 
to the shore of the Golden Horn, where a boat took the group to the Haydarpasa 
train station, from where Istanbul Armenians were deported and sent to their 
deaths.

Ali Rabis, 58, an unemployed shoemaker from Istanbul, said he had attended 
each public commemoration since 2010, when groups first came together on 
Istanbul’s central Taksim Square to remember the 1915 genocide.

“I am Turkish, which is why I come,” he said. “One cannot be aware of such 
horrible killings and pretend they have never happened.”

He said he hoped the commemorations would send a strong message: “If the 
genocide had not happened in 1915, maybe world war two would not have been as 
horrible, maybe the Holocaust would never have happened. I want that such 
things never happen again.”


Benjamin Abtan, president of the European Grassroots Antiracist Movement 
(Egam) that has been part of the commemorations since 2011, said that despite 
the modest number of participants, the atmosphere in Turkey had changed.


Centenary of the Armenian genocide: descendants tell their family’s stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/apr/24/armenian-genocide-centenary-descendants-family-stories>
“Very different people are now taking part in the commemorations: more young 
people, more women, more religious Muslims, and more Armenians from Turkey. The 
Turkish media are more openly referring to the term genocide. There is more 
confidence”, he said, adding that the movement had also become more 
international. “When I came the first time in 2011, I was the only person who 
was not a Turkish national. Today there are delegations from over 15 countries, 
including fromArmenia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia>.”


On Friday morning, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his French 
counterpart, François Hollande, joined other state leaders at the genocide 
memorial complex in the Armenian capital of Yerevan. After a flower-laying 
ceremony, Armenia’s president, Serge Sarkisian, told the guests: “I am grateful 
to all those who are here to once again confirm your commitment to human 
values, to say that nothing is forgotten; that after 100 years we remember.”


Earlier this month, Turkey recalled its ambassadors to the Vatican and the 
Austrian capital of Vienna after both countries recognised the massacres as 
genocide. A non-binding resolution passed by the European parliament to 
commemorate the centenary of the genocide prompted a similarly furious reply, 
with Erdoğan saying that “such a decision would go in one ear and out the 
other”.

 However, the tone of his message read during Friday’s memorial service at the 
Armenian Patriarchate in Istanbul was softer.

“We share the Armenians’ pain with sincerity,” his message read. “The doors of 
our hearts are open to the deceased Ottoman Armenians’ grandchildren.”

The Turkish president underlined that Armenians had made important economic 
and cultural contributions to the Ottoman empire, while insisting Armenians 
were only one of “millions of people from every nation living in the Ottoman 
empire’s borders” who also died during the first world war.

For the first time in the history of the Turkish republic, a Turkish state 
official attended the church service. Volkan Bozkir, the minister in charge of 
Turkey’s EU relations, said he was honoured to be able to attend the service: 
“We respect the pain felt by our Armenian brothers”.


Later on Friday a rally of Turkish and international human rights groups and 
others was planned in Istanbul’s Taksim Square. Sarkisian lauded those 
attending as “strong people who are rendering an important service to their 
country”.
 