
Until now the spread of the composting toilet has been one of 
environmentalism’s quieter and more unassuming movements - as it were. That’s 
despite the fact that the water-flush toilet devours 30% of the UK’s water 
supply.


But now the composting toilet is on the up, and we’re teetering on the cusp of 
a small-scale restroom revolution. This year, Glastonbury festival set a 
precedent by replacing the much-feared blue plastic chemical loos with swanky, 
stench-free waterless dunnies. “A world record … in all the history of 
shitting,” according to toilet supplier Hamish Skermer. It’s a move that has 
left the industry “wide open to everyone”, according to Dave Wood of the 
Thunderbox Collective, supplier of portable compost toilets. “The rest of the 
festivals will follow suit.”

Away from the muddy fields of Worthy Farm, Richard Saillet from Ecotoilets 
reckons there are about 2,500 domestic composting loos installed in the UK, of 
which they have installed 1,000. “That only includes complete toilets,” he 
says. “There are many thousands of composting toilets which are either 
completely self-built or constructed using some bought toilet parts.” True, 
when stacked against countrywide flushing stats, it’s doesn’t immediately sound 
like a watershed moment. After all, according to Waterwise, there are about 45m 
toilets in the UK, which equals 2bn litres of flushed, wasted water a day.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomposting-toilets-a-growing-movement-in-green-disposal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F23%2F1406113866834%2Fca708ba2-03b6-4dd2-9c71-34619613654e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Composting%20toilets%3A%20a%20growing%20movement%20in%20green%20disposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomposting-toilets-a-growing-movement-in-green-disposal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Composting%20toilets%3A%20a%20growing%20movement%20in%20green%20disposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomposting-toilets-a-growing-movement-in-green-disposal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F23%2F1406113866834%2Fca708ba2-03b6-4dd2-9c71-34619613654e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The joy of the non-composting toilets at Glastonbury. Photograph: David Levene 
But Saillet is excited nevertheless. “Our sales have been doubling 
year-on-year for the last three years,” he says. “We are currently selling a 
toilet a day and looking to double our staff this year to deal with the demand 
and extra warehousing to hold stock. It’s taken off faster than we can cope 
with.”

The working of a compost toilet is, in principle, nothing particularly 
complex. Human faeces in the presence of oxygen naturally breaks down into 
pathogen-free compost – another reason why dumping it into water is a pretty 
silly idea. Urine, which is sterile on exit and full of nitrogen, is an 
excellent fertiliser straight out of the tube. The tricky bit is funnelling the 
liquids away from the solids. To solve this, most composting toilets have a 
twin bowl, making natural funnels for front and back expulsions, while others 
use a pump to divert liquids elsewhere and an electric vent to stop smells. As 
for the solids, they just need to be stored until composted, a process that can 
take anywhere between six months (domestic) or two years (large scale).

Saillet from Ecotoilets explains: “The first thing we do in a normal toilet is 
drown all the good bugs, and the only ones left smell, which is what people 
expect. The smell is normally people’s first objection but we have a toilet 
that doesn’t smell even if you have a good curry the night before.”

Visually they aren’t what most people expect either. Admittedly, festival and 
other outdoor loos still have that Don’t Look Down feel about them, and tend to 
be more rustic looking. The Thunderbox, for example, started life as a way for 
forester Wood to “add value” to his product (trees), so he created little log 
cabins to house composting toilets. Domestic composting toilets, however, look 
just like your everyday WC. Except for maybe theFlame 8000 
<http://www.separett.eu/flame-8000-eu>, a terrifying sounding incinerating loo 
available for a cool $2,999, which doesn’t look particularly inviting. Make 
sure you’re fully off before flushing.


Low maintenance


Perhaps most surprising is how little actually comes out the other end. A 
25-litre container can take two people up to 10 weeks to fill. Richard says, 
“When you open the toilet up to take the container out all you see is soiled 
toilet paper, and there’s a lid for the bin. You only empty it every two or 
three months anyway, and it’s perfectly safe to put on your garden compost 
heap. Changing the kitchen bin is a more unpleasant task. People think that 
it’s going to smell, or object to having to empty it, or worry what it looks 
like. When people establish that our toilets are the same size as a WC and can 
be fitted in a matter of hours, they complain we’re not selling them more 
widely.”

Saillet says that business is booming mostly due to demand for toilets in 
cabins for outdoor clubs, such as lawn bowls, golf clubs, or allotment 
societies. Their greatest problem at the moment is building control and 
planning officers, who panic at the sight of something new, especially a toilet 
that requires no sewage outlet. In addition to that, he believes the government 
is largely ignoring our water problems. The Green Deal is focused on energy 
generation and efficiency, while most people aren’t yet on a water meter and 
can use as much as they like without it costing any more.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomposting-toilets-a-growing-movement-in-green-disposal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F23%2F1406114187602%2Fd20ef657-168b-4c4e-9b1e-4ff7f65ee85f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Composting%20toilets%3A%20a%20growing%20movement%20in%20green%20disposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomposting-toilets-a-growing-movement-in-green-disposal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Composting%20toilets%3A%20a%20growing%20movement%20in%20green%20disposal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcomposting-toilets-a-growing-movement-in-green-disposal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F23%2F1406114187602%2Fd20ef657-168b-4c4e-9b1e-4ff7f65ee85f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 There is growing demand from allotments and golf courses for composting 
toilets. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images 
Grace Crabb runs a composting toilet courses at the Centre for Alternative 
Technology and is a little more restrained when it comes to the progress of 
water-free loos. “It’s most popular in outdoor settings,” she says. “But there 
are still very few integrated into new builds and successfully retrofitted. I 
can’t see there has been a major change in the last 10 years for this. Flush 
and forget will continue to be the dominating desire as long as people have to 
come into contact with the excrement in one way or another. I suspect very low 
flush toilets are the way to go.”

Yet Thunderbox’s Wood says he and his wife call the lavatorial side of the 
business their golden goose. “It started laying golden eggs and it just keeps 
going. It’s amazing how big composting toilets have got. We’ve been wondering 
when the bubble will burst, but as the glamping trend is dying down, allotments 
are picking up as a new market stream, and we’ve just developed a disabled 
access unit which should be at Glastonbury next year.”

Wood’s many years of experience tells him this isn’t a just a fad destined to 
disappear into the eco ether. There is an enthusiasm and passion around 
composting loos; people are excited when they turn up to build the units, and 
want to find out more. “My take on it is that when you go you know it’s not 
wasted. You’re engaging with what makes the world go round, you’re part of the 
big cycle. You’re actually contributing! We know this intuitively. Even though 
it’s waste it will compost down and something will grow and that makes people 
feel good.”

Saillet thinks it’s time for a change, and that water shortages are going to 
force us into it sooner or later anyway. “We’ve had 150 years throwing water on 
it and chucking it down the pipes, so we think it must be the right thing to 
do,” he says. “Even though before that we used to compost our waste. A third of 
our good drinking water goes down the WC where it’s polluted and we have to 
spend money cleaning it again. In the east and south-east of England there is a 
terrible shortage of water at the moment, a terrible problem trying to make the 
water last for people who need it. If everyone used a waterless toilet that 
problem is immediately reduced by 30%.”

Have you ever used a composting toilet? Would you install one in your home? 


 * Greywater systems: can they reduce your water footprint? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/21/greywater-systems-can-they-really-reduce-your-bills>
 * Rainwater harvesting: can the weather help with bills? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/22/rainwater-harvesting-using-the-weather-to-pay-your-bills>
 * Why the modern bathroom is a wasteful, unhealthy design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/15/why-modern-bathroom-wasteful-unhealthy-design>
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/21/greywater-systems-can-they-really-reduce-your-bills>
Interested in finding out more about how you can live better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/live-better>? Take a look at this 
month’s Live Better challengehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/26/welcome-to-the-live-better-challenge>
.

The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable 
living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
advertisement feature. Find out morehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>

 