
A Nation’s Theatre, the Guardian and Battersea Arts Centre’s year-long 
programme celebrating UK theatre-making will culminate in a two-month festival 
held across London this spring.Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> companies from cities, towns and 
villages around the UK will descend on the capital with shows of all sizes, 
hosted at 17 venues.

We’re offering a Guardian Stage reader (and a guest of their choice) the 
opportunity to stay in one of the new artists’ bedrooms at BAC and attend a 
selection of shows at the festival. We’d like you to write about the experience 
for us afterwards. To enter the competition, please fill out the form below, 
including a critical assessment of a show you’ve seen recently and a response 
to the venue in which you saw it.

This show is open to UK residents over the age of 18. The closing date is 
Sunday 24 April. The winner will be notified in the week beginning Monday 25 
April. Full terms and conditions can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/04/terms-and-conditions-bac-a-nations-theatre-competition>
.

The prize:
• Travel and accommodation: Expenses-paid return travel and a three-night stay 
in one of BAC’s new artist bedrooms from Thursday 26 – Saturday 28 May, for two 
people in a double or twin room.


• Meals: Breakfast and dinner will be laid on by BAC’s Scratch bar.


• Tickets: The winner will choose complimentary tickets for a selection of 
shows from the A Nation’s Theatre festival.

During your stay you can pick from the following A Nation’s Theatre works 
being shown at BAC:

 * Reassembled, Slightly Askew 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40842/whats_on/shows/reassembled_slightly_askew_>
 by Shannon Yee

 * Paradise Lost (lies unopened beside me) 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40841/whats_on/shows/paradise_lost_lies_unopened_beside_me_>
 by Lost Dog

 * A Leicester Curve takeover, featuring Ventoux 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/41144/whats_on/shows/leicester_curve_takeover_ventoux>
 by 2Magpies theatre,I, Myself and Me 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/41145/whats_on/shows/leicester_curve_takeover_i_myself_and_me>
 by Rachael Young andInside Out Mixtape 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/41236/whats_on/shows/curve_takeover_inside_out_mixtape>

Meanwhile, these shows are playing at other London festival venues over the 
same weekend:


 * Voyager 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/41149/whats_on/shows/voyager> by 
Idle Motion, at New Diorama theatre

 * Cuttin’ It 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40859/whats_on/shows/cuttin_it> 
written by Charlene James, at the Young Vic

 * Untouchable 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40865/whats_on/shows/untouchable> by 
Ria Hartley, at the Albany

 * The Thadows Loom & The Sun Is Black 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40866/whats_on/shows/the_thadows_loom__the_sun_is_black>
 by VIDEOfeet Digital Arts, at Rich Mix

THIS COMPETITION HAS NOW CLOSED. THE WINNER WILL BE CONTACTED BEFORE 29 APRIL. 
 