
With the occasional exception 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/thomas-piketty-on-inequality-in-developing-countries-great-but-still-not-enough-on-politics/>
, my mood in conferences usually swings between boredom, despair and rage.


At the very least, can we commission a systematic review of the existing 
evidence on the efficacy of conferences?

The turgid/self-aggrandizing keynotes and coma-inducing panels, followed by 
people (usually men) asking ‘questions’ that are really comments, and usually 
not on topic. The chairs who abdicate responsibility and let all the speakers 
over-run, so that the only genuinely productive bit of the day (networking at 
coffee breaks and lunch) gets squeezed. I end up dozing off, or furiously 
scribbling abuse in my notebook as a form of therapy, and hoping my neighbours 
can’t see what I’m writing. I probably look a bit unhinged…

This matters both because of the lost opportunity that badly run conferences 
represent, and because they cost money and time. I hope that if it was easy to 
fix, people would have done so already, but the fact is that the format is 
tired and unproductive.

10 tricks to appear intelligent during development meetings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/29/10-tricks-to-appear-smart-during-development-meetings>
For example, how did something as truly awful as panel discussions become the 
default format? They end up being a parade of people reading out papers, or 
they include terrible powerpoints crammed with too many words and illegible 
graphics. Can we try other formats, likespeed dating 
<http://knowinnovation.com/ideas-lab/> (eg 10 people pitch their work for 2 
minutes each, then each goes to a table and the audience hooks up 
(intellectually, I mean) with the ones they were interested in);world cafes 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&ved=0CDIQFjAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FKnowledge_Cafe&ei=GLiCUP7jKsj4rQfB8ICoAw&usg=AFQjCNHu_FkX2_J-JqJV6FCTApX4N8CNtA&sig2=9qZpnvVJ4y84iyHjSmCQHg>
; simulation games; joint tasks (eg come up with an infographic that explains 
X)? Anything, really. Yes ‘manels’ (male only panels – take the pledgehere 
<http://www.owen.org/pledge>) are an outrage, but why not go for complete 
abolition, rather than mere gender balance?

Conferences frequently discuss evidence and results. So where is the evidence 
and results for the efficacy of conferences? Given the resources being ploughed 
into research on development (DFID alone spends about£350m a year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/67359/rsch-evi-div-2011.pdf>
), surely it would be a worthwhile investment, if it hasn’t already been done, 
to sponsor a research programme that runs multiple parallel experiments with 
different event formats, and compares the results in terms of participant 
feedback, how much people retain a month after the event etc? At the very 
least, can they find or commission a systematic review on what the existing 
evidence says?

Feedback systems could really help. A public eBay-type ratings system to rank 
speakers/conferences would provide nice examples of good practice for people to 
draw on (and bad practice to avoid). Or why not go real-time and encourage 
instant audience feedback? OK, maybe Occupy-style thumbs up from the audience 
if they like the speaker, thumbs down if they don’t would be a bit in-your-face 
for academe, but why not introduce a twitterwall to encourage the audience to 
interact with the speaker (perhaps with moderation to stop people testing the 
limits, as my LSE students did to Owen Barder last term)?

Doing them on the cheap is a false economy if all the people in the room wish 
they were dead/get nothing out of it

We need to get better at shaping the format to fit the the precise purpose of 
the conference. If it’s building networks, making new links etc, then you need 
to maximise the interaction time – speed-dating, lots of coffee breaks etc. If 
it’s to jointly progress thinking on a particular issue, then use a workshop 
methodology, like the excellentUSAID/IDS seminar 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/doing-development-differently-a-great-discussion-on-adaptive-management-no-really/>
 I attended a few months ago (whose results I’m still using). If it’s to pick 
apart and improve methods and findings, then it has to be at first draft stage, 
and with the right combination of academics and practitioners in the room. But 
if the best you can manage is ‘disseminating new research’ of ‘information 
sharing’, alarm bells should probably ring.

Six things not to do on social media if you're at a really boring conference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/26/six-things-not-to-do-on-social-media-if-youre-at-a-really-boring-conference>
Resource it properly. Organising good conferences requires expertise and time. 
It’s not something an overburdened academic should be doing at 1am, after the 
kids are in bed, and the emails are done. Weirdly, friends tell me that there 
is often no budget for conferences, but doing them on the cheap is a false 
economy, if all the people who end up in the room wish they were dead/get 
nothing out of it. So research funders should demand a sensible conference 
budget in any proposal, and outside particular research projects, academic 
institutions should fund conferences seriously as places where networking can 
incubate new ideas and refine old ones.

And why should academics be organising them anyway? Isn’t there a case for 
outsourcing more of them to good good conference organisers who ‘get’ the 
special challenges of academic (rather than, say, corporate) events?

With my How Change Happens 
<https://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/first-draft-of-how-change-happens-now-ready-anyone-want-to-read-it/>
 hat on, the obvious question is, why haven’t things changed already? Using the 
handy 3i rule of thumb, is it ideas, institutions or interests that are keeping 
things this way?

Ideas: maybe people genuinely think this format is the best possible, or just 
lack imagination – how do we undermine that view and get recognition of 
alternatives?

Institutions: is part of the reason for the leaden, top-down formats that 
organisers want to control the agenda, pump out their own material etc? Does 
everyone need to be on a platform, with at least 20 minutes to talk about 
themselves or their interests? If so, it will be very hard to get away from 
panelism.

Interests: Academics have to write papers for career advancement and to feed 
theREF <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Research_Excellence_Framework> beast. But 
does that really mean they have to present and discuss them in such a 
mind-numbing way?

Confessions of a humanitarian: I've never met a meeting I couldn't sleep 
through
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/08/confessions-of-a-humanitarian-snoozing-through-meetings>
Finally, allow me one unconstructive suggestion: can we please as standard 
have a clock above the platform that not only records the time, (for the 
benefit of the chair), but the cumulative cost of the day, based on a rough 
estimate of the hourly salaries of those in the room (we could base it on this
meeting cost calculator 
<https://hbr.org/2016/01/estimate-the-cost-of-a-meeting-with-this-calculator>)? 
Perhaps the IT wallahs could also come up with a way of monitoring the number 
of people who are not actually in the room in any useful sense, because they 
are on email/twitter/Facebook/doing their online shopping?

And in case you think I’m picking unfairly on academics, corporate, NGO and 
thinktank conferences are all usually awful, in their different ways (thanks 
Tolstoy 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/7142-all-happy-families-are-alike-each-unhappy-family-is-unhappy>
).

Rant over, reactions please, including top tips for how to organise good 
conferences on negligible time/money.

Duncan Green writes Oxfam’s Poverty to Power <http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/> 
blog where this wasoriginally 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/conference-rage-and-why-we-need-a-war-on-panels/> 
published.Follow @fp2p <https://twitter.com/fp2p> on Twitter.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 