
One year on from the chilly January morning when 19 people were gunned down  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/10/gabrielle-giffords-us-politics?INTCMP=SRCH>
outside a supermarket in Tucson, Arizona, a fragile figure, moving stiffly but 
with determination, joined her constituents as bells tolled 19 times.

They began to ring at 10.11am, the exact time of the shooting, and tolled for 
each of the six who died, among them ajudge and a nine-year-old girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/09/tucson-shooting-victims-john-roll?INTCMP=SRCH>
, and for the 13 survivors, including congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords herself. 
Later, there was a service in the cathedral and a candlelight vigil.

The horror of 8 January 2011 was a senseless act of slaughter. The first of 
dozens of bullets fired hit Giffords, and among those who died was Gabe 
Zimmerman, her outreach director who organised the Congress on Your Corner 
event, where anyone and everyone was invited to turn up outside the Safeway 
supermarket for a casual chat. Some had come with problems, some to thank 
Giffords for representations she had made, some just to see their 
congresswoman, when without warning the shooting started. "It was like death 
just passed right over you. He was just shooting everybody, right down the 
line," one man said.

Last May, a federal judge ruled that Jared Loughner 
<http://http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/26/us/26loughner.html?pagewanted=all>, a 
22-year-old high school dropout suffering from delusions and hallucinations, 
was mentally incompetent to stand trial for the shootings.

"Sad. Dumb, dumb, dumb, dumb, dumb," Giffords said, recalling the appalling 
morning. "Tough as nails," she said, agreeing with her recently retired 
astronaut husband Mark Kelly's assessment of her character.

Like many of those injured, Giffords, taken unconscious to hospital, was not 
expected to survive. Although her speech is halting, she still has limited use 
of her right arm due to damage to the left side of her brain, and she becomes 
exhausted if allowed to push herself too far, her husband and aides are now 
speculating on a possible return to full-time politics.

She has until May to decide whether to put her name forward for the November 
elections, and more than $800,000 has been raised for a potential campaign.

Her office received 24,880 Christmas cards and letters wishing her well, 
including cards and gifts from 428 schools.

President Barack Obama had earlier telephoned the Giffords to offer his 
support and tell Gabrielle that he and Michelle Obama are keeping her, the 
families of those killed and the whole Tucson community in their thoughts and 
prayers. He called Giffords an inspiration to his family and Americans across 
the country.

It was entirely her decision to join the memorial events. "Congresswoman 
Giffords wanted to be back in Tucson for this very emotional weekend," Pia 
Carusone, her chief of staff, said in a statement.

"She is continuing to improve each and every day", Mark Kelly told ABC News 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/mark-kelly-shares-gabby-giffords-progress-year/story?id=15312640#.Twm_ds3Ef74>
. "You know, hurdles for her is just how well she can speak, how well she can 
put sentences together and how many questions she can ask, so that's improving 
all the time."

"Just the other day she started asking me a few questions in a row. Back in 
April, March or April, she hadn't asked a single question about anything."

Survivors, including one middle-aged man weeping helplessly at the memory of 
nine-year-old Christina-Taylor Green, who was among those gunned down, shared 
their memories of the day with the Fix Gun Checks 
<http://http://www.fixgunchecks.org/tucson> campaign, which aims to tighten 
laws on illegal firearms.

â€¢ This article was amended on 9 January 2012. The original said the date of 
the shooting was 8 January 2010. This has been corrected.
 