
With Conmebol at the halfway stage, and with an important round of fixtures on 
Tuesday, it might seem timely to ponder the following: is this the most 
difficult confederation from which to qualify for the World Cup? Luis Suárez 
certainly thinks so. “Yes, yes, yes,” the Uruguay dynamo said last year when 
pressed on the how hard it was, so to speak. “The Argentinians can tell you, so 
can the Brazilians and the Colombians, all of them can tell you. It’s the most 
difficult thing there can be, qualifying for aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> from South America.”

Everton’s Enner Valencia chased by police while being carried off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/enner-valencia-everton-chased-police>
Is he right? On the face of it, perhaps Suárez is overstating things. Four and 
a half qualification spots from a group of just 10 teams seems remarkably 
generous: by comparison, Fifa gives Africa’s 53 teams and 1.2bn population a 
meagre five. The home-and-away league format of Conmebol means the top teams 
are afforded numerous opportunities to right previous wrongs. No one-and-done 
knockout fixtures here: lose your first three games and still you’re very much 
in the mix. (Though it’s probably not advisable.)

But boy, is Conmebol gruelling. Eighteen competitive matches in barely two 
years represents almost domestic championship levels of scheduling. Then 
there’s the travel, and the games at altitude in Quito and La Paz. Plus, that 
old canard about no easy games at international level might actually be true in 
South America. Bolivia and Venezuela are the weakest of the 10, admittedly, but 
they’re hardly genuine minnows. (Having said that, Bolivia haven’t won an away 
qualifier since 1993, andVenezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/venezuela> sit bottom with a lousy two 
points and no wins.)

The general point holds, however. Just look at the way South America’s teams 
are bunched in the Fifa rankings:Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> top, Colombia and Brazil equal 
fourth, Chile sixth, Uruguay ninth, Ecuador 19th, Peru 25th, Paraguay 36th. 
Quality players, quality teams: Conmebol hosts some competitive stuff, and at 
least one team with recent World Cup experience won’t be going to Russia.

That could yet be Chile, if they don’t pull their socks up. After nine matches,
La Roja are off the pace in seventh, five points behind fifth-placed Argentina 
after a limp 3-0 defeat againstEcuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ecuador> on Thursday, where a failure to 
pay attention at throw-ins cost them dear. “We were surpassed in every aspect 
of the game,” admitted coach Juan Antonio Pizzi. The gap between the leaders 
and the laggers is beginning to widen, and a team with two successive Copa 
America titles and a stacked roster of talent had better perk up. Chile need a 
home win against Peru on Tuesday. Time for Arturo and Alexis to shine.

Colombia’s 1-0 stoppage-time victory over Paraguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/paraguay> was the other important result 
from Thursday. Edwin Cardona’s slick finish from Carlos Bacca’s pass stole the 
points in Asunción, and lifted Colombia into fourth. (Fifth place plays the 
Oceania winner, likely New Zealand, in a two-legged play-off next November.) 
That late concession could prove costly for Paraguay: Francisco Arce’s team now 
have four points to make up instead of one, and for the Paraguayans, who 
struggle to score goals, the prospect of Argentina away on Tuesday is hardly 
one to look forward to.

Peru, who haven’t been to a World Cup since 1982, showed some steel to come 
back twice to draw 2-2 with Argentina in Lima, but with just eight points from 
nine games, the chance of a place in Russia is receding, and next up for them is
Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> in Santiago. The worry for 
Peru is their wretched away record: so far they’ve played four, lost four, and 
scored zero goals. Another away defeat on Tuesday could spell the end.

Argentina showcased their best and worst against Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peru>. Despite the absence of Lionel 
Messi, Gonzalo Higuain displayed his characteristic sang froid in front of goal 
to nab his team’s second, and Ángel di María showed what a fine player he is: 
what shame it never really worked out at Manchester United. (Argentina, by the 
way, began play on Thursday with a front four of Paulo Dybala, Di María, Sergio 
Agüero and Higuain. Is there a national team on the planet with more glittering 
attacking talent?) But defensive failures cost them: the Premier League twosome 
of Nicolas Otamendi and Ramiro Funes Mori bore much of the criticism for the 
way the evergreen Paolo Guerrero bullied and bruised his way to a goal and an 
assist.

Second-placed Brazil go to Venezuela after humping Bolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bolivia> 5-0, but Neymar’s yellow card 
for dissent rules him out for Tuesday. Adenor Leonardo Bacchi, better known as 
Tité, the coach who replaced Dunga in the summer, called for his star man to 
show more “maturity”, but that seemed churlish, considering the pounding he’d 
taken from a posse of Bolivian defenders – and specifically the elbow from 
Yasmani Duk that prompted his early withdrawal. Nevertheless, Tite has three 
wins from three, and Brazil look a team on the up. “We feel that the atmosphere 
here has changed for the better,” Dani Alves said afterwards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fconmebol-world-cup-halfway-chile-argentina-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3b94dda938e84dd87c8f73dd4a0187ef1a40f9f%2F0_29_1826_1096%2F1826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conmebol%20enters%20gruelling%20second%20half%20and%20Chile%20need%20to%20start%20winning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fconmebol-world-cup-halfway-chile-argentina-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conmebol%20enters%20gruelling%20second%20half%20and%20Chile%20need%20to%20start%20winning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fconmebol-world-cup-halfway-chile-argentina-brazil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3b94dda938e84dd87c8f73dd4a0187ef1a40f9f%2F0_29_1826_1096%2F1826.jpg>
 Blood pours from Neymar’s facial wound in Natal. Photograph: Ricardo 
Moraes/Reuters 
Neymar’s 10-minute opener, incidentally, was his 300th career goal for club 
and country. And he’s still only 24.

Finally, Uruguay, who visit Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia> next, lead the pack at halfway. 
Edinson Cavani’s double gave them a comfortable 3-0 home win over Venezuela 
last time out, and almost certainly put the visitors out of contention for 
Russia. For Venezuela, the lone South American country never to have been to a 
World Cup, the wait goes on.

It’s a cliche that Conmebol is a marathon, but cliches are invariably true. 
Uruguay <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uruguay> and Brazil might have 
forged slightly ahead, but we’re 13 miles in, and many more hard yards await. 
The strategy is simple: embrace the challenge, and keep on keeping on. Just 
remember to stay hydrated.

 * Full Conmebol standings and results 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/preliminaries/southamerica/index.html>  