
After 10 matches, Brazil sit top of Conmebol qualifying, thanks to a 2-0 
victory inVenezuela <https://www.theguardian.com/football/venezuela>. But 
Argentina were shocked 1-0 at home by Paraguay and find themselves in a 
precarious fifth place, which yields a play-off against the Oceania 
representative rather than automatic qualification. The two heavyweights face 
each other in Belo Horizonte on 10 November.

International football: 10 talking points from the World Cup qualifiers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/12/international-football-10-talking-points-from-the-world-cup-qualifiers>
Argentina 0-1 Paraguay

After two disappointing draws and still without the injured Lionel Messi, 
Edgardo Bauza’s team were even worse in the defeat to a hardworking Paraguay 
side in Cordoba. The winning goal was scored by Dynamo Kyiv striker Derlis 
Gonzalez in the 17th minute.Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> had a chance to equalize with 
a penalty early in the second half but Sergio Agüero saw his effort saved.

Argentina struggled in the absence of Pablo Zabaleta, Nicolas Otamendi and 
Ramiro Funes Mori. One of their replacements, Martin Demichelis, spelled out 
the predicament clearly. “We have to be honest with ourselves, we have to 
improve quickly,” Demichelis said. We have to make a big self-criticism. We 
have things to correct.”

In November, Argentina face tough matches away against Brazil and home against 
Colombia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/colombia>. Messi is expected to 
return for those two. Paraguay remain in sixth place, but are now only one 
point behind Argentina.

Venezuela 0-2 Brazil

By contrast, it took only seven minutes for Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> to forget the suspended Neymar’s 
absence, keep up their new-found momentum and ensure bottom-placed Venezuela 
remain winless. Teenage striker Gabriel Jesus, recently signed by Manchester 
City, scored his fourth goal in his fourth international appearance with a 
classy lob over Dani Hernandez after the goalkeeper’s mistake.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fsouth-america-conmebol-world-cup-argentina-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe200ae3f3951d283c87ac2016db20e66e9706125%2F0_0_3500_2256%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conmebol%20round-up%3A%20Argentina%20shocked%20by%20Paraguay%20as%20Brazil%20win%20fourth%20straight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fsouth-america-conmebol-world-cup-argentina-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conmebol%20round-up%3A%20Argentina%20shocked%20by%20Paraguay%20as%20Brazil%20win%20fourth%20straight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fsouth-america-conmebol-world-cup-argentina-brazil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe200ae3f3951d283c87ac2016db20e66e9706125%2F0_0_3500_2256%2F3500.jpg>
 Brazil’s Willian celebrates with team-mates after scoring. Photograph: Marco 
Bello/Reuters 
Chelsea’s Willian, who replaced Neymar in Brazil’s attack, scored the second 
in the 55th minute after a cross by Renato Augusto.

It was Brazil’s least impressive performance under new coach Tite, but Dunga’s 
replacement is enjoying a honeymoon period as the new coach, having lifted the
seleção from sixth in the standings to top spot. The match was interrupted 
after 67 minutes when the lights went out in Mérida. It took 22 minutes to 
restart the game.

Colombia 2-2 Uruguay

In Barranquilla, Oscar Tabarez’s Uruguay played against Jose Pekerman’s 
Colombia for the fifth time, and in rainy conditions, Colombia went ahead with 
a header by Abel Aguilar.Uruguay <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uruguay> 
responded with another header by Cristian Rodriguez, and Luis Suarez put the 
visitors ahead in the 73rd minute after bulldozing his way through the defence. 
Colombia defender Yerry Mina scored six minutes from time to earn Colombia a 
point.

“We are firm, we are strong and I believe that this match shows that the World 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> is much closer to 
us,” central defender Diego Godin said.

Suarez equaled Argentinian Hernan Crespo as the top scorer in South American 
World Cup qualifiers with 19 goals. “This was a great point. We have to enjoy 
this,” Suarez said.

Chile 2-1 Peru

Bayern Munich’s Arturo Vidal gave Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chile> renewed World Cup hope by scoring 
both goals in a 2-1 home win against Peru.

Before 35,000 tense fans in Santiago, Vidal opened the scoring for the Copa 
America champions with a header after 10 minutes. But when Peruvian Edison 
Flores dribbled through Chile’s defense and leveled from the edge of the box 
with 14 minutes left, the home fans showed their displeasure. Vidal came to the 
rescue with a fine turn and shot from the edge of the box in the 86th minute.

Chile remain in seventh place with 14 points, now two behind fifth-placed 
Argentina, who so far have the play-off spot.Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> are back lags in eighth, with eight 
points.

The Chilean football federation still claims the three points from the 0-0 
home draw with Bolivia in September. Chile’s executives claim thatBolivia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bolivia> fielded an ineligible player, 
defender Nelson Cabrera.

Bolivia 2-2 Ecuador

In the 3-0 victory over Chile on Thursday, Ecuador’s Enner Valencia was 
removed in an ambulance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/07/enner-valencia-everton-chased-police>
 in what some claimed was an attempt to elude police, who were chasing him for 
alleged avoidance of alimony playments. With his legal situation resolved, he 
was in the news for a different reason on Tuesday with a brace that delivered a 
draw in the altitude of La Paz.

Bolivian Pablo Escobar opened the score for the hosts in the third minute, and 
added another just before half-time. Valencia pulled one back in the 47th 
minute, and equalized with a minute to go.

Ecuador <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ecuador> stays in third place, 
with 17 points, and Bolivia lag in ninth, with eight points.

 * Full results and standings 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/preliminaries/southamerica/>  