
Conrad Black <https://www.theguardian.com/business/conradblack> is to become a 
TV talk show host. Well, co-host. The disgraced media tycoon has been signed up 
as one of the presenters of a weekly Canadian television show.

Black, publisher of the Telegraph titles and a host of newspapers across the 
States until he was convicted of fraud, will begin his new media role in the 
spring.

The live hour-long magazine-style show is aimed at people over 50 and is 
called The Zoomer - Television for Boomers With Zip. It will air on Vision TV, 
a multi-faith, multi-cultural cable channel owned by Moses Znaimer.

Black's co-host will be Denise Donlon, a former head of Sony Music in Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> and a CBC Radio executive.

Black is quoted in the Globe & Mail 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/conrad-black-in-deal-to-host-show-on-zoomermedia-tv/article7929435/>
 as saying

"I give an editorial opinion and interview somebody and there are going to be 
a couple of panels… I will have a lot of people that I know in this and other 
countries who are fairly prominent who will be happy to be interviewed. We 
should make it moderately interesting."

He also said former US secretary of state Henry Kissinger would "be happy to 
be our foreign-policy commentator."

In a pilot episode, which Znaimer is showing to international programmers in 
order to sell the show elsewhere, Black interviewedDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> via Skype.

According to the promotional blurb, the show will feature some of Black's 
favourite hobby-horses such as "the US justice system, prison reform, gun 
control and the world's financial crisis."

The Globe & Mail quotes Znaimer as saying: "He's the best dinner guest you 
might ever imagine – learned, witty, clever, engaging, knowledgeable – and 
opinionated."

Doubtless, Black will draw on his recent experiences in Britain as a TV 
interviewee last October when he called Sky's Adam Boulton"a jackass" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/oct/23/conrad-black-adam-boulton> and 
BBC's Jeremy Paxman"a priggish, gullible British fool" 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-20036674>.

But he sounded emollient by saying: "I'm certainly not entering into this with 
any thought of settling scores with anyone."

In 2007, Black was sentenced to six-and-half years by a US court. He 
eventually served two periods in jail, of 29 months and 13 months. After his 
release in May last year, he was deported to Canada.

He was granted a one-year residency permit, having renounced his citizenship 
in 2001. He and his wife, Barbara Amiel, have since been living in Toronto.

Sources: Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/conrad-black-getting-own-tv-415905>/
Globe & Mail 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/conrad-black-in-deal-to-host-show-on-zoomermedia-tv/article7929435/>
 