
I have followed the response to David Cameron’s party conference speech with 
interest (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/07/david-cameron-accuses-jeremy-corbyn-of-britain-hating-ideology>
, 8 October). What surprises me is that he made the choice to repeat the line 
about Jeremy Corbyn’s response to the death of Osama bin Laden, that had 
previously been exposed as inaccurate. It is clear to see the misrepresentation 
when comparing Cameron’s speech with Corbyn’s words.

Cameron said: “But you only really need to know one thing: he thinks the death 
of Osama bin Laden was a ‘tragedy’. No. A tragedy is nearly 3,000 people 
murdered one morning in New York. A tragedy is the mums and dads who never came 
home from work that day.”

Corbyn said: “On this [the killing of Osama bin Laden] there was no attempt 
whatsoever that I can see to arrest him, to put him on trial, to go through 
that process. This was an assassination attempt, and is yet another tragedy, 
upon a tragedy, upon a tragedy. The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the 
attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

Why does Cameron feel the need to smear his opponent with obviously incorrect 
information? Could it be that he is feeling threatened by theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader?
Clare Bewick
Guildford, Surrey

• Andrew Hussey (History lessons for the angry mob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/07/protesters-england-france-nostalgia-bullies>
, 8 October), not satisfied with stirring up controversy over his views about 
French Muslims, now seems to be making a superficial, selective and partisan 
use of incidents from French history to support the Conservative party, 
Corbyn-hating journalists and Air France bosses. Boss-napping is not some 
innovation but part of a longstanding French repertoire of contention of the 
kind explored by the historian Charles Tilly in his magisterial survey The 
Contentious French.

Doubts over David Cameron’s equality claims | Letters from Jonathan Lynn and 
others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/09/doubts-over-david-camerons-equality-claims>
More to the point, the vicious personal attacks on first Ed Miliband and now 
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> centring on 
their alleged hatred of Britain (or in Ed’s case, his Jewish refugee father’s 
alleged hatred of Britain) are only too reminiscent of the abuse hurled by the 
French right at Alfred Dreyfus, Léon Blum and Pierre Mendès France. While we 
must hope that Cameron’s conference speech and the Daily Mail’s incessant 
headlines do not provoke the kind of attack on Corbyn that Blum faced in the 
1930s as a result of the incitements of Action Française journalists, this 
continuous attack about treachery seems a lot more worrying than the old 
British tradition of egg-throwing, which is in no way unique to the left – I 
recall an occasion many decades ago when Michael Foot fell victim to it as a 
result of pro-Nato rightists’ disgust with his opposition to German rearmament.
Dr Tobias Abse
Department of History, Goldsmiths, University of London

• Andrew Hussey might consider the old saying: “You can’t change the law 
without breaking it.” The “existing model of negotiation, consensus and 
compromise” has come under threat precisely because the establishment in this 
country has deliberately trashed it. Five years of massive union marches, 
demos, civil disobedience by groups such as Occupy, UK Uncut and Disabled 
People Against Cuts, and petitions by online groups, have merely led us, via 
our outdated voting system, to a situation where our representatives, all too 
obviously under the sway of powerful moneyed interests, are simply thumbing 
their noses at us.

People get caught in the crossfire (or eggfire) because protesters cannot get 
at the real culprits, who are either sited offshore or in heavily secure 
corporate buildings. The actions of Sisters Uncut at this week’s premiere of 
Suffragette (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/07/feminist-protesters-storm-red-carpet-at-london-premiere-of-suffragette>
, 8 October) should be a reminder to Hussey, and those who throw up their hands 
in horror, of just what desperate tactics the women’s movement employed a 
century ago. As Emmeline Pankhurst said: “The broken window is the most 
powerful argument in modern politics.”
David Redshaw
Gravesend, Kent

• Cameron is both right and wrong. Right in that lefties like me now hate 
living in a country ruled by a party whose values appear to be the worship of 
money and wealth for their own sake instead of as a means to protect and help 
all citizens. Nor do we have any love for a party which is selling off our most 
valued public services, marginalising and stigmatising our most vulnerable, 
cares nothing for the environment, the arts or creativity, increases 
inequalities, cynically uses the House of Lords to reward its sponsors and 
believes in Westminster control over as much as possible.

So, Dave, you are wrong as well. It is not Corbyn’s Labour party that would 
wreck the Britain we love. Your party is already doing so and you are its 
leader.
Rachel Jenkins
York

• The only thing missing from Cameron’s Miss World-style bucket list (Polly 
Toynbee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/07/this-is-as-good-as-its-going-to-get-for-cameron-and-he-knows-it>
, 8 October) of “compassionate” Conservativism was the earnest desire for 
global peace. But first, welfare cuts…
Quentin Falk
Little Marlow, Buckinghamshire
 