
In 1985, at the height of the Aids epidemic, scientists in the US made a huge 
breakthrough in understanding this mysterious, deadly disease by isolating the 
Simian Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV) in captive rhesus macaques. A few years 
later, they successfully developed the first effective therapy against 
HIV/Aids, which gave researchers a foothold to continue investigating the 
disease.

Today, anti-retroviral therapies have advanced to such an extent that people 
living with HIV can easily manage the condition with a simple drug regimen and 
can even suppress HIV levels in the blood to undetectable levels. None of this, 
or countless other medical advances, would have been possible without 
animal-based research.

So why are we seeing so many attacks by politicians, activists and even the 
media on this fundamental aspect of scientific research?

Australian university defends using greyhounds for heart transplant study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/12/australian-university-defends-using-greyhounds-for-heart-transplant-study>
Earlier this month, Crikey published an article 
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2016/09/05/monash-university-alfred-hospital-researchers-suffocate-kill-greyhounds/>
 about the use of greyhounds in astudy 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27311376> conducted by researchers from 
Monash University and the Alfred Hospital. The words “grisly” and “gruesome” 
were thrown in to elicit a specific response: outrage and disgust.

The Age then published its own story 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/shocking-greyhounds-suffocated-hearts-removed-revived-and-killed-second-time-20160911-grdphx.html>
 on the same experiment that used similarly emotive language but took things a 
step further by heavily featuring the voices of animal rights activists. In 
both instances, the articles were unashamedly one-sided and demonised not just 
the researchers involved the study, but the use of animals in science in 
general. So, what exactly was the experiment in question?

The researchers were investigating how well they could preserve a heart once 
an organ donor had died and before transplantation occurs, with the aim of 
improving the success rate of heart transplants in humans. In order to test 
this, they anaesthetised 12 greyhounds – they were knocked unconscious to 
prevent any pain or suffering – before they were suffocated to induce 
circulatory death. The hearts were then removed and preserved for four hours 
using two different methods of preservation. Half of the dogs then received a 
heart transplant and were revived to monitor how well the heart functioned 
before they were promptly euthanised.

It may not sound pretty, but this is how scientific research works and how 
medical research in particular has advanced to such an incredible extent. 
Animal models have allowed scientists the study all manner of medical 
conditions: experiments using mice have provided crucial insights into how 
Alzheimer’s disease actually progresses in the human brain; Zika-infected 
monkeys have allowed scientists to slowly decipher how the virus works in order 
to develop a cure; and surgeries on dogs and cats have allowed researchers to 
develop and perfect life-saving procedures, like open-heart surgery and organ 
transplants.

The aforementioned articles did not convey the significance of the study – the 
researchers concluded that their findings had “potential for clinical 
application in DCD [donation after circulatory death] transplantation” – and 
make no reference to the strict ethical approval processes in place.

As a result, they made the scientists look like modern-day Dr Frankensteins 
performing all manner of experiments with whatever animal they can get their 
hands on but this couldn’t be further from reality. Scientists that use animal 
models in their work are guided by the 3Rs principles (replacement, reduction 
and refinement) that make them consider the impact of their work and ensure 
humane treatment of animals.

On top of that, an animal ethics committee 
<http://agriculture.vic.gov.au/agriculture/animal-health-and-welfare/animals-used-in-research-and-teaching/animal-ethics-committees>
 must approve all animal-based research proposals before the scientists can 
proceed. The Australian Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for 
Scientific Purposes dictates that these committees must include: a vet, an 
animal welfare representative, an animal researcher, and an independent 
representative. They have the power to reject proposals, advise researchers to 
adjust the proposal according to the 3Rs, and even stop experiments after 
they’ve begun.

Earlier this year, neurobiologist Associate Professor James Bourne wrote an 
impassioneddefence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/you-might-find-my-research-using-monkeys-abhorrent-but-it-could-save-your-life>
 of his work and the scientific community in response to federal Greens senator 
Lee Rhiannon’s moves to ban the import of non-human primates for scientific 
research. Bourne’s work is focused on how the brain repairs itself following an 
injury that results in brain damage, such as heavy impact from contact sports, 
traffic accidents and workplace injuries. He writes:

Primates share approximately 98% identity with the human genome and many 
anatomical, physiological, and behavioural similarities. For this reason, 
primates are critical to biomedical research targeting the causes, progression, 
prevention, and treatment of a wide variety of diseases.

You might find my research using monkeys abhorrent, but it could save your 
life | James Bourne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/you-might-find-my-research-using-monkeys-abhorrent-but-it-could-save-your-life>
Bourne goes on to explain that even though researchers are conscious of 
reducing the use of animal models, often there is “no alternative approach that 
can replicate the vast complexity of human disorder and disease.” He also 
stresses the importance of transparency in ethical approval processes and in 
the role of various bodies holding researchers to account – this ensures the 
public remains confident that the work being carried out by the scientific 
community is done so in the most efficient, ethical and humane way possible.

Another key failing of the articles is that they linked the use of greyhounds 
in medical research to the cruelty of some practices in greyhound racing. The
New South Wales Baird government’s moves to ban greyhound racing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/24/greyhound-racing-banned-in-new-south-wales-as-bill-passes-parliament>
have put the issue of animal rights and welfare back in the national spotlight, 
which will hopefully lead to more positive change and other state and territory 
governments following suit. But by bringing greyhound racing into the picture, 
the articles conflate the two issues and make the greyhound racing industry and 
scientific community one and the same. You cannot compare the use of animal 
models that has allowed countless medical advances to the wilful cruelty 
towards animals by a group of people motivated by profit and greed.

No one expects or wants scientists to conduct experiments on human beings to 
understand things like brain damage or heart transplants. Hence, animal-based 
research is crucial in ensuring we can still explore and investigate all manner 
of medical disorders and diseases without putting people’s lives at risk.
 