
Temperatures at the 2015 Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> are not expected to soar to 
the dizzy heights of last January’s heatwave but the tournament’s new heat 
policy will help keep tennis fans cool.


Organisers at Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> 
Park claim to have heat-proofed the event for spectators by completing the roof 
on Margaret Court Arena and adding shadecloths around backcourts.


Meteorologist Bob Leighton said his long-range forecast for the Open, which 
starts on 19 January, was a milder one than last year, with little or no rain.


“We’re expecting a slightly warm summer but this should result in about five 
days over 30 and perhaps one near 40,” he said.


“The heatwave situation will probably increase in further years but this 
summer I don’t think there will be one.”


The veteran weatherman was unruffled by the suggestion that such predictions 
more than a month away were largely guesswork.


“I’ve been with the bureau for 57 years, so if I don’t get a feel for it, I 
don’t know how you could,” he said.


For players, tournament director Craig Tiley said a new traffic light-themed 
“heat policy gauge” would help players understand whether their matches could 
be affected.


Green and amber lights would give way to red in extreme conditions.


“That’s when we’ll look at putting out the ice vests ... and potentially be 
invoking the heat policy,” Tiley said.


Criticism of the hot weather policy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2014/jan/16/australia-tennis-open-climate-change-extreme-heat>
plagued last year’s event duringa four-day stretch of 40C-plus temperatures. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/16/australian-heatwaves-hotter-longer-climate-council>


Tiley said the a combination of a wet globe bulb reading of 32.5C and an 
ambient air temperature of 40C would trigger the tournament referee to act and 
stop matches on outside courts.


“When those two happen, that’s when we’ll likely be invoking the heat policy 
if there’s going to be a sustainable period of ongoing heat,” he said.


“We felt this would take into consideration what’s best for the fans and what 
we believe is best for the playing group.”


With the completion of the third roofed stadium, the second undercover court 
Hisense Arena will be available to fans through the ground pass.


Margaret Court Arena will now be fully ticketed.
 