
If Andy Murray has a secret weapon, it might be serenity. Against Roger Federer
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> in the Rod Laver Arena here 
tomorrow night, he will need every scrap of calm he can muster if he is not to 
fall to him for a second time when in sight of the prize.

Murray sees tomorrow's final of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> not only as an examination 
of his character and tennis skill against the finest player the game has 
produced – the man who blitzed him at his first attempt, at the US Open two 
years ago – but as another step on a journey he started a long time ago.

While others – including Federer – would like him to believe this is a match 
of compelling historic significance, for ­Murray the expectations of others 
will not add an ounce to his baggage. The only pressure on him will be that he 
puts on himself.

When Federer came off court after ­blowing away an unusually meek Jo-­Wilfried 
Tsonga in three sets in the ­second semi-final yesterday, he snapped the 
­gathering to attention when he said of Murray: "I know that he would like to 
win the first [grand slam] for Britain in, what is it, 150,000 years?"

He was doing more than playing to an easily pleased audience with a limp joke. 
He was sending a mildly intimidating ­message to Murray, as a revered ­champion 
of the ring would to a contender. It is a metaphor that boxing fan Murray would 
understand better than most. He ­desperately wants to beat ­Federer in a major 
soon, much as Lennox Lewis was keen to get Evander Holyfield in the ring before 
he had moved on. ­Victory over Federer (who is not going away just yet) would 
validate Murray's young career. He could say to the next generation that he had 
beaten the best of this era and, as such, deserved to be considered his 
rightful successor in the next, the lineal ­champion of tennis. He could look 
Tsonga, for instance, in the eye and rightfully demand a ­different sort of 
respect. Likewise with his friend Rafael Nadal, if the wonderful Spaniard is 
not cruelly cut down by his knee injuries, or any of his other contemporaries 
queuing up for a shot at the champ.

When titles and ATP rankings ­accumulate, when one plane journey blurs into 
another, what matters most to the elite players is the respect of their peers. 
Murray wants that from Federer – and it has not been given unreservedly just 
yet. So he turned his guns on him ­yesterday. What Federer surely knows, 
though, is that Murray feels no need to unburden the nation. The Scot (and his 
Caledonian heritage is a factor in this) said it during the week and, if he 
fulfils that dream and gives Fred Perry's ghost a rest 74 years after the third 
and last of his or any other Briton's major wins, he will probably say it 
again: he is doing this for himself and his family.

Moments after Murray had secured his place in the final, by beating the 
­difficult and elegant Croat Marin Cilic in four sets on Thursday, he did not 
sound like someone weighed down by history. He talked, instead, like the boxer 
he probably would like to be, how each opponent was ­different, how each 
contest is ­independent of the ones that have gone before as much as the ones 
to come. "It depends on the situation. Who I am playing against," he said. "So 
long as you're calm in the head, whatever your tactics are for the match, if 
you know what you're trying to do out there, you will be fine.

"Against Rafa, I knew I had to go for my shots and play really aggressive. So 
long as you stay calm and remember to do that, it's OK. Sometimes, if you're 
­thinking about other things, you can take your eye off the ball a little bit."

Federer drove the stiletto of history in again when he reminded ­everyone 
that, in the US Open two years ago, the ­vulnerable Scot folded against him. 
"Maybe in the [2009] US Open," he said, "you could think he crumbled there 
under pressure [when he lost to Marin Cilic in straight sets], being in the 
finals the year before. Once your game is good enough, even on your off days, 
you come through. That's what he's proving here. He's one match away. I'll make 
sure it won't happen."

Murray, however, has an uncanny ability to compartmentalise good experiences 
from bad. He said of that Cilic defeat at the time that it was the worst day of 
his career. He does not talk about it now.

He remembers what he wants to remember. When the former world boxing champion 
Ricky Hatton saw him after his quarter-final win this week, Murray could not 
recall having met him before. ­Hatton says they had met several times. That 
does not invalidate his recollection of Flushing Meadows, either in 2008 or 
2009, but it does ­indicate he has the selective ­judgment that ­champions 
possess, culling the ­irrelevant from the useful.

"As a person I don't think I've changed that much [since losing to Federer in 
New York]," he said. "As a player, obviously, I'm a lot more experienced. 
Physically, I am a lot stronger and my game's just got better. I've improved 
most parts of it."

It is an assessment with which ­Federer did not wholeheartedly agree. Had 
­Murray improved since then, we ­wondered? "Well," he said, pausing, "I think 
he's still as good, let's put it that way. He was already an excellent player 
back then. Now he has more matches in his body."

It was beyond equivocal. It was a ­little dig to the ribs, a slight disguised 
as a compliment.

Federer says Murray is "consistent" and "one of the best return players we 
have". He can make these pronouncements because he is Federer. They are valid 
in the context of his considerable achievements, most of which will never be 
equalled. But they also serve his purpose.

When asked why Murray led him 6-4 in career match-ups, he saw it thus: 
"Without taking anything away from him, a few times he played me I wasn't at my 
very, very best."

If Federer was left debilitated by ­glandular fever after reaching the 
semi-finals here in 2008, it was Murray's good fortune, perhaps, to catch him 
at Dubai a few months later. "I know some don't like to hear it," Federer said. 
"Some still don't believe me, for some reason."

He added: "We had some close matches on many occasions, where I thought I was 
in control and I ended up giving the match away by making errors of my own ... 
That's why I don't really care too much about how the head-to-head stands."

Murray does not either, perhaps. There will be another title fight along soon 
enough. But he craves a win in this one. It is, as he said recently, his time. 
"[Winning a slam] is just something I have always wanted to do," he said. "I 
know that if I do it, it will be a huge weight off my shoulders and I'll play 
better tennis after I do it. I will try my best to do it this time. If it 
doesn't happen, I will try to do it again. But I will stay the same person, 
regardless."

There is a vivid sense that, although Federer says he feels less pressure than 
Murray in this final, that might not be entirely true. This will not be his 
last slam, far from it; it could, though, be the one that will be remembered as 
the match in which Murray landed the first proper punch on him.
 