
Stress affects one in five <http://www.stress.org.uk/Stress-at-work.aspx> of 
the working population and105 million days are lost to the illness each year. 
<http://www.stress.org.uk/Stress-at-work.aspx>

It's an ongoing issue in the UK, as the number of stress cases has not fallen 
in ten years <http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress/index.htm>.

And it can affect anyone, from graduates to top-tier professionals. The former 
head of the Financial Services Authority,Hector Sants, is the latest 
high-profile figure to take time off because of stress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/15/hector-sants-barclays-exhaustion>
.

It's a serious issue for managers too, particularly when it comes to helping 
their teams deal with problems. After all,figures show 
<http://www.stress.org.uk/Stress-at-work.aspx> that stress costs UK employers 
£1.24bn a year.

Both managers and employees can take steps to reduce their own stress at work 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/how-to-avoid-burning-out-at-work>, and deal 
with the consequences among their teams. From casual conversations, to 
psychological support, knowing how to deal with the everyday strains of your 
job is essential.

Whether you're concerned about your heavy workload, wanting to reduce the 
pressure of your job, or are suffering from critical levels of stress, taking 
action is crucial.

So, to mark National Stress Awareness Day 
<http://www.isma.org.uk/about-national-stress-awareness-day-nsad/>, we're 
hosting a live chat onWednesday 6 November from 6:30pm-8pm, where you can quiz 
our panel of experts. We'll be discussing:

• How to avoid stress

• How to recognise the symptoms of stress

• Coping techniques

• How to discuss stress with your employer

• Helping colleagues who are suffering

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you cancreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?returnUrl=http%3A%2F%2Fcareers.theguardian.com%2Fgraduate-schemes-application-process-live-chat>
, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook profiles and comment. Alternatively, 
you can tweet us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email 
your questions toMartin Williams <mailto:martin.williams.casual@theguardian.com>
 who can post them on the Q&A.

Our panel

Neil Shah is the founder and director of The Stress Management Society 
<http://www.stress.org.uk/>. He is also author of The 10 Step Stress Solution 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091939960>
 and is regarded as one of the UK's leading experts on stress.

Alan Bradshaw is a business psychologist specialising in work-related stress. 
He is non-executive director ofInternational Stress Management Association 
(ISMA) <http://www.isma.org.uk/>. His business, Work-Life Solutions 
<http://www.the-stress-site.net/>, provides training and surveys to 
organisations.

Clare Whitmell is a Guardian contributor and a qualified business 
communication trainer. Clare specialises in writing and presentation skills 
coaching. She also blogs about CV writing and job-hunting tips on
JobMarketSuccess.com <http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/>.

Sarah Archer is a career coach and co-founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>, an organisation providing coaching to help 
people find work they love. She has coached clients on career resilience and 
managing stress, and also has a background in HR where she developed policies 
on work/life balance.

Louise Aston is the Workwell director of Business In The Community (BITC) 
<http://www.bitc.org.uk/programmes/workwell>, where she has been since 2007. 
She led the development of BITC's Workwell Model, the first framework to 
successfully integrate employee engagement and wellbeing alongside business 
objectives.

Steve Nicholls <http://www.stevenichollscareercoaching.co.uk> is a career 
development coach who specialises in helping senior executives and managers 
forge meaningful careers. He has 17 years of career coaching experience and a 
background in business.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook. 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 