
Corey Feldman has said he is too scared to leave his home after his 
performance on the Today show on Friday went viral over the weekend.

The former child star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/23/elijah-wood-hollywoods-child-sex-abuse-comparable-to-jimmy-savile-case>
, who is best known for his roles inThe Goonies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/05/my-favourite-film-the-goonies>
 andStand By Me <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/89213/stand-by-me>, was 
on the morning show to perform Go 4 It, a new song from his fifth studio album 
Angelic 2 the Core.

The performance, which saw him don an all-black outfit and dance in a “Michael 
Jackson-inspired” manner, led some outlets to suggesthe’d lost his mind 
<http://www.spin.com/2016/09/corey-feldman-lost-his-damn-mind-on-today/> and 
became a viral hit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRg33G6apK7I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRg33G6apK7I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRg33G6apK7I&media=>
During a now deleted Facebook Live video Feldman said the past 24 hours had 
been “really painful 
<http://www.people.com/article/corey-feldman-sobs-reacting-today-performance>” 
and that he’s “never had such mean things said about me” during the aftermath 
of the performance. “We can’t get out of bed right now. We’re petrified to even 
go out,” he said.


He continued: “I’m sorry if it’s not good enough for you, but you don’t have 
to beat us up. I just want to say that, like, why is it OK to, like, publicly 
shame us?”

“It’s, like, not PC to, like, say somebody is fat or somebody is white or 
somebody is black or somebody is yellow or green or if they have a short leg or 
if they have a missing finger,” He added. “But it’s OK to bash Corey Feldman 
and the Angels.”

Feldman recently spoke about how he felt threatened by child abusers in Los 
Angeles in the 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/23/elijah-wood-hollywoods-child-sex-abuse-comparable-to-jimmy-savile-case>
 when he was a rising child actor.

He said he was “surrounded” by abusers, with around 15 older men “leching 
around like vultures”.
 