
It is not just a UK and an NHS first. The start of building work on the 
high-energy proton beam service at Manchester’s Christie hospital marks a 
significant point in the institution’s transformation, from locally loved 
north-west specialist institution to world-leading player on the cancer stage.

The £125m five-floor proton beam therapy centre opening its doors in 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/04/uk-three-proton-beam-therapy-centres-ashya-king-cancer>
 will be able to treat 750 of the most complicated cancer patients every year, 
many of them children – such as Ashya King, whose parents triggered an 
international police hunt when theytook him to the Czech Republic to receive 
proton beam therapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/15/ashya-king-start-proton-therapy-czech>
.

The government has invested £250m in building and equipping two NHS sites. The 
second, at University College London hospitals, will open a few months after 
the Christie.

The Christie is already the biggest centre in the UK delivering conventional 
electron-based radiotherapy (as well as the biggest chemotherapy centre), but 
the advantage of proton beam therapy is that it allows the use of higher doses 
of radiotherapy, precisely targeted to within millimetres (rather than 
centimetres) of the tumour and, crucially, without damaging surrounding tissues.

A cyclotron weighing the same as a Boeing 747 will generate a proton beam 
capable of treating three patients at a time, five days a week. Treatment can 
take as little as a minute at a time, although positioning a patient correctly 
can take up to 45 minutes.

The UK currently has a low-energy NHS proton beam facility at Clatterbridge 
cancer centre, in the Wirral, suitable for treating rare cancers of the eye, 
but complex cases need high energy proton beam therapy.

Other groups to benefit from this NHS facility will be people suffering from 
advanced prostate, ocular and spinal cancers. Currently NHS patients have to 
travel to the US or Switzerland. The cost of overseas treatment varies 
according to its complexity, but the average is approximately £75,000, whereas 
the Christie expects the average cost of on the new NHS service to be less than 
£40,000. The figures in both cases include accommodation.

At the turf-cutting ceremony for the Christie proton beam centre, chief 
executive Roger Spencer said: “This proton beam therapy facility represents a 
crucial piece of the jigsaw, which equips the Christie to become the biggest 
radiotherapy centre in the world as well as one of the top five cancer 
hospitals in the world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fproton-beam-therapy-help-cure-uks-toughest-cancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514289996%2Fc166bd4a-de2d-4c24-b1a0-fa9d2b2af27b-2060x1405.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20proton%20beam%20therapy%20help%20cure%20the%20UK's%20toughest%20cancers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fproton-beam-therapy-help-cure-uks-toughest-cancers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20proton%20beam%20therapy%20help%20cure%20the%20UK%27s%20toughest%20cancers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhealthcare-network%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fproton-beam-therapy-help-cure-uks-toughest-cancers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440514289996%2Fc166bd4a-de2d-4c24-b1a0-fa9d2b2af27b-2060x1405.jpeg>
 Marcel van Herk says Manchester has a powerful cancer infrastructure he’s not 
found anywhere else. Photograph: The Christie 
Big claims, but what of the substance? The Christie has form for world firsts 
– including therapeutic use of x-rays in 1901, clinical use of the breast 
cancer drug tamoxifen (1970), use of cultured bone marrow in leukaemia, and 
umbilical cord stem cell transplant for blood cancers.

The world expert on targeted cancer treatment, Marcel van Herk, has left the 
prestigious Netherlands Cancer Institute after 32 years to take up the chair of 
radiotherapy physics based at the Christie, but jointly funded with the 
University ofManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>. Another 
recent catch is Karen Kirkby, the new chair in proton beam physics, who has 
left the Ion Beam Centre at the University of Surrey to take up her joint post.

What excites me and has brought me to Manchester is the chance to get the 
whole cancer treatment chain right.
Marcel van Herk 
There’s also another new piece of kit arriving at the Christie – the MR Linac 
– one of only 10 in the world combining advanced imaging techniques with a 
linear accelerator. Across the road from the Christie is the newly opened 
£28.5m Manchester cancer research centre building, a joint venture between the 
Christie, Manchester University andCancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Research UK. It brings together 
250 researchers and clinicians from across the UK, working to translate new 
research into treatments as fast as possible. A new Maggie’s centre is also 
under construction.

So what’s the current pull about Manchester? Van Herk (who has a formula named 
after him defining the margins of treatment around a tumour) is clear that 
access to the new proton beam therapy centre is part of it because it completes 
a powerful cancer infrastructure he’s not found anywhere else. He has uprooted 
his family because of the critical mass of networks and expertise built up 
between the Christie, Manchester University and Cancer Research UK and beyond, 
that promises real cancer breakthroughs – and soon.

 He said: “What excites me and has brought me to Manchester is the chance to 
get the whole cancer treatment chain right. It is about much more than 
equipment.”

Factors he mentions are access to the 3.2m cancer population – Europe’s 
biggest and not divided as in London’s specialist hospitals – and the 
excitement of having a new, young team of clinicians and researchers from every 
aspect of medicine and medical physics. Van Herk has already started a 
large-scale data-mining project to identify which lymph nodes need treating in 
high-risk prostate cancer patients, and another to improve image-guided 
radiotherapy for children.

Knowledge from the proton beam project will also have worldwide support thanks 
to a recently announced £915,000 grant from the Science and Technology 
Facilities Council (STFC) to allow the Christie to make links with some of the 
the world-leading organisations such as Cern. Their advances in detectors 
developed for the large hadron collider may allow strides to be made in 
advanced radiotherapy.

The transformation of Manchester into a cancer top player represents five 
years of canny collaboration (including a £30m joint recruitment programme) 
between the Christie and the university, driven by the fact that Manchester’s 
population has one of the worst cancer records in the country.

David Scott, Cancer Research UK’s director of science funding, said: “The 
Cancer Research UK Manchester centre has recently received extra investment, 
and the additional funding is already attracting leading cancer researchers 
from around the globe. We have watched it grow into a world class cancer 
centre, and by uniting doctors and scientists under a single strategy, we hope 
this will help accelerate the progress of getting beneficial new treatments to 
patients as quickly as possible. There’s a particular focus on personalised 
treatments and immunotherapy, which is already showing huge promise for 
patients with several types of cancer.”

The arrival of the proton beam therapy to Manchester is one more piece of 
equipment in the search for effective cancer treatments. Spencer says: “We are 
clearly getting something right by this collaborative approach, as Greater 
Manchester’s one-year cancer survival rates are now [at 70%] the best in the 
country. We now need to look at the longer term figures and at late-stage 
presentation.”

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.

• This article was amended on 27 August 2015 to make clear that Prof van 
Herk’s position as chair of radiotherapy physics at the Christie is jointly 
funded by the University of Manchester.

 