
Last week Ian Jones, the chief executive of S4C, made an impassioned plea for 
the survival of the Welsh language broadcaster. WithS4C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/s4c> now almost totally dependent on the BBC 
for funding Jones was effectively kicking off the debate about the next BBC 
charter. The future of the broadcaster is intertwined with the BBC, and yet no 
guarantee has been given on funding beyond early 2017, with the key questions 
on level and length of support hammered out as part of the charter renewal 
process.

"It shouldn't be a poor relative but a national treasure," he asserted.

When the coalition government came to power S4C received an annual grant of 
£101m a year from the culture department. The government's austerity era 
burning of departmental budgets meant theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is now S4C's lifeline – albeit with a 
36% funding cut.

While Jones was making his case for a secure slice of the BBC licence fee in a 
market town in NorthWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, in the 
capital Ofcom announced its third major review of public service broadcasting. 
The five-yearly reviews usually translate into a year of cross-examination of 
the BBC, a chance for rivals to put the boot in. This time Ofcom said it is not 
overly keen to look at well-trodden issues such as top-slicing: the regulator 
says it will not seek to "ask or answer questions" relating to the BBC that 
will be covered in the upcoming royal charter review.

Ofcom has already built some stability into the PSB eco-system with the calm 
renewal of the 10-year licences of ITV, Channel 4 andChannel 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive>. And its plan to present 
conclusions in a year's time, after the general election, means it is seeking 
to side-step politics. This extends to deciding not to explore the potential 
for further devolution of broadcasting, though how Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland are served is a key issue. Nor is it going to advise on "what might be 
a more optimal mix of institutions" for public service delivery.

This seems to be also avoiding the major debate. Which is contestable funding, 
or the merits and demerits of a more systematic, evidence-based top-slicing of 
the licence fee than we have at present. Should £3.5bn or so a year be shared? 
Could Britons get more bang for the PSB billions? Detailed, dispassionate work 
is needed to prepare for charter renewal, on the risks of decriminalising 
non-payment, the trends in new household formation (more licence fees), how 
public money is spent, by programme genre and community.

At last month's Westminster Media Forum, children's television producers 
demanded bigger budgets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/02/bbc-childrens-content-licence-fee>
 under the new charter for CBeebies and CBBC, as the only patrons to fully fund 
British children's programmes. Lenny Henry used his Bafta lecture to argue for 
ring-fenced funds for BAME (black, Asian and minority ethnic) production.

The one area where Ofcom will expressly focus is the future of Channel 4, 
which was founded at the same time as S4C, but which commercially funds itself, 
as a not-for-profit company. When Andy Duncan was chief executive (2004-09),
Channel 4 argued vociferously that it would face a ruinous £150m "funding gap" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/06/channel-4-programme-budget-cut> 
by the end of 2012. The broadcaster reported a "planned loss" of £15m in 2013 
and says it will break even this year. Ofcom is to examine if it has the muscle 
to compete with larger global media operators, while also expressing concern 
about the "compelling alternatives" online companies pose in luring away its 
highly sought-after youth audience. In reality the competition question is 
partly code for assessing the impact of Channel 5, now owned by US giant 
Viacom, which promises a complete overhaul of its programming.

Channel 4's ad sales business could also be seriously disrupted if Channel 5's 
TV ads sales contract is handed to Sky Media, whereViacom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/viacom> is already the biggest third party 
customer. Ofcom has worried for some time about Channel 4's performance, last 
year firing off a letter of concerns including audience share decline at the 
main channel - which has fallen to a record low.

A key Channel 4 strength is its hold on 16-34s, despite them quickly moving to 
mobile and tablets. Ofcom is also keenly aware of the growing issue of data and 
who controls it, a major theme ofChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> chief executive David Abraham.

In typically dry Ofcom-speak there will also be an investigation into "new 
intermediaries which control platforms". This bland terminology belies the 
importance the regulator clearly attaches to an analysis of the "control of 
potentially valuable direct relationships with audiences". Expect Netflix, 
Amazon and Apple to feature, alongside smart-TVs, phones and games consoles. 
WhatOfcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> finds could well prove to 
be the most intriguing, and impactful, outcome of its latest review of the 
future threats facing our biggest public service broadcasters.
 