
All summer long, visitors stopped to puzzle over the ruins that had surfaced 
on the new heath at Sandy Warren. In the five years since the conifer 
plantations had been cut down, sunlight had brought forth bracken, birch 
seedlings, sheep's sorrel and welcome sprigs of heather. But here out of the 
earth appeared the footings of buildings, bricks laid on edge as 
herringbone-pattern trackways, and, most striking of all, a double-garage-sized 
rectangle of block paving that one wag said must have been a barbecue base.

Whenever I encounter a baffled walker at this point, I feel compelled to tell 
the story. Late last winter, I was part of an English Heritage-backed team 
following up on aerial photographs from 1946. The grainy pictures showed oblong 
clusters on this area of the then partly forested heath. In just one day, it 
took little more than a skim of the sandy soil to uncover their remnants – the 
foundations of Nissen huts and sentry blocks from the second world war. Thrown 
up in haste, these buildings were the town's great wartime secret in the woods. 
I tracked down an old soldier whose recollections of coming here were sketchy. 
But he confirmed that the site was an ammunition dump – one of three huge 
stores in woods within a five-mile radius used for bullets and shells.

For the second time in 70 years, these rough constructions are suffering a 
kind of invasion. During their brief summer in the sun, the ranks of bricks 
were infiltrated. Brambles sent spiny stems snaking over the open surfaces, and 
weeds found rootholds in the gaps between frost-bitten edges, before collapsing 
in the dieback of autumn. Perhaps future generations will uncover these ruins 
again. But in the absence of wartime written records and living testimony, the 
little that we know now will be all they have to rely on.
 