
Autumn means fungus forays through multicoloured woods, kicking a way through 
crunchy fallen leaves of gold, red and green. Fat-bellied stoggies (wood 
pigeons) feasting on beech mast, and squabbling rooks in the oak trees raiding 
acorns. Bejewelled hedgerows, strung together with gossamer threads, 
highlighted in the misty mornings as the weak rays of the morning sun nudge 
their way through the greyness, with wild geese flying overhead in a V 
formation, noisily proclaiming that winter is on its way.

Walking down my quiet country lane, I feel the heaviness of the still air. The 
mist has dulled all the senses: no sounds, no smells, just a greyness. But as I 
walk on I hear a high-pitched sound, and then I see them, a flock of 
long-tailed tits whistling down the hedgerow, and I watch their acrobatics with 
wonder; soon they are gone, enveloped by the grey haze of autumn.

And autumn, in east Yorkshire, is the time of Hull Fair. The first royal 
charter for a fair to be held here was granted in the 1200s, and to begin with 
it was mainly a gathering of traders to sell all manner of goods, but by the 
1800s entertainment was the main focus. By 1906 it had a fixed date in October, 
and a fixed site off Walton Street of 14 acres, making it the largest fair in 
England. This year it is running for eight days, until tomorrow. Like so many 
other revellers, I have golden memories of the fair, of battling against the 
tide of people down Walton Street. I remember the bright lights and swirling, 
stomach-churning rides, the sounds of the hurdy-gurdy barrel organ competing 
with pop music blaring out from the rides, showmen shouting their wares, the 
roar of motorbikes on the wall of death, and the wail of the ghost train. The 
sweet smell of candy floss, roasted chestnuts, and hot dogs and onions bring it 
all back to me.


 