
It was refreshing to hear Courteney Cox boldly admit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/25/friends-star-courteney-cox-regrets-horrible-efforts-to-fight-ageing>
 that she regrets her past efforts to conceal the effects of ageing. The 
actor’s realisation that it was all fairly pointless might stop the rest of us 
down here on the ground from trying it.

I’m not quite sure what’s she’s tried, she’s been a bit cagey about it, 
admitting only to the sort of mistake that “dissolves and goes away”, but 
apparently theworld has been talking about 
<http://www.nova1069.com.au/entertainment/courteney-cox-thought-she-looked-horrible-after-cosmetic-surgery>
 “her ever-changing appearance – bigger lips, wrinkle-free forehead, the 
works”. So I had a stare at some of herbefore and after pictures 
<http://www.lifeandstylemag.com/posts/courteney-cox-plastic-surgery-face-69871/photos/ourtney-cox-sept-2003-112240#photo-anchor>
, but I couldn’t tell the difference. She looked fine to me. No calamitous 
sausage-lips or balloon bosoms; no stretched, stuck-in-a-wind-tunnel face. 
Whatever she has done must have been fairly modest, and she could presumably 
afford not to go to any quacks, because cosmetic surgery can be adangerous game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/21/cosmetic-surgery-clinics-named-shamed-cqc-misuse-eye-surgery>
.

But most importantly Cox has decided to stop “trying to keep up with getting 
older … [and just] let it be”. This is a lesson for us all, because there’s 
nothing we can do about it, and the sooner we stop being repulsed by old age, 
the better.

For baby boomers, the 1950s were years of hope | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/29/for-baby-boomers-the-1950s-were-years-of-hope>
It’s not easy, though. I’m pretty repulsed by my own old age – the extra 
whiskers, moles like saucers, turkey neck, swaths of wrinkles and general 
last-chicken-in-the-shop body, but I am trying to love and accept it all the 
same. And anyone, like Cox, who’s struggling at 49, 50, 52 (there’s a bit of 
confusion in the press as to how old she is), is going to find it much harder 
as life goes on. So good for her, for starting now.

Perhaps it is more difficult to cope with old age if you have been considered 
beautiful in your youth. You have more to lose. But those of us who thought 
ourselves fairly gruesome from an early age (whether it was true or not) may 
have got to grips with this problem earlier. I moan about my own elderly looks, 
but really I don’t give half as much of a stuff as I used to. Having been 
called coconut-bonce, pointy head and a praying mantis by various fellows, I 
realised decades ago that I was never going to win.

But whatever you do, however hard you try, however “beautiful” you are, the 
bar will always be raised when you think you’ve got there. For Cox and her 
sort, there will always be some bitchy/slimeball commentator searching for a 
minuscule flaw that they can sneer at. Particularly if you are a woman, and 
getting older. And even more so if you are in the public eye. I hear 
comparatively little moaning about ageing men’s beer-bellies, bald heads, 
comb-overs, and general flab, whiskers and wreckage.

Friends star Courteney Cox regrets 'horrible' efforts to fight ageing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/25/friends-star-courteney-cox-regrets-horrible-efforts-to-fight-ageing>
So stuff it. Why slice oneself to pieces, stick potentially leaking jellies 
into your breast, suck out fat, slap on “rejuvenating” creams, inject, paint, 
shave, and scrape away at your skin, at first to look pleasing to God knows 
who, but most of all, to stop looking old? Why not, as Cox has suggested, “let 
it be”, because nobody really cares. No one passing in the street spots you and 
thinks “what a hideous looking old woman!” They couldn’t care less. They’re 
probably too worried about their own mouldering complexions.

Not that I’m condemning any interventions. If you are weighed down by gigantic 
bosoms, or have none to speak of, or satchels beneath your eyes, or your front 
teeth fall out, then why not improve things if you can, and if it makes you 
feel better. I can understand the pain of wanting to do something about it. 
Aged 15 I was desperate to have the end of my gigantic nose cut off. It wasn’t 
allowed.

Now I dye my hair, I have caps on my teeth, my ears are pierced, I remove 
facial hair, I try not to go out with egg on my T-shirt, but the good news, I 
find, is that as the years go by, accepting one’s looks seems to get easier – 
if like Cox, you can try not to be bothered. Because what did she get for 
looking great while dining on maggots in the Irish wilds with Bear Grylls?

“There’s life in your eyes,” said he 
<http://www.womensweekly.co.nz/latest/celebrity/courtney-cox-opens-up-about-her-struggle-with-ageing-20302>
. Was that meant to be a compliment? Is that what all the anti-ageing efforts 
were for? Is it worth it?
 