
Memories of the biggest humiliation in Brazilian football and the return of 
Lionel Messi to Argentina were not enough to stop the five-time World Cup 
winners from beating their arch-rivals on Thursday in South American qualifying 
for theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>.

Brazil won in Belo Horizonte, and they won comfortably, 3-0. There were no 
Brazilians in tears this time, unlike at the World Cup in 2014, when the hosts
infamously lost 7-1 to Germany in the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
.

Brazil 3-0 Argentina: World Cup 2018 qualifier - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/10/brazil-argentina-world-cup-2018-qualifier-live>
The lopsided victory over Argentina extended Brazil’s winning streak under new 
coach Tite to five matches, giving the qualification leaders 24 points from 11 
matches. Argentina have 16. TheArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> coach, Edgardo Bauza, finds 
himself in an even tougher position after a poor performance in Brazil. His 
team remains in sixth place, outside the continent’s four automatic spots for 
the 2018 World Cup in Russia.

Elsewhere, Copa America champions Chile held third-place Colombia to a 0-0 
draw away, despite the absence of Arsenal striker Alexis Sanchez due to injury. 
Second-place Uruguay beat an Ecuador side filled with reserves 2-1 in 
Montevideo. The Uruguayans have 23 points, just one behindBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil>.

Elsewhere, Peru producing a shock 4-1 win in Paraguay and are now back in the 
race for a place in Russia. The Peruvians remain in eighth spot with 14 points, 
one behind seventh-place Paraguay.

In a match between the two worst teams in South American qualifiers, Venezuela 
trashed Bolivia 5-0 at home. Venezuela are now in ninth place with five points, 
one ahead of Bolivia.
 