
The latest setback on the housebuilding front (UK construction at weakest 
level for four years as housebuilding stalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/housebuilding-stalls-britain-eu-construction>
, theguardian.com, 11 November) is seen by some commentators as a sign of the 
doom and gloom about to engulf the post-Brexit economy. It is also argued that 
the prospect of controlling our borders will serve only to deepen this gloom. I 
totally disagree.

Redfern review into housing: worth building on?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/nov/15/redfern-review-housing-taylor-wimpey-labour-theresa-may>
The truth is that no government in recent decades has built enough homes. But 
with post-Brexit interest rates being at the level they are, the prime minister 
has a mega opportunity to reverse this trend, thereby paving the way for 
progress on three fronts: boosting the supply of housing to buy or rent, 
initiating a serious programme of welfare reform, and meeting voters’ wishes 
for lower immigration.

Here’s how. A first necessary move is to deliver to housing associations the 
land and resources they need to get building. As a second move, this needs to 
link into a skills acquisition strategy. A handful of skills providers are now 
offering boutique apprenticeship courses in bricklaying, plumbing, carpentry 
and so on, which take just 10 weeks to complete. Were Mrs May to extend this 
provision – promoting it as a serious option for young people leaving school as 
well as prisoners on short sentences – she would find in no time that she has 
all but plugged the skills shortages in the building trades. Crucially she will 
have done so without needing to recruit from overseas. Thousands of young 
workers would be equipped with the skills they need to earn decent wage 
packets, rather than draw benefit.

What better way of putting working-class families in the driving seat of 
post-Brexit Britain, than by so acting to give a generation of youngsters a 
foot in the door?
Frank Field MP
Labour, Birkenhead

• To set against the present reality of Polly Toynbee (Only a decrepit society 
would deprive families of a home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/decrepit-society-deprive-young-families-home-autumn-statement-theresa-may>
, 15 November), there is some sign of imminent breakthrough when theSun warns 
on 4 November 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2114589/as-government-ponders-return-for-prefabs-our-shortage-of-homes-leaves-door-open-for-premier-corbyn/>
 that the housing crisis is the one thing Labour “could use to claw itself back 
into power” and elsewhere Sajid Javid admits that the big developers have a 
stranglehold over (land) supply and are sitting on land banks delaying 
build-out. All it will take is for John McDonnell, a member ofthe Labour Land 
Campaign <http://www.labourland.org/>, to steam in with a land value tax to 
push all available land on to the market and into the bargain the decrepit 
Conservative party is finished.
David Reed
Northampton

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 