
Global financial collapse isn't necessarily bad news for everybody in the 
business world. A solitary US company, Campbell's Soup, has been standing ever 
taller while all around have fallen.

When Wall Street suffered the worst points fall in its history on Monday, 
there were 499 fallers in the Standard & Poor's 500 index. There was only one 
climber – the world's biggest soup manufacturer.

Wags quickly suggested this was in anticipation of long queues at soup kitchens
 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/blogs/phillyinc/Campbell_Soup_stirs_as_the_SP_500_melts_down.html>
 in the Great Depression of 2008.

But Campbell's has been doing nicely for a little while. Its shares have 
surged by 9% over a month in which the Dow Jones Industrial Average has lost 
6%. The New Jersey-based company posted a handy 46% rise in quarterly profits, 
to $89m, last month.

So is it really true that people slurp more soup in moments of economic 
hardship? Are people flocking to the shops to buy tins of condensed tomato 
broth?

Anthony Sanzio, a Campbell's spokesman, was only to happy to revel in the 
moment with a cheesy comment: "During times of uncertainty, people look to the 
familiar and, to Americans, Campbell's soup is certainly that."

Sign of the chimes

It is generally considered a great honour to ring the opening or closing bell 
at the New York Stock Exchange, but the privilege lost a little of its tarnish 
this week.

The ceremony, shown daily on CNN and CNBC, usually comprises a clutch of 
grinning executives or celebrities pressing a button and then applauding 
wildly. But it didn't happen quite like that on Monday, when the Dow Jones 
Industrial Average fell by 777 points.

A lone woman appeared on the trading floor balcony, rang the bell and 
disappeared through a side door the moment the chimes had ceased. She was back 
on Tuesday morning, ringing the bell and then scuttling off anonymously at 
speed.

The New York Times solved the mystery 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/01/business/01bell.html?ref=> – apparently, the 
Broadway actor Missi Pyle was lined up to do the honours but wasn't entranced 
at the prospect of bringing down the curtain on the Dow's biggest ever points 
fall. So a clerk at the NYSE was hurriedly roped in.

Jim Haggerty, the chief executive of the PR Consulting Group, told the NYT 
that the Stock Exchange isn't a good place to be seen just now: "Right now, it 
can be a little bit like being asked to blow the foghorn on the Titanic."

The NYSE's website is a mine of information on bell-ringing – recent ringers 
include the president of Montenegro, the US Olympic fencing team and Miss 
German-America (somebody called Melissa Gratzl).Clips of the ceremonies 
<http://www.nyse.com/events/Cal_1161196810933.html> are usually available on 
the NYSE's website. Oddly, Monday's isn't there.

Radler heads for 'golf therapy'

The man who snitched on Conrad Black is finally getting his reward. The dodgy 
lord's erstwhile business partner David Radler was promised light treatment in 
prison as part of a plea agreement in which he became the star prosecution 
witness at Black's trial in Chicago last year.

In court, Radler admitted helping Black concoct fraudulent schemes to embezzle 
millions of dollars from shareholders at the pair's Hollinger media empire. 
But, he told the jury, Black was the brains behind the operation.

In return for his co-operation, Radler was sentenced to 29 months in jail. 
Black got six and a half years.

And after only seven months in a Pennsylvania prison, it was confirmed this 
week 
<http://canadianpress.google.com/article/ALeqM5i9zQFDbvkS37Ksnga10WGdwXva7A> 
that Radler has been transferred to a facility in his homeland north of the 
49th parallel.

Serving time in Canada is a much more convivial experience than slopping out 
in the US. During Black's trial, a scornful US prosecution lawyer read out the 
lax rules of some of Canada's prisons – one British Columbia jail has an 
organic farm and tennis courts, while another allows inmates to tend cattle or 
participate in "golf therapy".

"As a non-golfer, it won't help me," Radler deadpanned to the jury.
 