
How much of a battering does your fast forward button take? Any serious telly 
watcher worth their salsa-stained Slanket knows viewing hours are just too 
precious to wade through adverts, titles and even (whisper it) duff scenes. 
Thankfully, watching on catch-up means you don't have to.

And yet, there are some shows where it's worth spending that extra three 
minutes watching from the very beginning; some shows where the opening credits 
are so jaw-droppingly impressive they'll stop even the itchiest trigger finger 
in its tracks; some shows where the titles are even actually better than the 
show. So here's a starter-list of our favourites. Let us know what you'd add to 
it

Hung 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFSEWYOFu6EQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFSEWYOFu6EQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFSEWYOFu6EQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Thomas Jane's <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Jane> formidably schlonged 
sports coach struts through Detroit's crumbling streets before stripping off 
for a spot of daytime skinny-dipping. The credits are terrifically shot and 
performed â€“ and the soundtrack is a bluesy Black Keys riff so filthy it'll have 
you reaching for the anti-bac gel.

Titles v show = titles. The show might be a bit of a bawdy 
cable-drama-by-numbers, but the titles have a swaggering brilliance.

Dexter
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fcgo57OBKFOA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fcgo57OBKFOA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fcgo57OBKFOA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Forensic close-up footage transforms serial killer Dexter Morgan's morning 
routine into something more sinister and nailsthe show's darkly comic feel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/jul/11/indefenceofdexter>
 in less than two minutes. It's a sharp combo of slyly knowing fake-outs and 
Caligulicious breakfast scoffing that won the Emmy for Outstanding Main Title 
Design in 2007.

Titles v show = titles. The twist-laden slasher drama never quite matches the 
perfectly creepy genius of the intro.

The Simpsons
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhakTgWriy7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhakTgWriy7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhakTgWriy7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Engineering an ever-changing chalkboard and couch gag into the DNA of the 
yellow-skinned comedy institution 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog+the-simpsons>? A 
masterstroke. Freshening up the famous titles with a new sight gag-stuffed 
sequence after nearly two decades? Even smarter.

Titles v show = titles. The titles still raise a titter but when was the last 
time you watched a new Simpsons episode all the way through? Exactly.

The Muppet Show 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzU7RhSLi-No%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzU7RhSLi-No%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzU7RhSLi-No%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"It's time to play the music, it's time to light the lights!" Surely it's not 
justKermit-nuzzling nostalgia 
<http://www.muppetcentral.com/articles/editorials/kermit_bn.shtml> that makes 
this an all time favourite can it? The opening titles' combo of high-kicking 
chaos, wry razzle-dazzle and a suitably bewildered human guest star is still an 
instant grin-inducer.

Titles vs show = show. The opening is ace but the show was ripping into 
backstage buffoonery way before30 Rock did the same 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2009/dec/07/30-rock>.

The Sopranos
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRiDoBYu-S04%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRiDoBYu-S04%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRiDoBYu-S04%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Tony Soprano's cigar-chomping car journey to Jersey captures all the brooding 
suburban menace explored acrosssix gong-strewn seasons of operatic mob action 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/jan/12/sopranos-best-tv-drama>. 
It's since been spoofed to exhaustion by everyone from E4 to The Simpsons.

Titles v show = both. An example of quality stretching from an unskippably 
iconic intro through to cracking scripts.

Ashes to Ashes
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRgnRBCKhPfI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRgnRBCKhPfI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRgnRBCKhPfI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Keeley Hawes handily explains the show's flashbacking premise through 
voiceover before the Quattro skids up and a parping sax attack of a theme tune 
kicks in. We're looking at the titles for series one here, butseason two also 
deserves an honourable mention <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BIdE-BFgMZA&NR=1>
. Entirely filmed in Eighties-vision and all the better for it.

Titles v show = titles. The Life On Mars sequel may have stuttered a bit 
(althoughwho knows what the third series promises 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/15/gene-hunt-last-stand-ashes>
) but this cleverly retro opening sequence is head and shoulderpads above a lot 
of other British offerings.

True Blood
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvxINMuOgAu8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvxINMuOgAu8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvxINMuOgAu8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
WARNING! This video has some adult content. Might not be totally safe for work 
(or indeed, children).
From the second the camera crawls out of the swamp to the sinister strains of 
Jace Everett <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jace_Everett>'s Bad Things this is 
flat out fantastic. Scorched footage of decomposing animal corpses, writhing 
strippers, sweaty browed preachers and that killer "God Hates Fangs" billboard 
haul us intoblood-splattered Bon Temps <http://www.welcometobontemps.com/>.

Titles v show = titles. Ludicrously thrilling titles that display a subtlety 
that is occasionally missing from the schlocky vampire drama.

Mad Men

A sharp-suited silhouette plummets from a dissolving skyscraper past a 
cityscape of giant 60s adverts in this eerie animation. Inspired by Hitchcock's 
stark monochrome movie posters, it hauntingly ushers us into the boozy, woozy 
cigarette-puffing world of Sterling Cooper.

Titles v show = show. The sledgehammer-shaped symbolism of the "falling man" 
can't really match the intricately complex lives of Don Draper and co.

Shameless 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmuSUZ-qtoiQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmuSUZ-qtoiQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FmuSUZ-qtoiQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"Tickets this way for the Chatsworth express!" Ten-pint philosopher Frank 
Gallagher turns bard with this enjoyably loopy introductory monologue over 
Doctor Who composer Murray Gold's distinctively twinkly theme music.

Titles v show = titles. Not quite as good as the original Frank voiceover but 
not quite as tiresome as the Gallagher clan's recent cartoony ASBO capers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/jan/26/stop-it-shameless>
.
 