
As student demonstrations continue to build, Aaron Porter's shock u-turn is 
causing more ructions than Katie Waissel's ginger crop. But are we seeing the 
"real Aaron" now or can we expect another makeover next week?

Here's the NUS president apologising at the UCL occupation 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qpRCDmhhgrg> for his "spineless dithering" on 
the protests:

"For too long the NUS has perhaps been too cautious and too spineless about 
being committed to supporting student activism. Perhaps I spent too long over 
the last few days doing the same."

Porter had been criticised for not attending the national day of action last 
week, where school and university students were "kettled" in Whitehall for 
several hours by police, and for taking several days to issue public support 
for the occupations which have sprung up at universities around the country in 
protest against the rise in tuition fees and the scrapping of education 
maintenance allowances.

Porter's blog lets us know what we can expect tomorrow: 
<http://www.nus.org.uk/en/News/Aaron-Porters-Blog/Dates/2010/11/Now-is-the-time-for-a-fresh-wave-of-student-action/>

"On Tuesday, there is another day of action, and I would encourage every 
student union to find a way of contributing and ensuring we are maximising the 
pressure on politicians from all parties. I will be mobilising NEC members to 
support your activities. On the same day, the Labour Party have also secured an 
opposition day debate on the issue of higher education funding, which should 
help us amplify the issue to a national level once more."

While Porter regroups, an extraordinary new student leader has emerged. This 
is Barnaby, speaking at the Coalition of Resistance conference in Camden at the 
weekend <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CrgzpPvJxmQ>.

So what's happening at the moment?

@UCLOccupation <http://api.twitter.com/#!/UCLOccupation> says: "FLASHMOB 
TODAY! They marketise our education, we educate their markets. Meet 1:20 Argyll 
st/oxford st... PLEASE RT".

In Cambridge, the illustrious Noam Chomsky has come out in support of the 
200-strong student occupation of the Old Schools administrative headquarters of 
the University, which has been going on since Friday morning.

More than 80 Cambridge academics have also backed the occupation, calling on 
the university to "ensure that no undue force is exercised against the students 
involved".

Second-year student Jamie Stern-Weiner says:

"Early Friday morning a small number of Cambridge students burst into Old 
Schools, the nerve centre of university administration, and announced to 
bemused staff having their morning coffee: "This building is now occupied!" 
"But there's only six of you," they pointed out.

"That didn't last long. Now in its fourth day, the Cambridge occupation is 
going strong. In between the political talks, the folk singing, the study 
sessions and the cups of tea (this is still, after all, Cambridge), students 
have quickly adapted to the practicalities of direct action.

"And this is where the real value of the experience lies: with media training, 
direct action workshops and, above all, participation in truly non-hierarchical 
collective decision-making about everything from our demands and our political 
strategy to how best to deal with the university administration, this 
occupation is creating committed and skilled activists and sophisticated 
political thinkers.

"It is still unclear how this will end – a lot depends on what the university 
does – but for now everyone is enjoying and exploring our newfound feeling of 
power. The level of solidarity we've received from university staff, academics, 
union workers and other students around the country has been incredible – we 
know we're part of a national movement, and we're in it for the long haul."

Martin Wainwright rounded up some of the other occupations yesterday – he 
reckoned there were 34 going on 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/nov/28/student-occupations-increase-sit-ins>
as he wrote his piece.

Cribsheet would be happy to hear from you if you're involved in a student 
occupation, and will feed this in to our news coverage.

More education stories from the Guardian and Observer

Patrick Wintour says Liberal Democrat ministers are under pressure to toe line 
on tuition fees 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/nov/28/liberal-democrat-tuition-fees>– 
Simon Hughes is calling for collective abstention as the party fears its own 
'Iraq' issue. But according to Helene Mulholland, more than100 Lib Dem 
parliamentary candidates have petitioned Nick Clegg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2010/nov/29/lib-dem-tuition-fees-clegg> to 
oppose fee rises to avoid pushing the party "back into the political 
wilderness".

The police say there is "only so much they can do"  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/nov/29/student-protests-police-warn-risk>
to stop young children getting hurt on marches. The head of the Metropolitan 
police's public order branch says schoolchildren have a right to protest but he 
urges parents to talk to them about the "potential dangers".

Headteachers have launched a fightback 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/nov/28/school-sport-partnerships-abolition-gove>
 against Michael Gove's plans to axe funding for school sports. Sixty heads 
from across England expressed their outrage at his decision to cut the entire 
£162m budget for School Sport Partnerships (SSPs) ina hard-hitting letter to 
the Observer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2010/nov/28/schools-sports-partnerships-education-obsesity?intcmp=239>
.

Why we're got to go on funding the humanities 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/nov/29/funding-cuts-rebalance-education-humanities>
: they excel in training the mind.

Christmas in the classroom

Today sees the launch of Education Guardian's seasonal series Christmas in the 
classroom 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/series/christmas-in-the-classroom>: and 
how better to kick off than with instructions formaking Rudolph the loo roll 
reindeer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2010/nov/29/christmas-crafts-paper-roll-rudolph-reindeer>
.

Every day until the big one, we'll be bringing you ideas for crafts, cards, 
cartoons and carols, with audio, photos and videos from classrooms up and down 
the land. We'd love to know what's going on in your classrooms – chip in in the 
comments sections or send us links to your blogs and flickr groups.

Education news from around the web

The Telegraph reports that universities could lose their charitable status  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/universityeducation/8164558/Tuition-fees-rise-could-hit-charity-status-of-universities.html>
if poorer students stop applying to study there due to the proposed increase in 
tuition fees – that's according to the head of the Charity Commission, Dame 
Suzi Leather.

Its former editor, Charles Moore, argues that Michael Gove's sense of the 
nobility of education offers hope to us all 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/columnists/charlesmoore/8163713/Michael-Goves-sense-of-the-nobility-of-education-offers-hope-to-us-all.html>
.

"I do not know his private religious opinions, but he seems to have an 
exceptionally strong Protestant sense of the nobility of education. He sees it 
as the way by which everyone, regardless of wealth and background, can learn 
what matters, developing the informed freedom of conscience that is the mark of 
human dignity. Such learning will probably be good for the wallet, but it will 
certainly be good for the soul."

The Daily Mail is concerned with figures that show children who speak English 
as their first language are in a minority 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1333845/English-speaking-children-minority-inner-city-London-schools.html?ITO=1490>
 in a rapidly growing number of schools. The surge has been most pronounced in 
London, it says, where in some boroughs youngsters with a different mother 
tongue make up nearly 80% of primary pupils.

Terence Kealey, vice-chancellor of the private University of Buckingham, tells 
the Independent that it's not students who should be taking to the streets over 
higher education finance – it's vice-chancellors.

"How odd that it was the good bits of Lord Browne's report that provoked the 
riots. The students have no legitimate grievance. It is the vice-chancellors 
who are in trouble. They are the ones who should have taken to the streets."

A Scottish teenager is suing her former school 
<http://teachersupport.info/news/in-the-press/teenager-sues-school-after-failing-exam.php?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+teachersupport%2Fglobal+%28Teacher+Support+Network%29&utm_content=Google+Reader>
 after failing her Higher English exam. Marion McLeod claims lack of staff and 
preparation led all but two of her class of 11 to fail the exam and believes 
that her long-term earning potential has been damaged as a result. Thanks to 
Teacher Support Network for this one.

Competition

Do you have a clever way of using technology to teach children at your school? 
Enter the Classroom Innovation awards 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/classroom-innovation/awards-2011> by sending us a 
short video of what you can do. There is a primary and secondary category and 
each winner will get £7,500 of Asus computing kit.Take a look at some of the 
entries so far 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/classroom-innovation/award-video-entries>.

Find us on the Guardian website

EducationGuardian.co.uk <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education>

All today's EducationGuardian stories <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/all>

Follow us on Twitter and Facebook

EducationGuardian on Twitter <http://twitter.com/GuardianEdu>

Judy Friedberg on Twitter <http://twitter.com/JudyFriedberg>

Jeevan Vasagar on Twitter <http://twitter.com/jeevanvasagar>

Jessica Shepherd on Twitter <http://twitter.com/jessshepherd1>

Claire Phipps on Twitter <http://api.twitter.com/#!/Claire_Phipps>

EducationGuardian on Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/educationguardian>

EducationGuardian resources

The Guardian University Guide 2011 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/universityguide>

School league tables <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/school-tables>

Postgrad tables 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/series/postgraduate-subject-tables-2009-10>

The world's top 100 universities 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2010/sep/08/worlds-top-100-universities-2010>

More education links on the Guardian

Online learning and teaching resources from Learn 
<http://www.learnthings.co.uk/>

Job vacancies in education <http://jobs.guardian.co.uk/education/>

More about Crib sheet

Sign up to get Crib sheet as an email on Tuesdays 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/signup/2009/apr/23/sign-up-for-crib-sheet>

 