
NUS leadership

The big education story of the day is, of course, Aaron Porter's decision not 
to seek re-election for the NUS presidency 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/feb/21/nus-president-aaron-porter-resign>
 in April. Jessica Shepherd reports that:

A source at the NUS said Porter was facing too much personal abuse from 
students angry that the union had not taken a harder stance against fees and 
cuts. Last month, Porter was due to speak at a rally in Manchester, but had to 
be escorted away when protesters hurled abuse at him. He said they had tried to 
intimidate him and shouted antisemitic comments.

Supporters – and critics – acknowledge that Porter should be praised for the 
part he played in getting Liberal Democrat MPs to sign the pre-election pledge 
to vote against tuition fees. Commenting on the Guardian websiteymudiadcymraeg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/ymudiadcymraeg> says:

Much as I distrusted and thought little of Aaron's capacities, he did pull off 
a stroke of genius getting the Lib Dems to make such a fuss of signing the fees 
pledges. The government would have had a very easy ride over the past few 
months if he hadn't thought of that.

In a comment piece written for the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/feb/21/nus-president-student-cuts?intcmp=239>
 Porter says it was those MPs who betrayed the students.

We must not forget the betrayal of politicians who signed a pledge to vote 
against the rise in tuition fees and then voted for it. It is a betrayal that 
will see thousands of young people decide that they cannot risk the debt that 
going to university would load them with. The campaign to reverse that decision 
has already started and will need to continue both locally and nationally until 
we have a better outcome.

He also credits himself and his fellow students with having launched the 
fight-back against the government's cuts package.

We have reasons to be proud and reasons to be angry, often at the same time. 
As a group we kick-started the resistance to the government's cuts agenda that 
came from all quarters.

Students commenting on Porter's decision gave a range of responses from this 
comment byfreakingout <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/freakingout>:

I realise some of the more vocal people on CiF may disagree with me, but as a 
first year student, I have to say I thought Aaron argued our case very sensibly 
and cogently against the government's drastic "reforms" to higher education and 
will be sorry to see him leave. He had a very difficult job and remained 
professional and controlled throughout. I only hope the next NUS president will 
be able to embody the same qualities.

To this by Ishowerdaily 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/Ishowerdaily>: 

The truth is a lot simpler Aaron, you're not standing for re-election because 
you don't want to lose.

And this by bill40: <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/bill40>

I think you stepped down because you put your own ambition of an establishment 
meal ticket for life, over and above those you were meant to represent. You'll 
make a great politician just choose the party you think will win. You have no 
beliefs so will fit fine into any.

A new president will be elected at the NUS annual conference in April. Three 
people have thrown their names into the ring so far, they are:Mark Bergfeld, a 
member of the Socialist Workers party and the spokesman for the Education 
Activist Network.Liam Burns, head of NUS Scotland, and Shane Chowen, 
vice-president of the NUS.

More education stories from today's Guardian

• The free schools policy threatens to overwhelm existing provision 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/feb/22/free-school-faith-segregate-communities>
 and segregate communities by teaching different faiths separately, saysWarwick 
Mansell

• Estelle Morris makes a plea for teachers to be allowed to use their 
initiative 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/feb/22/schools-accountability-teachers-initiative-estelle-morris>

• While Peter Scott considers the different interpretations of the vice 
chancellors role 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/feb/22/universities-future-challenges>

• And, how long should headteachers stay in the job? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2011/feb/22/headteachers-legends-schools-staying-put>
 Britain's longest-serving headteachers explain why they believe it's right to 
stay put, bringing experience and continuity to their schools, writesJoanna 
Moorhead

Guardian Teacher Network

Thousands of teachers have already registered for the new Guardian Teacher 
Network. <http://teachers.guardian.co.uk/teacher-network/> The upload 
functionality is proving very popular, with new resources available from 
creative teachers, content providers and organisations such as ActionAid and 
Wellcome - and more being added all the time.

Are you feeling lucky?

What role does luck have to play in helping students building students 
confidence? Or helping graduates land their all important first job? Recent 
graduates have had the misfortune to land themselves on the job market in the 
middle of a real corker of a recession, and could, very reasonably, argue that 
lady luck has dealt them a very bad hand. But the news is actually even worse 
that that, as:

Researchers have found that people who experience a recession when they are 
starting to gain experience of the job market (18 to 25 years of age) are more 
likely to believe that success in life depends more on luck than on effort. 
This belief persisted throughout their lives.

This feeling is known as learned helplessness. 
<http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-learned-helplessness.htm> Experience leads 
students to believe that things are outside their control, and that their 
actions will not make a difference, so they make less effort. Because they are 
making less effort, they are less successful, which in turn confirms their 
belief that they can't change anything.

There is a video showing the effect of learned helplessness in a classroom 
situation here. <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gFmFOmprTt0> And there is a 
cracking article about combating the effects of learned helplessness and 
teaching students to make the most of the hand that has been dealt themhere. 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/luck-and-career-success>

The Peer Factor

Who would your students put in the House of Lords and why? If they have strong 
ideas on this why not enterThe Peer Factor. 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/lords/lord-speaker/outreach-programme/lord-speaker-competition-2011/>
 Pupils aged between 11 to 16 should make their case within a short film, 
podcast, essay, collage, newspaper or magazine article for a chance to win a 
£100 cash prize and an all-expenses paid trip to Parliament. Competition 
winners will be invited to parliament to discuss their ideas for who should sit 
in the house of Lords with Lord Speaker, Baroness Hayman and the judging panel. 
Register to enterhere. 
<http://fs10.formsite.com/mrafteryhansardlseacuk/form2/index.html> Deadline for 
entries is 6 May 2011.

Insight into journalism seminars for teachers

A unique opportunity for teachers to spend a day at the Guardian, find out how 
a national news media organisation works and get ideas and resources that can 
be used in the classroom.

News 11 March <http://www.guardian.co.uk/gnmeducationcentre/38> Learn about 
the 24 news cycle; meet news reporters, feature writers, picture and sub 
editors; understand the role newspaper advertising; go on a tour of the 
editorial floors and take part in a workshop creating you own news front page 
which will be evaluated by an editor.

Multimedia 31 March <http://www.guardian.co.uk/gnmeducationcentre/30> Writing 
for a news website, web editing, blogging, the use of social media, video 
production; podcasting.

Places are limited and likely to fill up quickly, so book soon.

Find us on the Guardian website

EducationGuardian.co.uk <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education>

All today's EducationGuardian stories <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/all>

Follow us on Twitter and Facebook

EducationGuardian on Twitter <http://twitter.com/GuardianEdu>

Judy Friedberg on Twitter <http://twitter.com/JudyFriedberg>

Jeevan Vasagar on Twitter <http://twitter.com/jeevanvasagar>

Jessica Shepherd on Twitter <http://twitter.com/jessshepherd1>

Claire Phipps on Twitter <http://api.twitter.com/#!/Claire_Phipps>

EducationGuardian on Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/educationguardian>

EducationGuardian resources

The Guardian University Guide 2011 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/universityguide>

The Guardian Postgraduate Guide 2011 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/series/postgraduate-subject-tables-2011>

School league tables <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/school-tables>

The world's top 100 universities 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2010/sep/08/worlds-top-100-universities-2010>

More education links on the Guardian

Free online classroom resources from the Teacher Network 
<http://teachers.guardian.co.uk/teacher-network/>

Job vacancies in education <http://jobs.guardian.co.uk/education/>

More about Cribsheet

Sign up to get Cribsheet as a daily email 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/signup/2009/apr/23/sign-up-for-crib-sheet>

To advertise in the Cribsheet email, contact Sunita Gordon on 0203 353 2447 or 
emailsunita.gordon@guardian.co.uk <>

Subscribe to get Cribsheet as an RSS feed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/series/crib-sheet/rss>
 