
When Amicus Productions released The House That Dripped Blood 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0065854/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1> in 1971, it hardly 
capitalised on the lurid promise of the title. It must have stuck withGuillermo 
del Toro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/guillermodeltoro>, however: he has 
beautifully literalised the image inCrimson Peak (Universal, 15), a sweeping, 
swollen haunted house horror in which bricks and mortar become flesh and bone, 
veritably streaming with the ketchup-coloured residue of dead residents. 
Allerdale Hall, the crumbling Cumbrian mansion owned by dashing but damaged 
inventor Thomas (Tom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston>) and his emotionally corseted 
sister Lucille (Jessica Chastain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jessica-chastain>), is like Daphne du 
Maurier’s Manderley turned inside out; the ghosted gothic love story it houses, 
too, plays like a disarrangedRebecca, its most intense surges of feeling 
gushing from unexpected trapdoors.

To unpick the Hall’s unhappy history, of course, there must be an ingenuous 
outsider. Enter aspiring American writer Edith, wonderfully played byMia 
Wasikowska <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mia-wasikowska> as a kind of 
flickering human candelabra amid the film’s necessarily purple excesses: the 
possibly doomed declarations of devotion between lovers, the bloodied ectoplasm 
trailed by the mansion’s phantoms, the tightly wound veins popping against the 
deathly complexion of Chastain’s deliciously kinked-out Mrs Danvers figure. Del 
Toro and his inspired design team know not the meaning of “too much” – even the 
ballooned sleeves of Kate Hawley’s costumes seem dreamily out of scale – but 
it’s the deranged grandeur of it all that makesCrimson Peak so moving. It’s a 
paean to the lavish romance of other lifetimes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeXfp859pcM0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeXfp859pcM0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeXfp859pcM0&media=>
 Watch the trailer for The Program. 
Speaking of glory gone to ruin, Lance Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-armstrong> is the subject of Stephen 
Frears <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears>’s safety-helmeted 
biopicThe Program (Studiocanal, 15), a film that sets out to tell us precisely 
what we already know about the champion cyclist’s doping-fuelled downfall, in 
precisely the way we’d expect it to be dramatised – with a diligent 
impersonation of cold, clenched determination from Ben Foster as Armstrong 
himself. From the artificial triumphs of the Tour de France to the tell-all 
Oprah interview, there’s not a beat here that wasn’t covered more thoroughly in
Alex Gibney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alex-gibney>’s documentary The 
Armstrong Lie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/02/the-armstrong-lie-mark-kermode-review>
; what’s missing is any dramatic sense, however speculative, of the man in 
private. Only Jesse Plemons’s remarkable performance as eventual whistleblower 
Floyd Landis contains a glimmer of life behind the headlines; a film about him 
might have been more rewarding.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGcimmToPFR0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGcimmToPFR0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGcimmToPFR0&media=>
 Watch the trailer for The Search. 
Still speaking of glory gone to ruin, spare a thought for Michel Hazanavicius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michel-hazanavicius>. Fresh from a shower of 
Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/27/michel-hazanavicius-best-director-oscars>
 for his beguiling silent comedyThe Artist, he poured his new-found industry 
cred into an ambitious pet project intended to show off his skill as A Serious 
Director: an update of a Fred Zinnemannsecond world war classic from 1948 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OoVbVk1pnGY>. Two years after its Cannes 
premiere, it crawls straight to DVD in the UK. What went wrong? Almost 
everything, sad to say, inThe Search (Studiocanal, 15), a well-meaning but 
terminally windy anti-war parable in whichBérénice Bejo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/berenice-bejo> flounders shrilly as a 
stressed NGO worker who opens her heart and home to a pre-teen refugee during 
the Russian invasion of Chechnya. Having previously triumphed without the help 
of words, Hazanavicius now goes all in on sticky, hand-wringing rhetoric. “It’s 
just all horrifying,” drones Annette Bening’s dead-eyed orphanage aide. She’s 
not wrong.

There’s some welcome cheer, however slight, on offer in Bill (Universal, PG), 
a jaunty, cardboard-built reworking of Shakespeare’s life story from the
Horrible Historiescrew that prances amiably where Tom Stoppard and Kenneth 
Williams’s satirical sensibilities intersect. It’s innocuous family viewing for 
parents seeking something a shade more improving than theAdam Sandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adamsandler>-written Hotel Transylvania 2 
(Sony, U), which nonetheless represents a good-humoured improvement on its 
predecessor, with a none-too-subtextual message of social acceptance woven into 
its undead hijinks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fcrimson-peak-the-program-the-search-tom-hiddleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b22b726c0ca20959645051702535af82d004b11%2F0_0_1150_690%2F1150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crimson%20Peak%3B%20The%20Program%3B%20The%20Search%3B%20Bill%3B%20Hotel%20Transylvania%202%3B%20Lila%20%26%20Eve%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fcrimson-peak-the-program-the-search-tom-hiddleston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crimson%20Peak%3B%20The%20Program%3B%20The%20Search%3B%20Bill%3B%20Hotel%20Transylvania%202%3B%20Lila%20%26%20Eve%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fcrimson-peak-the-program-the-search-tom-hiddleston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b22b726c0ca20959645051702535af82d004b11%2F0_0_1150_690%2F1150.jpg>
 Lila & Eve: ‘a fascinatingly discordant melange of ripe B-movie camembert and 
social protest’. 
Unaccompanied adults, however, may have more fun – not all of it intentional – 
by firing upNetflix <https://www.netflix.com/gb/>, where Charles Stone III’s 
riotously overwrought feminist vigilante thrillerLila & Eve has quietly made 
its UK debut. Critically buried at Sundance last year, this tale of two 
grief-stricken mothers avenging the deaths of their children is nonetheless a 
fascinatingly discordant melange of ripe B-movie camembert and genuinely 
steaming social protest, gutsily carried by its two leads. AfterThe Boy Next 
Door 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/05/still-alice-chappie-focus-boy-next-door-return-sender-dvd-reviews-guy-lodge>
,Jennifer Lopez <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jennifer-lopez> is 
becoming an earnestly good sport in exploitation fare, but it’sViola Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/viola-davis>’s hot, bristling 
characterisation that welds you in place: she has an uncanny gift for finding 
the hardest truth in the hoariest scripts, and just about makes this nonsense 
essential.
 