
Clueing coincidence

Nothing spooky is imputed by our predilection here for spotting the same word 
in different crosswords: nothing cosmic, and certainly nothing underhand – just 
the pure pleasure of seeing how different minds approach the same problem.

On Friday, say, the Times offered 
<https://www.crosswordclub.co.uk/puzzle/crossword/b6649b054174feea0141b69ea9470021/print_solution/3>
 …

26ac Worker with background in satellite dishes (9)

… giving us, via the "satellite" or moon of Jupiter known as IO, ANTIPASTO

… while the same day's Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26088> had from new veteran 
setter Otterden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jun/13/crossword-blog-meet-setter-otterden>
, in much the same place in the grid …

25ac Opposed to previous duck course (9)

… a different recipe for ANTIPASTO, via cricket's "duck", which equals 
tennis's "love", which equals 0.

Interesting to note that Otterden is happy to think of his ANTIPASTO as a 
single course, while the edacious Times setter demands multiple dishes within a 
single serving. Yum. Talking of satellites, and love …

Culture clue

As the inhabitants of heaven note a new arrival tapping a bespectacled 
resident on the shoulder – "Hey Andy, it's me. Yeah. You owe me 60 bucks" – 
let's enjoy a couple of cameosLou Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/27/lou-reed-velvet-underground-dies>
 has had in crosswording. Reed's music has always been helpful in reminding 
solvers, humming the first line of Walk on the Wild Side, that "Florida" in a 
clue might indicate FLA in an answer but his is also a name with handy letters, 
as exploited by Plench inthe "Woodchuck puzzle" from earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/feb/28/crossword-blog-story-of-woodchuck-puzzle>
, in a clue …

13ac In repeat performance, Lou Reed at last adopted blues, perhaps?

… for ENCOLOURED, while Petitjean's Telegraph Toughie clue 
<http://puzzles.telegraph.co.uk/site/search_puzzle_number?id=11613> likewise 
suggested a change of musical direction …

16d Bass sound of Lou Reed's music (9)

… to BLUEGRASS.

The news in clues

As Arachne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/02/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-arachne>
'srecent epic surveillance puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/cryptic/26076> reminded us, the uses to 
which Ada Lovelace's thoughts have been put are often baleful, but that was no 
reason not tocelebrate Lovelace herself 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03b0ydy>, especially on Ada Lovelace Day. 
Radian stepped up with an Independent puzzle where the mathematician featured 
at 23 across and in answers including DADAIST, GRADATIONS, MADAMS, FANNY ADAMS, 
ADAM, RAMADAN, CANADA, PRADA and LAMBADA, while also allowing a sly description 
…

17ac Beneficiary of 23's software with large margins? (5)

… of APPLE. In terms of personal computing, Apple is now most strongly 
associated with the Macintosh, but once had an alternative:the higher-end Lisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/jan/23/apple-macintosh-25>. Why 
"Lisa"? Here's the 1985 Prentice-Hall Standard Glossary of Computer Terminology:

LISA (* microcomputer) An innovative line of microcomputers developed and 
marketed by Apple Computer, Inc. Introduced in 1983, LISA features extreme 
"user-friendliness," integrated software, and a "mouse" to control cursor 
movements. LISA also uses "icons," or pictorial representations of functions 
that the user wishes to perform. LISA stands for Local Integrated System 
Architecture.

Little did they know that the "mouse" would shed its quotation marks, or that 
Apple would later shed the mouse. As for "Local Integrated System 
Architecture", since there was also a person called Lisa Jobs, who happened to 
be daughter to Apple's Steve, others jocosely claimed that LISA stood for 
"Let's Invent Some Acronym", or more recursively, "Lisa: Invented Stupid 
Acronym". So much for the etymology: reader, how would you clue LISA?

Clueing competition

Thanks for your clues for SORTED 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/oct/14/1#show-all>. 
Lovely letters and so many meanings made for so many wonderful clues. I enjoyed 
especially the subtractive wordplay of yungylek's "Prepared to maim, cut down, 
destroy" and Journeyman7's "Detours, without U-turns, on the right track".

The narcotic associations gave us scurrilous Cyclops-like entries including 
baerchen's "Heads of Irish broadcaster bugger about with drugs" and Truth101's 
"Type of person Miliband supplied with drugs". Careful now.

The runners-up are phitonelly's clear "After stuffed olive starters, King 
Edward is ordered" and MwanzaFrank's terse "Arranged tour of Dorset"; the 
winner from a bumper crop is andyknott's "Drugged-up, I missed Editors set". 
Kudos to Andy – please leave this fortnight's entries and your pick of the 
broadsheet cryptics below.

Clue of the fortnight

Bravo to Monk for deft hiding of a classic piece of pedantry in his clue … 

14d Panic as drunken European interrupts odd bits of Swan Lake (7,3)

… for CASPIAN SEA. Salty stuff!
 