
Few songwriters have the ability to waltz around their own subconscious quite 
like Neil Finn and Fall at Your Feet is a tender example of his pop 
craftsmanship at its finest. Understandably, both the song and the band’s 
lineage need to be placed into context for Australia to claim it as their own.

Nick Seymour (brother of Hunters and Collectors frontman Mark) and the late 
Paul Hester, formed Crowded House after the demise of Split Enz in Melbourne in 
1985. And Woodface, the 1991 album on which Fall at Your Feet features, was 
mostly written and recorded in Melbourne’s eastern suburbs. Local myth claims 
the Crowdies stayed at57 Mount Pleasant St 
<http://www.onlymelbourne.com.au/where-is-57-mount-pleasant-street#.U-DCQdy6hSU>
, the fictional place name checked in Weather With You.

Crowded House’s catalogue runs so deep with classics that most Australians 
will diplomatically concede 1993’s Together Alone as the the “Kiwi effort”, 
recorded as it was with the Maori choirs on Kare Kare Beach. Woodface is full 
of references to its Melburnian surroundings, not least Four Seasons In One 
Day. What makes Fall At Your Feet the album’s stand-out anthem is the way it 
has snaked into the cultural songbook.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82JZh3VyE2M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82JZh3VyE2M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82JZh3VyE2M&media=>
It’s a track played on acoustic guitars around campfires, pianos in swanky 
inner city hotel bars and on loop in Australia’s pop culture consciousness. And 
it doesn’t just resonate with the mainstream. Alongside cameos inAustralian Idol
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cub2nbNe1MA> and recent Hottest 100 countdowns
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r-1vQ7sf7VE>, it has also been covered by 
indie darlings likeGlenn Richards <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KK_ogE7dPm4> 
of Augie March andClare Bowditch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DbTZKxe4m7E>.

During the Woodface sessions, producer Mitchell Froom ordered Neil to attach 
the chorus of one song that wasn’t working to the verse of another the band was 
struggling to get off the ground. Bassist Nick Seymour would go on to describe 
the recording process of Fall at Your Feet as a “jigsaw”. The song certainly 
showcases Finn’s songwriting, a marriage of classic 1960s FM pop and the 
abstract lyricism and concepts of the Flying Nun Records Kiwi experiments of 
the 1970s.

While the guitars and rhythm section chug along, articulate keyboard and vocal 
harmonies from Finn’s brother Tim give a straight forward pop song memorable 
shading and colour. Neil sings along until the middle eight, emoting his 
frustrations in one of his finest moments as a lyricist: “The finger of blame 
has turned up on its self and I’m more than willing to offer myself. Do you 
want my presence or need my help. Who knows where that might lead?”

A friend recently referred to Finn as the master of the middle eight melody, 
blessed with the ability to fill out his wide-scale masterpieces with smaller 
moments of pop brilliance. On the SBS documentary seriesGreatest Australian 
Albums <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Frbn6M0Wnqg>, Finn described what he 
was trying to achieve with Fall at Your Feet: “It was really that moment post a 
conflict or a struggle, when you sense a great sadness in the person you’re 
with ... where you want to offer yourself as some kind of sounding board or a 
weeping wall. You want to take all their sadness, especially if you’ve been 
responsible for some of it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DId6fyY8CUkk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DId6fyY8CUkk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DId6fyY8CUkk&media=>
Perhaps the song’s interpretation doesn’t end with a lover. According to Chris 
Bourke’s 1997 biography of the band, Something So Strong, the decision to 
introduce Tim Finn into the mix for album number three became problematic. Once 
the Woodface tour began, an undefined power vacuum opened up on stage, which 
inevitably forced Tim out by the end of the tour.


Tension was something that hovered just under the surface, drummer Paul Hester 
revealed to Andrew Denton in 1994 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eq8jJdEeac4>
. “I don’t know what anyone else’s band is like, but ours is like ... 
psychotherapy. But getting paid to do it,” he half-jokingly admitted in the 
aftermath of quitting the band himself..


In the liner notes of Recurring Dream, the band’s 1996 greatest hits record 
(an album guaranteed to be owned by most people you know –13 times platinum in 
Australia 
<http://www.aria.com.au/pages/httpwww.aria.com.aupageshttpwww.aria.com.aupagesARIACharts-Accreditations-2010Albums.htm>
 at last count), journalist Peter Paphides tells a story about Spike Milligan 
in order to describe the magic of Crowded House’s music: “[Spike] once recalled 
how he was in the throes of a nervous breakdown. Alone in bed and crying 
uncontrollably, he noticed his baby daughter walking towards his bed, arms 
outstretched. In her hand was a glass of water.

“She wanted to give something. Something to make it alright. This was all she 
could find. A while ago someone asked me to sum up the music of Crowded House. 
For some reason, I responded with that tale – perhaps because it’s 
simultaneously the saddest and most uplifting thing I’ve ever heard.”
 