
Do you remember the year you were 16? I remember GCSEs, hair gel and an unholy 
amount of Star Trek. I was, in simple retail terms, a generic teen. Since my 
time, some teens have become brands in their own right, and they don’t get much 
more high-quality than 16-year-old actorAmandla Stenberg 
<http://www.amandlastenberg.com/>. She makes me want to do my teens all over 
again.

For a certain audience, Stenberg is Rue, the fragile young girl who died in 
The Hunger Games so Katniss Everdeen could go on to win the tournament 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NdEQ9ficU5U> and overthrow the evil 
government. For others, she is an outspoken activist and film-maker. On her
Tumblr <http://amandla.tumblr.com/> site, Stenberg eloquently breaks down 
issues for her teen (and not so teen) fanbase. “When the media is not ignoring 
black women altogether,” she wrote ina recent post 
<http://amandla.tumblr.com/post/123951266013/words-by-me>, “they are 
disparaging them.” At the age of 15, she directed ashort film of Charlotte 
Perkins Gilman’s The Yellow Wallpaper <https://vimeo.com/95343563>, an early 
feminist short story about a woman living with mental illness.

She does all this and yet remains a charmingly #CarefreeBlackGirl. Alongside 
links to news stories from the Charleston shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/charleston-shooting> and beyond, 
Stenberg’s Tumblr site featuresphotos of her with her squad 
<https://instagram.com/p/2fSjATG1U-/> (Willow Smith and Tavi Gevinson among 
them), prom pictures, art and music (she plays violin in her own band,Honeywater
 <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Honeywater/573409742749148?fref=ts>). What’s 
more, her eyebrows are works of art.

My affection for her is the type I’d have for a little sister (if I had one): 
pure delighted love, with only a touch of envy. The world is laid out before 
her, and she’s bright and spirited enough to go out and make a difference. Is 
that not crush-worthy?
 