
Yet again, I am relieved I don’t have a penis. This week, a survey from YouGov 
<https://today.yougov.com/news/2016/06/28/crying/> found that one in six 
Americans think it’s “unacceptable” for a man to cry in public while only one 
in 12 think women shouldn’t.

Those attitudes are very different when it comes to crying in private 
(although the survey didn’t specify whether “private” means the bathroom at 
work, a fitting room at H&M or your parents’ couch – all personal favorites). 
Only 5% said it was unacceptable for men to cry in private while 3% said the 
same for women. It seems that as long as people keep their wet faces hidden, 
Americans aren’t so bothered.

Is crying good for you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/06/is-crying-good-for-you> 
This data upsets me. A lot. I can feel myself tearing up just thinking about 
how society allows women to cry but not men (then points at said women and says 
“calm down you overly emotional lil things”). There is nogender gap in crying 
frequency 
<http://nymag.com/scienceofus/2016/04/i-cry-more-than-normal-people.html> until 
the age of 12 then boom! Men claim they cry less often than women (just once 
per month on average compared to 2.7 times for women).

Dry your eyes guys, I’m going to help. See, social stigmas can often be fixed 
by normalization – that’s when we see something so frequently that it goes from 
being shameful to just plain mundane. So I present you with eight of the most 
beautiful man cries I have been able to find in the half hour I had this 
morning.

1. John Boehner

This former house speaker deserves a medal for his numerous salt-water 
outpourings. So many in fact that Daily Beast created a compilation set to the 
tune of Justin Timberlake’s tick-tock-depression-o-clock melodyCry Me A River 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/videos/2013/01/03/boehner-cries-us-a-river.html>. 

2. Dawson and his miserable creek

Readers who are in their late 20s/early 30s will remember this appealing 
drama/the worst TV show to ever make it to six entire seasons. In it, Dawson 
lives on a creek (the show, which left about as much to the imagination as a 
video taped colonoscopy, was called Dawson’s Creek) with some of his friends 
where he feels sad sometimes and where his friends feel sad sometimes. In this 
clip, Dawson’s one true love Joey Potter (played by Katie Holmes) tells him 
that she still has feelings for him. Dawson, standing in the very public 
setting of his public creek, lets out a very public cry. This video may have 
been dubbed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHkDknjHHJBU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHkDknjHHJBU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHkDknjHHJBU&media=>
 Creeky tears 
3. Man 

I do not know this man, I do not know where he is and I do not know why he 
cries so. All I know is that I watched it all the way to the end and laughed – 
I mean cried – so loudly that four of my colleagues gchatted me: “What’s 
happening???”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVROq0SBlvNA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVROq0SBlvNA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVROq0SBlvNA&media=>
 
Waaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
4. Dr Tobias Funke

Much like my upper body at the beach, Tobias is a never-nude. Though you can’t 
see it, he is wearing a pair of denim cut-offs in this shower scene from
Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>. Yes, Tobias 
isn’t in private so this doesn’t technically count. But it’s amazing, so we’ve 
included it.

5. LeBron James

I’m no football fan, but apparently LeBron is a good player and when he plays 
very good, he cries like he did here. Also I know that he plays basketball not 
football but I thought maybe I could get some men to angry cry in public when 
reading this.

According to the Guardian US sports editor Tom Lutz, the significance of this 
weeping was that:

“They were the tears not just of a man who had waited his whole life to bring 
a title home to Cleveland but the tears of a city that had waited 52 years for 
a sports title. And also tears of relief of a man who hadn’t taken a kick to 
the groin from Draymond Green.” 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkcgTtgB8rC4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkcgTtgB8rC4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkcgTtgB8rC4&media=>
6. Crying Jordan

While we’re on the subject of sports, no list of epic man cries could be 
complete without the epic omnipresent-meme creating moment that was Michael 
Jordan crying. In 2009, just before he began his acceptance speech for his hall 
of fame induction, Jordan’s face leaked a bit before he regained his composure 
in classic public crying man style.

No matter that the tears were tears of joy, the image of his wet face has now 
become an internet by-word for loss, failure and sadness. A few examples 
include:
Emmanuel Acho (@thEMANacho) 
How all my #Powerball <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Powerball?src=hash> tickets 
looked!pic.twitter.com/luMZsL7AX3 <https://t.co/luMZsL7AX3>
 <https://twitter.com/thEMANacho/status/687486718774099968> January 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/thEMANacho/status/687486718774099968> 
I had a dream I was throwing cash off a chariot being pulled by 
unicorns...shit was lit until my alarm went off 😩😩😩🦄🦄🦄💸💸💸 
#cryingjordan #cryingjordanmeme #funnymemes #meme #memes #lol #lmao #sadjordan 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BFh0SOyouiu/>

A photo posted by Crying Jordan Memes (@cryingjordanmeme) on May 17, 2016 at 
5:25pm PDT

I again asked our sports editor for comment before suddenly remembering that 
Tom is a man’s name. So I said, “Tom, have you ever cried in public?” Tom 
replied: “Yes, when I got drunk when I was 17 and poured pasta sauce on my head 
to impress my friends. Then none of them were impressed and just laughed and I 
felt humiliated.”

Thank you, Tom.

7. Don Draper

This man was supposed to be the manliest man out of a bunch of very manly men 
depicted on the TV showMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>. Then he starts 
crying and shockingly reveals that he is not in fact a man but a hu-man. It was 
a profound moment. Apparently. Again, Don is in his office at the moment he 
breaks down, but it’s too good to not include.

8. Obama

Men crying in public is one thing but a president who is moved to tears in 
front of the entire nation is quite another. And the image of Barack Obama 
crying while delivering yet another press conference about yet another mass 
shooting bears no comparison to any other emotional episode. It’s different 
becausethe words 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/01/05/remarks-president-common-sense-gun-safety-reform>
 Obama attempts to deliver as his eyes fill with tears and his voice creaks:

“Our unalienable right to life, and liberty, and the pursuit of happiness – 
those rights were stripped from college students in Blacksburg and Santa 
Barbara, and from high schoolers at Columbine, and from first-graders in 
Newtown. First-graders.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DijFPMrptrwE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DijFPMrptrwE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DijFPMrptrwE&media=> 