
Susan Orlean and Sarah Thyre want to make you cry.

The New Yorker writer and the actress and comedian teamed up for a podcast 
aptly namedCrybabies <http://crybabies.wolfpop.com/>, which is dedicated to the 
songs, commercials, movies and moments that make us all tear up. “We’ve created 
a safe space for people to admit that they cry at a telephone commercial,” 
explained Thyre.

Here Be Monsters: the podcast that makes you face your fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/13/here-be-monsters-podcast-jeff-emtman>
Why you should listen

Thyre is not exactly sure what lead her to the idea of creating a podcast 
about crying: “It might be because I cry a lot at things,” she laughed. “It’s 
partially my own fetishization of crying and having young children and noticing 
the things that upset them and make them cry.”

“The reason it appealed to me so much is that I like the idea of commonality,” 
said Orlean. “I liked the idea of taking something that people are going to 
respond to in many different ways and then seeing what they have in common and 
what differences they might have around the same topic.”

To foster those conversations, on the show Thyre and Orlean play host to 
guests that include some of the funniest women and women around –Amy Poehler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler>, Christopher Guest, Jenny 
Slate, Weird Al Yankovic – and have them introduce a song or a movie or a 
concept that makes them cry and, yes, there are tears. “It surprised us how 
many people will actually cry on the show when we play the clips of the things 
that make them cry,” Thyre said. “I think a lot of people thought we expected 
them to cry, which was not the case, but people get really emotional even just 
listening to a recording.”

“When we started I never thought anyone would cry in the studio,” agreed 
Orlean. “Not only have people cried, but we’ve ended up crying, too, partly 
because we’re choosing stuff that’s very evocative, but then we’re discussing 
it. It gets very emotional and we’ve had some very deep conversations with 
people about parental issues, love life issues.” While guests do cry, they 
certainly aren’t required to. “We tell people they are under no obligation to 
cry,” Orlean noted. “This isn’t a game show.”

The hosts are not immune to the emotions either. Thyre recounted a time when 
her mother was on the show and she had chosen a clip from The Elephant Man as 
the cue for what makes her cry, which Thyre had initially shrugged at. “When we 
played it in the studio with my mom there, I completely lost it and was sobbing 
to the point that snot was coming out of my nose,” Thyre laughed. “And I’m sure 
it was because my mommy was there, but even she was looking at me like, ‘you’re 
kidding, right?’”

As to what makes people cry, it varies wildly. Movies like It’s A Wonderful 
Life, Terms of Endearment, and, of course, thePixar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pixar> oeuvre (“If you can make it through 
the opening montage of Up without crying, you’re probably a psychopath,” joked 
Orlean) have been featured. Other crying cues have included commercials for 
insurance or a telephone company and, in the case, of comedian Guy Branum, the 
legal opinions of supreme court justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg (“That was a new 
one,” said Thyre, about the story, which will be featured on an upcoming 
episode.) The biggest trigger for tears, though, seems to be songs with 
selections from Beethoven, Gershwin’s musicals, and Bette Midler’s The Rose 
causing on-set tears. When asked what the most surprising crying trigger for a 
guest, both Orlean and Thyre quickly say Sir Mix-A-Lot’s song Baby Got Back.

The song was chosen by comedian Karen Kilgariff 
<http://wolfpop.com/photos/713758/karen-kilgariff> who explained on the show 
that when she first heard the novelty rap song it helped her learn to love her 
own body, backside included. Orlean admitted that when she saw the song on the 
pre-show prep list, she didn’t get it, but after talking to Kilgariff about it, 
the song choice made perfect sense. “The song made her feel validated and 
appreciated and it was really wonderful,” Orlean said.

For both hosts, guests, and even listeners, the show feels like a journey. “It 
feel like there’s been kind of a bonding that’s gone on,” Thyre said. “We’ve 
just had a deep emotional conversation with people we might not have met 
before. It feels very therapeutic.”

While the show has dabbled in the psychology of what makes people cry, and the 
hosts said they are actively seeking a neurologist to come speak to them, for 
the most part the show feels like a kitchen table chat between friends, albeit 
ones prone to bursting into tears. That’s exactly how Thyre and Orlean want it 
to feel, too. For Orlean, a highly regarded journalist who has written many 
non-fiction books, including The Orchid Thief, talking about the deeply 
personal act of crying is an interesting change of pace. “In my work life, I’ve 
always avoided writing anything that’s really personal,” she explained. “This 
is a little different for me.” She credits the show’s format for helping her 
open up. “It’s just us in a room, so it feels like a normal conversation,” 
Orlean said.

“In my personal life and in my creative endeavors, I’ve always been very 
autobiographical and open about emotional things,” Thyre said. “This is a 
natural progression for me. It’s like sitting around and having coffee.” Thanks 
to Crybabies, it’s easy to join them in the coffee klatsch – pull-up an 
episode, pour yourself a cup, and don’t forget the tissues.

Where to start: Amy Poehler and Julie Klausner 
<http://crybabies.wolfpop.com/audio/35177/amy-poehler-julie-klausner>; Matthew 
Weiner <http://crybabies.wolfpop.com/audio/25336/matthew-weiner>; Christopher 
Guest <http://crybabies.wolfpop.com/audio/20139/christopher-guest>

Subscribe to Crybabies <http://crybabies.wolfpop.com/> on iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/crybabies/id935751853?mt=2> or listen on 
Soundcloud <https://soundcloud.com/crybabies>.
 