
Times and places are fuzzy. Some anonymous arena, around 2004. I can’t even 
remember which band I was there to review – something a bit goth, I suspect. 
But the pre-gig video is fried forever on to my internal Imax like a nuclear 
shadow, in all its surreal, expressionist cabaret glory.

A woman dressed like a Weimar-era debutante mime – face pan-stick white, 
curlicues for eyebrows, the striped stockings of a Brechtian sex doll – slammed 
the window on a stream of human suitors and cuddled up instead to a clockwork 
boyfriend. “I turn him on and he comes to life,” she cooed, animating her 
robotic beau by dropping a silver penny into a slot on his chest, “automatic 
joy … many shapes and weights to choose from / I will never leave my bedroom / 
I will never cry at night again / wrap my arms around him and pretend.”

By the end of the clip she’d graduated from forcing her plastic man-toy to 
waltz along to her entrancing music-box melody to hammering at a piano and 
bawling like a horror movie banshee crying out for her long-dead baby. It even 
came with a postmodern cry for help in the bridge, “written to make you feel 
smittener / with my sad picture of girl getting bitterer / Can you extract me 
from my plastic fantasy?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj4gPZPKJc0s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj4gPZPKJc0s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj4gPZPKJc0s&media=>
The song was Coin-Operated Boy, the band was the Dresden Dolls and the woman 
wasAmanda Palmer <https://www.theguardian.com/music/amanda-palmer>. And I 
wasn’t the first, or the last, person dumbstruck by her.

Occasionally known as Amanda Fucking Palmer, she first emerged as a leading 
agent provocateur of the Boston street-theatre scene. Between directing surreal 
Nazi-themed performance art pieces based on the music ofthe Legendary Pink Dots 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YwU27t2DHcw> and touring the world’s tourist 
plazas with her Eight Foot Bride living statue act, she developed a cult 
following with the Dresden Dolls, the “Brechtian punk cabaret” band she formed 
with drummerBrian Viglione <http://www.brianviglione.com/> in 2000. Inviting 
fans to fire-breathe, stilt-walk and generally burlesque it up at their early 
shows, they grew a wing called theDirty Business Brigade 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HuGuGMEtScI> to co-ordinate the performers and 
became a keystone of the burgeoning dark cabaret movement, a parade of 
theatrical freaks, mimes and Moriartys.

The Dresden Dolls lived out the dream of every university drama troupe that’s 
ever bagged free Glastonbury tickets in return for parading across the theatre 
fields dressed as escapees from a vaudevillian drumming workshop, but it worked 
because of Palmer’s innate talent, tortured demeanour and contemporary nous. 
Lesser artists might have defined themselves by the am dram theatrics or played 
it asDita Von Teese <http://www.dita.net/> with attitude, but Palmer dug deep 
into her squirming sack of issues and let her songwriting skills speak for 
themselves.

Their debut album certainly contained enough cabaret overtones to warrant its 
own woodland stage in Bestival’s ambient forest, but Palmer’s savvy piano punk 
construction ofGirl Anachronism <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sO5APfKnR50>, 
Coin-Operated Boy and Bad Habit was blessed with a post-millennial pop edge and 
her lyrics struck a chord with the damaged emo era. In interview she spoke of 
abortion, bisexuality, open relationships, date rape and a past as a stripper 
called Berlin; on record she seemed constantly on the edge of screaming 
emotional meltdown, tackling thorny taboos such as self-harm, romantic 
delirium, paedophilia and psychiatric medication in brutally frank terms. 
Missed Me’s portrayal of a young girl’s thought processes while being groomed 
for abuse was particularly disturbing: “If you kiss me mister you must think 
I’m pretty / If you think so mister you must want to fuck me / If you fuck me 
mister it must mean you love me.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdyE2MLq24OE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdyE2MLq24OE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdyE2MLq24OE&media=>
Difficult pills indeed, only made palatable by the fourth wall of Palmer’s 
melodramatic persona and the gallows humour of the unbroken survivor. Witness 
her skewering an uncaring ex from behind a fake mask of indifference on first 
singleGood Day <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SJ9Bv99wo-E>, years before we 
all perfected the “look how much fun I’m having without you” Facebook album.

Like other artists using their music as an open diary of tangible anguish, 
Palmer grew a devoted following, sucked into her expanding web of artistry. 
Rather than let her success in music constrain her, she remained a theatrical 
and poetic polymath, writing books that accompanied the Dresden Dolls albums, 
and encouraged and collaborating with fans on two 2006 musicals of their work: 
A Clockwork Waltz and The Onion Cellar. Their gigs became carnivals or nights 
of “celluloid vaudeville”, featuring short films made by fans and friends, 
local artist performances and Palmer playing impromptu solo shows of film 
soundtrack covers. The result was a fan community that felt intrinsically 
involved in her beautiful dark twisted fantasy, and deeply defensive of their 
hardy heroine.

When Palmer blogged that her label, Roadrunner, had tried to insist that she 
remove shots of her “uncommercially fat” stomach from the video of a song called
Leeds United <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i62UF7uROGU> from her 2008 Ben 
Folds-produced solo debut, Who Killed Amanda Palmer – a song, obviously, about 
losing a football shirt given to her by Ricky Wilson – a fan “reBELLYon” struck 
up online. Fans sent pictures of their stomachs to Roadrunner in their droves, 
eventually helping Palmer achieve her goal of being released from her contract. 
The album’s other videos, featuring Palmer stripped bare on Ampersand or caught 
mid-breakdown on Runs in the Family, received overwhelming support in the 
24-hour Troll Power rally that is the YouTube comments section. When she 
launched a Kickstarter campaign to fund her second solo album, Theatre Is Evil, 
in 2012, her modest target was smashed as thoroughly as all of her bedroom 
mirrors.The grand total of $1.2m was the most raised by a musician at the time. 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/amanda_palmer_the_art_of_asking?language=en>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5i0o3JRaF2g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5i0o3JRaF2g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5i0o3JRaF2g&media=>
In return, Palmer leaves nothing about her life and music out of bounds. On 
the tour for Theatre Is Evil, she invited fans to join her Grand Theft 
Orchestra backing band on horns and strings for a few songs, only to run into 
criticism from the likes of Steve Albini for not paying them out of her 
Kickstarter windfall. She’s regularly played all-ages guerilla gigs on the 
ukulele, covering the likes of Neutral Milk Hotel, NWA, Radiohead (she released 
an entire covers album of Radiohead songs) and, oh yes, Rebecca Black’s Friday. 
Sometimes, she stripped naked to let hordes of fans write and draw on her. The 
Daily Mail was playing with fire when it tried to turn her into faux-shock 
tabloid titillation in the wake of a “nip slip” at Glastonbury 2013; she 
responded by performing a song calledDear Daily Mail, Up Yours 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TAcI2b21eXM> in the nude at London’s 
Roundhouse.

Bold, brazen, inclusive and flamboyantly political – this is the woman who 
kissed, gagged, kidnapped and mock-married a Katy Perry impersonator onstage in 
2008 to protest Proposition 8 – Palmer is a one-woman creative typhoon, 
gathering disciples and import wherever she spins. In a pop landscape full of 
contrived shock and ghostwritten soul-baring, Palmer’s the real deal.
 