
Private detectives may usually work in, well, private – but their shady 
shenanigans have this week been thrust into the limelight. On Tuesday, the News 
of the World apologised to actor Sienna Miller for having paid detective Glenn 
Mulcaire to intercept her phone calls. Yesterday, it was alleged that detective 
Jonathan Rees had targeted Tony Blair and Kate Middleton on behalf of News 
International.

Entirely coincidentally, a private investigator has loomed large on the small 
screen this week:Case Histories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jun/05/case-histories-tv-review>
, the BBC six-parter drawn fromKate Atkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/30/hay-festival-kate-atkinson-published>
's bestselling thriller, stars Jason Isaacs as Jackson Brodie, police officer 
turned PI and classic tough-nut-with-a-heart. Brodie doesn't tap phones, but he 
does spend a lot of time running around with his top off. It's the sort of 
detective work pioneered by Tom Selleck in the 1980s: hisMagnum, PI 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CquMO3vJvo> sported a series of daringly 
navel-grazing Hawaiian print shirts.

Roman Polanski's superb Chinatown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/best-film-ever-chinatown-season> 
(1974) centres on a more classically noir detective: JJ Gittes (Jack Nicholson) 
is a hardboiled ex-cop investigating marital infidelities in a drought-ridden 
1930s LA. Scoping out extramarital affairs also happens to be the bread and 
butter of Precious Ramotswe(below), the Botswanan heroine of Alexander McCall 
Smith <http://www.mccallsmith.com/botswana.htm>'s sleuthing series The No 1 
Ladies' Detective Agency.

Gene Vincent is himself caught in the act in his rocking 1964 song Private 
Detective <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=03-fChCa8cg>: he recounts meeting an 
attractive lady in a club, taking her home, and then discovering she's a PI 
employed in a honeytrap operation by his wife. It's a theme picked up two 
decades later by the American band They Might Be Giants: their exuberant 1988 
track(She Was a) Hotel Detective <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VkVHvD-IMbg> 
is about a female investigator who spies on hotel guests. Here, too, comes a 
spookily prescient forewarning about the dangers of phone-hacking. "She's got 
her ear to the walls," John Flansburgh sings, "and she's tapping the calls. If 
you've got a secret, boy – forget about it."
 