
Refereeing was always likely to be a sensitive subject for this afternoon's 
African Nations Cup final between Egypt and Ivory Coast. After the controversy 
over the hosts' semi-final win over Senegal, the Confederation of African 
Football has inflamed the situation by assigning the game to Mourad Daami, the 
Tunisian official once banned for attempting to influence a decision by another 
referee.

Daami was a member of the Tunisian club Esperance's delegation at the 
notorious 2000 African Champions League final against Ghana's Hearts of Oak. As 
fans rioted in the second leg in Accra, Esperance, who trailed on aggregate, 
repeatedly tried to have the game abandoned, their goalkeeper Chokri el-Ouaer 
even cutting his own head in an attempt to persuade the South African referee 
Robbie Williams he had been struck by a missile thrown from the crowd. Daami 
was banned for 12 months after entering Williams's room during the rioting and 
trying to persuade him to call off the game.

Daami took charge of the 2000 African Nations Cup final in Lagos when Nigeria 
lost a penalty shoot-out to Cameroon after he mistakenly ruled that a penalty 
from Nigeria's Victor Ikpeba did not cross the line after bouncing down off the 
bar.

African refereeing standards have again prompted debate since Cameroon's Evehe 
Divine denied Senegal a clear penalty in the last minute against Egypt. 
Senegal's striker El Hadji Diouf claimed the "whole world is laughing at 
Africa" over the decision. The Ivory Coast forward Bonaventure Kalou said: "I 
hope the referee will be impartial for the final because all the world is 
watching the game,"

Nigeria won yesterday's third-place play-off after Garba Lawal struck in the 
79th minute in a 1-0 victory over Senegal. It marked the international farewell 
of Nigeria's captain Jay-Jay Okocha, who was substituted in the second half. 
The Nigerians have now finished third at three successive African Nations Cups.
 