
The first note I found in Dad’s pocket said: “My name is Tom Carew, but I have 
forgotten yours.” I soon discovered he was showing this note to everyone. The 
next one read: “Thursday Sep 15 2005, I have no memory of writing this Tom BUT 
it could not be written by anyone else I must be going BONKERS Tom.”

He was coming up to his 86th birthday. I don’t know what made me keep these 
notes that he wrote himself, but I did. I have a folder full of them. Each one 
in different coloured pens – ever since I can remember, he switched colour as 
he went along. They were like small windows ajar into the twilight world that 
Dad was slowly and reluctantly entering, and trying to outwit. At the same time 
they were testimony to his indomitable spirit, his sweetness and courage. 
“[Black pen, crossed out] TOM CAREW’S Brain is collapsing [blue biro] TOM 
CAREW’s Brain is switching switching away from Memory – memory of people and 
their names [red biro] So you write me off?? not necessarily I invent – Yes I 
do – come to my New HUT Wednesday 28 July Tom.”

Dad was always inventive, and had a capacity for great cunning, so it took us, 
his four children, a while to notice his memory lapses. It wasn’t that he was 
forgetting things: he had always forgotten things. It was his frustrations that 
gave him away. He was bewildered and confused. How his bedside light switched 
on; where the voices on the radio were coming from; why he had to wait for the 
kettle to boil. My sister, Nicky, eventually took him for a scan. It was 
confirmed. Dad had begun to suffer little strokes in his brain. Tiny infarcts. 
Obstruction of the blood supply to the cerebral tissue. Oxygen not getting as 
far as it should. Small clusters of brain cells dying.

I keenly felt the irony of the timing; for only recently had I been able to 
reconnect with him without the proceedings being strictly monitored under the 
patrolling eye of my stepmother, who had died the year before. A last, 
unexpected chance to spend some time with him and it was too late. And yet …

As each layer of onion peeled away, the essence of Dad somehow remained. 
Simpler, more fragile, quite a few wires disconnected, but the person I knew: 
wacky, alternative, wanting to please, was still very definitely there. He was 
still making me laugh. In the supermarket one day, I looked round and realised 
he had given me the slip. I saw him halfway down another aisle. He was standing 
very close to a lady who was inspecting a blue plastic laundry basket in a 
design of woven, see-through lattice work, like a trellis. Dad was leaning 
towards her, and she was leaning away from him. A little alarmed, I sped down 
the aisle towards them. He was still leaning over her shoulder, very close, as 
I got there, just in time to overhear him say: “They leak, you know.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd8fd7deb65403a58c22b84b415c83036a0fab3%2F15_9_927_1419%2F927.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dd8fd7deb65403a58c22b84b415c83036a0fab3%2F15_9_927_1419%2F927.jpg>
 Tom Carew in wartime. Photograph: Courtesy Keggie Carew 
Dad had lost the word for orange, and for me, but not “fastidious” or 
“scrumptious”, and other slightly old-fashioned words. While I didn’t seem to 
have a gender, I did have an “industry” – which he wanted to join (run, more 
like). All Dad really wanted was jobs: to be occupied and feel useful again. 
“Give me a job!” From dawn till dusk every day: “What’s my next job?” They were 
getting harder to find. Something he could succeed at, something that didn’t 
bore him, something that would give him a sense of achievement. If possible, 
something where he could invent a better way of doing it – with a piece of 
string, a bungy clip or No More Nails, which he applied with his hands straight 
from the nozzle and then wiped all over his sleeve.

One favourite invention was cutting a hole in a two-litre plastic milk bottle. 
The hole was opposite the handle, so he could pee into it and hold it at the 
same time. He made one for me and wouldn’t be persuaded otherwise. He made one 
for everyone! He had them all over the house in case he got caught short. Dad 
was always practical. Nothing tired him. He could still touch his toes. Pain 
didn’t affect him. He had never had anaesthetic at the dentist, and still did 
his own first aid. But everyone was running out of things for Dad to do. And if 
we couldn’t occupy him, he would be off. And it was hard to keep track of him.

Life with Dad had never been dull, and that certainly wasn’t going to change. 
On my way to retrieve him from next door’s garden, I overheard him saying to my 
neighbour: “I don’t remember you, but I do remember your teeth. They’re very 
distinctive.”

As my sister, two brothers and I (in our 40s) grew older, and Dad grew 
younger, it was only logical he didn’t recognise us as his children anymore. 
Sometimes he hardly recognised himself. “I’m amazed at what goes on,” he told 
me.

“What do you mean?” I asked him.

He pointed to his beard and whiskers: “I didn’t put any of this on.”

I suggested it grew by itself. He thought the idea of that was hilarious.

“Someone put it on,” he told me. He looked in the mirror, baffled. “If it’s 
not me,” he said mysteriously, “then it’s someone else.”

Finding out who Dad was, coincidentally, was something I was rather 
preoccupied with myself – because now I had the freedom of his attic, and 
access to the large metal trunks full of letters and diaries and all sorts of 
mysterious documents. Dad had been a specialist, SOE guerrilla agent in the 
second world war – parachuted into France, behind enemy lines, to sabotage the 
Germans and organise resistance. Once he had a close escape from the Germans by 
hiding in a schoolteacher’s house, and the BBC sent him a message in their
Message Personnels 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/history/story/2007/02/070122_html_40s.shtml> 
broadcasts to France, which went out after the evening news bulletin. Certain 
death was the punishment for hiding an agent. Dad said he learnt to trust 
communists, nuns, priests and schoolteachers, for they had less to lose … 
whereas “respectable” French valued their position more than their country’s 
freedom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F125c2f015e52a52784713e14c1bbb4139671789c%2F0_0_2272_1704%2Fmaster%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F125c2f015e52a52784713e14c1bbb4139671789c%2F0_0_2272_1704%2Fmaster%2F2272.jpg>
 Tom Carew in his garden. Photograph: Courtesy Keggie Carew 
Later, he was dropped into the jungles of Burma to raise resistance against 
the Japanese, where he operated withAung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi>’s father, and where he 
made quite a name for himself. In the yellowing Indian newspaper cuttings of 
1945, which I remembered as a child, he was referred to as Lawrence of Burma 
and the Mad Irishman. But 60 years on, my maverick, rule-breaking father had 
begun to break down in tears. Tears for the loss of people he would never see 
again. Tears for the loss of a past that could not be revisited. He was 
experiencing another bereavement – tears for the loss of him.

It was my husband Jonathan’s idea to take Dad to see The Lion King show. We 
hoped he would enjoy the spectacle, the razzamatazz, that it might take his 
mind off his memory. The three of us walked up the red-carpetted steps in the 
theatre foyer when Dad, one step from the top, tripped on something and fell, 
and started rolling down the steps. Everyone froze, the usherettes froze, the 
doormen froze, the other theatregoers froze, we all froze. And stared. As an 
85-year-old man rolled over and over, bump, bump, bump, all the way down to the 
bottom. Then sat straight up. Unscathed, unbruised and perfectly fine. There 
was a loud sigh of relief from the usherettes. What we had just witnessed was 
Dad going straight into a parachute roll, arms tucked in and totally relaxed. 
His body had not lost the ability to remember – his guerrilla training was 
still second nature to him; it just clicked in. He stood up and dusted down his 
trousers, enjoying every second of our incredulity.

Slowly things were getting worse. All around Dad’s house were notices for 
reminding. Pinned to kitchen cupboards, in pockets, in drawers, in books. 
Photographs of us were put up with our names underneath. “[red biro] I HAVE 
JUST READ pronounced RED all those above BUT I must blame my ‘MEMORY’ outfit 
(my MEMORY KIT) MY MEMORY hopesness HOPELESSNESS [green biro] If you are going 
to be like that IT IS YOUR OWN BLOODY FAULT [red biro] I suppose it is ...”

Dad’s contrail became all destruction. Tears of sadness fomented into tears of 
frustration. Things wouldn’t work. People wouldn’t come. Water wouldn’t boil. 
He would leave the front door wide open, the blow-heaters on, the gas hob 
blazing.Every day was getting more and more difficult, and more and more 
stressful. He ranged about the place precariously, tying things up, scraping 
things down with his penknife, mixing up dog food with Rice Krispies, cutting 
the cuffs of his shirt or the tongues out of his shoes. Even when he walked 
along, he was head-down, his penknife snipping something. “I just want to help 
someone,” he said. “All my life I’ve helped someone.” We showed him photographs 
to try to jog his memory, but nothing coherent seemed to click. “What?” “Who?” 
“Where?” I felt like a stranger gaping in.

Then, for the first time I had ever witnessed, there was flatness in his 
voice. I noticed it one day speaking on the phone to him.

“Who is this speaking again?” he asked. “Keggie,” he repeated after me, as if 
he had never said it before.

“Your daughter,” I told him.

“Do I have a daughter?” he asked, but not with wonder, like he usually did.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa28cb310f25722b5f53da0541fb4e11577670ed1%2F0_0_1773_1374%2F1773.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa28cb310f25722b5f53da0541fb4e11577670ed1%2F0_0_1773_1374%2F1773.jpg>
 Tom Carew. Photograph: Courtesy Keggie Carew 
“You have two,” I told him, “and two sons.”

“Do I?” Again, flat, lifeless, soulless. Dadless. All I could do was choke off 
my breath, thinking, don’t cry, don’t cry, and all I could get out was: “I love 
you, Dad.”

Each day we fed him a handful of pills, which arrived packed, dated: Monday, 
Tuesday, Wednesday ... seven sealed pockets containing each day’s prescribed 
confection. What, I began to wonder, if we didn’t give him these? What were we 
really doing with our complex pharmaceuticals, our humane ways, our ethical 
behaviour, our warped cruelty? I was getting in a bind about Dad. One minute he 
thought he was going mad, the next that we were trying to rob him. He was 
always so proud of his clear, unencumbered thinking. I wondered how the old Tom 
would have dealt with the new one. Once, he said he would sail away if he had 
to, for whatever reason, when the time came he would get in his boat and head 
out to sea. I knew if I was able to describe this new Tom to the old one, he 
would have laughed and said: “Shoot me, for Christ’s sake.” And he would have 
meant it. But I didn’t know how to shoot my dad. Or when to.

There was one of life’s pleasures he still enjoyed. Chocolate. Anything sweet, 
in fact. He pushed his first course around, but made very quick work of the 
chocolate ice cream, over which I drizzled two large spoons of golden syrup.

“Scrumptious. Mmm … Terribly good!” He pondered on this: “How absurd to say 
terribly good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22afd5730787dd73298461dacb26bedcc2aae80e%2F0_243_1164_1455%2F1164.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dad%2C%20the%20guerrilla%20who%20refused%20to%20give%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fdad-the-guerrilla-who-refused-to-give-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22afd5730787dd73298461dacb26bedcc2aae80e%2F0_243_1164_1455%2F1164.jpg>
 Keggie and Tom in June 2004 at the 60th Jedburgh anniversary reunion at Milton 
Hall, Peterborough. 
I could see him searching for a better word. I waited. “Sexually good!” he 
says, looking triumphant.

Dad wanted to come and live with me, but I had seen what having Grandad living 
with us for all those years did to Mum, and I did not rate my chances of coming 
out sane. My sister knew she couldn’t manage either. Dad wouldn’t sleep in a 
room but stayed in a shed, or sometimes in the tent he had pitched in the 
garden, with his two dogs who slept with him and which were allowed to do 
anything they wanted. We called the little one Psycho Dog. It guarded things. 
When Dad tried to get into bed, it sat bang in the middle of his pillow then 
growled and spat if you tried to move him off. In the morning, I invariably 
found Dad at the bottom of the bed, no bedclothes, foetally curled, trying to 
keep warm, with the dogs stretched out slap in the middle. Yet he wouldn’t have 
it any other way.

We got more help, and then we got a live-in carer, but very soon they could 
not manage either. Then, just before we were pitched into total meltdown, 
miraculously we found a home for people with dementia and Alzheimer’s half an 
hour’s drive from Dad’s home, with a room looking out on to a garden, and, 
miracle of miracles, one that would let him bring his little dog. We began to 
regularly visit the place for tea; we decorated Dad’s room with all his 
pictures and photographs, we walked Dad and Psycho Dog in the garden, so that 
they both became familiar with it. As D-Day loomed, when we would be leaving 
him there, my sister Nicky and I found the deceit unbearable. The rule for such 
transitions, when the day finally comes, is to leave the new resident in the 
home for two whole weeks without any family (or friend) contact; two weeks to 
bond with the staff and their new surroundings, to transfer all their 
connections.

Dadland by Keggie Carew review – retrieving the life of a remarkable man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/30/dadland-keggie-carew-review-remarkable-life>
It was poor Nicky who drove Dad away from his home for the last time. Knowing 
he would never see it again, never shut his gate, never open his door, never 
walk to the bottom of the garden, never go in his bodger-shed, never sit in his 
conservatory, never call down the stairs. The treachery of it. The acting and 
pretending to be jolly so he wouldn’t suspect anything, so he wouldn’t get 
upset. He sat meekly in the front seat of her car in his smart jacket waiting 
to go out for tea. Unsuspecting. It took Nicky hours to drive home. She had to 
keep pulling over to stop, sobbing uncontrollably. She said it felt like the 
worst thing she had ever done.

No sooner did she get home when the phone rang. Dad had escaped! So she had to 
drive back again. He was found half a mile down the road, stopping the traffic. 
Nicky sat with him on his bed. He was focused and alert. He told her, furtively 
casting his eyes towards the trees at the end of the garden, that the best plan 
was to wait until darkness, then go over the fence and find a teacher or priest 
to help them.

• Dadland by Keggie Carew is published by Chatto & Windus, £16.99. To order a 
copy for £13.93, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dadland.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 