
Shares in the Daily Mail’s parent company have slumped 9% after it reported a 
fall in print advertising revenues at its flagship national newspapers.

Advertising revenues at the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> fell £7m, or 15%, in the three 
months to the end of June. Although their digital counterpart, Mail Online, 
recorded an 8% increase in advertising turnover, it was not enough to offset 
the print decline.

Daily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> & General Trust 
described the print advertising performance within its media division as a 
“marked deterioration” and warned that the outlook for the group’s full-year 
results was now “towards the lower end of market expectations”. .

The market expects DMGT to report revenues of between £1.82bn and £1.93bn, 
with adjusted pre-tax profit of between £275m and £292m, according to the 
company.



In its latest trading update 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/daily-mail---38--general--dmgt-/rns/third-quarter-trading-update/201507230700138293T/>
, DMGT said: “There was a marked deterioration in the UK print advertising 
market in the quarter and total underlying advertising revenues across dmg 
media were down 6% compared to last year, with newspapers down 13%, newspaper 
companion websites (mainly Mail Online) up 7% and other digital advertising 
(including Wowcher and Elite Daily) up 24%.”

“Reported advertising revenues were further adversely impacted by the disposal 
of the digital recruitment business, Evenbase, which occurred in stages during 
2014,” it added.


Revenue from circulation was also down by 3% as sales of the Mail on Sunday – 
which increased its cover price by 10p to £1.60 in April – and the Daily Mail 
fell. The company said the two titles increased their market shares to 23.4% 
and 22.1% respectively. Users ofMail Online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> increased with global monthly 
unique browsers in June 2015 reaching 211 million, up 25% on last year.

In its business-to-business operation, B2B, which includes its Euromoney 
Institutional Investor arm, revenues fell by 5% as the operation felt the pinch 
of banks pulling back their fixed income, currency and commodity (FICC) 
businesses which traditionally fuel its growth. “The recent negative trends for 
events and advertising revenues are expected to continue into the final 
quarter,” the company said.
 