
Tornadoes <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tornadoes> that swept through the 
Dallas area caused substantial damage and at least 11 people died either from 
the storm or related traffic accidents. Dozens of people were injured in the 
storms as well.

It’s the latest of a succession of freakish winter weather events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/25/severe-storms-mississippi-survivors-southeast-tornadoes>
 across the country that could include heavy snow and massive flooding Sunday 
from north Texas through eastern Oklahoma, eastern Kansas, western Arkansas and 
parts of Missouri. Days of tumultuous weather in the south-east have led to 21 
deaths overall.

The full extent of damage in Texas isn’t yet known, though it stretched over 
about a 40-mile-long area from 20 miles south ofDallas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dallas> to northeast of the city. The 
storm blew the roofs off homes, mangled vehicles, damaged churches, downed 
power lines, toppled trees and caused natural gas lines to burst.

Garland police lieutenant Pedro Barineau said Sunday morning that eight people 
have died and 15 have been injured in Garland, which is about 20 miles 
northeast of Dallas. That death toll has risen by three since Saturday night.

“This is a huge impact on our community and we’re all suffering,” he said.

Barineau said the single tornado hit about 6.45 pm and damaged stretches 
across an area of two square miles, and was near the intersection of Interstate 
30 and George Bush Turnpike, which is a major route in the region.

At least three people who died were found in vehicles, said Barineau, who also 
noted that some cars appeared to have been thrown from the interstate, though 
it wasn’t known whether that was the case for the people found in the vehicles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Fdallas-tornadoes-deaths-injuries-storms-southeast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e89019e0fb76f35f34087a1a2374a66fa526c16%2F0_0_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dallas%20area%20tornadoes%20leave%2011%20dead%20and%20dozens%20injured&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Fdallas-tornadoes-deaths-injuries-storms-southeast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dallas%20area%20tornadoes%20leave%2011%20dead%20and%20dozens%20injured&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fdec%2F27%2Fdallas-tornadoes-deaths-injuries-storms-southeast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e89019e0fb76f35f34087a1a2374a66fa526c16%2F0_0_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Debris lies on the ground near a home that was heavily damaged by a tornado in 
Rowlett, Texas. Photograph: Guy Reynolds/AP 
About 600 structures were damaged, the majority of which were single-family 
homes. “Driving around the area, you can see that it’s total devastation,” 
Barineau said.

Three other people died in Collin County, about 45 miles north-east of Dallas, 
according to sheriff’s deputy Chris Havey, although the circumstances were not 
immediately clear.

In the town of Rowlett near Garland, city manager Brian Funderburk said Sunday 
morning that 23 people were injured. The extent of their injuries wasn’t known, 
but there were no deaths and no reports of missing people, he said.

The Red Cross set up shelters for people whose homes were damaged by the storm.

“I think everyone understands now the gravity of what happened,” Anita Foster, 
spokeswoman for American Red Cross of NorthTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, said on WFAA television.

Passengers waiting for flights at Love Field, a major Dallas airport, were 
moved away from windows during the storm. Flights were temporarily halted from 
Dallas-Fort Worth international airport. The Dallas Mavericks NBA game was 
delayed about half an hour because of the storm.

On the other side of Texas, a snowstorm accompanied by plunging temperatures 
was expected to leave up to 16in of snow in West Texas and much ofNew Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/newmexico> through Sunday evening, 
according to NWS meteorologist Brendon Rubin-Oster in College Park, Maryland.

“It’s going to be quite dangerous for anyone exposed to these elements,” 
Rubin-Oster said.

In the south-east, two more deaths linked to weather were reported Saturday in 
Mississippi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/26/mississippi-alabama-south-storms-tornadoes>
, bringing that state’s death toll from severe weather over Christmas to 10. 
Late Saturday, one death was reported in Alabama.

Flash flooding closed roads across Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> and trapped motorists in rapidly 
rising waters. Ranager Tyler and his son waded into flood water Christmas night 
and used rope to pull an 11-year-old boy out after his family’s car was swept 
away near Pinson, about 15 miles north-east of Birmingham.

“The little boy was hanging on to the back of the car,” Tyler said Saturday. 

The family’s car was overcome with flood water and ended up in a ditch near 
Tyler’s Pinson home. The rushing water separated the family as they got out of 
the car, he said, but the boy was later reunited with his family.

The flooding is the result of heavy downpours that have thrashed the 
southeastern US since Wednesday, bringing record rainfalls in some areas.

Better weather was forecast for the south-east on Sunday, and temperatures in 
the eastern third of the country could set numerous record highs, Rubin-Oster 
said.Washington DC <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/washingtondc> could see 
a record daily temperature of 73F, New York City 65F, which would break a 
record of more than 50 years, and Orlando, Florida could tie a record of 86 
degrees set in 1921.

 