
Dan Brown may no longer be the fastest-selling adult author of all time, 
losing out on that record last week to EL James and her slice of erotica Fifty 
Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/28/fifty-shades-grey-one-million-paperbacks>
, but The Da Vinci Code author has retained another, less sought-after honour: 
he has topped Oxfam's list of the writers most donated to its charity shops for 
the fourth year running.

Scottish crime writer Ian Rankin was the second most likely author to have his 
books donated to Oxfam's 685 shops, followed by James Patterson,Alexander 
McCall Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexander-mccall-smith> and 
John Grisham, Oxfam said today. The American legal thriller writer Grisham 
entered the chart of "most donated" authors for the first time this year, in 
joint fourth place with McCall Smith.

The charity said that its bestselling author, in contrast, was Stieg Larsson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stieg-larsson> – the second year in a row 
that the late Swedish writer has topped Oxfam's bestseller charts – followed by 
JK Rowling. Larsson's fellow Norwegian author Jo Nesbø, whose crime novels 
starring detective Harry Hole have been critically acclaimed, was a new entry 
in third place, with Lee Child and Terry Pratchett rounding out the top five.

Although its charts were made up entirely of fiction authors, and dominated by 
crime and thriller writers,Oxfam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam>, 
which is currently running its two-week annual literary festival Bookfest, said 
that overall its most donated and bestselling genre was non-fiction.

"Oxfam loves books and book sales have been helping Oxfam in its fight against 
poverty for more than 50 years," said director of trading Andrew Horton. "Every 
single book, whether it is donated or bought, helps to support Oxfam's vital 
work. Bookfest is a great opportunity to celebrate this and we really hope that 
the public will get involved by coming along to their local Oxfam shop or 
bookshop to enjoy the brilliant range of events and promotions taking place 
during the fortnight."

• This article was amended on 2 July 2012. In the original it stated that 
Stieg Larsson was Norwegian. This has been corrected.
 