
At the Siobhan Davies dance studios <http://www.siobhandavies.com/> this 
weekend, a cross-disciplinary festival of performances,What Remains … Anatomy 
of an Artist: 10 New Works 
<http://www.siobhandavies.com/whats-on/performance/what-remains-anatomy-artist/>
, investigated the different ways in which artists can plunder, reinvent and 
take colour from the work of others. Writers, film-makers, choreographers and 
an anonymous sculptor contributed short works about their responses to other 
works or makers. Some were sketchily experimental, and some – such asJulie 
Cunningham’s We Shall See the Sky 
<http://www.timeout.com/newyork/art/julie-cunningham>, danced to the poetry of 
Kate Tempest – were a thrilling dialogue between art forms.

Anyone who has seen Cunningham dance, and admired her meticulous accuracy and 
classical grace, might be surprised to see her tackling the ferocious furnace 
of language, hip-hop rhythms and archaic prosody that characterise the poetry 
of Tempest. Yet it’s from that absolute contrast of aesthetic that the work’s 
special beauty develops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fkate-tempest-and-roller-skating-for-andy-warhol-siobhan-davies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97a9ccc6155710596a9186214a219b7c6ab3363d%2F0_141_4193_2517%2F4193.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dancing%20up%20a%20storm%20to%20Kate%20Tempest%20and%20roller-skating%20for%20a%20Warhol%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fkate-tempest-and-roller-skating-for-andy-warhol-siobhan-davies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dancing%20up%20a%20storm%20to%20Kate%20Tempest%20and%20roller-skating%20for%20a%20Warhol%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fkate-tempest-and-roller-skating-for-andy-warhol-siobhan-davies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97a9ccc6155710596a9186214a219b7c6ab3363d%2F0_141_4193_2517%2F4193.jpg>
 We Shall See the Sky, at the What Remains festival. Photograph: Stephen Wright 
Cunningham and her three dancers (two men, one woman) are uniformly dressed in 
black, and at first their classically stretched limbs, poised balances and 
precisely graduated shapes seem to occupy a more rarified space than the 
passionate, full-on delivery of Tempest’s recorded voice. Gradually though, we 
come to see how Cunningham’s scrupulously sensitive reading of the poems 
doesn’t limit but amplifies their force.

Initially, it’s the choreography’s responses to the rhythm and vocal music 
that are most striking: moments where the force of Tempest’s quasi-rap delivery 
sends a current of spiking energy through the dancers’ footwork, or where 
passages of more melodious lyricism float them on longer phrases of movement. 
When Tempest’s voice rises in intensity, the four dancers move in more 
concentrated unison, and the patterns that they form and re-form seem to map 
out the space in which the poetry’s emotions lie.

There are moments, too, of more figurative interpretation. The dancers revolve 
on the spot as planets spin in the poetry; they touch the floor; they move with 
softness or with hard resistance; they clench their fists or gently touch each 
other in response to specific images. When Tempest declares that she feels 
herself becoming “bigger than all the buildings”, Cunningham stands in a long 
ecstatic balance, one leg extending upwards, arms reaching out to embrace the 
world.

This sounds more literal on paper than it appears in performance, where over 
the course of 30 minutes, the dance steadily becomes more deeply and 
passionately embedded in the choreography. Julie Cunningham is still at a very 
early stage in her choreographic career, yet We Shall See the Sky is a 
wonderfully crafted, original work, which could easily expand to a larger stage.

Fred Herko: the life and dramatic death of an avant-garde hero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/23/fred-herko-life-and-dramatic-death-avant-garde-hero>
A very different encounter with language comes in Jamie Atherton 
<https://jamieatherton.com>’s Possibilities for a Pleasant Outing, a 
“performance memoir” ofdancer Fred Herko 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fred_Herko> who, while almost forgotten now, was 
once a bright-burning star of the New York avant-garde. Back in the 1960s, 
Herko’s contemporaries saw him as a man overly blessed with talents – 
beautiful, clever, a gifted musician and an even more gifted dancer, who 
performed in everything from experimental Judson Church events to commercial 
television. Yet early in his career, Herko became addicted to drugs. A friend 
once had to rescue him from a downtown diner, where he was dancing crazily on 
the counter, covered in filth. A few days later, he jumped from the window of a 
fifth-floor apartment, naked, with the sound of Mozart’s Coronation Mass 
blaring from the gramophone. Some thought the 28-year-old was hallucinating as 
he died, imagining theperfect, Nijinskyan leap 
<http://www.russianballethistory.com/nijinskythelegend.htm>; others believed 
this was the “suicide performance” that he’d always promised to dance.Andy 
Warhol <http://www.biography.com/people/andy-warhol-9523875>, who was 
fascinated by Herko, believed it was the latter and was said to have lamented 
that he hadn’t been present to film it.

Warhol did, however, catch him on camera before that, in the 1963 film Roller 
Skate, in which Herko attempted to dance all over New York on one roller skate. 
The film is now lost, but Atherton reimagines it in his own 35-minute solo, 
dressed in the sameWMCA Good Guys <http://www.musicradio77.com/wmca/> 
sweatshirt that Herko wore in the film; executing his own one-skate “dance” 
while simultaneously reading aloud extracts from memoirs and biography that 
related to Herko’s life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fkate-tempest-and-roller-skating-for-andy-warhol-siobhan-davies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2035db76f8504fcd0b6e94b0fbfd7195770b29c2%2F0_2385_3794_3298%2F3794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dancing%20up%20a%20storm%20to%20Kate%20Tempest%20and%20roller-skating%20for%20a%20Warhol%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fkate-tempest-and-roller-skating-for-andy-warhol-siobhan-davies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dancing%20up%20a%20storm%20to%20Kate%20Tempest%20and%20roller-skating%20for%20a%20Warhol%20star&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fkate-tempest-and-roller-skating-for-andy-warhol-siobhan-davies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2035db76f8504fcd0b6e94b0fbfd7195770b29c2%2F0_2385_3794_3298%2F3794.jpg>
 Possibilities for a Pleasant Outing by Jamie Atherton. Photograph: Stephen 
Wright 
It’s a curious, chancy little solo. Perhaps in tribute to Warhol’s trademark 
style of blurring art and life, Atherton makes no effort towards a polished 
performance. Hunched, wobbling and tense, he scoots aimlessly around the 
studio, sometimes pausing to balance awkwardly on his one skate, at one point 
attempting a half-baked imitation of the classical attitude in which Herko 
glided through New York, his leg gracefully lifted behind him, according to 
Warhol, his “head lifted” his “throat free.”

Atherton’s vocal delivery is just as casual as his physical style. The 
material he’s assembled is riveting, portraying Herko’s New York as a place of 
skuzzy apartments and glamorous parties, of artistic ferment and promiscuous 
gay sex. Yet Atherton doesn’t attempt to make any kind of theatrical impact 
with the story – on the contrary, he stumbles and mumbles his words and 
occasionally drops the paper he’s reading from.

What might seem like wilfully irksome defects in another context, however, 
make a kind of sense here. Herko was attempting the impossible in Warhol’s film 
– towards the end of his marathon performance he was apparently hobbling and 
bleeding, and his pain was said to have been as interesting to Warhol as his 
most dancerly flights. Like Warhol too, Herko identified himself with a culture 
that rejected the polish of high art for the novelty of the pedestrian and raw. 
And most interestingly, to Atherton, Herko was also part of a gay community 
whose history remains largely untold, so what’s known about him now has been 
gleaned from fragments of gossip and anecdote. Atherton’s fragmented, 
half-achieved solo attempts to honour all these elements. And even though, as a 
standalone work, it’s too awkward and tenuous to succeed in a theatre, it takes 
on a convincing resonance in this festival context – lodged among works 
exploring parallel ideas, among artists making parallel journeys.
 