
It was at the Etihad Stadium in May that Danny Welbeck’s devastated expression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/danny-welbeck-injury-arsenal-england-euro-2016-manchester-city>
, as he lay on the pitch while the Arsenal physiotherapist examined his knee, 
told of another major problem. He was not long recovered froman injury  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/13/danny-welbeck-return-new-year-arsenal-knee-surgery>
that kept him out of action for 10 months. The blow of new serious damage was 
obvious.

Seven months down the line of the latest spell in rehabilitation, Welbeck gave 
himself the best Christmas present with a return to full training on Friday 
morning.

Arsène Wenger says Mesut Özil not exempt from Arsenal’s dirty work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/arsene-wenger-mesut-ozil-arsenal-danny-welbeck-aaron-ramsey>
“Of course it’s fantastic, because for him it’s like starting a new career, 
because he has been out for such a long time,”Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> said. “But I’m a bit 
cautious with the little setbacks you have when you have been out for a long 
time. You have to be patient. Welbeck will need some time.”

However desperate Welbeck is to get back in the first team, that is a sensible 
view as he has spent a total of 17 of the past 20 months sidelined. It is 
revealing that Welbeck joinedArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> the same summer as Alexis 
Sánchez, and the Chilean has played roughly three times as much football since 
then.

Wenger normally allows for somewhere between three to four weeks for a 
long-term absentee to regain full match fitness. Welbeck is ahead of schedule 
in his recovery from cartilage damage, and all being well will come into 
contention in early January.

With Sánchez’s reinvention at centre‑forward, Welbeck might find himself in 
contention on the left-hand side of Arsenal’s attack, which has seen various 
options tried this season. Welbeck would be an interesting choice to bring pace 
and muscle to that department.

During his most recent fit spell, last spring, he made a real impact in terms 
of goal threat and all-round attacking presence, so he will be a useful weapon 
to add to a team who looked jaded in the past two defeats.

With 2017 approaching, Wenger stressed that any negativity around recent 
results will not affect his thinking about a new contract, with his deal up in 
May. “I always said I will judge where I stand in spring and make my decisions 
then. And the club is free as well. It’s not because I am here a long time that 
I have any rights. We are both on the same boat.”
 