
Darcey Bussell <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bussell> might have hung up 
her pointe shoes, but she's set to dish out scores instead, after the BBC 
announced that the former Royal Ballet principal dancer is to joinStrictly Come 
Dancing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> as a 
judge.

She will replace Alesha Dixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alesha-dixon> on the show's judging panel 
when it returns in the autumn, after the singer binned ballroom dancing for 
variety acts earlier this year and joined Britain's Got Talent instead. Bussell 
will sit alongside the show's long-term judges Len Goodman, Craig Revel Horwood 
and Bruno Tonioli to pass comment on a selection of celebrities taking to the 
dance floor for the first time.

It won't be the first time Bussell has perched on the Strictly panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/nov/08/darcey-bussell-judge-strictly-come-dancing>
, after a stint as a guest judge at the end of the 2009 series. As part of the 
semi-final show, she danced a non-competitive jive with Ian White, one of the 
regular professional dancers on the series.

Bussell expressed her excitement at the new role. "I had such a lovely 
experience in 2009 when I was a guest judge, that coming on board now feels 
very natural. Strictly combines quality dance and great entertainment, which is 
such a positive for everybody involved."

It will be interesting to see how Bussell's years in ballet inform her 
assessment of rumbas, quicksteps and paso dobles. After her previous 
appearances on the show,she told the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/darcey-bussell-strictly-retired-but-keen-to-find-new-moves-1835046.html>
: "People think, when you've been a professional dancer all your life, that 
you're going to have tried every sort of style, and I kind of felt embarrassed 
that I'd never ever tried ballroom dancing."

Bussell joined the Royal Ballet in 1988, rising to principal a year later. She 
retired in 2007, but subsequently performed alongside opera singer Katherine 
Jenkins inViva la Diva <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/nov/28/theatre2> 
at the O2 Arena.

Despite such large-scale live appearances, Strictly Come Dancing will bring a 
considerably bigger audience. The BBC remain absolutely committed to the 
format, with thechannel's controller Danny Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/danny-cohen> describing the programme as "a 
jewel in BBC One's crown."

He continued: "I can think of no-one better to join our Strictly judging panel 
than Darcey, the UK's queen of ballet. Darcey has all the poise and glamour, 
along with the experience and credentials to deliver meaningful and insightful 
critiques of our couples' performances. She's a huge fan of the show and will 
be a fantastic addition to the Strictly family."
 