
The way Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir has talked about the current 
referendum in Darfur 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/sudan-to-hold-darfur-referendum-in-spite-of-us-concerns/3279223.html>
, you’d be forgiven for thinking the results will actually mean something for 
the people living there.


“It is the people of Darfur <https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur> who 
choose whether they want states or one region and we are holding this 
referendum so that no one else can come and say we want this or that,” said 
Bashir, midway through a controversial campaigning tour through all five of the 
states that make up the war-torn territory.

Darfuris reject controversial referendum ​as fierce fighting continues ​
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/darfur-referendum-rejected-fighting-intensifies-sudan-omar-al-bashir>
As if, amidst the war and the refugee camps and the permanent humanitarian 
suffering the people of Darfur really care about the administrative structure 
of a local government that has, at its best, completely failed to provide for 
them, and at its worst enthusiastically oppressed them.

The referendum, to determine whether Darfur should remain divided into five 
smaller states or be reconstituted as one large one, is a small but significant 
step on the peace plan agreed in 2011 in Doha.

Or it would be significant, if Darfur’s major rebel groups had signed up to 
the plan, and if any of the other major provisions of the plan had been 
implemented.

But as a spokesperson for the opposition Justice and Equality Movement told 
reporters: “The priority was the return of the displaced to their villages. 
Whatever the result, the referendum means nothing.”

In this context, it’s hardly surprising that most rebel groups have boycotted 
the referendum, and have urged their supporters to do the same.

If Bashir had been serious about implementing the peace plan, he might have 
stopped forces loyal to him from fighting rebel groups. But as of the end of 
March, about138,000 people had been newly displaced by hostilities 
<http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/2016/04/06/world/middleeast/ap-un-united-nations-sudan-darfur.html?_r=0>
, with the government preventing United Nations peacekeepers from doing 
anything about it.

Human Rights Watch has also revealed, in its most recent report on Darfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/09/sudan-security-forces-killed-raped-burned-civilians-alive-human-rights-watch-report-darfur>
, how government forces were implicated in systematic abuses of civilians, 
including the rape and torture of young women.

This referendum is not about the people of Darfur. ​The president, a pariah 
for so long, wants to come in from the cold
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fdarfur-sudan-referendum-omar-al-bashir-attempt-to-come-in-from-the-cold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe26791f9e91648d7c6017c6499264751040089c2%2F0_3_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Darfur%20vote%20is%20Omar%20al-Bashir%E2%80%99s%20attempt%20to%20come%20in%20from%20the%20cold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fdarfur-sudan-referendum-omar-al-bashir-attempt-to-come-in-from-the-cold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Darfur%20vote%20is%20Omar%20al-Bashir%E2%80%99s%20attempt%20to%20come%20in%20from%20the%20cold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fdarfur-sudan-referendum-omar-al-bashir-attempt-to-come-in-from-the-cold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe26791f9e91648d7c6017c6499264751040089c2%2F0_3_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A woman casts her ballot during Darfur’s referendum. Photograph: Mohamed 
Nureldin Abdallah/Reuters 
So this referendum is not about the people of Darfur, it’s about Bashir. The 
Sudanese president, a pariah for so long, wants to come in from the cold.

Wanted by the international criminal court on charges of genocide 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/en_menus/icc/situations%20and%20cases/situations/situation%20icc%200205/press%20releases/Pages/a.aspx>
 – relating to his role in the conflict in Darfur – Bashir has been subject to 
financial sanctions, a travel ban, and the imposition of peacekeepers, the 
United Nations and African Union Mission in Darfur (Unamid).

But last year, the South African government risked its own reputation and 
relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/16/omar-al-bashir-escape-south-africa-african-union>
with the ICC to fete Bashir at an African Union summit in July. He received a 
standing ovation from his counterparts there, an action interpreted by many as 
a welcoming back of Bashir into the continental fold.

Then towards the end of the year, relations with the United States began to 
thaw 
<https://africajournalismtheworld.com/2015/11/05/is-the-west-letting-sudan-and-bashir-back-in-from-the-cold/>
, with Sudan being removed from a watchlist of countries deemed to be 
facilitating the financing of terrorism.

Bashir’s Sudan was being rehabilitated, even as he strolled to victory  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/29/sudan-repression-omar-al-bashir-presidential-election-human-rights-watch>
in presidential elections characterised by widespread intimidation.

More good news came soon after, with the sudden announcement that South Africa 
wouldwithdraw its troops from Unamid 
<http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article58121>. “Whatever Zuma’s 
intentions in ordering the withdrawal ... its effect will surely be to help 
Bashir and hurt the long-suffering Darfuris,” wrote Peter Fabricius for the 
Institute for Security Studies when it was announced.

Music from the Blue Nile: unique recordings from Sudan's refugee camps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/10/-sp-alsarah-music-sudan-refugees-darfur-blue-nile>
Fabricius added: “Bashir probably hopes that when the South African troops 
pull out, other troop-contributing countries will follow suit, collapsing the 
mission altogether.”

Sure enough, diplomatic gossip in the corridors of Addis Ababa is that the 
African Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> – a crucial 
component of Unamid – is losing its stomach for the fight in Darfur, and is 
angling for a withdrawal. This is where the Darfur referendum comes in: if 
Bashir can make it look like he’s doing his bit to achieve peace, even while 
all independent evidence suggests otherwise, then this increases the chances of 
a full Unamid withdrawal.

But there has been some pushback against the credibility of the vote. In a 
statement from the US state department, a spokesman said: “If held under 
current rules and conditions, a referendum on the status of Darfur cannot be 
considered a credible expression of the will of the people of Darfur. Moreover, 
it will undermine the peace process now under way.”

On the surface, the referendum may look like a rare opportunity for the 
region’s long-suffering citizens to express their will, and an important step 
on the long road to peace. Not so fast. As usual, the Sudanese president has an 
ulterior motive – and, for now, he will probably emerge as the big winner.

A version of this article first appeared on The Daily Maverick 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2016-04-11-sudan-darfur-referendum-is-another-step-in-bashirs-rehabilitation/#.Vw5O_mSrRdB>
 