
Spoiler alert: do not read this if you haven't seen The Dark Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight> yet.

Should Christopher Nolan bow to the inevitable and sign on the dotted line to 
direct a sequel to this summer's preposterously gargantuan mega-hit The Dark 
Knight, he will have to start all over again.Aaron Eckhart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart>, whose Harvey Dent character 
ended the film transformed into the villain Two Face, has confirmed he will not 
be returning in any future pictures. Fans have been speculating otherwise on 
online forums, but it appears that that final fall out of the window really was 
... well, final: there will be no miraculous recovery.

Eckhart told Superhero Hype 
<http://www.superherohype.com/news/featuresnews.php?id=7641>: "I asked Chris 
[Nolan] that question and he goes, 'You're dead' before I could even get the 
question out of my mouth. 'Hey Chris, am I?' 'You're dead!' Alright, cool."

Eckhart, who is currently promoting new movie Towelhead, in which he plays a 
paedophile, added that he was only never meant to appear in one movie, but 
revealed that Heath Ledger was intended to return as The Joker before his death 
in January from an accidental overdose.

"No, I'm not coming back," he said. "I think unfortunately, Heath [Ledger] was 
supposed to go on and that didn't work out."

Speaking of The Joker, Ledger's character has been voted the summer's top 
movie villain ina poll for Moviefone 
<http://www.moviefone.com/insidemovies/2008/09/03/summer-movies-poll-2008-the-results/>
. Ledger beat off "competition" from the main baddie from Indiana Jones and the 
Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, Cate Blanchett's evil Soviet Irina Spalko in the 
fan-led contest. Perhaps inevitably, Ledger received a staggering 95% of the 
possible vote.

Elsewhere on the poll, Sex and the City edged out Mamma Mia! as best chick 
flick, while Tropic Thunder beat Pineapple Express to the title of funniest 
movie.
 