
"My parents weren't into jazz at all, but my Dad did have a tape of Dave 
Brubeck <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dave-brubeck> and he loved Take 
Five. I heard that in the car long before my jazz awakening through Herbie 
Hancock'sHead Hunters and Miles Davis's In a Silent Way, all that swampy, odd 
music. At the time I wrongly dismissed him. When you're a young, impressionable 
jazz fan you look for the most esoteric and obviously hip things, and he didn't 
seem to be pushing the boundaries in ways that I thought were cool at the time.

"Of course I was unbelievably wrong. It all gradually began to make sense to 
me when I heard Live From the Blue Note and I realised that his signature sound 
- blocked chords, very rigorously rhythmic - was as trailblazing as anybody 
else's. Take Five, for example, is a staple while remaining a true piece of 
jazz music. It was written by Paul Desmond but it's got the stamp of Dave 
Brubeck all over it.Playing a 5/4 groove takes a great deal of practice and 
persistence, and yet it's done so simply 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BwNrmYRiX_o>. It paved the way for Pyramid 
Song! He can caress the piano, but he also attacks it in quite an unsubtle way, 
and I've definitely brought some of that into my own playing. I'm very fond of 
playing those stabbing, sharp notes, and that's definitely a Brubeckian thing.

"After I really got into him I had the chance to meet him. He was in England 
and he asked to meet me in a house he was staying at in Maida Vale. I had a cup 
of tea with him and his wife. That was the beginning of our friendship. A year 
later I was at the NewportJazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> 
festival, and I looked to the side of the stage and there he was. He watched my 
entire gig, and I was shaking in myÂ boots!

It was one of my slightly more insane shows. He came up to me after and said 
quietly, "I really like it when you play ballads, Jamie. You play beautiful 
ballads."

"He's very relaxed, very low voice, he just has this air of brilliance 
hovering around him. He hasnever had the mystery of Miles Davis or Coltrane, 
didn't have a drug habit, has been married to the same woman for years. He's 
the horn-rimmed glasses college guy, so the iconography isn't quite as strong, 
but he's proper cool."

Key recording: Time Out (Columbia, 1959)
 