
The Labor MP for Batman, David Feeney, has criticised a poll which showed that 
the Greens could take the innerMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> seat with a primary vote 
of 41%.

The robocall poll of 1,631 voters was commissioned by the Greens and conducted 
by Lonergan research. The results placed Feeney’s primary vote at just 28%. The 
poll also found 66% of those surveyed would consider voting for the Greens 
candidate Alex Bhathal, including 30% of those who intend to vote Liberal and 
52% of those who intend to vote for Labor.

Feeney took to Twitter to criticise the results, which he described as 
“unethical”.

Sophie Mirabella complains of 'stacked-out audience' at Indi election forum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/sophie-mirabella-complains-of-stacked-out-audience-at-indi-election-forum>
“Greens party caught out running #unethical ‘push poll’ attack in Batman,” he 
tweeted, and included a definition of push poll with the tweet that read: “A 
so-called push poll is an insidious form of negative campaigning, disguised as 
a political poll. Push polls are not surveys at all, but rather unethical 
political telemarketing.”

However the member for the neighbouring electorate of Melbourne, the Greens MP 
Adam Bandt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, told 
reporters during a press conference with Bhathal on Tuesday that the poll was 
legitimate.

“When you ask people who they’re going to vote for, if that’s push-polling, 
then every poll in the country is push-polling,” he said. “It’s conducted by a 
reputable firm.”

He went on to describe Feeney as “the Sophie Mirabella of the Labor party”.

“Increasingly, his own party is distancing itself from him,” he said.

Feeney had a difficult run in the first weeks of the election campaign after 
it was revealed he had failed to declare his $2.3m Northcote property on the 
register of members interests. He then blundered his way through an interview 
with Sky News where he failed to answer questions about key Labor policies, 
accidentally leaving Labor campaign strategy documents behind which were then 
leaked.

He did not attend the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> campaign launch in 
western Sydney on Sunday.

But a Newspoll published 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-voters-fading-party-allegiances/news-story/c19c75f44bea2e53de9df353e321d5fb>
 on Tuesday found Labor and the Greens tied at 34% of the primary vote. With 
Liberal directing its preferences to the ALP, Labor would hold the seat with a 
swing against Feeney of 7.6%, the poll found.

Scare campaigns: the major parties ramp up some frightening hyperbole | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/scare-campaign-the-major-parties-ramp-up-some-frightening-hyperbole>
Guardian Australia has contacted Feeney for comment. 

Bhathal maintained she was noticing “a huge swing in the seat” while out 
campaigning.

“I’ve been living and working in [Batman] for 30 years and I was well aware 
that in this seat we have more people who believe in human rights, in social 
justice and in democracy than anywhere else in the country,” she said.

“The people in Melbourne might be running second to us.” 

She said voters in the electorate once “had a huge loyalty” to the Labor party 
but “they’re finding that party is moving away from their values”.

The traditionally working-class electorate in Melbourne’s north has seen the 
Greens finish second to Labor in the previous two elections, gaining more of 
the vote each time. The Greens are hoping that the increasing gentrification of 
suburbs like Northcote, Preston and Coburg North will see them gain more of the 
vote come 2 July.
 