
For as long as David Olusoga has been writing and broadcasting on black 
British history (almost two decades), he has received infuriated letters from 
the public. Nowadays, there are tweets too, which employ the same fulminating 
tone.

“The number of people who say, ‘I’m sick of hearing about slavery’, or ‘black 
people are always talking about slavery’. My response to them is ‘Name a 
British plantation. Name a slave trader. Name a British slave ship.’ Normally 
they can’t, because we don’t know that much about slavery. It’s not a central 
part of our national story.”

Olusoga’s new book, Black and British: A Forgotten History, is not about 
slavery as such, but it is a radical reappraisal of the parameters of history, 
exposing lacunae in the nation’s version of its past. Domestic history cannot 
be separated from the vast former empire building, he argues, which was 
inextricably bound to the economics of global slavery. Joining up history at 
home and abroad makes it harder to gloss over Britain’s part in the slave trade.

It also becomes harder to ignore the legion of black Britons who have lived on 
the Sceptred Isle since Roman times, rarely acknowledged in mainstream 
textbooks, but whose presence proves that there was never a “year zero” or a 
lost idyll of ethnic purity to which modern day nativists can hark back. “Black 
history is a series of missing chapters from British history,” he says. “I’m 
trying to put those bits back in.”

Olusoga, 46, who started out at the BBC in 1998 as a researcher on Radio 4, is 
surely a “celebrity historian” in the making. He arrives in the hotel lobby for 
this interview fresh from Delhi, on his way to Mexico, in a sharp suit and with 
luggage in tow. He has an easy eloquence that is made for TV, speaking in 
perfectly formed, modulated sentences. His second book,The World’s War, won a 
Political Book award for“World War One Book of the Year” 
<https://www.politicos.co.uk/posts/political-book-awards-winners> in 2015, no 
mean feat for a book published in the previous, centenary year (his first,The 
Kaiser’s Holocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/04/kaisers-holocaust-olugosa-erichsen-review>
, looked at Germany’s colonial rule in Namibia). Meanwhile, his BBC2 series, 
Britain’s Forgotten Slave Owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/23/britains-forgotten-slave-owners-review>
, earned a Bafta this year. Having just finished book three, he has put the 
next one (about the global history of slavery) on hold in order to co-present
Civilisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/27/civilisations-mary-beard-simon-schame-david-olusoga-television>
 alongside Simon Schama and Mary Beard. It is a 10-part remake of Kenneth 
Clark’s landmark documentary series on the history of western art and thought, 
due on our screens next autumn.

There has not been much sleep in the past four months, the time it took to 
writeBlack and British, in between filming the tie-in TV series. It was first 
conceived two years ago, when former BBC2 controller Janice Hadlow approached 
Olusoga. He could not have known then how the national climate would change. 
“Is the TV series and book being delivered in the same country that it was 
commissioned for?” he wonders. “I’m not entirely sure.”

It is, he agrees, a fortuitously timed post-Brexit vote book. In it, Olusoga 
lists the flash points in modern black British history, from the unrest in 1919 
when thousands in the country’s ports targeted local non-white communities, to 
the Cable Street riots attacking black sailors in London’s docklands, to the 
Notting Hill riots of 1958, and beyond. On each occasion, white communities 
turned on their black minority counterparts. Are we heading towards another 
flare-up of this kind? “I think we have the strength and the resourcefulness to 
confront parts of our history that are difficult and painful, but there’s also 
a dark side to British history and there was a flash of it this summer. We 
don’t know how deep or how serious it is yet.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdavid-olusoga-interview-black-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78b5ff6460948ddcb7b7da9060dea4dcf1eac6a9%2F0_141_4300_2581%2F4300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Olusoga%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20a%20dark%20side%20to%20British%20history%2C%20and%20we%20saw%20a%20flash%20of%20it%20this%20summer%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdavid-olusoga-interview-black-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Olusoga%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20a%20dark%20side%20to%20British%20history%2C%20and%20we%20saw%20a%20flash%20of%20it%20this%20summer%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdavid-olusoga-interview-black-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78b5ff6460948ddcb7b7da9060dea4dcf1eac6a9%2F0_141_4300_2581%2F4300.jpg>
 David Olusoga meeting school children in Cumbria during filming forBlack and 
British: A Forgotten History. Photograph: BBC/Des Willie 
The change in tone, and chill in the air towards people of colour, has 
certainly been felt by him. “I’ve received tweets that I suspect people 
wouldn’t have sent in 2015. Is that a changed country or is that people who are 
unpleasant feeling emboldened to speak? We don’t know at the moment. As a 
historian, I always think you know what a moment was 20 years later.”

Olusoga was born in Lagos to a white British mother and a Nigerian father who 
met in Newcastle as students. His parents separated when he was two years old 
and his mother returned with him and his three siblings to her home town in the 
north-east, to work as a linguist. A mixed-race family was a rarity in 
Newcastle in the early 80s, and Olusoga felt under attack every day, at school, 
on the streets: “People used to shout ‘National Front’ at us. And ‘wogs out’. 
It was routine, ubiquitous. There were men who would spit and shout. When we 
came out of school, we’d go to the bus stop and if there wasn’t a white person 
waiting, we’d walk to the next one because we knew the buses wouldn’t stop for 
black people. Sometimes we’d end up walking all the way home.”

But one summer, when he was 14, the violence went off the scale. A brick was 
thrown into the family’s home wrapped in a note telling them to go back to 
Africa. A police officer had to be stationed outside their door for protection, 
until the family was eventually rehoused. “It was the summer from hell,” he 
says. “Afterwards, I think we did that thing you do when you’ve been through 
something together as a family – we stopped talking about it, because it was 
over, we’d got through it.”

For this book, he opened up that conversation again and found some catharsis. 
It is heartening for him that his youngest siblings, born much later, can 
barely believe what it was like to be black and British then. “At my lowest 
moment, I wanted to leave the country. But it is no longer 1984. There has been 
too much integration. I was on a beach a few years ago, in the south of 
England, and I saw this guy who had bulldog tattoos, England flag tattoos – the 
sort of person I’d be really frightened of as a child – and he was with this 
mixed-race child who was clearly his granddaughter. It was such an amazing 
sight.”

That summer didn’t scar him, Olusoga reflects, because his was a strong, close 
family and his mother pushed them hard to succeed at school, and at life. They 
moved to another council estate (which appears briefly in the filmGet Carter – 
“I saw it many years later when I was a student, I was amazed to see Michael 
Caine wander past my bedroom window”) and their lives returned to normality.

He later realised how the study of world history could help him make sense of 
that personal experience. He had always loved “great stories”, but over the 
years history “began to explain why things had happened to me and my family. It 
had answers. It made sense of the world and not just of my experiences but also 
why the north-east was the way it was, why those industries were there, why 
people felt the need to drive you out of your home, why some people could never 
accept the idea that I could be of this country, and be British.”

He went to Liverpool University and then to Leicester for a master’s degree 
before rejecting the idea of a PhD – “becoming an academic, doing a PhD, felt 
to me like never leaving school”. He joined the BBC instead, met his partner in 
the canteen (she is a producer at the Natural History Unit), and wound up in 
the job of his dreams. “I only ever wanted to do history, and make 
documentaries.”

Now, Olusoga wants to do more than rehabilitate lost or forgotten individuals. 
“I was trying to look at black British history beyond just biography,” he says, 
arguing that historians in the past have focused on the lives of black 
“heroes”, who remain on the margins. These exhumed figures need to be 
incorporated into mainstream history.

One excavation that resonates with him is an image of a black sailor 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelson%27s_Column#/media/File:Nelson%27s_column_-_Death_of_Nelson_at_Trafalgar.JPG>
, on the south-facing bronze relief panel at the bottom of Nelson’s column in 
Trafalgar Square. The panel shows Nelson mortally wounded and the sailor 
standing close by, musket in hand.

“He’s been there since the 1840s,” says Olusoga. “Think of all the things that 
have happened in Trafalgar Square since then – the mass union meetings, Keir 
Hardie’s speech, the CND marches, the poll tax riots. He was there to witness 
all that history and he’s there because he’s a representation of a norm – black 
sailors in the British navy. I think about what he’s witnessed, looking out at 
the changing world, watching Britain change.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdavid-olusoga-interview-black-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49bcf2fc83bfb27cc7dd4a0102c45eaf2320dd60%2F0_0_2979_4048%2F2979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Olusoga%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20a%20dark%20side%20to%20British%20history%2C%20and%20we%20saw%20a%20flash%20of%20it%20this%20summer%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdavid-olusoga-interview-black-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Olusoga%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20a%20dark%20side%20to%20British%20history%2C%20and%20we%20saw%20a%20flash%20of%20it%20this%20summer%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdavid-olusoga-interview-black-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49bcf2fc83bfb27cc7dd4a0102c45eaf2320dd60%2F0_0_2979_4048%2F2979.jpg>
 A sketch of Francis Barber, a servant to Samuel Johnson, dating from around 
1750 Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
He is indelible proof for Olusoga – carved into a monument to heroic 
nationalism – that black Britons belong inside British history, not on its 
side-lines. There are other memorable figures, such as the third century’s 
sub-Saharan African woman who grew up in East Sussex, and John Blanke, a 
trumpeter at Henry VIII’s coronation. He hopes one day that TV dramas or 
documentaries on the court might incorporate, even incidentally, the black 
Tudors we know were there. As part of his TV series he places plaques in 
various locations to commemorate moments or figures in black British history, 
including a plaque at Bunce Island in Sierra Leone, which was used as a slave 
fortress, and in Samuel Johnson’s home in honour of his Jamaican manservant, 
Francis Barber.

The way that history is taught in schools and universities is telling half a 
story, Olusoga believes. What happened inside Britain cannot be separated from 
its global identity. “We were the biggest empire the world had ever seen. The 
idea that you can have a domestic history apart from it doesn’t make sense. 
Take the industrial revolution: the stories about spinning jennys and water 
frames are all part of our heritage. But where does the cotton being spun in 
those machines come from? At school, we went to mills and factories and nobody 
at any point in my education pointed out that the cotton processed in those 
mills was made by enslaved black Americans. When we talk about the history of 
the industrial revolution, the missing people in that revolution are the 1.8 
million enslaved people who made that cotton. It was our biggest export and 
almost all of it came from the American deep south.” To fail to tell the story 
of these black Americans is, he thinks, “to tell a lie”.

So should we talk about the historical guilt and shame of the coloniser and 
colonised, passed down through the generations? “No. I want to excise the words 
‘guilt’ and ‘shame’ from the conversation. There is no one alive today who is a 
slave trader or a slave owner. I don’t think it’s about people feeling guilt or 
shame. It’s about acknowledgment, and it’s about truth and reconciliation. But 
I don’t even think we’ve done the truth bit yet.”

• Black and British: A Forgotten History is published by Macmillan. To order a 
copy for £20.50 (RRP £25) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/black-history-of-britain.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99. The accompanying series begins on BBC2 at 9pm on 9 November.
 