
It was billed as David Beckham's epic journey into the heart of the Amazon 
rainforest <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/amazon-rainforest>, but 
Michael Palin has branded the former England football captain a "wimp" after he 
was rattled on his debut BBC1 travelogue by a frog, a snake and concerns about 
his hair.

Beckham and three friends travelled to Rio de Janeiro, where they played beach 
volleyball with the locals, before journeying to the remote Yanomami tribe for 
the 90-minute film masterminded my Beckham's marketing guru, Simon Fuller.

The footballer, who hung up his boots last year, spent the night in the 
rainforest during the 12-day trip – "literally the middle of nowhere," he said 
– accompanied only by his friends and two expert guides.

Beckham achieves one of his ambitions, which was to find somewhere in the 
world where he was not recognised, and has to explain football to one of the 
locals.

Beckham said: "It is the first time I have ever had to explain what soccer is 
to anybody apart from Victoria."

Beckham, who travels around much of the country on a motorbike, described some 
of the experiences as "terrifying" and complained about the perils of having to 
sleep in a hammock.

He is filmed being left shaken by a brightly coloured frog which appears on 
top of the tent and by a snake which he worries is on his back and is seen 
slithering off into the jungle.

Palin, the Monty Python star and veteran of numerous BBC travelogues including 
one toBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, who interviewed 
Beckham at the programme launch on Monday, told him: "You are a wimp really. 
David Attenborough would have interviewed it [the frog]."

Beckham said: "I wish the snake had been bigger. It was bigger than it looks 
on TV.

"I am not a big frog fan. It was bright orange and I was told it was pretty 
dangerous. I was a little bit nervous about that."

Before setting off on the journey Beckham is filmed being given advice by his 
wife Victoria.

She asks him: "What are you going to do with your hair, with all that 
humidity?"

Beckham replies, much to the approval of his wife: "I am going to wear a hat."

He also related a tricky experience with one tribesman who was naked and 
covered entirely in black paint.

Despite his misgivings about the sleeping arrangements, Beckham said he wanted 
to do another travelogue "without a doubt".

Whether it is on the BBC remains to be seen. The documentary, David Beckham: 
Into The Unknown was funded by its commercial arm,BBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide>, BBC1 and Fuller's XIX 
agency. It has been sold to about 15 countries so far.

Fuller is understood to have first approached the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> last year with the idea for the 
documentary, in the run-up to the football World Cup this month.

Palin said the programme showed aspects of Beckham he had not seen before. 
While he said parts of it were "moreDavid Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham> than David Attenborough", 
he said it was well shot and praised the footballer as a "good observer".

It will air on BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> next Monday, in 
China on the same day and in Brazil the following week.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 