
The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party will tomorrow 
unveil the first official political poster created by a member of the public.

It depicts David Cameron as Gene Hunt, the politically incorrect star of Ashes 
to Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes>, the BBC TV 
series set in the early years of the Thatcher era. He is pictured above the 
words: "Don't let him take Britain back to the 1980s." The Tory leader is 
wearing snakeskin boots and sitting on the bonnet of the red Audi Quattro made 
famous by the show.

Labour party officials hope it will remind young voters of the Tory record in 
the 1980s when youth unemployment hit record heights. The poster illustrates 
the growing importance the big three parties are placing on the internet and a 
recognition that the best ideas do not always belong to ad executives in London.

It was created by Jacob Quagliozzi, a 24-year-old Labour supporter from St 
Albans, who entered a competition organised by the party's advertising agency, 
Saatchi & Saatchi, which invited supporters to meet a brief posted online last 
weekend. It will be launched in Basildon, Essex, by the foreign secretary, 
David Miliband, and his brother, Ed, the energy secretary, who is also writing 
Labour's election manifesto.

David Miliband will say: "Ed and I became politically active in the 1980s. 
Jacob's poster is a powerful reminder of the damage which the Tories did to 
Britain in the 80s."

Labour is turning to the internet, in part because it cannot match the 
resources of the Conservative party. Paul Bainsfair, a former Saatchi executive 
behind the Liberal Democrat's "Labservatives" campaign, which briefly became an 
internet phenomenon earlier in the week, said: "Social networking is a bit of a 
leveller. It's possible to achieve quite a lot with quite a little. 
Historically, the battle that went on in advertising was governed by the amount 
of money you had to spend. The Tories are way out in front of Labour."

The Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> will 
launch a series of pre-election posters portraying a grinning Gordon Brown at 
850 sites in England and Wales on Monday, attacking the prime minister's 
record. Its national advertising push is part-financed by their billionaire 
chairman, Lord Ashcroft.

Labour's "Ashes to Ashes" posters will be displayed on electronic billboards 
from London to Manchester, after it was chosen from around 1,000 entries. 
Labour officials are delighted by the response to the invitation to the public 
to pitch, which they claim demonstrates that they understand the power of the 
internet far better than their political opponents.

They have been encouraged by the response to the election ads produced by the 
Conservatives' agency, Euro RSCG, which were designed to appeal to floating 
voters, but were lampooned online. Earlier this month, the Tories announced 
they had hired M&C Saatchi to work alongside Euro RSCG, in a move that was 
widely interpreted as a snub to their original agency.

Bainsfair said it is important to use humour in advertising and that members 
of the public are sometimes better placed to "take the mickey" out of political 
parties. "You've got to do something a bit cheeky. People are saying: 'At last 
â€“ a party that can be funny.' That's how a lot of brands work."

Labour's general election co-ordinator, the international development 
secretary Douglas Alexander, travelled to America in September 2008 to study 
Barack Obama's presidential campaign, which harnessed the power of the internet 
more successfully than any before or since. They have borrowed some of the 
Obama team's tactics for making campaign material available online and raising 
money for parliamentary candidates over the internet.

Mark Hanson, a Labour party digital strategist, claimed: "We have more people 
out on the doorstep making contact with voters. We are double where we were at 
the same stage in 2005."
 