
David Bowie’s art collection was tasteful. Disappointingly tasteful. As 
Sotheby’s announcesthe full list 
<http://www.sothebys.com/en/news-video/blogs/all-blogs/bowie-collector/2016/06/david-bowie-sales-exhibition-dates-preorder-catalogues.html>
 of art owned by the late great pop star, to be auctioned in November, it is 
hard to stifle a yawn.

Where are the vulgar pop art provocations? Where is the camp outrage, the punk 
iconoclasm? And where’sAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol>?

You won’t find much in Bowie’s collection that connects in any striking or 
interesting way with his music, videos, performances or personae. One exception 
is his small but impressive collection of paintings by Jean-Michel Basquiat. 
Bowie played Warhol inJulian Schnabel’s film 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0115632/> of Basquiat’s life, so there’s a 
connection there; he owned a Schnabel, too. But otherwise the art of 
avant-garde New York is notable by its absence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-art-collection-sothebys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82060801cfe3c59aa266d2dcb14a5d83dfaa1645%2F296_296_5160_5675%2F5160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie's%20sombre%20art%20collection%20needs%20more%20space%20oddities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-art-collection-sothebys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%27s%20sombre%20art%20collection%20needs%20more%20space%20oddities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-art-collection-sothebys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82060801cfe3c59aa266d2dcb14a5d83dfaa1645%2F296_296_5160_5675%2F5160.jpg>
 Basquiat, Air Power (1984), part of David Bowie’s art collection. Photograph: 
Sotheby's 
Bowie payed homage to Warhol in his 1971 song Andy Warhol 
<http://www.songfacts.com/detail.php?id=13136>. He also produced Lou Reed’s 
music <http://genius.com/albums/Lou-reed/Transformer>, which is steeped in 
Warhol’s world. Yet Warhol and other pop artists are in very, very short supply 
in the Sotheby’s auction. Instead, it seems Bowie was obsessed with British 
20th-century art by some very unglamorous artists.

If his paintings by Ivon Hitchens, Winifred Nicholson, Peter Lanyon, Graham 
Sutherland and their ilk (with their vaguely modernist reinterpretations of the 
British landscape tradition) remind me of anything in Bowie’s oeuvre, it is 
surely his appearance in the film of The Snowman. Like the snowy dream version 
of Britain in that Christmas classic, a lot of the art in Bowie’s collection 
wallows in melancholy nostalgic idylls of Englishness, albeit with the lightest 
dusting of abstraction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-art-collection-sothebys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2738fb72b3169b7a47cb510264ce52c7e604448%2F0_0_4140_3055%2F4140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie's%20sombre%20art%20collection%20needs%20more%20space%20oddities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-art-collection-sothebys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%27s%20sombre%20art%20collection%20needs%20more%20space%20oddities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-art-collection-sothebys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2738fb72b3169b7a47cb510264ce52c7e604448%2F0_0_4140_3055%2F4140.jpg>
 A woman at the preview of the Bowie/Collector exhibition in Sotheby’s, New 
York, with Peter Lanyon’s painting Witness 1961. Photograph: Angela 
Weiss/AFP/Getty Images 
Visionary and apocalyptic this art is not. If you took Bowie’s collection on 
the whole and put it in a museum, you’d have the kind of gallery that gets 
three visitors on a rainy weekday afternoon to look sadly at the Henry Moore 
and the Bernard Leach pots.

One of the most expensive lots in the auction is his Moore sculpture 
<http://www.sothebys.com/en/auctions/ecatalogue/2016/bowie-collector-part-i-modern-contemporary-art-evening-auction-l16142/lot.12.html>
, with a high price also anticipated forhis Stanley Spencer painting 
<http://www.sothebys.com/en/auctions/ecatalogue/2016/bowie-collector-part-i-modern-contemporary-art-evening-auction-l16142/lot.39.html>
. Who will buy them? Most likely enthusiasts for 20th-century British art, 
which is for some reason fashionable at the moment, even though so much of it 
is a dull 10th-rate imitation of Picasso.

There are only a few ceramics by Picasso himself. There are more substantial 
works 
<http://www.sothebys.com/en/auctions/ecatalogue/2016/bowie-collector-part-i-modern-contemporary-art-evening-auction-l16142/lot.34.html>
 by Marcel Duchamp, and here at least you can see an artistic ancestor of 
Bowie’s own art of self-invention, for Duchamp was perhaps the first modern 
artist to play with identity when he adopted the female personaRrose Selavy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rrose_S%C3%A9lavy> – pronouced “eros, c’est la 
vie”. So if you want something to help understand Bowie, bid for Duchamp.

The subtle side of David Bowie: 'quiet' art collection goes on display in LA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/20/david-bowie-art-collection-auction-los-angeles-sothebys>
Yet alongside cool furniture it’s serious, sombre British art that dominates. 
Frank Auerbach and Leon Kossoff meant much more to him than younger British 
artists. He had some Hirsts, but they seem perfunctory, and the rest of the YBA 
generation are represented sparsely, even though they were all keen Bowie fans.

A lot of people would say that shows good taste. And no doubt it does. But 
surely Bowie knew that good taste is a killer? I prefer to think of him needing 
an axe to break the ice, a junkie hitting an all time low, than pacing around 
in slippers admiring his tedious art by Victor Pasmore. Bowie the collector is 
his most perplexing persona of all – a repressed art snob.
 