
David Bowie has been honoured with a posthumous place on the Hyundai Mercury 
prize <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mercuryprize> shortlist for his final 
album, Blackstar, which was described as a “parting gift” for fans.

The 2016 Mercury prize shortlist: hear all the albums – and see what our 
critics thought of them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/04/2016-mercury-prize-shortlist-what-our-critics-said-hear-the-albums>
The nomination, Bowie’s third – after Heathen in 2002 and The Next Day in 2013 
– comes almost seven months afterthe singer’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie> from 
cancer. He had released Blackstar to the surprise of fans worldwide just two 
days earlier, to coincide with his 69th birthday.

Blackstar received wide critical acclaim on its release and was described by 
the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
 as “ambiguous and spellbinding … a rich, deep and strange album that feels 
like Bowie moving restlessly forward”. Initially, the album’s mysterious lyrics 
confounded critics but after news of Bowie’s cancer diagnosis 18 months earlier 
emerged, songs such asLazarus <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y-JqH1M4Ya8> – 
which saw Bowie sing “Look up here / I’m in heaven” – were widely interpreted 
as the singer saying goodbye.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy-JqH1M4Ya8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy-JqH1M4Ya8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy-JqH1M4Ya8&media=>
Watch the video for David Bowie’s Lazarus 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y-JqH1M4Ya8> 
This year’s shortlist sees the return of several Mercury favourites, as well 
as first-time nominations for artists such as the 1975, Skepta, Kano and Jamie 
Woon. Radiohead have picked up their fifth Mercury nomination forA Moon Shaped 
Pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/08/radiohead-a-moon-shaped-pool-review>
, making them the most nominated artist in the history of the prize, though 
they have yet to win.

The inclusion of both Skepta’s Konnichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/skepta-konnichiwa-review-boy-better-know-album-of-the-week>
 andKano’s Made in the Manor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/10/kano-made-in-the-manor-review-grime-mainstay-finds-a-reflective-maturity>
 in the nominations is testimony to the resurgence of grime over the past few 
years and its move into the mainstream. Dizzee Rascal was the first grime 
artist to win the Mercury, in 2003 for Boy in da Corner, but the Mercuries have 
been criticised in recent years for failing to recognise grime artists.

Anohni, the artist once known as Antony Hegarty, on life beyond the Johnsons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/09/trans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness>
Anohni  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/09/trans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness>
– formerly known as Antony Hegarty – is also up for a nomination for 
Hopelessness, her heavily political album, dealing with subjects such as 
Obama’s drone wars, climate change and Guantanamo Bay. This is her second time 
among Mercury award nominees, havingwon the prize back in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/sep/08/mercuryprize2005.mercuryprize> 
before her transition, when she was performing as Antony and the Johnsons.

This is also the third nomination for singer Natasha Khan, known as Bat for 
Lashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/07/natasha-khan-bat-for-lashes-new-album-the-bride>
, for her concept album The Bride, which follows the tragic story of a bride on 
her wedding night whose fiancé then dies in a car crash. Khan, who produced 
much of the album herself, said The Bride had been “the most emotionally 
enjoyable and joyful to execute” out of all her albums.

“I feel emotional and overwhelmed and just really flattered to be nominated 
again,” she said. “This album was a body of work that really took a long time 
and has been such an event for me that it’s really lovely that it’s been 
recognised.”

Khan recorded much of the album in upstate New York, down the road from where 
David Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> owns a house, and 
said she had listened to Blackstar while recording The Bride. Speaking about 
being nominated alongside the singer, Khan said it was “very surreal”.

Bat For Lashes: 'Even in Sex And The City, the single girls end up with 
someone'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/07/natasha-khan-bat-for-lashes-new-album-the-bride>
“I started listening to Bowie songs when I was really small and the fact that 
his career has spanned for so long that it overlaps with mine is an amazing 
testament to him and his relevance.” She added: “I absolutely loved that album 
so I wouldn’t mind at all if I don’t win and he does.”

In a Mercury nominee list noticeably absent of the usual contingent of indie 
bands, holding up the baton for guitar music is the 1975 for their much lauded, 
and lengthily titled, second album I Like It When You Sleep, For You Are So 
Beautiful Yet So Unaware of It. The follow up to their platinum-selling debut 
was described by the Guardian as “a collection of fantastic pop songs full of 
interesting, smart lyrics, but also peppered with self-conscious lunges for 
gravitas.”

Ladbrokes have named Bowie as favourite to win this year’s prize. Bookies make 
him 2/1, withRadiohead <https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead> and Anohni 
at 5/1.

“Bowie is bound to be the emotional choice for the award, but after last 
year’s 25/1 surprise in Benjamin Clementine, we’re not ruling out another 
shock,” Jessica Bridge of Ladbrokes said.

The full shortlist

Anohni – Hopelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/05/anohni-hopelessness-review-the-most-profound-protest-record-in-decades>
Bat For Lashes – The Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/30/bat-for-lashes-the-bride-review-beautiful-darkly-intriguing-torch-songs>
David Bowie – Blackstar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
Jamie Woon – Making Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/05/jamie-woon-making-time-review-excellent-soul-styled-second-album>
Kano – Made in the Manor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/10/kano-made-in-the-manor-review-grime-mainstay-finds-a-reflective-maturity>
Laura Mvula – The Dreaming Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/laura-mvula-dreaming-room-cd-review>
Michael Kiwanuka – Love & Hate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/14/michael-kiwanuka-love-hate-review>
Radiohead – A Moon Shaped Pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/08/radiohead-a-moon-shaped-pool-review>
Savages – Adore Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/14/savages-adore-life-review-the-looser-lighter-sound-of-a-band-moving-forward>
Skepta – Konnichiwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/skepta-konnichiwa-review-boy-better-know-album-of-the-week>
The 1975 – I Like It When You Sleep, For You Are So Beautiful Yet So Unaware 
of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/25/the-1975-i-like-it-when-you-sleep-for-you-are-so-beautiful-yet-so-unaware-of-it-review-great-pop-if-not-great-art>
The Comet Is Coming – Channel the Spirits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/01/the-comet-is-coming-psych-jazz-sun-ra-legacy>
 