
The contract cancellations started to come in the next morning. First the big 
makeup brands dropped Vic, then some TV shows she was scheduled to present over 
the summer, then a brand of soap and a building society who were using one of 
her songs in an ad.

It got worse. Doorstepped by journalists, she swore and shouted and spat. 
Suddenly it wasn't about her father any more, but about "respect for the 
elderly", or "the drug-addled generation". She gave a garbled interview to a 
music magazine in which she seemed to be saying that everyone should cut their 
parents out of their lives.

The hate mail started to arrive: from estranged children and angry mothers and 
custody-seeking fathers. Suddenly she didn't even represent herself any more. 
According to columnists she represented a selfish, acquisitive generation, 
willing tostep on anyone's heads to get what they wanted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/apr/19/velvet-underground>.

And there were the drugs. More every day now. More photographs of her 
stumbling out of pubs and clubs, of her vomiting in the street, of her shouting 
and swearing and falling down drunk. There were details of the extravagant sums 
she'd spent renovating her house at that mountain near Aix-en-Provence, when 
her poor father was in such need. Some tabloid called her the most hated woman 
in Britain. I thought: once we used to save titles like that for 
child-kidnappers or convicted murderers, now we use it to mean "someone we used 
to admire, who turned out to be human".

She was caught trying to get on the Eurostar carrying a small bag of cocaine. 
She received a suspended sentence. Her father, half-forgotten already, popped 
up on television saying what a terrible disappointment she was to him.
 