
Amsterdam by De Jeugd van Tegenwoordig 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/GuardianTravel/guardian-travel-playlist-for-amsterdam-by-de-jeugd-van-tegenwoordig/#utm_source=widget&amp;utm_medium=web&amp;utm_campaign=base_links&amp;utm_term=resource_link>
 byGuardiantravel 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/GuardianTravel/#utm_source=widget&amp;utm_medium=web&amp;utm_campaign=base_links&amp;utm_term=profile_link>
 on Mixcloud 
<http://www.mixcloud.com/#utm_source=widget&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=base_links&utm_term=homepage_link>

David Bowie - Amsterdam

Is it really a translation of the Jacques Brel song? Anyhow, we really like 
the story about how Bowie once tried to seduce Mick Jagger – nowthat's 
Amsterdam.

Johnny Jordaan - Geef Mij Maar Amsterdam

Johnny Jordaan was a singer for the people … this song is about a club of card 
players who go to Paris to spend some extra money. The club's president, who 
tried to learn French, has such a heavy Amsterdam accent that no one 
understands him. Everyone in the club ends up deciding they prefer Amsterdam 
(the title translates as Give Me Amsterdam). The song is all about the accent.

André Hazes - Mijn Leidseplein

André Hazes is a legend and a hero. He died years ago, but everyone in his old 
neighbourhood of De Pijp still has a personal story about him. The song is 
about Amsterdam's most famous square – it's actually not a square but more of 
an entertainment centre. But with André singing a song you can never go wrong.

Manke Nelis - Oh Amsterdam Wat Ben je Mooi

The song title means "Oh Amsterdam, how beautiful you are". Meanwhile Manke 
means "crooked ass". But he's also known as Mister Real Talk. Enough said.

Willy Alberti - Oh Mooi Westertoren

Willy was from the Jordaan neighbourhood (originally a working-class area) and 
loved Italian opera. In the old days, theJordanezen used to get their salaries 
paid in the cafe, which is why they drank so much. And after drinking too much, 
they'd start to sing.

Herman Brood & His Wild Romance - Doin' It

Brood was a musician and painter and enfant terrible who committed suicide. 
But when he was alive he was Mr Amsterdam: a big attraction. Back in the 1970s 
there were two big Dutch bands,Golden Earring 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JeRa3RtBiIU> and Herman Brood & His Wild 
Romance, and they both wanted to make it in the US. It worked for Golden 
Earring thanks to their massive hit Radar Love, but when Brood and his band 
toured America, they totally messed up by taking too many drugs. But Brood is 
more real.

Van Halen – Amsterdam

In this song David Lee Roth sings "Got a pocket full o' money. Got me a long 
night ahead", which is really very stupid. But, hey, thoseVan Halen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/van-halen> boys are actually Dutch.

Aux Raus - The Fall

Gabberpunks! They have very nice Amsterdam accents. And their music belongs to 
that typical Amsterdam genre called "pretty goddam awesome".

De Jeugd Van Tegenwoordig - Centje Centje (Damsko Centje Express)

This is our Amsterdam song. "Centje" is short for Central Station and "Damsko" 
is street slang for Amsterdam. We always hung out at Central Station. It was 
Facebook before Facebook, the place to find out about what's coming up in 
fashion and culture.

Le Le - Luxe Benen

Le Le is side project of some of the members of De Jeugd Van Tegenwoordig, 
with illustrator Parra. You can find "luxurious legs" prancing around all over 
town. And particularly in Café Lux – now that's an epic playground.
 