
It is now a week since Pope Francis described the slaughter of between 1 and 
1.5 million Armenians, by the forces of Ottoman Turkey during the First World 
War, as “the first genocide of the 20th century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/14/pope-armenian-genocide-other-20th-century-massacres>
”. The responses to the pontiff’s statement have, for the most part, been 
predictable. On Sunday, there was a near instant explosion of hurt outrage in 
Turkey. By Monday, the Turkish envoy to the Vatican had been ordered to leave 
and by Tuesday the pope’s words had been denounced by the Turkish president,
Recep Tayyip Erdogan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>.

​Across the Armenian diaspora, in sprawling communities that stretch from 
Paris to Milwaukee, London to Montreal, and inArmenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/armenia> itself, there was a surge of 
optimism and even gratitude that the leader of the Catholic faith had used the 
“G-word” to describe the mass slaughter of their ancestors.

In the US, a nation home to a vocal Armenian community over a million strong, 
there have been calls for Barack Obama to follow the pope’s example and 
formally classify what the Armenians call the“Great Evil” 
<http://www.historyplace.com/worldhistory/genocide/armenians.htm> as a 
genocide. It has been noted he was willing to utter that word in 2008 when, as 
a senator, he was courting the votes of Armenian Americans.

However, when the media analysts at the Vatican scrutinise the social media 
traffic of the past seven days, their eyes might well be drawn away from Turkey 
and the Armenian diaspora towards a cluster of tweets, comments and Facebook 
posts that emanate from Africa. There, another debate raged last week. The 
pope’s description of the Armenian massacre as “the first genocide of the 20th 
century” was simply incorrect. That grim distinction belongs to the genocide 
that imperial Germany unleashed a decade earlier against the Herero and Nama, 
two ethnic groups who lived in the former colony of South West Africa, modern
Namibia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/namibia>.

The Namibian genocide, 1904-1909, was not only the first of the 20th century; 
in so many ways, it also seemed to prefigure the later horrors of that troubled 
century. The systematic extermination of around 80% of the Herero people and 
50% of the Nama was the work both of German soldiers and colonial 
administrators; banal, desk-bound killers. The most reliable figures estimate 
90,000 people were killed.

In the case of the Herero, an official, written order – the extermination 
order – was issued by the German commander, explicitly condemning the entire 
people to annihilation. After military attempts to bring this about had been 
thwarted, the liquidation of the surviving Herero, along with the Nama people, 
was continued in concentration camps, a term that was used at the time for the 
archipelago of facilities the Germans built across Namibia. Some of the victims 
of the Namibian genocide were transported to those camps in cattle trucks and 
the bodies of some of the victims were subjected to pseudoscientific racial 
examinations and dissections.

All of this is now well known and widely accepted in Africa and even in 
Germany. In2004, the German government apologised to the Herero  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/aug/16/germany.andrewmeldrum>and 
admitted that what Germany had done to their ancestors constituted a genocide. 
As the co-author of one of the more recent histories of the genocide, I am 
regularly invited to attend conferences and give lectures on the subject in 
Germany and the word is spreading. A decade ago, my co-author and I described 
what took place in Namibia between 1904 and 1909 as “Germany’s forgotten 
genocide”. That phrase is now past its sell-by date, everywhere, it seems, 
other than in the Vatican.

The question now is whether the pope’s statement was made in ignorance or if 
the Vatican was guilty of the sin of deliberate omission. In either case, this 
has been a bizarre and self-defeating episode. Catholicism is growing faster in 
Africa than anywhere else: 200 million Africans are followers of the faith. But 
awareness of history is also increasing inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and crimes such as the Namibian 
genocide can no longer be ignored, whether by accident or design.

David Olusoga is the co-author, with Casper Erichsen, of The Kaiser’s 
Holocaust: Germany’s Forgotten Genocide and the Colonial Roots of Nazism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/04/kaisers-holocaust-olugosa-erichsen-review>
 