
Angus Deayton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton> is set 
to make a surprise return to the BBC a year after he was sacked from Have I Got 
News for You after revelations about his private life.

He is to play a beleaguered doctor in a new comedy drama billed as "a west 
country version of Fatal Attraction".

The decision to employ him as an actor is part of a well-orchestrated way of 
repositioning and rehabiliting Deayton's image following his sacking in the 
wake of a sex and drugs scandal.

Deayton has presented just two shows - both specials - on the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> - BBC2's Comic Relief University 
Challenge in March and Before they were famous at Christmas - since station 
bosses decided his position had become untenable last autumn.

The drama has been written by and also stars Julia Davis.

Nighty Night, made by comedian Steve Coogan's production company Baby Cow, is 
Davis' latest project after co-writing and heading the cast in Human Remains 
with Rob Brydon, with other credits including Big Train and Brass Eye.

Deayton made his name as an actor before his HIGNFY days, most memorably 
playing Patrick, Victor Meldrew's long-suffering neighbour for 10 years in 
BBC1's One Foot in the Grave.

But his dry wit and sharp suits could not save his job as host of the 
satirical quiz show, following repeated tabloid revelations about his private 
life throughout 2001.

BBC bosses decided he had become the focus of the show's banter and could no 
longer make jokes about certain issues.

The last straw came when Christine Hamilton made fun of him on the show, 
saying, "If my husband is disgraced, what does that make you?".

But the BBC made it clear that although he could not carry on with HIGNFY, it 
would bring him back to the small screen when the right project came along.

"We never said Angus would never work for the BBC again, it was just that 
presenting Have I Got News For You had become difficult because he couldn't 
make certain jokes. It was just a matter of the right programme coming along," 
said a spokesman for the BBC.

Nighty Night and will be shown on BBC3 first in the autumn and then BBC2 
shortly after.

Â· To give MediaGuardian a story email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857
 