
The navy and air force are failing to meet their female recruitment targets, 
despite a concerted effort from defence to improve its treatment of women.

Reports of aggravated sexual assaults within the defence force have also 
continually risen each year since 2012-13, albeit marginally, while reported 
acts of indecency are now at their highest level in five years.

Defence launched a major program of cultural reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/02/recruitment-and-retention-of-women-still-too-low-in-australian-defence-force>
 in 2012, following a number of sexual abuse scandals, including the 2011
Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) Skype case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/28/skype-sex-scandal-two-men-found-guilty>
.

Torturing our soldiers OK in some circumstances, 21% of Australians say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/06/torturing-our-soldiers-ok-in-some-circumstances-21-of-australians-say>
The strategy <http://www.defence.gov.au/pathwaytochange/> was informed by a 
comprehensive review by the then sex discrimination commissioner, Elizabeth 
Broderick, and included the setting of 2023 recruitment targets; 25% female 
participation for navy and air force and 15% for army.

Strong public statements on gender equity were made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/14/army-chief-ruthless-emails-scandal>
, including byAustralian of the year David Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/david-morrison-former-chief-of-army-named-australian-of-the-year>
, while defence created specialist recruiting teams, developed advertising and 
websites specifically targeting women, and removed barriers thought to be 
preventing entry, including reducing initial minimum periods of service.

But a new report shows the navy and air force are falling behind on female 
recruitment.

The annual “women in the ADF” report 
<http://www.defence.gov.au/AnnualReports/15-16/Downloads/Women-in-ADF-Report-2015-16-online-only.pdf>
, published by defence in recent weeks, shows both services were only able to 
achieve marginal net increases to the number of women in their ranks in 2015-16.

The navy performed the worst, ending the year with just 146 additional women, 
while the air force increased its number of women by 344.

The report warned both services were not on track to achieve the 2023 targets. 
The army achieved a net increase of 676 women and is on track to achieve its 
much lower target.

A separate report 
<http://www.defence.gov.au/AnnualReports/15-16/Downloads/SeMPRO-Supplementary-Report-2015-16-online-only.pdf>
, also recently published, showed 245 sexual misconduct incident reports were 
received by defence’s recently established sexual misconduct prevention and 
response office in 2015-16.


The majority related to sexual assaults, acts of indecency, or other offences 
against the person, while roughly 30% were sexual harassment complaints and 5% 
related to pornography.

The number of reports was lower than the two previous years but was still well 
above 2011-12 and 2012-13, when 217 and 194 sexual misconduct reports were 
received respectively.

Defence received 30 reports of aggravated sexual assaults in 2015-16, 
continuing an increase year-on-year since the 20 reports received in 2012-13. 
There were also 85 reports of acts of indecency in 2015-16, the highest number 
in five years.

Malcolm Turnbull welcomes Trump plans for military buildup in Asia-Pacific
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/malcolm-turnbull-welcomes-trump-plans-for-military-buildup-in-asia-pacific>
The current sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, is continuing to 
work with defence on its cultural reforms.


Jenkins told Guardian Australia the fact that defence was publicly reporting 
on female recruitment “demonstrates their commitment to meeting the targets”.


“I have no doubt that the ADF’s senior leadership are working constructively 
to meet these targets,” she said. “Some of these initiatives may take some time 
to result in recruitment. It is also important that the ADF focus on retaining 
women by creating an inclusive, fair workplace that supports flexibility and 
sees diversity as a capability multiplier.”

Jenkins warned it was important for defence’s leadership not to become 
complacent but said they were “acutely aware” of the challenges they faced and 
that there “is still work to be done”.


The Australian Defence Association’s executive director, Neil James, said 
boosting female recruitment was a complicated task and needed to reverse 
decades of military inattention toward women.

James said there was a ceiling on the level of female interest in military 
service across western nations, not just Australia.


“It doesn’t matter how much you try to change those percentages, you’re coming 
up against a pretty strong paradigm in western society, that females don’t want 
to join the military,” James said.


He said defence was currently pursuing reforms to make it easier for serving 
members to switch between full-time and part-time service.

That reform, named Project Suakin, was unique to Australia and would help 
drive female participation, he said.

“You’ll increase your female participation in the defence workforce, because 
you’ll make it more attractive for people to do it as a career,” he said. “It 
will give them a career structure for permanent part-time service.”
 