
If there’s any quality that lifts a song into anthem status, it’s a certain 
longevity. Degenerate Boy has seen mainstream and underground heroes alike 
perform their own covers, with You Am I, Bored! and Feedtime all including the 
song in live sets over the years. Each version has somehow managed to pay 
respect and preserve the spirit of the original, while aligning the bands with 
the kind of cred that accompanies plugging an underground classic.

Bass player Ian Rilen formed Sydney punk band X in the late 70s with 
guitarist/vocalist Steve Lucas. The closest thing to an X hit, Degenerate Boy 
featured on the band’s sophomore record, At Home With You, which was the first 
to feature Cathy Green as drummer and produced by Rose Tattoo alumnus Lobby 
Loyde in 1985. (Rilen had previously written the Rose Tattoo breakthrough track
Bad Boy For Love <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IGk2PybQeQU>.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlN0OIiS6EH8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlN0OIiS6EH8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlN0OIiS6EH8&media=>
For many a young’un in the following decade, the soundtrack to the 1996 film 
Idiot Box provided an education of sorts. Its black humour appealed to the 
crass blurts of the adolescent mind. The film also served as a gateway to a 
crop of Australian bands past and present which seethed noisily yet often 
unseen beneath the Australian pop culture mainstream, and included Adelaide 
precision-noise trio the Mark of Cain with acover of Degenerate Boy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cgm6EYzwxpg>. 

The four and a half minute song is a cocky, cacophonous rumble that 
encapsulated the gritty and laconic aesthetic of the film. While the soundtrack 
version of Degenerate Boy was certainly doused in a sarcasm and connotation 
befitting of the film’s no-hoper protagonists, the grit and tear of the 
original is incomparable.

Degenerate Boy’s opening snarl: “I ain’t got no money, I ain’t got a cent, 
last week’s dole cheque, it’s already spent” is delivered as if the song’s 
anti-hero protagonist is snaking up a bustling street, talking out loud to 
anyone in earshot. The song’s brooding pulse is aligned with a dose of lyrical 
nihilism, most noticeably in the self-defeatist lyrics “I ain’t got no reason, 
I ain’t got no excuse, I don’t give a stuff / last week’s dole cheque, up my 
arm it went”.

Despite (or in spite) of this realist satire, Degenerate Boy has a rallying 
quality. It’s locked-in rhythm swaggers at a decent clip, while a rhythmic 
guitar phrase chases its tail around the groove.

And the song soars with a chorus in which Rilen starts and then stutters, 
before launching into the gutsy refrain: “I’m a d-e-dirty”, then pauses for 
effect, lets out a sigh, and then bang – “dirty, degenerate boy”. Underneath 
this, the music rolls on with a kind of groundhog monotony.

Lucas’s guitar solo is a dirge blast, oozing confidence before coalescing into 
the third verse and putting to rest any notion of prolonged bravado or glam 
fret work.

To the disinterested, the music of X and that era of Australian punk rock 
bands might seem boorish and crass. However, the songs and live performances of 
this period remain vital to those who tapped into it at the time, as well those 
discovering it decades later.

X’s Degenerate Boy, whichever incarnation, sought an emotive and visceral 
release, kicking and scratching its way into the rich canon of Australian rock 
and punk music.

 