
Like medical centres across India’s sweltering capital, the Kalawati Saran 
hospital in north Delhi is bearing the brunt of an outbreak of mosquito-borne 
disease.

Entire families are camped out in its corridors, alongside stocks of food and 
water. Women sleep nearly 20 to a room on mats inside the neonatal ward. 
Outside, a bin overflows with rubbish and a stray dog shuffles up the stairs.

Few people wear masks and even fewer use foot covers, which might keep Delhi’s 
incorrigible dust from entering treatment rooms.

Hospitals such as Kalawati, a government facility providing vital free care to 
Delhi’s poorest, are ground zero for antibiotic-resistant superbugs –described 
at the UN general assembly this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/un-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance>
 as the biggest threat to modern medicine.

UN agrees to fight 'the biggest threat to modern medicine': antibiotic 
resistance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/un-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance>
Nowhere is the growing global threat of antibiotic resistance as stark as in 
India <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4775002/>, researchers say.

One of the resistance-enabling enzymes that most concerns doctors was 
discovered to be rampant in Delhi in 2008, and named after the city: NDM-1. It 
hassince spread 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/home/science/New-Delhi-superbug-spreads-to-70-countries-across-the-world/articleshow/48998960.cms>
 to 70 countries around the world.

But poor conditions inside some Indian hospitals, cities and villages are only 
part of the problem. A 2010 study found Indians werethe largest consumers of 
antibiotics 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/India-becomes-worlds-largest-consumer-of-antibiotics/articleshow/38251650.cms>
 in the world, and the Indian Medical Association has estimated that about 50% 
of prescriptions might beinappropriate or unnecessary 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/IMA-asks-doctors-not-to-prescribe-antibiotics-for-common-cold/articleshow/50700508.cms>
.

“Doctors try to be on the cautious side, so they usually prescribe antibiotics 
for conditions where it is not required,” says Dr Ajay Kumar, a senior 
specialist in paediatrics at Kalawati Saran.

There are also financial incentives: doctors routinely receive commissions 
from drug companies for prescribing particular medicines.


Over-prescribing isn’t limited to hospitals. At a pharmacy close to Kalawati 
Saran, it was possible on Wednesday to buy the antibiotic Nflox-TZ without a 
prescription – just a vague description of a stomach ache. The pharmacist 
agreed to sell a single strip – half the full course – for about 69 rupees 
(80p).

Hundreds of strips and packages of antibiotic were also being sold, seemingly 
without prescription, from the rows of pharmacy stalls opposite the AllIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), a major hospital in south Delhi.

But cracking down on antibiotic use, or making the drugs more expensive, would 
have its own toll: more Indians still die for lack of access to the powerful 
medicines than from their overuse.

Delhi’s newborns often bear the brunt of poor conditions and antibiotic 
overuse.A landmark study 
<file:/Users/michael_safi/Downloads/PIIS2214109X16301486.pdf> published in the 
Lancet last week followed 13,530 babies admitted into intensive care units in 
the city’s three largest hospitals, and found an “alarming degree” of 
antibiotic resistance.

Nearly 500 babies died from sepsis, many contracting the disease from the 
bacteriaacinetobacter. Of those, 82% simply could not be treated by any known 
antibiotic.

“We are now staring at overwhelming evidence of rampant antibiotic resistance, 
across all ages, all over the country,” Dr Vinod Paul, the chief of paediatrics 
at AIIMS,told the Hindu newspaper 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/babies-fall-victim-to-antibiotic-resistance/article9112101.ece>
.

Awareness campaigns have proliferated among India’s medical establishment to 
persuade doctors to prescribe alternatives. “We don’t use antibiotics 
indiscriminately, and we closely monitor the common bugs, and which antibiotics 
would be best to treat it,” says Kumar, from Kalawati Saran.

“We avoid broad-spectrum drugs, and we try to use specific antibiotics for 
specific conditions. We are more aware, and really very finicky about it.”

However, he added: “Developing countries are the same … There’s nothing unique 
to this place or this city. The reasons are all the same.”

On Tuesday, all 193 member states of the UN agreed to take the threat of 
antibiotic resistance as seriously as climate change, and report back in two 
years about the results.

But superbugs are spreading fast and, in Delhi, are a daily reality. “No doubt 
about it,” says Kumar. “The resistance is already there.”
 