
Many people would delay getting a diagnosis for potential dementia because 
they fear it would mean “life is over”, research byAlzheimer’s Society 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/> suggests.

A survey of more than 2,000 people found that six in 10 said they felt this 
way, while the same proportion believed it would mean no longer enjoying the 
things they used to.


Separately, a poll of 1,000 GPs found that more than half (56%) had diagnosed 
someone with suspected dementia whose symptoms had been going on for at least 
seven months, while more than 10% said the symptoms had been going on for a 
year or more.


Alzheimer’s Society believes fears about a dementia diagnosis might put people 
off going to see a doctor, thereby denying patients the opportunity of getting 
the best treatment and support.


Its chief executive, Jeremy Hughes, said: “Too many people are in the dark 
about dementia – many feel that a dementia diagnosis means someone is 
immediately incapable of living a normal life, while myths and 
misunderstandings continue to contribute to the stigma and isolation that many 
people will feel.

“We know that dementia is the most feared health condition of our time  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/31/theres-no-need-to-fear-dementia-the-end-of-the-epidemic-is-in-sight>
and there’s no question that it can have a profound and devastating impact on 
people, their family and friends – but getting a timely diagnosis will enable 
people with dementia to live as well as possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fdementia-myths-delaying-people-seeking-diagnosis-poll-alzheimers-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89b677720eb365703fa1bf6d31515f60b5d7bbb%2F0_502_5096_3058%2F5096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dementia%20myths%20might%20be%20delaying%20people%20from%20getting%20treatment%20%E2%80%93%20poll&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fdementia-myths-delaying-people-seeking-diagnosis-poll-alzheimers-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dementia%20myths%20might%20be%20delaying%20people%20from%20getting%20treatment%20%E2%80%93%20poll&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fdementia-myths-delaying-people-seeking-diagnosis-poll-alzheimers-society%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89b677720eb365703fa1bf6d31515f60b5d7bbb%2F0_502_5096_3058%2F5096.jpg>
 Alzheimer’s Society believes fears about dementia might put people off going 
to see a doctor. Photograph: Alamy 
About 225,000 will develop dementia this year in the UK, according to the 
charity. It said evidence shows that the earlier a person is diagnosed and 
accesses appropriate treatment, information and support, the better their 
chances of living well for longer.


But it said many myths still existed that might put people off from seeking a 
diagnosis. For example, a quarter of the 2,000 people polled thought that a 
dementia diagnosis would instantly mean having to stop going out for a walk on 
their own, while almost half thought they would have to stop driving a car 
immediately. Six in 10 thought they would personally struggle to join in 
conversations post-diagnosis and half worried that people would think they were 
“mad”.

Alzheimer’s Society released the research on Monday to coincide with the start 
of dementia awareness week. It is urging people who are diagnosed to contact 
the charity for help and support.

It estimates that there will be a million people with dementia in the UK by 
2025, althoughresearch published last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/19/drop-in-dementia-rates-suggests-disease-can-be-prevented-researchers-say>
 suggests that the number of new cases in recent years has been fewer than 
previously predicted.
 