
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/dementia> have replaced ischaemic heart 
disease as the leading cause of death in England and Wales for the first time.

Last year, 61,686 (11.6%) out of a total of 529,655 deaths registered in 
England and Wales were attributable to dementia, according to theOffice for 
National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics> (ONS).

The statisticians said an ageing population, better diagnosis, and lifestyle 
and treatment advances with respect to other illnesses were among the factors 
that had pushed dementia to the top of the list.

The mortality rate for dementia, which was the second leading cause of death 
for the previous four years, has more than doubled since 2010, while that of 
ischaemic heart disease declined sharply over the same period.

Martina Kane, senior policy officer at Alzheimer’s Society 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/>, said: “Today’s news that dementia and 
Alzheimer’s disease are the leading cause of death in England and Wales is a 
stark reminder that dementia remains a growing concern across the country. 
While the news represents improvements in diagnosis rates, general awareness 
and the accuracy of reporting, it also reflects that there are rising numbers 
of people with dementia.

“While there remains no cure for the condition, everyone who develops it will 
sadly still have the disease when they die. It is therefore essential that 
people have access to the right support and services to help them live well 
with dementia and that research into better care, treatments and eventually a 
cure remain high on the agenda.”

Alzheimer's treatment within reach after successful drug trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/alzheimers-treatment-within-reach-after-successful-drug-trial-amyloid-plaques-bace1>
Ischaemic heart diseases were responsible for 11.5% of deaths last year, 
although it was still the leading cause of death for men, accounting for 14.3% 
of male deaths.Dementia <https://www.theguardian.com/society/dementia>, the 
leading cause of death for women, was responsible for 15.2% of all female 
deaths, up from 13.4% in 2014.

Hilary Evans, chief executive of Alzheimer’s Research UK 
<http://www.alzheimersresearchuk.org/?gclid=CjwKEAiA3qXBBRD4_b_V7ZLFsX4SJAB0AtEVfxeYAHy77VuslD6wHRvld8JbziwiFMcYv-ngj_weRBoC173w_wcB>
, said the figures “call attention to the uncomfortable reality that currently, 
no-one survives a diagnosis of dementia”. He added: “With growing numbers of 
people living with dementia, we urgently need treatments that can stop or slow 
the diseases that drive this devastating condition.”


The ONS said there was likely to have been an increased reporting of dementia 
on death certificates because of dementia diagnosis incentives paid to GPs (
which have since been scrapped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/26/nhs-discontinue-gp-payments-dementia-diagnosis>
), theprime minister’s challenge to improve dementia care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/mar/26/david-cameron-dementia-funding-boost>
 and an agreed ambition that two-thirds of the estimated number of people with 
dementia in England should have a diagnosis.


Elizabeth McLaren, from the vital statistics outputs branch at ONS, said: “In 
2015, dementia and Alzheimer’s disease became the leading cause of death in 
part because people are simply living longer but also because of improved 
detection and diagnosis. An updating of the international rules for determining 
the underlying cause of death is also a factor, with the increase in cases 
attributed to these conditions accompanied by falls in other causes.”


The most common causes of death last year after dementia and ischaemic heart 
disease were cerebrovascular diseases, such as strokes, chronic lower 
respiratory diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and lung 
cancer.


There was wide variation by age group. Dementia was the leading cause of death 
for people over 80 but it was the fourth leading cause of death for women aged 
65 to 79 and not in the top five leading causes of death for men aged within 
that age group. Among men aged 35 to 49 suicide and injury/poisoning of 
undetermined intent was responsible for the most deaths, while for women of the 
same age group the leading cause of death was breast cancer.


If all cancers <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> are grouped 
together, it was the most common cause of death, accounting for 27.9% of all 
deaths last year, compared with 26.2% caused by circulatory diseases, such as 
heart diseases and strokes.

Alzheimer’s Society estimates that there will be a million people with 
dementia in the UK by 2025, althoughresearch published earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/19/drop-in-dementia-rates-suggests-disease-can-be-prevented-researchers-say>
 suggests that the number of new cases in recent years has been fewer than 
previously predicted.





 