 Professor Dennis Welland, who has died aged 82, made a major contribution to 
the development of American studies in this country, and wrote perceptively on 
British and American literature. He will also be remembered for his service to 
Manchester University and its surrounding community. His acute sense of loyalty 
and social responsibility was complemented by an equally acute sense of humour.
Though a northerner by adoption, after living 60 years north of the Trent, 
Dennis was born in Hackney, east London. Few would have guessed his Cockney 
background. He went to Westcliff high school in Essex, and read English at what 
was then University College Nottingham, receiving an external London BA degree, 
first class, in 1940.

After six years in the army (Royal Artillery and combined operations), he 
returned to Nottingham to join the English department in 1947, completing his 
PhD on Wilfred Owen in 1951. When he visited Siegfried Sassoon, the poet 
chatted to Dennis for some time before saying, "Well, I suppose you want to 
hear about the war." He was then completely transformed as he re-entered that 
past world. Dennis retained the notes that Sassoon made on his manuscript. The 
book resulting from his thesis, Wilfred Owen: A Critical Study (1960), was a 
landmark text in resurrecting interest in its subject.

In 1952, as a member of what he called "the most progressive English 
department in the country", Dennis was encouraged to develop American 
interests, and was sent on a 12-month Rockefeller scholarship to the University 
of Minnesota. On his return he instituted the first courses inAmerican studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies> at Nottingham. His 
strong interest in drama resulted in Arthur Miller (1961), a groundbreaking, 
and still admired, critical study of the playwright.

In 1962, Professor Marcus Cunliffe, another of the founding fathers of that 
discipline in this country, secured American funding for staff in his new 
Manchester department, and Dennis was appointed as reader. From 1965 to 1983 he 
was the university's professor of American literature, the first and only 
person to hold that post, and became professor emeritus on retirement.

Dennis was one of the instrumental figures in promulgating American studies in 
this country. As one colleague said, Dennis "never was a passenger", 
contributing fully to any community of which he was a part. He helped found the 
Association of American Studies in the early 1950s, was its first treasurer, 
and then assumed the post of secretary and, later, chair (1980-83). He was also 
the founder editor of the Journal of American Studies in 1967.

At this time, American studies found it hard to establish itself as a 
respectable academic subject. Marcus Cunliffe would tell of the Manchester 
librarian who held back on request forms for the work of living American 
authors, patiently explaining that "we don't want Book-of-the-Month-Club 
stuff". In such an atmosphere, the value of the work done by Dennis and his 
fellow Americanists cannot be over-estimated.

At Manchester Dennis had two careers, as an academic and an administrator, and 
often felt that his work as a teacher and critic suffered accordingly. None the 
less, he expanded his books on Owen and Miller, and is perhaps best known for 
his work on Twain. Mark Twain In England (1978), based in part on research done 
in the Chatto and Windus correspondence, is a valuable detailed study of Twain 
and England and of his publishing history here. The Life And Times Of Mark 
Twain (1991) followed his retirement. But Dennis published on a wide range of 
other authors and artists too, ranging from Franklin and Dickinson to William 
Carlos Williams and Jackson Pollock.

Asked to be pro-vice-chancellor at Manchester in 1979, Dennis later wrote that 
"loyalty rather than common-sense led me to accept". This was one in a series 
of such posts. He was made part-time executive of the Owens Park student 
complex (an innovative development in student housing and the largest in Europe 
at the time) from 1967 to 1971. Elected dean of the faculty of arts in 1976, he 
then became presenter of honorary graduands in 1979, a post he thoroughly 
enjoyed. From 1980 to 1981 he was acting vice-chancellor and showed 
considerable skill in sometimes delicate negotiations. The establishment, with 
the city council, of the university science park was a case in point. After a 
final period as pro-vice-chancellor (1981-83), he remained active in university 
affairs.

Dennis constantly sought to build bridges between the university and the 
larger community. A founder trustee of the University Contact Theatre Company 
in 1972, and later its chair (1984-97), he encouraged close collaboration with 
schools and local communities. Similar interests spurred his later work as 
chair of the steering group of Northern Artists into Schools.

Dennis believed strongly in public service. All those who knew him talk of the 
loyalty, affection, hatred of hypocrisy, charm and integrity that marked both 
his private and public life. He was also very good at conjuring tricks, which 
he was pleased to perform at his son's and grand-children's parties.

Dennis's wife Joan died in 1987. Later, he found further happiness with 
Barbara Leigh, who died just two weeks before he did. He is survived by his son 
Michael.
Â· Dennis Sydney Reginald Welland, academic, born December 21 1919; died 
September 1 2002
 