
Derek Jacobi <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/derek-jacobi> has revealed 
he andDaniel Day-Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/danieldaylewis> were 
both in line to play the role of Hannibal "the cannibal" Lecter 
<http://blog.wenn.com/all-news/daniel-day-lewis-and-derek-jacobi-were-in-the-running-for-hannibal-lecter/>
 inThe Silence of the Lambs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/39337/silence.of.the.lambs>, which 
later wonAnthony Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthony-hopkins> an 
Oscar.

Writing in his autobiography, As Luck Would Have It, Jacobi said casting 
directors forJonathan Demme <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jonathan-demme>'s 
1991 thriller, about a young FBI agent who consults a jailed psychopathic 
murderer in her efforts to track down a serial killer, shortlisted a trio of 
actors for the role.

"I was one of the three finalists for the casting of Hannibal Lecter for The 
Silence of the Lambs: the others wereDaniel Day-Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danieldaylewis> and Tony Hopkins," writes 
Jacobi. "They were determined to have a Brit for their villain – I'm not sure 
what this says about us. Goodness knows how it would have turned out if I had 
played the part, but I would have been malevolent in a very different way.

"Tony has harder eyes than I have. He was wonderful."

Silence of the Lambs gave Hopkins a huge career boost: prior to the film, 
which was based onThomas Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomasharris>
's 1988 novel, he had never been nominated for an Oscar. Since winning the best 
supporting actor prize in 1992, the Welshman has been firmly on the awards 
radar. He picked up a further three nominations between 1994 and 1998 – for The 
Remains of the Day,Nixon <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/61568/nixon> 
and Amistad – and in 2008 received a Bafta fellowship.

Playing Lecter is not a guaranteed passport to Oscar glory, however. Brian 
Cox's acclaimed turn in the same role in Michael Mann's 1986 thriller Manhunter 
(based on Harris's earlier novel Red Dragon) singularly failed to attract the 
interest of the Academy.
 