
Are you looking for a colourful career? Thousands of graduates are looking to 
break into the design industry, but how can you stand out from the crowd? Here 
a selection of industry experts and former graduates give their tips on how to 
succeed.

Isobel Dennis is director of New Designers <http://www.newdesigners.com/>

Information and connections

Be well informed, become part of the professional community. Sign up to 
industry newsletters, blogs, Twitter and attend networking events. Use any form 
of media that keeps you up-to-date with what is going on in your field. 
Information leads to opportunities.

Think about the whole package

You can't just rely on your portfolio being impressive. You have to be just as 
impressive as a person. Be reliable, be professional, respond swiftly, deliver 
on time and communicate well via all forms of media. People like to work with 
people they like and trust.

Claire Vallis is design director of Harlequin <http://www.harlequin.uk.com>

Familiarise yourself with the industry

Gain an understanding of the market and the main players within it. You can 
research the fabric and furnishing market via the net and by digesting home 
interest magazines and visiting retailers. This will help you widen your search 
when looking for openings in the design world.

Demonstrate a good understanding of colour within your portfolio

Although a good drawing hand is essential, I always want to see a good use of 
colour throughout a student's work.  So much of what we do at Harlequin is 
about colour. Any designer within a studio will be dealing with colour every 
day, so a portfolio should show an understanding of what makes 
different colours work together.

Have your portfolio available to view at all times. Don't just rely on the 
work you have on display, but take as many other strong projects, drawings, 
mood board, colourings etc to back up your work. Prospective employers will 
want to see lots of ideas and interest – someone who has made the most of their 
degree course.

Ella Doran <http://www.elladoran.co.uk> is an award-winning 
designer-entrepreneur

Stand out from the crowd

Don't play it safe in your designs as that is noticeable and boring. Challenge 
yourself rather than try to please imaginary others. You will please some real 
people that way. Try to develop your own look and talents and go for what 
you're passionate about.

Be open to opportunities to collaborate, freelance, work for a company and 
travel. Take your time to figure out how to run your own business – it needs to 
suit your personality and go beyond designing. It's valuable to gain experience 
in collaboration, production and distribution early on because there's a lot to 
learn about what not to do.

Take it one step at a time

Don't worry too much about not having all the answers straight away. Talk to 
anyone you think may have something interesting to say, ask questions and be 
prepared to put a lot of effort into your work. But stop to reflect if you find 
you're not enjoying what you're doing.

Louise Tiler is a surface pattern designer

Get online

Blogs and social media are a fantastic tool and an effective way to connect 
with industry leaders, designers, manufactures and customers. And they're also 
a great way to advertise. Blogs can raise your profile and help to advertise 
your work.

Be willing to work hard

You have to be focused on what you need to achieve and use every opportunity 
to further your career. Meet contacts and be aware of opportunities such as 
competitions, grants and government funding that may be available to drive your 
future business.

Make a short and long term plan or have goals to aim towards. This will keep 
you focused and determined to do well. Look at other companies and see how they 
have achieved success and use them as your inspiration.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 