
One of my favourite scenes in Appropriate Behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/appropriate-behaviour> – Desiree Akhavan’s 
terrific debut film that she directed, wrote and stars in – comes very early in 
the film. The protagonist Shirin (Akhavan) meets up with Ken (30 Rock’s Scott 
Adsit), a stoner Brooklynite, in a trendy cafe, in the hope he’ll give her a 
job. His eyes light up greedily when she mentions that her name is Iranian.

“Iranian! Wow! What do you think of that whole situation?” he coos.

Shirin blinks and tries to come up with an answer (she settles for “It’s a 
mixed bag”), but Ken has already moved on: “So tell me, what’s the scene like 
in Tehran? I just read this big article about the underground hip-hop scene in 
Vice. So you’re part of that?” he asks eagerly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fappropriate-behaviour-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425641909748%2Fcrop_KP_113615_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Appropriate%20Behaviour%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fappropriate-behaviour-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Appropriate%20Behaviour%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fappropriate-behaviour-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425641909748%2Fcrop_KP_113615_640x360.jpeg>
 The film team review Appropriate Behaviour 
Shirin pauses, just for a beat.

“No, unfortunately I spend most of my time in Iran watching Disney videos with 
my grandmother while she untangles jewellery,” she deadpans back.

So it is with some trepidation that I wait to meet Akhavan in a very similar 
cafe in west Hollywood. I don’t generally expect people to behave like figures 
from Vice features but, in keeping with her character in the film, the 
31-year-old tends to attract some truly cringeworthy stereotyping from other 
people. This has been going on since she first came to attention with her very 
funny 2011 web seriesThe Slope <http://theslopeshow.com/>, which she made with 
her then girlfriend Ingrid Jungermann. It poked fun at both gay culture and 
Brooklyn, and was clearly made by someone who knows both very well.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fappropriate-behavior-clip-comedy-lena-dunham&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424442092669%2Fcrop_KP_100545_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Appropriate%20Behaviour%3A%20watch%20a%20clip%20of%20the%20indie%20comedy%20championed%20by%20Lena%20Dunham%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fappropriate-behavior-clip-comedy-lena-dunham>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Appropriate%20Behaviour%3A%20watch%20a%20clip%20of%20the%20indie%20comedy%20championed%20by%20Lena%20Dunham%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fappropriate-behavior-clip-comedy-lena-dunham&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424442092669%2Fcrop_KP_100545_640x360.jpeg>
The cliches, however, have ratcheted up since the Sundance premiere of the 
critically feted Appropriate Behaviour, the hilarious and moving story of a 
twentysomething woman trying, not very successfully, to get over a bad breakup 
while simultaneously hiding her sexuality from her family. The story in the 
film is total fiction, but there are some personal overlaps between Akhavan and 
Shirin, and the flurry of press around her can besummed up as 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/sundance-desiree-akhavan-appropriate-behavior-1201063786/>
:“An Iranian bisexual Lena Dunham!” 
<http://www.vulture.com/2015/01/desiree-akhavan-girls-appropriate-behavior.html>
 There is something very odd about how the media willways in which a 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/01/desiree-akhavan-appropriate-behavior>
 young woman is different (Iranian! bisexual!), while at the same time 
insisting she is exactly like someone else (the new Dunham! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/29/desiree-adkavan-new-lena-dunham-girls>
).

Akhavan is, to her credit, fairly sanguine about being repeatedly reduced to 
her nationality and sexuality: “It was a fear I had when making the film, and it
really came true. But it’s not such a bad thing. What’s funny is those are the 
things that made me feel so alienated in my life, and now they’re pulled out as 
myentire life,” she smiles over a cappuccino.

Slightly more irksome are the frequent references to Dunham, not because she 
resents her – Akhavan, in fact, plays a recurring character in the fourth 
series ofGirls <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls> – but because 
of the insinuations.

“It’s the idea that there’s room for only one funny woman whose work can be 
monetised. It happens with any young female film-maker with humour in her 
work,” she says. “But no one ever looks at [indie film-maker]Alex Ross Perry 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3504405/reference> and says: ‘Oh, another Noah 
Baumbach!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575015429%2Fb2b55e87-5e9d-4132-b3ae-fde8972ecaf9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Desiree%20Akhavan%20on%20Appropriate%20Behaviour%20and%20not%20being%20the%20%E2%80%98Iranian%20bisexual%20Lena%20Dunham%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Desiree%20Akhavan%20on%20Appropriate%20Behaviour%20and%20not%20being%20the%20%E2%80%98Iranian%20bisexual%20Lena%20Dunham%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575015429%2Fb2b55e87-5e9d-4132-b3ae-fde8972ecaf9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Desiree Akhavan with Lena Dunham in Girls Photograph: PR 
Because American critics have got so caught up in looking for the next Lena 
Dunham 
<http://www.vulture.com/2015/01/desiree-akhavan-girls-appropriate-behavior.html>
, no one has yet compared Appropriate Behaviour with Annie Hall, which, with 
its relationship-told-in-retrospect structure, clearly inspired Akhavan. With 
its emotional sharpness balanced against laugh-out-loud lines, Akhavan’s movie 
feels a lot more like something by Baumbach or Sarah Polley than the 
hipster-awkwardness-as-artform seen in Girls. In a strange way, even though 
Appropriate Behaviour is, on the surface, dealing with issues ostensibly more 
niche than in Girls (specifically, coping with a traditional Iranian family 
while being bisexual), it feels more universal, perhaps because struggles with 
sex and family are more common than the travails of being a middle-class white 
woman in Brooklyn.

If Appropriate Behavior is part of any trend, it’s that of the rise of smart 
and funny stories by and about young women, showing that they struggle as much 
to grow up as male characters have long done in their films. Greta Gerwig in
Frances Ha <https://www.theguardian.com/film/frances-ha>, Kristen Wiig in 
Bridesmaids <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridesmaids>, Jenny Slate in 
Obvious Child <https://www.theguardian.com/film/obvious-child> and, yes, Dunham 
in Girls, have all recently explored this area. These stories are very 
different from the twinkly eyed Kate Hudson chicklit films of the past two 
decades because the women here are depicted in a far more brutal and honest 
way: they’re often broke, usually selfish, sometimes cruel, occasionally 
promiscuous, frequently intoxicated or high and generally pretty confused. They 
don’t have Bridget Jones’s idealised group of friends, let alone Carrie 
Bradshaw’s couture wardrobe. Rarely is there a handsome prince at the end of 
the story who makes everything all right. Instead of looking like perfect 
princesses, the women in these stories get messy and smelly. But whereas this 
is the norm for male characters, it is still seen as so anomalous for female 
characters to look and behave like this that they can be discussed only by 
comparison with Dunham.

“No good film-maker looks around to see what other people are making and 
thinks: I’ll make that!” she says. “But things like the manic pixie dream girl, 
these were the stereotypes that my contemporaries and I grew up with, and there 
is this influx of narratives because we’re responding to those cliches.”

Akhavan was born in New York in 1983, just a few years after her parents had 
emigrated from Iran, and raised there. The whole family would learn about the 
US together by watching western TV shows and movies.

“None of us are alike so if we could settle on a TV show we all liked, it was 
the best kind of bonding,” she says. While Akhavan and her older brother loved 
Muriel’s Wedding and Saved By the Bell, her father’s favourite films were by 
Mel Brooks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575370322%2F1668b3db-f78d-455c-9538-b0d6fe7f9aef-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Desiree%20Akhavan%20on%20Appropriate%20Behaviour%20and%20not%20being%20the%20%E2%80%98Iranian%20bisexual%20Lena%20Dunham%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Desiree%20Akhavan%20on%20Appropriate%20Behaviour%20and%20not%20being%20the%20%E2%80%98Iranian%20bisexual%20Lena%20Dunham%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575370322%2F1668b3db-f78d-455c-9538-b0d6fe7f9aef-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Desiree Akhavan in Appropriate Behaviour. Photograph: PR 
“As soon as my parents moved to New York they very firmly identified as 
American. It’s not about the shame of being Iranian – it’s about letting go of 
the past,” she says. “Also my father hasn’t been able to go back to Iran since 
1980 and I think it hurts him too much to think about what he left behind, so 
his identity is firmly American.” To this day, he never follows Iranian news: 
“He’d rather watchTwo and a Half Men 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two_and_a_Half_Men> or 2 Broke Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2012/may/02/2-broke-girls-racist-baffling>
.”

One of the things Akhavan learned about from movies was, of course, sex. So it 
came as quite a shock when she eventually learned first-hand that sex in real 
life is not quite how it is in the movies: “I thought: am I crazy? Am I doing 
it wrong?” she says, still sounding flummoxed. As a result, the sex in
Appropriate Behaviour <https://www.theguardian.com/film/appropriate-behaviour> 
is one of the movie’s great strengths. It’s utterly realistic, not gratuitous 
or farcical, because Akhavan isn’t interested in the erotics but in the subtle 
exchanges of power that happen between a couple in bed.

“I really care about how sex is depicted and want to be honest in that arena,” 
she says, citingAndrea Arnold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-arnold> 
andCatherine Breillat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jul/15/catherine-breillat-interview> as 
inspirations. “That’s why I take my top off in the sex scene because that is 
absolutely what the character would have done. But now I’m worried people are 
watching and going: ‘Oh my God, it’s the director’s tits!’”

Akhavan is a delightful coffee companion, exuding the kind of warmth that 
makes strangers want to tell her their most intimate stories, which she loves. 
I have to all but physically wrench her back to the interview when she gets 
distracted by yet another cafe patron who, after eavesdropping on our chat, 
spends 15 minutes telling Akhavan her life story: “Other people’s stories are 
so fascinating, don’t you think?” she says, forcing herself to talk about 
herself again.

So it’s hard to square this warm and sociable young woman with the 
self-described “weird and ignored” teenager she once was. At school she was, 
astonishingly, voted ugliest girl and she didn’t make her first friend until 
she was 14. She didn’t kiss anyone until she was 17, “and that was only because 
someone dared someone else to kiss me. That’s how much of a weirdo I was.” She 
then corrects herself: “I actually don’t think I was interesting enough to be 
weird. I think it’s just that when you’re unattractive and young, you 
disappear.”

Akhavan is great at capturing the sense of disappearing in her film: Shirin is 
often not just on the physical outside of parties, but also mentally – you see 
her getting lost in her own memories, in one instance in the middle of a 
threesome. “When you’re not the hottest girl in the room at school,” she says, 
“you get used to being the observer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575503511%2F65eac401-7b8c-4502-a9ef-64809c13f05c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Desiree%20Akhavan%20on%20Appropriate%20Behaviour%20and%20not%20being%20the%20%E2%80%98Iranian%20bisexual%20Lena%20Dunham%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Desiree%20Akhavan%20on%20Appropriate%20Behaviour%20and%20not%20being%20the%20%E2%80%98Iranian%20bisexual%20Lena%20Dunham%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fdesiree-akhavan-appropriate-behaviour-not-being-iranian-bisexual-lena-dunham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575503511%2F65eac401-7b8c-4502-a9ef-64809c13f05c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In The Slope with ex-girlfriend Ingrid Jungermann. Photograph: PR 
The morning we meet it’s the day after the Independent Spirit Awards 
<http://www.spiritawards.com/>, where Akhavan was nominated for best debut 
script, an experience she describes as “fun and strange. Emma Stone walked into 
a party I was at and I was like: ‘OK, this party just got too cool for me, I’m 
done.’”

After school, she went to the all-women university Smith and, once again, she 
felt like “the ugliest and most ignored student, but for totally different 
reasons than at school”.

In what sense?

“Because I wasn’t gay enough! I didn’t have a half-shaved head and a pierced 
septum – that would have made me the coolest girl. It was really funny to go to 
Smith, where the aesthetic was the opposite of the New York aesthetic, but I 
was still at the bottom of the totem pole. But it was also kind of great. When 
you’re constantly on your own, you develop your own criteria about what’s 
cool.” And one of those things, she decided, was film-making. After doing a 
film course at college, she went on to study film as a postgrad at NYU, where 
she met Ingrid Jungermann, and the two fell in love.

Appropriate Behaviour is partly inspired by her breakup with Jungermann, but 
the film is not, Akhavan frequently stresses, autobiographical. For a start, 
her parents didn’t react to her coming out the way Shirin’s parents do, but 
that is not to say that coming out was easy. After she told her parents, they 
didn’t talk “for a long time”.

“I was heartbroken to have lost my parents, but it was also a really exciting 
time because I stopped giving a shit about anything. I think all of us are 
motivated by wanting to do well by our parents – that’s like the universal 
truth, but especially so for the children of immigrants. I was so driven by it 
for so long that it literally made me sick at times, and when I let go of that 
desire my work became 20 times better,” she says.

She made The Slope with Jungermann during this period of near estrangement 
from her parents, which foregrounded her sexuality and acted as a very public 
form of coming out. Appropriate Behaviour takes this even further, with 
relatively more explicit sex and greater emphasis on the emotional bond between 
Shirin and her ex-girlfriend.

By now, however, her parents have fully accepted their daughter’s sexuality: 
“It took about a year but my father made the choice to fully embrace me and 
this public persona I have of being gay. I think we talk about things more 
openly because of my work,” she smiles, as though that was her intention all 
along.

Appropriate Behaviour is released in the UK on 6 March
 