
Money talks, especially in the bustle of an Indian bazaar. But what would you 
do if someone thrust a note in your hand that on close inspection turned out to 
be worth nothing at all? Astonishingly, but for good reason, there are now 
millions of zero-rupee notes in circulation inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.

But what on earth is the point of a zero-rupee note? What are they used for? 
Who printed them and what do they mean? In fact, these apparently frivolous 
notes turn out to be a key weapon in the fight against corruption.

Anna Hazare ends hunger strike after Indian government backs down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/28/anna-hazare-ends-hunger-strike> 
Anti-corruption is a major enterprise in India today. In 2009 the social 
reformerAnna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/28/anna-hazare-ends-hunger-strike> 
spearheaded a huge anti-corruption movement across the country. Hazare called 
on the Indian government to introduce alokpal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/18/lokpal-bill-indian-anti-corruption-watchdog-approved>
 – a type of public ombudsman committee – with the legal power to investigate 
government corruption.

There have also been numerous village-level and regional movements, using 
public interest legislation and the 2005Right to Information Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/apr/10/india-freedom-of-information> 
to counter corruption where it occurs.

But campaigners are also getting creative. In 2007 an NGO called 5th Pillar 
came up with the idea of printing bank notes with a value of zero 
<http://www.5thpillar.org/programs/zero-rupee-note>. They look a lot like the 
50-rupee notes: They carry a picture of Gandhi and are a similar colour. But 
they are, literally, not worth the paper that they’re printed on.

When an official demands a bribe, a citizen can present the zero-rupee note as 
payment. The note carries the warning: “I promise neither to accept nor give a 
bribe.” In theory, officials will be compelled to reflect on their actions when 
presented with the note, and they will be shamed into recognising the 
illegality of their demand.

The NGO’s website <http://www.5thpillar.org/> carries numerous examples of 
where this tactic has been effective: even hardened bribe-takers are sometimes 
persuaded to change their practices. By August 2014 there were reputed to be 
2.5m zero-rupee notes in circulation. So successful has the note been that it 
is now being adopted in places as diverse as Nepal, Ghana, Benin, Mexico and 
Yemen.

But will this initiative bring about real change? During the past 20 years I 
have been carrying out research in the state of Uttar Pradesh, where corruption 
is intense, varied and entrenched. Most of my friends say that the zero-rupee 
note movement will have little effect, “Corruption is corruption,” they say, 
“no one will be put off by getting a zero-rupee note.”

People are more pragmatic than in the 90s. 'It is alright to be corrupt,' they 
say. 'As long as you avoid fraud'

In the past two decades senior officials have appropriated vast sums in Uttar 
Pradesh, and more broadly in India, in everything fromsecond-generation mobile 
phones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/02/india-minister-andimuthu-raja-arrest-corrupti>
 and cricket’s Indian Premier League to rural healthcare. According to some 
estimates, the opportunity costs of corruption in terms of lost investment 
growth and jobs are $50bn in India every year.

At the ground level, bribery is a daily ritual for many Indians. Government 
bureaucrats demand payment for providing services that should be free. They 
embezzle money earmarked for development projects. And police officers 
routinely demand “tips” – known euphemistically as “money for water and tea”.

A portion of the money collected on the ground is passed up through state 
hierarchies and on to politicians, who use the funds to finance elections. In 
this system, it is very difficult to avoid becoming corrupt.

Many anti-corruption organisations themselves become corrupt. Just a few days 
ago the AAP – theAam Aadmi, or “Common Man”, party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/11/indian-moral-politics-delhi-aam-aadmi-party-narendra-modi>
 – a motley assortment of activists and intellectuals vigorously opposed to 
corruption – became mired inrumours of favoritism and power-grabbing 
<http://www.firstpost.com/politics/vvip-boards-not-a-crime-but-has-aap-irrevocably-lost-its-identity-2185711.html>
.

Corruption may actually be getting worse. Economic growth in Uttar Pradesh has 
led to spiralling corruption. Rising inequality has increased frustration, 
especially among low-ranking government officials and the unemployed. People 
are more pragmatic now than they were in the 1990s. “It is alright to be 
corrupt,” they sometimes say. “As long as you avoid fraud.” “Corruption” refers 
to the ordinary system of kickbacks and bribes; “fraud” is where an official 
takes a bribe and still does not act.

Zero-rupee notes may be having an effect, however marginal. But Salman 
Rushdie’s aphorism remains as true as ever: “Indian democracy: one man, one 
bribe”.
 