
You probably own a camera in some form or the other, but how do you convert 
your photography passion into a source of work and income?

For Roycin D'Souza, a media student from Mumbai, India, the answer was simple. 
He created a portfolio of his work by simply putting faces to Twitter handles 
of users from different cities in India and the Middle East. A year on and not 
only doesTweeter A Day 365 <http://roycin.com/blog/tweeter-a-day-365/> 
(#TAD365) have a great collection of photographs but it's also generated 
interest from national press, more work and more assignments.

Closer to home, Cardiff photographer Sarah Hill decided to produce a magazine 
as a platform to showcase other photographers.Télégramme Magazine 
<http://hellotelegramme.co.uk/>, produced using the digital publishing tool 
Issuu and edited in Photoshop, is now in its third issue. It has 800 members 
and more than 13,000 photographs onits Flickr group 
<http://www.flickr.com/groups/telegramme/>.

But these aren't the only ways to get yourself noticed. Caroline Hunter, 
picture editor for Weekend Magazine, says that exhibiting your work at the 
numerousphotography festivals cropping up each year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/camera-club-blog/2012/jun/28/photography-festivals>
 all over the world may be a good place to start as it helps you network and 
share your passions and ideas with like-minded people.

To explore the wide range of ways budding photographers can get their career 
started, we've put together a panel of experts from across the photography 
industry. They will be online onThursday 26 July between 1pm and 3pm to offer 
advice on how to create a photography portfolio, get your images noticed and 
find work in the industry. Don't forget you can email your questions in advance 
tokate.hodge@theguardian.com <mailto:kate.hodge@theguardian.com> and we'll make 
sure our experts answer them for you.

Our panel


Caroline Hunter is the deputy picture editor of the Guardian Weekend Magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jul/21/weekend>. She has over 15 
years' experience of commissioning photography for newspapers and magazines. 
She regularly participates in portfolio reviews at photo festivals and writes 
about photography.

Heike Löwenstein is an executive member of the Association for Photography in 
Higher Education <http://www.aphe.ac.uk/> and programme leader for the BA 
(Hons) Photography <http://www.derby.ac.uk/photography-ba-hons> and MA film and 
photography <http://www.derby.ac.uk/film-and-photography-ma> courses at the 
University of Derby. Her work has been published in several books and is 
exhibited internationally. Heimat is on show at the Ostrale '012 in Dresden 
until mid September.

Steve Thirsk is the director of The Guild of Photographers 
<http://www.photoguild.co.uk/>, a national association for the development and 
support of photographers. He is also the director atThe Staffordshire Wedding 
Show <http://www.thestaffordshireweddingshow.co.uk/> and the UK agent for 
Venice Album <http://www.venicealbum.com/>.

Chris Milne runs the Blackthorn School of Photography 
<http://www.photography-courses.com/> in Wiltshire. His areas of expertise are 
wildlife, portrait, landscape and travel photography. For the past 15 years he 
has been a regular supplier of images for photographic libraries.

Roycin D'Souza is a professional music and lifestyle photographer. He spends 
his time filming concerts, shooting portraits for magazines and working with 
musicians. He has been published in every major Indian publication for his work 
in music photography and the#TAD365 
<https://twitter.com/#!/search/%23TAD365/slideshow/photos> project. 

Sarah Hill is a marketing assistant from Cardiff who has a passion for 35mm 
photography. She startedTélégramme Magazine <http://hellotelegramme.co.uk/> in 
2010 as a new way to curate interesting and unusual photos from around the 
world.

Laura Palmer is a young photographer but with vast experience having exhibited 
atThe Photographer's Gallery <http://thephotographersgallery.org.uk/>. Although 
primarily concentrating on her editorial work with the likes of NME, Laura has 
been published internationally with a number of commercial clients.

James Arnold is a professional music and portrait photographer from 
Lincolnshire. He shoots for magazines such asQ Magazine 
<http://www.qthemusic.com/>, NME and Front - along with shooting for clients 
such as Universal Music, EMI, Lynx and more.

Jonathan Mitchell is a freelance photo-journalist who supplies images to UK 
newspapers and several press photo agencies. He is also the author of the e-book
Freelance Photojournalism & Stock Photography: A Professional Guide 
<http://itunes.apple.com/us/book/freelance-photojournalism/id517531038?mt=11>.

Julia Boggio runs a successful family, wedding, and boudoir portrait studio in 
Wimbledon. She is a columnist forPhoto Professional magazine 
<http://www.photopromagazine.com/> and has also written and presented for The 
British Journal of Photography <http://www.bjp-online.com/>. 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for our weeklyCareers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 