
So I’ve just finished dinner and I go to pay and it’s not there. It’s just not 
there. It’s not anywhere. I’ve dumped my bag on the counter and am rifling 
through it with increasing panic. So many crumbs! Why? Was there a biscuit in 
there? Not eaten? The card was there – when? – this morning at the ATM, then … ?


I retrace my steps and the angle of the wallet when I went to pay for the 
coffee at the market and the crush of the crowds. Maybe it fell out then. Maybe 
I left it in the ATM? Maybe it’s been stolen?

I’m in Bali, writing a travel piece – so, you know, lucky me. Right now I 
don’t have enough money to pay for dinner. I am on my own and all I have is a 
few crumpled Australian dollars – sitting brightly where the credit card should 
have been.

I took a prescription pill to get a lot of work done quickly. Here's what 
happened | Brigid Delaney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/i-took-a-prescription-pill-to-get-a-lot-of-work-done-quickly-heres-what-happened>
The staff have gathered around me. The manager is called, and … the bouncer. 
Why have they called the bouncer? I look at my phone, as if I expect it to tell 
me where my credit card is. But tonight the oracle is without answers. A small 
group is now surrounding me – as though I’m a grifter – trying this trick all 
over town to get that free glass of rosé and Mexican food.

“Yeah, yeah, there’s this new chick with this old trick. She gets a rosé and a 
beef taco pretends her card is gone and then backs out of the restaurant, 
blushing and apologising and we never see her again … ”

They register the loud Australian banknotes and the bouncer takes me outside, 
and from the dark, a teenager in a singlet makes room for me on his motorbike 
and I understand that I am go with him, somewhere on this bike and get my money 
changed. We ride for a long time, turning on to a dirt road towards the sea to 
a little shop with a dim bulb where an old woman counts out the rupiah. I am 
worried about the lack of helmet and the roads wet from tropical rains while at 
the same time registering the pleasure of the rain and the feeling of riding 
through the dark in a foreign country on a stranger’s motorbike, while not 
wearing a helmet.

A bank card needs to have the weight it deserves

I’ve lost half a dozen bank cards and credit cards this year alone and wonder 
if the cause is carelessness, a “slippery” wallet (the damn things just won’t 
stay in), or is this a bellwether for an unbalanced life – the same way some 
people become more clumsy or have more accidents when they feel overwhelmed.

I remember a time before cards, walking quickly alongside my mother, to get to 
the branch before it shut at 4pm or 5pm. This was country Victoria in the early 
1980s. The passbook in her hand, with its ledger, the handwriting of the 
teller, alongside the dollar amounts, the stamps, solid like a passport, each 
stamp telling its own story of the withdrawal or deposit counted in five-, 10-, 
20-dollar notes.


I’m sure for those involved in the seismic transition from passbook to card, 
it was epic. But for me it seemed seamless. One minute you had no access to 
money on the weekend or after hours. (Can you imagine? Can you even imagine?) 
Then you had these ATM machines and these cards – as slim as playing cards but 
instead of fake magic, they were real magic – giving you money anywhere and 
everywhere. Even letting you “overdraw”. It was the best. But when you lose 
them life becomes medieval, difficult and you find yourself at the mercy of 
others.

Ubud food festival: best of Bali on a plate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/may/27/ubud-food-festival-bali> 
I once lived in a seaside village in south-west Victoria in the converted 
ballroom built below the mansion of my landlord. He was a benevolent dude with 
John Lennon specs who spent a lot of time on boats. He had a mansion and a 
yacht because he was one of the big cheeses who brought Eftpos to Australia. 
Whether he told me this or not, or whether it was even true - the fact of it 
struck me as miraculous. I guess Eftpos had to come from somewhere but …

Yet I want to go back in time and make it differently, recreate it BIGGER. 
Credit cards are too small. They are too important to be the size of business 
card, to be slim enough to fall out of a wallet unannounced.


A bank card needs to have the weight it deserves. It needs to be the size and 
shape of a brick. When you lose it or it is stolen – man you’re going to notice 
it – because it’s going to be the equivalent of someone trying to wrestle a 
brick off you. When you drop it on the ground it should shatter the earth like 
a wrecking ball.

Or maybe it should be implanted in our fingertips and there’s fingerprint 
recognition technology and if someone wants to take it, they’ll have to chop 
off our hands. A brick or a chip … That’s what I need.

Jacket required

Sometimes the new world saves us. It was winter when I lost the last batch of 
cards. I scarcely had time to create and remember one new pin when the new card 
would go missing – and I’d get messages like this one on Facebook messenger 
from strangers that tracked me down: “Did you lose your credit card? I found a 
card with your name on it on the ground outsideCivic Video in Bondi. 
<http://www.civicvideo.com.au/location/bondi-beach-2/>”

My poor card – unguarded, just lying out there in the street.

… What was it doing outside Civic Video?

The day or so before I lost my credit/debit card, I was in Taipei, covering an 
art biennale. I left my favourite jacket in the hotel wardrobe and flew out of 
the country. When I landed in Indonesia I was desolate. My favourite jacket! 
Lost in Taipei! I tweeted about my sadness and the fine Australian journalist
Annabel Crabb 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=annabel+crabb&ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Esearch>
with her legion of followers, retweeted with a call to anyone passing through 
to retrieve it.
Brigid Delaney (@BrigidWD) 
Oh no! I left my favourite coat in the hotel room in Taipei !!
 <https://twitter.com/BrigidWD/status/801206250151129088> November 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BrigidWD/status/801206250151129088> Annabel Crabb 
(@annabelcrabb) 
Anyone flying Taipei/Sydney soon??? https://t.co/L4Xy3Memkz 
<https://t.co/L4Xy3Memkz>
 <https://twitter.com/annabelcrabb/status/801264434538684416> November 23, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/annabelcrabb/status/801264434538684416> Brigid Delaney 
(@BrigidWD) 
My jacket back IN Australia before me!! thank you Ben and Annabel for staging 
such a great rescue. I LOVE TWITTER & ITS POWER FOR GOOD XXXXX
https://t.co/RbMbRPnJpe <https://t.co/RbMbRPnJpe>
 <https://twitter.com/BrigidWD/status/802017276744433664> November 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BrigidWD/status/802017276744433664> 
The jacket beat me back to Australia by a week – rescued by a good samaritan 
from Adelaide.

I am still here in Indonesia – without my credit card, haggling with hotel 
staff, but dreaming that it might be possible to go backwards, like the people 
who choose flip phones over smartphones. It’s the past again. I’ll carry wads 
of cash in my shoes, and passbooks and travellers’ cheques and have money 
coming in from Western Union, like a character from a Graham Greene novel. And 
this thing that I’m going through again and again, will happen no more. And if 
I lose my jacket – tough. 
 