
• A small triumph for Boris Johnson against the wrath of conservative 
Christian lobbyists who took him to court in the long-running battle of the bus 
ads. You may remember that the gay rights campaigners from Stonewall were 
allowed to run an advert on the side of London buses two years ago saying: 
“Some People are Gay. Get Over It.” But when an evangelical body called Core 
Issues Trust wanted to retaliate with “Not Gay. Post Gay. Ex-Gay and Proud. Get 
Over It”,the advert was banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/12/anti-gay-adverts-boris-johnson>. 
Boris’s view was that the slogan suggested that gay people were sick but could 
be cured and was accordingly offensive. The evangelicals have been hounding him 
ever since through the Christian Legal Centre, the body that takes all the 
cases alleging discrimination against Christians who want to discriminate 
against gay people – and generally loses them. Today it racked upanother defeat 
in the high court 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2014/07/30/uk-high-court-judge-favours-mayor-and-tfl-in-ruling-on-ex-gay-bus-advert-ban/>
. Mrs Justice Lang ruled that Boris was entitled to take the view he did and 
the Christians had not proved he was motivated by a desire for electoral 
advantage in the forthcoming mayoral election. It has left the legal centre’s 
Andrea Williams fuming, not for the first time, about a bad day for free 
speech: “No one wants to hear the other side.” She claims she doesn’t want to 
cure anyone, but she does not like gays having sex either. Possibly time for 
new lawyers, or different advice.

• Now that the Church of England has voted in favour of female bishops, just 
how helpful will the crown nominations committee that selects them be in making 
its choices? An analysis of the votes about the matter at the recent general 
synod shows that some lay members of the CNC clearly still have to be 
convinced. Although both archbishops and the clergy representatives on the CNC 
voted in favour of the move, two of the three lay members of the committee 
remain firmly opposed. One, Jane Patterson from Sheffield, is a conservative 
evangelical; and the other, Aidan Hargreaves-Smith ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, is a high church Anglo-Catholic – both 
from the factions resolutely against women’s ordination. They will remain in 
post for another year, by which time the first female bishops will have been 
appointed. They won’t be able to prevent that, but it does show the power of 
political lobbying within the church: congregations still opposed to female 
priests amount to about 10% of the total, yet they secured 66% of the national 
lay representation on the decision-making committee.

• One question that emerges from the government’s latest crackdown on EU 
immigrants is why it feels the need for extra measures. If it wasn’t bellowing 
so hard against all things European, it might notice that it already has powers 
under a 2004 directive to use an unreasonable burden test against migrants who 
throw themselves on a new country. This can kick in after three months if 
immigrants do not have a job, or have insufficient resources to support 
themselves or private health insurance. Other countries such as Belgium do 
this: even retrospectively to a French professor at a Brussels university 
because he had initially claimed housing benefit. You can argue it is a bit 
drastic or even inhumane, but the powers do exist – yet of course it is easier 
to blame the European Union.

• Consolation for bathroom singers everywhere. Here’s Alan White, drummer with 
the prog rock band Yes in an interview with Uncut magazine about his colleague, 
the singer Jon Anderson: “We were in the studio for almost six months. One time 
Jon was singing, and he said, ‘It doesn’t sound like it does at home – in my 
bathroom it sounds great.’ So the roadies built a shower in the studio, and he 
sang the track in there.”

• A week since the Guardian columnist George Monbiot challenged former 
environment secretary Owen Patterson to a country walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/22/british-tea-party-conservatism-owen-paterson>
 together identifying flora and fauna following the sulky ex-minister’s 
contention that environmentalists can’t tell theirsnakeshead fritillaries 
<http://rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=814> from their silver-washed 
fritillaries 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/679-780/silver-washed-fritillary.html> and 
still no reply. We’re waiting, Owen.
 