
• The on-off summer leaves people tetchy. And as a consequence, perhaps, many 
unkind things are being said in Hampshire about the Conservative nominee for 
police commissioner, the former minister Michael Mates. A man of his experience 
might hope to be a shoo-in. And yet the question persists: how can he hope to 
escape the shadow ofAsil Nadir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/26/asil-nadir-polly-peck>? Bad 
enough, mutter critics, that Mates had to resign his ministerial post amid the 
furore over Nadir's flit to Northern Cyprus in 1993. Few forget how he sent 
Nadir that watch with the message "Don't Let The Buggers Get You Down". But 
there was Mates again, during the recent trial, putting in that good word for 
the man now shamed as a crookwho stole millions and got 10 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/23/asil-nadir-10-years-jail-polly-peck>
. As a result, there are many worried about the official candidate's prospects. 
A squeeze seems likely, for those who would vote Tory can affirm their support 
forSimon Hayes <http://www.policecrimecommissioner.co.uk/Hampshire>, an 
independent candidate but a former Conservative councillor and chair of 
Hampshire Crimestoppers. Those who can't vote Tory can smile uponJacqui Rayment 
<http://www.dailyecho.co.uk/news/district/southampton/9564553.Labour_councillor_joins_police_chief_race/>
, a local Labour councillor who has chaired Hampshire Police Authority with 
distinction. And enter stage right Ukip – which may well compound Mates's 
worries with its own spoiler candidate. Should Nadir decide to send his friend 
a watch with the message "Don't Let The Buggers Get You Down", a good time 
would be now.

• Everywhere, great men struggle to receive the respect they deserve. Witness 
the newish Met commissioner, Bernard Hogan-Howe.Yesterday we told how the very 
mention of his name at events attended by the rank and file 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/aug/27/hugh-muir-diary-stop-search-privacy?newsfeed=true>
 is sufficient to trigger waves of panto-style booing. Still, he will derive 
comfort from the fact that when the lateSir Robert Mark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/oct/01/sir-robert-mark-obituary> took over 
the same job in 1972, also in the wake of scandals at the Yard, he was even 
more unpopular. "I felt rather like the representative of a leper colony 
attending the annual garden party of a colonial governor," was how he summed up 
his reception. But he persisted, and is now regarded as one of the greatest of 
commissioners. He also said: "A good police force is one that catches more 
criminals than it employs." No commissioner has cracked a worthwhile gag since.

• Suddenly, there is no more Murray Morse at the helm of the Irish Post 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/story.asp?storycode=48808>. It did seem a 
strange move, from the Daily Sport to the Irish Post, but it was a lively time. 
Some were perturbed when, in his first week, he managed to upset the Irish 
embassy, much of the Irish community in Britain and thepresident of Ireland, 
Michael D Higgins, <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_D._Higgins> to the 
extent that an apology was required. Others suffered motion sickness as the 
organ lurched rightwards. No word on the circumstances of his departure, but 
apparently no tears either. The only way seems up for the Post.

• Tension, meanwhile, at the Ecuadorean embassy as the author Dominic 
Shelmerdine arrives with letters of support for the ambassador Ana Alban and 
Julian Assange. On his first visit, police tell him to "keep away". On his 
second, he brushes past a big security officer, is surrounded by six burly 
police officers and moves towards the door, only to have an embassy official 
decline to accept his letter. On the third attempt, protesters outside accuse 
him of being an undercover policeman. Little Assange is short of friends.

• Finally, when awards are doled out to celebs for just doing their jobs, it's 
refreshing to see recognition for others performing public service. Congrats to 
Tom Grundy, who will receive £2,400 for his attempt to make a citizen's arrest 
of Tony Blair at an event in Hong Kong. The money comes from a bounty fund 
created by theArrest Blair Campaign <http://www.arrestblair.org/>, brainchild 
of Guardian columnist George Monbiot. Grundy, who will give the money to 
charity, is the fourth recipient to have met the Arrest Blair rules, which 
don't actually require the former PM to be apprehended. The criteria reward 
endeavour and intent. The area is contentious, for some see Blair as a war 
criminal, and some don't. Still, watching the former PM pursued by 
bounty-hunters does add an agreeable something to the gaiety of the nation. On 
that basis alone, this is money well spent.

 Twitter: @hugh_muir <http://twitter.com/hugh_muir>
 