
After John and Jane discover that they are both secretly assassins in Mr & Mrs 
Smith, they have to methodically go through and debunk all the lies they’ve 
told each other. John reveals that he had a brief previous marriage, (“No, 
you’re not going to kill her,” he says exasperatedly when Jane demands the 
woman’s name and social security number). For her part, Jane reveals that her 
parents died when she was five.

Angelina Jolie files for divorce from Brad Pitt citing irreconcilable 
differences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
“Then who gave you away at our wedding?” John demands.

“Paid actor,” Jane admits.

The joke is, more or less intentionally, meta. Jane and John have both set up 
complete alternative identities as cover stories; they’re acting out their 
lives. And that is precisely what they’re doing in real life as well, where 
Brad Pitt is pretending to be John Smith pretending to be John Smith, and
Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> is Jane Smith 
pretending to be Jane Smith. The conceit of the film is the same as the 
marketing of the film. What if two extraordinary people pretended to be normal, 
boring, suburbanites, who marinate in quiet desperation and bitter lack of 
fulfillment?

Mr & Mrs Smith was also the set on which Pitt and Jolie met; they became the 
most famous celebrity couple in the world following Pitt’s separation from 
Jennifer Aniston in 2005. Now thatPitt and Jolie are separating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
 in turn, Mr & Mrs Smith seems prescient in various ways (though not in its 
portrayal of Jolie as a woman who hates children, obviously). A couple whose 
perfect life turns out to be a complete fiction; that resonates, right?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7C1miwFdQOQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7C1miwFdQOQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7C1miwFdQOQ&media=>

 Well, maybe. What with the klieg-light media obsession, it’s easy to forget 
that we don’t really know that much about the inner workings of Jolie and 
Pitt’s relationship. We – “we” here meaning everyone on the planet, just about –
want to know the intimate secrets of these exciting, sexy, unusual people. We 
want to know them even if, or perhaps especially if, those secrets are banal 
and tedious and boil down to something like, “They stopped getting along.”


If Brangelina broke up over marijuana, what could it mean for their divorce?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/21/brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-brangelina-divorce-marijuana-use>
And this is where, in hindsight, the frothy by-the-numbers Mr & Mrs Smith 
approaches a kind of genius. The film is a multi-layered, interlocking 
celebrity fantasy, which caters to both the desire tobe the wonderful, exciting 
Pitt and Jolie, and the voyeuristic desire to experience schadenfreude at their 
manifest failure to be wonderful and exciting.

“It probably feels like you’re the only ones going through this,” the 
offscreen marriage therapist tells the couple earnestly at the beginning of the 
film, “but I’ll tell you something: there are millions of couples that are 
experiencing the same problems.” The joke is that this is false – most couples 
aren’t concealing careers as assassins, to say nothing of the fact that most 
people aren’t married to universally idolized male or female sex symbols. But 
the fun of the film is that it’s also, maybe, true; stars have marital troubles
just likeUs <http://www.usmagazine.com/stars-just-like-us>. There’s a kinky, if 
overdetermined, charge that comes from watching Angelina Jolie dress in a hot 
leather dominatrix outfit to get close to and kill one of her targets, or from 
watching Pitt virilely strip off his shirt (again). But there’s also a 
fetishistic edge to watching Jolie glowering past those perfect cheekbones at 
her husband because he doesn’t sufficiently appreciate the drapes, or watching 
Pitt, the movie star who serially dated the most celebrated women in Hollywood, 
stutter and stammer and try to avoid confessing his sex life isn’t so great.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fmr-mrs-smith-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd0352b2b4becc67df7b909b9491f3bee3ef018f%2F0_0_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Did%20Mr%20%26%20Mrs%20Smith%20predict%20the%20fall%20of%20Brangelina%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fmr-mrs-smith-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Did%20Mr%20%26%20Mrs%20Smith%20predict%20the%20fall%20of%20Brangelina%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fmr-mrs-smith-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd0352b2b4becc67df7b909b9491f3bee3ef018f%2F0_0_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
 Pitt and Jolie … just like us? Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
Jolie’s dominatrix getup is given extra va-voom because she hides it under a 
demure coat in preparation for a great reveal – and because the boots 
accidentally peek out when she’s at a neighbor’s suburban party. Similarly, 
Pitt’s caddish dudebro bumbling is funny and engaging because it’s secretly a 
front; in the film he repeatedly adopts the persona of a clueless civilian 
schmo in order to conceal his suave uber-competent spy deadliness. The real 
source of stimulation isn’t sexy excitement or boring mundanity. It’s the 
closeted concealment itself, and the way the viewer gets to know more about the 
characters than the characters do about themselves.

Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie: a marriage that started – and ended – on screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
When they first meet, John and Jane go to a carnival where they line up for a 
shooting game; John thinks he’s putting one over on Jane by pretending not to 
know how to shoot, and Jane thinks she’s putting one over on John by pretending 
not to know how to shoot. But really it’s the viewer who is in on the truth, 
which is that they both know how to shoot – and, inevitably, in on the even 
realer truth that they don’t know how to shoot, but are pretending to be 
run-of-the-mill assassins when they are, in fact, those rarefied movie stars 
Angelina Jolie andBrad Pitt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradpitt>.

Just as the energy in Mr & Mrs Smith comes from the overlapping layers of lies 
and revelations, so too does celebrity culture run on the titillating thrill of 
intimacies concealed and then revealed. The news of Jolie and Pitt’s separation 
will be mined for details and secrets. The film foreshadows the breakup not 
because it suggests that the stars were never compatible, but because it 
anticipates the fascination of every stimulating hint that Mr & Mrs Smith are 
more exciting than they appear, and every equally stimulating hint that they 
are not.
 