
If it bleeds, it leads – that most reliable axiom of journalism – may be 
nowhere as true as onTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>. 
War, natural disasters, sudden violence, and their confusion, certainly get an 
immediate, spontaneous, and vivid expression in a tweet roll.

Andy Carvin, a social media promoter, gained lots of attention for himself, 
and for Twitter's usefulness in fraught circumstances, during the successive 
convulsions of the Arab spring. It was largely his focus on personal stories, 
on individual pain and terror, that made his obsessive tweeting compelling, and 
that form the basis of his just-published book, Distant Witness: Social Media, 
the Arab Spring and a Journalism Revolution. "Unflinching, real-time depiction 
of conflict" is Carvin's metier, according tothe book's press notes 
<http://press.journalism.cuny.edu/book/distant-witness-social-media-the-arab-spring-and-a-journalism-revolution/>
.

[Carvin] is reinventing how people experience the news. No longer merely 
consuming it, they participate in it, interacting with the very people on the 
ground engaged in the uprisings.

Late last week, Carvin applied his you-are-there, or I-am-there-in-spirit, 
tweeting approach to the school shooting in Connecticut, not just noting each 
raw increment of the unfolding story, but adjudicating on, and frequently 
scolding, the rest of the media's confused accounts. From a remote control 
booth, Carvin uses Twitter as a field walkie-talkie calling out to others, and 
then centralizing their reports. In theory, he's harnessing the eyes and ears 
of people actually on the ground, in sight of the carnage, and, as it were, 
disintermediating the outside cameras and hacks yet to arrived – or who might 
not ever arrive (aka parachuting reporters).

This is "crowdsourcing", that new notion of information collection and 
retrieval that has become a cliche even before its actual process has been much 
tested or entirely defined. Carvin is certainly a bona fide practitioner of a 
new form of journalism, inventing a role for himself that seems as native as 
the network anchorman became to television in the 1960s. (Carvin even has his 
own signature signoff before he stops tweeting for the night: "Stay safe, 
everyone.")

This successfully assumed identity seems to have compelled his employer, NPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/npr>, quite a traditional news organization, 
to have acknowledged his special standing with the awkward title, "senior 
product manager for online communities". As it happens, and perhaps the 
awkwardness of his title reflects NPR's discomfort here, Carvin himself has no 
journalism or reporting experience. He was a not-for-profit administrator 
involved with digital issues, primarily how to expand public computing 
resources to those without, when he started to focus on computing's role in 
mass events – a good way to promote the importance of computers for all.

Carvin's interest has never been reporting, per se, or storytelling, or even, 
in the manner of the untrained war reporter, experiencing the reality for 
himself. Rather, his vocation, along with promoting social media itself, has 
been that new information role called "curation" – another cliche even before 
being adequately defined – which has somehow become an uber form of editing.

Carvin's elevation to sacred cow and groundbreaking auteur in the new news 
media has strongly benefited from the digital establishment's instant and 
militant defense of its own, and the old media establishment's ambivalence 
about itself. Indeed, Carvin has what seems like a personal publicist in the 
technology writer, Matthew Ingram, who often tweets and writesabout Carvin's 
significance 
<http://gigaom.com/2012/05/25/andy-carvin-on-twitter-as-a-newsroom-and-being-human/>
, going so far as to say he ought to win a Pulitzer prize for tweeting. 
Likewise, Carvin has become a constant and scornful disciplinarian of the news 
media that does win Pulitzer prizes – and, more often than not, is praised, 
courted, and quoted by that media.

When the details of the shooting first started to emerge last Friday morning, 
Carvin quickly moved to insert himself as the grandmaster tweeter, 
consolidating, parsing, weighing the other tweets in his wide purview. His 
talent is not just speed but centrality: he assumes a striking intimacy with 
the event at hand.

He quickly became bathed in Newtown's drama, proudly explaining during 
Friday's marathon tweeting session that CNN had called to try to get him on the 
air, thinking he was at the scene rather than in Washington, DC. (He noted 
<http://tweetwood.com/acarvin/tweet/279653115517620224>, from his 300-mile 
distance from the event: "Just called home. Never been so relieved to hear my 
son's voice in the background.")

He also became, on Friday morning, a fevered spreader of misinformation.

While claiming not to retweet most of what he finds, because of its 
questionable provenance, he nevertheless tweeted a rather broad range of 
bollocks. There wasnews of a mysterious purple van <http://t.co/RUPsdDX> that 
does not seem actually have existed. Then there was, suddenly, a second shooter 
theory thatgot Carvin's attention <http://t.co/CzjDWDd>. And the gunman's 
brother found dead <http://t.co/NkmXmzw>. And two bodies at the mother's house 
<http://t.co/rss1wuM>. And he piled on to the fake letter moment – retweeting 
reports about a letter supposedly written by a child from inside the school.

While the guise is to retweet in order to verify, the effect is to propagate.

Carvin's defender, Ingram, had to rush into the fray with a blog saying that 
this is how news works: misinformation emerges. But fortunately, there are 
people like Carvin, practicing social media, to sort it out.

Part of the background noise to Carvin's incessant tweeting is Carvin 
defending his "method", and complaining about being the wounded party: "Looks 
like another occasion for MSM to blame social for spreading rumors when many of 
the rumors spread to social *from* MSM."

It is this self-righteousness, and claim of moral stature, that, more than the 
technology, may give him his leeway and license – and voice. By virtue of his 
immersion in social media, he identifies with suffering more than people who 
see the world through traditional media. Through social media, he shares the 
pain.

He's the empathy king. He feels everything 
<http://tweetwood.com/acarvin/tweet/279760257595609088> ("First thing I did at 
restaurant tonight: identify exits, hiding places, and objects that could be 
used to fight back"), and it is unbearable ("I just wonder how many others are 
having weird flashbacks that combine Arab Spring violence with yesterday's 
shooting,"he says <http://tweetwood.com/acarvin/tweet/28017121495207> a day 
after the mayhem).

And he doesn't go away, he keeps tweeting and keeps feeling ("unflinching", 
according to his publicist), vastly more than the heartless cynics and 
professional snobs of nonsocial and nonparticipatory media ("Putting away 
phone. Gonna go sit in my kids' rooms for a while – just to reflect on today. 
You should do the same with yours. Stay safe 
<http://tweetwood.com/acarvin/tweet/279837476309327872>.")

The new journalism, it turns out, is every bit as self-dramatizing as the old.

• Andy Carvin has responded below, with an edited version 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/20156166> of his long-form 
reply <http://storify.com/acarvin/in-response-to-michael-wolff-and-the-guardian>
 to Michael Wolff's article
 