
The curse of Tutankhamun first struck in February 1923. The previous November, 
the intrepid archaeologist Howard Carter and his sponsor Lord Carnarvon 
discovered the burial chamber of a forgotten boy-king hidden in the Valley of 
the Kings in Egypt, untouched by robbers and stuffed with treasures.

They were soaking up the press attention as Tutankhamun 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/tutankhamun.shtml>, forgotten 
for millennia, suddenly became world famous – and so did his discoverers.

Then Lord Carnarvon 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e5/Carnarvon.jpg> got bitten 
on the cheek by a mosquito. He accidentally made the bite worse while shaving, 
and died in a delirious fever.

Arthur Conan Doyle 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-1QVEoP7tSuE/TxQ9KvLfpoI/AAAAAAAABzk/23yAYeDBXkg/s1600/Conan+Doyle.jpg>
, creator of Sherlock Holmes and ardent believer in the supernatural, said it 
must be the "curse" of the mummy. Death was decreed on anyone who disturbed the 
young pharaoh, reported newspapers.

With an exhibition about Howard Carter and the discovery of Tutankhamun 
opening on 24 July atOxford's Ashmolean Museum 
<http://www.ashmolean.org/exhibitions/discovertut/>, should the university city 
be worried? Is King Tut's curse about to strike Oxford?
 Left to right: James Henry Breasted, Harry Burton, Alfred Lucas, Arthur 
Callender, Arthur Mace, Howard Carter and Alan Gardiner eat lunch in the tomb 
of Ramesses XI in 1923. Photograph: Lord Carnarvon/Griffith Institute, 
University of Oxford 
The media in the 1920s found plenty of evidence that something was punishing 
the excavators of the most perfect ancient Egyptian burial chamber ever found. 
Lord Carnarvon's pet bird was eaten by a snake, his dog died back in England 
almost the exact moment he kicked the bucket in Egypt, and a radiologist who 
supposedly x-rayed the mummy died of a mysterious illness. A rich American died 
of pneumonia after visiting the tomb, and a member of Carter's excavation team 
was said to have died of arsenic poisoning.

No wonder that in 1932, a decade after Tutankhamun's discovery, the Boris 
Karloff horror film The Mummy 
<http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Mummy-1932-film-poster.jpg> was closely 
modelled on the story of this famous find.

But of course there was no curse. If Tutankhamun wanted revenge, why spare 
Howard Carter, the man who actually found him and lived to tell the tale? The 
expedition mortality rate was no higher than you'd expect among the imperial 
British at the time – Lord Carnarvon should have been more wary of mosquito 
bites.
 Transporting objects from King Tutankhamun's tomb. Photograph: Griffith 
Institute, University of Oxford 
Even without the beguiling legend of the curse, the tale of how Tutankhamun's 
tomb was discovered is a thrilling encounter with archaeology at its most 
spectacular. Today's archaeologists stress patient analysis of small pieces of 
pottery from carefully measured trenches, a scientific approach pioneered in 
Egypt by the Victorian great,Sir William Matthew Flinders Petrie 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/museums/petrie>. By Petrie's modern scientific standards, 
Carter and Carnarvon were naive and out of touch, looking for lost treasure 
like characters in some Boy's Own story.

Yet anyone lucky enough to see Tutankhamun and his burial objects in the 
Egyptian Museum in Cairo <http://www.sca-egypt.org/eng/MUS_Egyptian_Museum.htm> 
wonders in awe at the sheer richness of this panoply of exquisite art and 
design. From his chairs and games to hisgolden mask 
<http://www.virtourist.com/africa/cairo/imatges/37.jpg>, the young pharaoh and 
his lifestyle survive as miraculously as theash-imprisoned people of Pompeii 
<http://news.bbcimg.co.uk/media/images/65719000/jpg/_65719528_65714235.jpg>.

The Ashmolean's exhibition revisits the greatest archaeological story ever told
 <http://mholloway63.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/628x471.jpg>. Even the true 
bits of it are amazing.
 