
Like many US universities, it has long been a goal of the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison to engage our alumni in a culture of philanthropy to support 
their alma mater. And we have another goal – of increasing private gifts raised 
to support need-based scholarships to help make Wisconsin's flagship university 
accessible to academically qualified students, regardless of their family 
income.

Imagine our excitement when a talented, young alumnus named Will Hsu, and his 
spouse, Jenny, approached the University of Wisconsin Foundation about using 
money that they received as wedding gifts to assist in both areas – despite 
still facing their own student loans. Success!

But they were not done yet. Will, a senior finance manager at General Mills 
Corp in Minneapolis, Minnesota, is a food blogger attached to his iPhone. He 
loves to tweet from his account at@Wphsu <http://twitter.com/#!/wphsu>. Jenny 
is equally connected, but prefers Facebook. They decided to make an additional 
gift to the university and asked, "Is there a way to amplify the power of the 
gift through social media?" And so, theBucky Challenge 
<http://www.buckychallenge.wisc.edu>, was created.

For each new Facebook friend or Twitter follower connecting with the 
UW-Madison, WisconsinAlumni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/alumni> Association or 
both, Will and Jenny and Will's parents, Paul and Sharon Hsu of Wausau, 
Wisconsin, gave $1 to the Great People Scholarship. Through the campaign, which 
ran between 15 September and 3 October, nearly $20,000 was raised. Of course, 
we're enormously grateful for their generosity, but what might be surprising 
was that the scholarship funds generated are only part of this initiative's 
success.

Social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/social-media> use at 
UW-Madison has grown enormously in the past two years, with more than 750,000 
followers to roughly 500 campus accounts on platforms such as Facebook, 
Twitter, YouTube, Foursquare and Flickr. Schools, colleges and campus units are 
increasingly using platforms such as Facebook and Twitter to tell the 
university's story, but more importantly, directly engage with students and 
alumni, hold conversations, answer their questions and re-post their content. 
This is an important shift in the way that we communicate. Although contests to 
gain followers or re-tweets for a cause are common, this link between a donor, 
scholarship funds and social media was the first of its kind in higher 
education.

The Bucky Challenge was different because it paired several vital 
institutional goals with the perfect reason to engage with audiences who may 
not have had a lot of contact with the institution. Not only did we support 
students, but the effort expanded the university's potential audience for the 
future.

Publicity in the Chronicle of Higher Education, the New York Times higher 
education blog and other outlets helped position Wisconsin as a forward-looking 
leader in higher education social media.

And most importantly, it has given us a perfect opportunity to reach out to 
our base of 350,000 living alumni, both through traditional means such as email 
and the alumni magazine, but also through new means like Twitter.

Participation in the challenge by alums such as Houston Texans defensive end 
JJ Watt (@jjwatt <http://twitter.com/#!/jjwatt>), Salon.com 
<http://www.salon.com/> writer Joan Walsh (@joanwalsh 
<http://twitter.com/#!/joanwalsh>) and CBS News correspondent Jeff Greenfield (
@greenfield64 <http://twitter.com/#!/greenfield64>) was invaluable, both to 
advance this campaign, but let them personally know that we're creatively 
operating in this new space and that we care deeply and urgently about student 
access.

Now that the challenge has ended, we face several other challenges for the 
future. Chief among them is to continue pairing our goals with social media 
initiatives that successfully engage our key audiences, whether they are 
parents, students, alumni or donors.

We also have to continue engaging our alumni and donors in on and off-line 
conversations about the critical role of private financial support on campus. 
In a climate of rising tuition and declining state support, our success in 
private fundraising is more important than ever.

The most exciting piece is still ahead of us, and is unknown. How much do new 
"likes" and "follows" from this effort translate to engaged alumni who visit 
campus, follow our news and share their views and ideas with us? Can we ensure 
that they become lifelong supporters and ambassadors for our campus and state? 
If they're anything like Will and Jenny, we have many reasons to be excited for 
the future.

Vince Sweeney is vice-chancellor of university relations, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison <http://www.wisc.edu/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 