
The Russia international Diniyar Bilyaletdinov is expected to make his full 
Everton debut tonight afterDavid Moyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> learned that Phil Neville 
will be out for three months with a knee injury.

The Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> captain visited a 
surgeon in Manchester yesterday and it was confirmed he suffered posterior 
cruciate ligament damage in a challenge with Fulham's Dickson Etuhu on Sunday. 
He does not, though, require an operation. "I would like to know if those 
tackles that can danger a player are acceptable now?" Moyes said yesterday.

Neville's absence leaves Everton short of options both at right-back and in 
central midfield for their Group I opener againstAEK Athens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aekathens>, given that Tony Hibbert is 
suspended and new signing John Heitinga ineligible.

Moyes confirmed he is considering handing Bilyaletdinov a first start since 
his £9m arrival from Lokomotiv Moscow. Dan Gosling is expected to deputise for 
Hibbert at right-back. "Guus Hiddink told me a lot about Everton before I 
joined," said Bilyaletdinov, a left midfielder. "He said it was one of the 
teams that impressed him greatly when he was at Chelsea and I feel I have been 
given a lucky ticket to be here."

Everton (4-4-1-1, probable): Howard; Gosling, Yobo, Distin, Baines; Pienaar, 
Rodwell, Cahill, Bilyaletdinov; Fellaini, Saha. Subs from: Nash, Coleman, 
Garbutt, Duffy, Mustafi, Osman, Wallace, Akpan, Jô, Vaughan, Yakubu, Agard, 
Baxter.

AEK Athens (4-3-3, probable): Saja; Araujo, Geraldo, Jahic, Juanfran; Kafes, 
Makos, Nsaliwa; Scocco, Blanco, Leonardo. Subs from: Arabatzis, Majstorovic, 
Karabelas, Georgeas, Arce, Hersi, Manduca, Yahaya, Tachtsidis, Gentzoglou, 
Pavlis, Iordache, Nemeth.

Referee Robert Malek (Poland)
 