
A drug that was seen as a strong contender to slow the progression of 
Alzheimer’s disease has failed to deliver in the final stage of clinical trials.


The results, based on 2,000 patients with mild dementia, are a significant 
blow because there arecurrently no treatments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/long-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia>
 to slow the effects of Alzheimer’s. Few have made it to phase 3 trials.

The long, difficult search for a drug to treat Alzheimer’s and dementia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/long-difficult-search-for-a-drug-to-treat-alzheimers-dementia>
The drug, called solanezumab, is an injectable antibody designed to stick to 
amyloid plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients and clear away the 
abnormal proteins.

Scientists had hoped that, by helping to destroy the sticky plaques in the 
early stages of the disease, the drug would protect patients against more 
severe cognitive decline later on.

However, the latest results, announced by the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly 
ahead of theClinical Trials on Alzheimer’s Disease 
<http://www.ctad-alzheimer.com/location> conference in San Diego next month, 
show the drug has no significant benefits to memory when compared with the 
placebo taken by some patients.

John Lechleiter, president and chief executive of Eli Lilly, said: “The 
results of the solanezumab trial were not what we had hoped for and we are 
disappointed for the millions of people waiting for a potential 
disease-modifying treatment for Alzheimer’s.”

Dementia and Alzheimer's leading cause of death in England and Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
In a statement, the company said: “Lilly will not pursue regulatory 
submissions for solanezumab for the treatment of mild dementia due to 
Alzheimer’s disease.”

Lilly’s shares plunged 14% on Wednesday before markets opened. The same drug 
failed in a large 2012 trial involving people with more advanced dementia, but 
the company had hoped it would be more effective if given at an earlier stage.

James Warner, a consultant psychiatrist in older people’s mental health at 
Imperial College London, said the results represented a failure. “To my 
knowledge, solanezumab is the first ‘next generation’ Alzheimer’s treatment to 
have concluded phase 3 trials,” he added.

“It was a potentially groundbreaking approach to treatment – regular 
injections of a compound designed to scavenge the protein called amyloid that 
is deposited in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease.”


Robert Howard, a professor of old-age psychiatry at University College London, 
said: “This is disappointing, but not a great surprise. What we have learned 
from several decades of research, and hundreds of failed Alzheimer’s disease 
trials, is that no matter how promising the basic and early-phase data, all 
that really matters is the results of these late-phase effectiveness trials.”

A luxury care home for people with dementia – but at what price?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/23/luxury-care-home-dementia-but-what-price>
The findings also raise questions about whether pharmaceutical companies are 
on the right track in targeting amyloid plaques, which are one of the most 
visible hallmarks of Alzheimer’s in the brains of patients. Not all experts 
agree that the plaques are the root cause, with some arguing they are just a 
visible symptom of a more fundamental problem.

There are 850,000 people with dementia in Britain and this figure is expected 
to reach 1 million by 2025. Earlier this year,dementia overtook heart disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/dementia-and-alzheimers-leading-cause-of-death-england-and-wales>
 as the leading cause of death in England and Wales.

Between 2002 and 2012, 99.6% of drugs studies aimed at preventing, curing or 
improving Alzheimer’s symptomswere either halted or discontinued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/a-decade-of-deadlock-over-alzheimers-treatment-may-be-drawing-to-a-close>
.
 