
Watch this episode on iPlayer here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00mb15m/Desperate_Romantics_Episode_5/>.

Well 'ere's a turn up for the books an' no mistake. Five weeks after they'd 
first charged through the door marked "Historically Questionable Costume Romp: 
Quite Rude, Actually", the members of thePre-Raphaelite Brotherhood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/aug/16/pre-raphaelite-brotherhood-germaine-greer>
 were finally in a position to celebrate their collective achievements. 
Rossetti had pocketed a massive cash advance from increasingly creepy/crackers 
patron Ruskin. Hunt was pumping out pictures of Jesus in a fog of chaste 
industriousness ("I made £5,000 … IN ONE WEEK!") Millais, meanwhile, had lost 
his heart and personality to married life and was thus too busy drifting around 
like a sigh in a cravat to care that everyone thought his new "slapdash 
schmaltz" direction was absolute arse. A party was evidently in order. While 
the fireworks banged and the groupies giggled, the PRB popped its cork and let 
the self-congratulation flow. Drunk on his thunderously good luck, Rossetti 
staggered outside for some air. There, in the moonlight, stood a vision of 
delicate comeliness. Pillow lipped and sumptuously hipped, she leaned on a 
lamppost, gobbing. Rossetti gasped. "I should not become distracted by lust," 
he gulped, but it was too late.

Seconds later, they were using his four-poster bed as a gymnasium, Rossetti 
roaring delightedly as the tart's blancmanges pounded his face like a punchbag. 
But this was no one-night workout: the incorrigible slapper had fallen in love. 
Again. Her name? Fanny. Fanny? Yes, Fanny. How could Rossetti resist? It'd be 
like Shane MacGowan not fancying a woman called Alcohol. But there was trouble 
in Fitness First. While Rossetti and Fanny were busy doing Bums, Tums and 
Thighs on his studio floor, his fiancee was dying. Devastated by his constant 
infidelities, Lizzie had knocked back one laudanum and cranberry too many. "You 
much preferred me when I was a hopeful failure," she wept, sweatily. "You have 
broken my heart." It was actually really sad. Weeping profusely, Rossetti 
promised he would marry her and everything would be brilliant again and they'd 
start painting together and he'd never bang another prostitute ever again, 
honest.

"What were you thinking?" demanded Hunt between saving prostitutes by handing 
them pamphlets telling them they were going to hell. "I thought she'd die 
before she got to the altar," groaned Rossetti, head in hands. But, again, it 
was too late.

The wedding went ahead. While Fred the Non-Existent Plot Device shared his 
plans for the biggest PRB exhibition ever, Fanny stood outside the church, 
weeping. "Just 'cos I work wiv my below-decks don't mean I 'aven't got a 
heart," she wailed, as Hunt nodded understandingly and handed her one of his 
"Repent, Slag" leaflets.

The End. 

Next week: the finale! Excited? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2009/aug/15/charlie-brooker-screen-burn-desperate-romantics>
 