
Over the last few months, it has felt as if the winds of change might at last 
be blowing through British theatre. Blowing gently, but blowing nonetheless.

Refusing limits: Why the government must fund disability arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/27/refusing-limits-why-the-government-must-fund-disability-arts>
True diversity in British theatre is scandalously overdue. It will bring huge 
benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/06/diversity-creativity-british-theatre-2015>
 both creatively and organisationally, but I’ve long argued that until we get 
over a tick-box mentality in the arts nothing is going to really change, and 
that British theatre risks becoming increasingly irrelevant.

Maybe there is a shift because people are starting to take action on 
diversity. Over the last few weeks, I’ve seen two main-stage plays on 
consecutive nights –A Raisin in the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/02/a-raisin-in-the-sun-review-lorraine-hansberry>
 andMa Rainey’s Black Bottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/07/ma-raineys-black-bottom-lyttelton-review-august-wilson-dominic-cooke>
 – written by black playwrights and with predominantly black casts. Red Velvet 
is doing good business in the West End and we are shortly to have a black 
Hamlet at the RSC, although of course one black Hamletdoesn’t signify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jan/13/colour-blind-casting>
 that the job is done.

At the Wales Millennium Centre, Omidaze’s all-female Henry VI 
<http://www.omidaze.co.uk/artistic> has been much admired, and on London’s 
fringe there are gender-neutral reworkings of classic plays includingThe 
Spanish Tragedy <http://dan-hutton.co.uk/2015/12/22/the-spanish-tragedy/> at 
the Old Red Lion. At the Royal Court in London, four older actors are simply 
glorious inEscaped Alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/10/linda-bassett-caryl-churchill-escaped-alone-royal-court>
, a brilliant, unnerving play written by a woman in her 70s, Caryl Churchill. 
Later this week, three women – and two black leads – star inThe Maids 
<http://thejamielloydcompany.com/our-shows/the-maids> in the West End. Rufus 
Norrisrecently announced 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/national-theatre-commits-to-gender-equality-by-2021/>
 that within the next five years there will be gender equality at the NT.

Signs of life: how deaf theatre can reinvigorate the spoken word
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/oct/27/deaf-theatre-grounded-can-i-start-again-please>
It’s not enough but it’s a genuine shift, in part due to the campaigning clout 
of Lucy Kerbel’s Tonic Theatreresearch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/22/theatre-female-figures-gender-gap>
 andAct for Change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jun/09/do-we-need-diversity-quotas-for-theatre>
, which have both put diversity high on the media agenda. No artistic director 
planning a programme, or casting a show, can hide any longer behind lack of 
knowledge. As Trevor Nunn discovered withThe War of the Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/trevor-nunn-war-roses-all-white-history>
, people will be on your case.

But is all diversity equal in British theatre? It was an issue raised at the 
Arena in Wolverhampton on Friday night when as part ofA Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/a-nations-theatre>, I chaired a 
lively discussion around disability, the creative advantages it might bring and 
the failure of many theatres to really embed disability arts in their practice. 
As John Dyer observed at this year’sNo Boundaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/oct/05/arts-council-england-no-boundaries-conference>
, “diversity is inviting people to the party, but there is only real inclusion 
when you ask them to dance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fdisability-theatre-diversity-arena-wolverhampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd004780963496e6c12f1d6f5d730e021dfecf7df%2F0_99_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diversity%20in%20theatre%3A%20why%20is%20disability%20being%20left%20out%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fdisability-theatre-diversity-arena-wolverhampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diversity%20in%20theatre%3A%20why%20is%20disability%20being%20left%20out%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fdisability-theatre-diversity-arena-wolverhampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd004780963496e6c12f1d6f5d730e021dfecf7df%2F0_99_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom at the National Theatre. Photograph: Johan Persson 
The Unlimited <http://weareunlimited.org.uk/> programme has created some 
terrific projects, andGraeae <http://www.graeae.org/>’s The Solid Life of Sugar 
Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/solid-life-of-sugar-water-edinburgh-festival-review-graeae>
 is about to play the NT, but as Unlimited’s producer Jo Verrent pointed out: 
“It’s important not just to make work but also to change infrastructure.”

That’s still not happening. “A lot of what we make is crap, but a lot of what 
they make is crap, but they have the money to make it look good,” declared 
disabled artist and activistPaul Darke 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/ouch/interviews/13-questions-paul-darke.shtml> in 
Wolverhampton. He argued that arts organisations should be made to programme 
and support disabled artists and companies, and if they don’t, the Arts Council 
should apply sanctions and remove funding – similar toAdrian Lester calling 
last year 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2015/adrian-lester-lambasts-embarrassing-lack-diversity-theatre/>
 for arts organisations who use non-diverse casts to be publicly shamed.

Deaf and disabled artists: we will not let government cuts make us invisible
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/13/deaf-and-disabled-artists-we-will-not-let-government-cuts-make-us-invisible>
But if mainstream theatres have been slow to respond to the creative benefits 
that could accrue by employing disabled people, should disabled artists eschew 
the mainstream? Some clearly thought yes, but as one audience member observed: 
“We don’t want crumbs, we want the entire bakery.”

If the Arena in Wolverhampton, where the discussion took place, can put 
diversity at the very heart of its practice, why can’t better-funded and 
resourced organisations do the same, rather than seeing disability diversity as 
merely necessary for funding? There is a generation of disabled artists who 
have been in the forefront of arts activism who feel that time is running out 
for them. Real change comes when there is a critical mass of diverse work, not 
just individual projects, and when arts organisations all across the country 
understand the benefits for everybody, themselves included. For many disabled 
artists, that still seems a long way off.

 