
The first inhabitants of Vanuatu hailed from Taiwan and the Philippines rather 
than theSouth Pacific <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southpacific> island 
nation’s much closer neighbours, scientists have discovered.

A study by scientists at the Australian National University of ancient DNA 
taken from three skeletons excavated from Vanuatu’s oldest known cemetery 
revealed that the first people arrived about 3,000 years ago.

Neanderthal DNA may account for nicotine addiction and depression
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/neanderthal-dna-may-account-for-nicotine-addiction-and-depression>
Rather than moving from neighbouring countries including Australia, Papua New 
Guinea or the Solomon Islands – where people have lived for between 40,000 and 
50,000 years – Vanuatu’s original inhabitants came from much further north in 
Taiwan and the northernPhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, the scientists found.

“The people of Vanuatu today are descended from Asia first of all,” said 
research professor Matthew Spriggs, of the ANU’s school of archaeology and 
anthropology. “They travelled past places where people were already living, but 
when they got toVanuatu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vanuatu> there was 
nobody there.
Vanuatu map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/oct/2016-10-03T02:10:58.html> 
“Only some time later did they intermarry with Papuan peoples to produce the 
genetic mix we see today in Vanuatu, and indeed across the Pacific.”

Details of the scientists’ findings were published on Tuesday in the 
scientific journal Nature.

Dr Stuart Bedford, of ANU’s college of Asia and the Pacific, said debates 
about the origins of Pacific islanders had raged for centuries, particularly 
about the Lapita people who first colonised islands stretching from Vanuatu to 
nearbyTonga <https://www.theguardian.com/world/tonga>.

“It demonstrates the enormous potential for these sorts of studies but these 
data have already provided an extremely important piece of the puzzle,” he said.

Ancient DNA of a sample from a Tongan cemetery confirmed that the same group 
of people became the first inhabitants of Tonga only slightly later.

“This is the first genome-wide data on prehistoric humans from the hot 
tropics, and was made possible by improved methods for preparing skeletal 
remains,” said Dr Ron Pinhasi at University College Dublin, a senior author of 
the study.

A team led by researchers at Harvard Medical School, University College 
Dublin, and the Max Planck institute for the Science of Human History led the 
DNA analysis.

“The unexpected results about Oceanian history highlight the power of ancient 
DNA to overthrow established models of the human past.”

Vanuatu was part of the Tongan empire from the 14th century, and ruled by the 
English and French after missionaries settled there during the 19th century.

'Hobbit-like' hominins died out sooner than thought. Were humans to blame?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/30/hobbit-like-hominins-died-out-sooner-than-thought-were-humans-to-blame-homo-floresiensis>
“A particularly striking finding is the different ancestry observed on the 
X-chromosome, which is inherited mainly from females,” said lead author Dr 
Pontus Skoglund of Harvard Medical School and Stockholm University.

“This reveals that the vast majority of the ancestry from these open-water 
pioneers that survives today is derived from females, showing how DNA 
information can provide insights into cultural processes in ancient societies.”

Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
 