
It has been 10 years since the theatrical release of No Direction Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/aug/21/shopping.martinscorsese>, Martin 
Scorsese’s much-anticipated Bob Dylan documentary. Billed as a collision of two 
giants of their respective fields, the movie was instead a 
three-and-a-half-hour-long chore. The big-name draws also never really collided 
at all. Hours of interview footage with Dylan had been recorded by his manager 
Jeff Rosen, who then asked Scorsese to step in and turn it into something 
cinematic. The singer had little interest in the film and the end product only 
seemed to perpetuate myths surrounding an already well-documented period in its 
subject’s career. At this point, the future of the music documentary seemed to 
be in dire straits.

Certainly, no one would have imagined that just one decade later the genre 
could be entering a golden age. But that is precisely what has happened, and 
2015 has provided a particularly rich seam of immersive films. Brett Morgen’s
Cobain: Montage of Heck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cobain-montage-of-heck>, Asif Kapadia’s Amy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy> and Liz Garbus’s Netflix-funded What 
Happened, Miss Simone? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/23/sundance-2015-first-look-review-what-happened-miss-simone-liz-garbus-nina-simone>
 have wowed audiences and critics alike – and there are more to come.

While all of these films can be described as loving tributes, their makers 
have not been afraid to expose the flaws of their subjects. Drug addiction is 
tackled head-on in the lives of Winehouse and Cobain, while Simone’s abusive 
relationship with her own daughter is dealt with unflinchingly.

Nina Simone: 'Are you ready to burn buildings?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/22/nina-simone-documentary-what-happened-miss-simone>
“People think that when she went on stage, that was when she became Nina 
Simone,” says Lisa Simone Kelly. “My mother was Nina Simone 24/7. And that’s 
where it became a problem.” Mitch Winehouse reportedly said that he “felt sick” 
at his portrayal inAmy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy>, but Phil 
Meynell, who was best man at Winehouse’s wedding to Blake Fielder-Civil, urged 
his friends on Facebook to “see her as we saw her”. Meanwhile, for Montage of 
Heck, Morgen was given access to an archive of material that took him eight 
years to sift through, resulting in the film’s eerily evocative animations of 
Cobain’s drawings and doodles.

It is possible to consider that, in choosing subjects who are no longer with 
us, these directors have taken the easy route – after all, the main attraction 
is no longer around to upset or even build a basic relationship with – but that 
would ignore the fact that they have all produced genuinely touching and 
revealing films. What’s more, these high-quality documentaries have not come 
from nowhere. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fdo-look-back-new-golden-age-music-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437059192520%2F67d195f5-7d5e-4161-9d06-e9c47d207749-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20look%20back%3A%20a%20new%20golden%20age%20for%20the%20music%20documentary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fdo-look-back-new-golden-age-music-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20look%20back%3A%20a%20new%20golden%20age%20for%20the%20music%20documentary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fdo-look-back-new-golden-age-music-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437059192520%2F67d195f5-7d5e-4161-9d06-e9c47d207749-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Nick Cave documentary 20,000 Days on Earth blurred the lines between truth 
and fiction. Photograph: PR 
Last year, several films stretched the parameters of what music documentaries 
are supposed to be and do. For instance, James Hall and Edward Lovelace’sThe 
Possibilities Are Endless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-possibilities-are-endless> documents the 
rehabilitation of the singer Edwyn Collins after a brain haemorrhage. It is a 
fractured, abstract and challenging piece of work, but the beauty of its 
cinematography and the fact you cannot not help but root for its subject makes 
it both accessible and compelling.

Asif Kapadia on Amy: ‘The drinking, the bulimia, the drugs – nobody stopped it’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/27/asif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc> 
Pulp: A Film About Life, Death & Supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pulp-a-film-about-life-death-and-supermarkets>
 , meanwhile, could have easily relied on footage of the band’s final UK show, 
filmed in Sheffield. Instead, director Florian Habicht makes the city itself 
the star of the movie. A tribute to working-class eccentricity and hope in 
bleak circumstances, this film also exemplifies an important shift in 
music-documentaries. It appears that, as social media has made celebrities more 
accessible to their fans, filmmakers are no longer content to put their 
subjects on pedestals and, instead, want to portray them as ordinary people.

Perhaps the smartest instance of this is the 2014 Nick Cave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nick-cave> documentary 20,000 Days on Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/20-000-days-on-earth>, made by London-based 
artists Iain Forsyth and Jane Pollard. Presented as an honest portrayal of a 
day in the singer’s life, this subversive film blurs the boundaries between 
truth and fiction. Sitting opposite a therapist, Cave shares his fledgling 
sexual experiences, his brief dalliance with cross-dressing and his earliest 
memory – his father reading him Lolita. But the viewer can never be entirely 
sure if Cave is playing it straight – a laMetallica’s Some Kind of Monster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101926/metallica> or Blur’s No Distance 
Left to Run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/134150/no-distance-left-to-run> – or 
weaving an elaborate tapestry of falsehood.

Such films also mark a change in the roles rock stars are willing to play to 
their fans. In DA Pennebaker’s legendary 1967 filmDon’t Look Back 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0061589/>, Bob Dylan reclines in a 
chauffeur-driven vehicle looking unassailably cool. In 20,000 Days on Earth, 
however, Cave does the driving, with Einstürzende Neubauten’s Blixa Bargeld and
Ray Winstone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ray-winstone> along for the 
ride. “I can’t reinvent myself, but then I don’t want to,” Cave tells Winstone. 
“You’ve got to be able to see the rock star from a distance. You’ve got to be 
godlike, but it’s all an invention.”
 