
Now that Copa América and the Euros are behind us, the focus turns to World 
Cup qualification. For South American teams – who kicked off their campaigns 
last October – the road to the biggest football tournament in the world has 
always been tough and since 1996, when the current round-robin format was 
originally introduced, competition has improved tremendously. Historical 
powerhouses such as Brazil andArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> are no longer shoe-ins to 
qualify as teams such as Chile, Uruguay, Colombia, Paraguay and Ecuador, with 
star players of their own, are more than just also-rans. Less successful teams 
such as Venezuela and Peru, who enjoyed a good run at this summer’s Copa 
América, are still in the running and Bolivia – who struggled at the Centenario 
– are above both of them in the table. Quite simply, there are no easy matches, 
and given the improvement in talent and coaching, it’s a stark contrast to the 
European qualifiers where teams such as Andorra and Gibraltar provide cannon 
fodder and little else.

It’s also far better entertainment than the Champions League, whose popularity 
is purely saved by its own historic reputation. Despite the Champions League’s
financial fair play regulations 
<http://www.uefa.com/community/news/newsid=2064391.html>, matches (especially 
in the knockout stages) are often dull because no matter what happens, the same 
teams end up winning. It’s time to pay attention to the most exciting football 
on the planet.

In his 1995 book, Soccer in Sun and Shadow 
<http://www.sbnation.com/soccer/2015/4/13/8403253/eduardo-galeano-soccer-in-sun-and-shadow-review>
 the Uruguayan writer, Eduardo Galeano, said, “All Uruguayans are born shouting 
‘Goal!’ and that’s why there’s always such a tremendous racket in our maternity 
wards.” Galeano’s words ring true with the South American soccer fan and the 
way the continent experiences the beautiful game. No emotion is internalized, 
no sentiment is hidden, every match is experienced as if it was your last day 
on Earth, and the stadium(or even your own living room) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yGXOK2DY7z8> is your last refuge. From the 
Pacific classic between Peru and Chile to Brazil’s tumultuous rivalry with 
Argentina – one that drove sociologist Pablo Alabarces to say, “Brazilians love 
to hate Argentinians, and Argentinians hate to love Brazilians” – every 
encounterhas a significant competitive agenda. 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/news/y=2014/m=6/news=argentina-in-brazil-the-essence-of-football-rivalry-2355354.html>
 Every fixture is a derby.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyGXOK2DY7z8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyGXOK2DY7z8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyGXOK2DY7z8&media=>
But the qualifiers are about far more than passionate fans. Another factor is 
geography as this is a tough part of the world to play in, especially for 
European-based players who have to readjust to different altitudes and 
climates. It’s fascinating to see how Neymar, Messi or Suárez – spoiled by the 
comforts of Barcelona – perform in locations such as La Paz (12,000 ft above 
sea level) or Quito (9,000 feet above sea level). Cities such as Barinas in 
Venezuela and Barranquilla in Colombia can also be extremely uncomfortable to 
play in, given the high temperatures throughout the summer. In the South 
American qualifiers, pressure comes from the stands and mother nature.


The coaching and tactical philosophy throughout each nation also makes for 
some attractive, hail-mary fútbol, managers who enjoy sitting back are a 
rarity. Head coaches such as Jose Pekerman, who has turned Colombia into an 
experimental wonderland, switches his formations (3-5-2, 4-2-3-1, 4-2-2-2) in 
accordance to the players at his disposal - and not the other way around. Or 
how about Óscar Tabárez? The deep-thinking manager who has been able to soften 
Uruguay’s traditional rough-rugged style by helping the squad - especially 
upfront - develop a more fluid approach.Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> – feeding off their successful 
Rio campaign – are finally looking like the seleção of old and when Neymar 
plays for his country, he appears to mature, disregarding the need to be the 
main event and happy to make everyone around him better.

Many teams have also placed their trust in young coaches, hoping that they can 
introduce a fresh approach and bring in new ideas. Venezuela’s Rafael Dudamel 
is no stranger to the South American game. The 43-year-old former-goalkeeper 
played for 15 teams in Colombia and Venezuela and was capped 56 times. Paraguay 
– after finishing last in the 2014 qualifiers – are quietly moving up the 
table. Francisco “Chiqui” Arce took over the squad after Ramon Diaz departed 
following this summer’s Copa América, but from a strategic perspective, smartly 
decided to keep things the same. Last week, the 45-year-old manager led his 
team to a 2-1 victory over Chile, and now sit in sixth place, only trailing 
Brazil by goal difference.

On the field, there is an abundance of talent. Aside from the obvious names 
who we know so well from European leagues, there are players making their trade 
in South American domestic football. From Venezuela’s Romulo Otero to Lucas 
Pratto from Argentina – who both play for Atlético Mineiro in the Brazilian 
league – the qualifiers are a perfect opportunity for these players to make a 
statement on the international stage.

Tim Stillman (@Stillberto) 
CONMEBOL World Cup qualifying table at the moment. One of the world's most 
exciting leagues IMO.pic.twitter.com/n5YzmsUdov <https://t.co/n5YzmsUdov>
 <https://twitter.com/Stillberto/status/771644631918321664> September 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Stillberto/status/771644631918321664> 
All this has made the road to Russia 2018 so captivating to watch, and the 
table is extremely tight. The difference right now between first-place 
Argentina and seventh-place Chile is four points. Contrast this to European 
qualifying where a team as modest as England can sail through qualifying, and 
the smaller teams are there to make up the numbers. There are of course 
favorites in South America, but no one is invincible.

 