
 “Edinburgh’s a casino, but some do hit the jackpot,” David Byrne of the New 
Diorama <http://newdiorama.com/> theatre told me this week. The idea that you 
have to be in it to win it is widespread regarding Edinburgh, and particularly 
among young companies who know that these three weeks are when they might get 
some attention from programmers, producers, award-givers and critics. Some do 
strike it lucky, but even if it feels that, in Edinburgh, the chances of being 
spotted are better than they are the rest of the year, they are still slim.

If I see a steady five shows a day (including international festival 
<http://www.eif.co.uk/> acts, and pretty much everything at the Traverse 
<http://www.traverse.co.uk/>, unless it’s previously shown elsewhere) during my 
time here, I will only see a tiny number of the shows and companies jostling 
for attention. It’s the same for programmers and producers – however 
conscientious they are, some shows, possibly very good ones, will remain below 
the radar.

Biff! Bam! Pow! Striking Edinburgh festival shows – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/aug/20/biff-bam-pow-striking-edinburgh-festival-shows-in-pictures>
Given the economics of the fringe, which I wrote about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/04/the-cost-of-staging-an-edinburgh-fringe-show-artists-open-their-account-books>
 at the start of the festival, are there ways young companies might up their 
chances of making the professional connections they need? It’s one of the 
things we will discuss next Wednesday, 26 August, at theA Nation’s Theatre 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-edinburgh-the-impact-of-the-edinburgh-fringe-on-uk-theatre-and-beyond-17673564106>
 debate, organised by Northern Stage, Battersea Arts Centre and the Guardian; 
we’ll explore the impact of the fringe on the ecology of UK theatre and beyond.

Some thoughts to kick off the debate. Last week, an international producer who 
is always scurrying around the fringe, and has a great track record in picking 
up companies here and giving them wider exposure, mentioned to me how so often 
work at Edinburgh seems scrappy and unfinished. It’s something I’ve noticed, 
too, particularly this year. If you are bringing a show to Edinburgh why, given 
the expense, would you bring anything other than your best work? It’s risky to 
bring a show that you know needs a lot of development in the faint hope that 
someone will spot a gold nugget and offer to help nurture it. In any case, if 
you are only here with something in the hope of catching someone’s eye, you are 
selling audiences short. They should be the people you really make the show 
for, not some producer who may or may not pitch up.

It was a point reiterated to me by New Perspectives 
<http://newperspectives.co.uk/>’ Jack McNamara in an email exchange after the A 
Nation’s Theatre debate in Derby 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-developing-artists-and-audiences-are-we-getting-it-right-17427035733>
 about how best to support emerging artists. He referred to Edinburgh as “the 
party no new artist wants to miss”, but went on to argue that “if emerging 
companies put more time and money into building themselves up properly at home 
with meaningful regional relationships, their occasional ventures to Edinburgh 
would be far more rewarding. Often, emerging artists use Edinburgh as an end 
point, whereas my view is that it is more a place to bring work once it is at 
its best, to open up further opportunities for it.”

Why radical kindness is the key to artistic development
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/28/theatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company>
Of course the difficulty is making those meaningful relationships with funded 
organisations both in the regions and beyond in the first place. As Sarah 
Brigham of Derby has proved, it is possible for theatres to starton their own 
doorstep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/01/want-to-develop-and-diversify-artists-start-on-your-doorstep>
, really pull their fingers out, and prioritise their responsibility to develop 
local talent. Here in Edinburgh, the Newcastle companyNorthern Stage 
<https://www.northernstage.co.uk/> are taking that idea further, acting as a 
regional resource and helping north-east-based companies to come to Edinburgh.

It’s the fourth year that Northern Stage have been in Edinburgh, and this 
visit will cost them around £80,000 – that’s the same as a main-stage show 
budget back home – to bring their own work and also that of other companies to 
the fringe. Northern Stage’s artistic directorLorne Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/15/theatre-wages-lorne-campbell-cuts-edinburgh-festival-2015>
 reckons that it’s money well spent: raising the profile not just of Northern 
Stage but also of other companies based in the north, offering technical 
support so that the work is seen in the best possible light, increasing the 
critical profile by mounting shows in a curated programme, and shouldering the 
lion’s share of the financial risk. It benefits everyone and creates a proper 
legacy. It’s a reminder that relationships don’t just start in Edinburgh, but 
can be part of a conversation that is strengthened during the three weeks of 
the fringe.
 