
You’d be sympathetic, I assume, if you heard of a man so psychologically 
troubled that he compulsively saved receipts, empty food cans, old toothbrush 
boxes, stamps and toenail clippings, squirrelling them away in boxes. You’d 
feel sad to learn how difficult he found it to relate to other people – and how 
he referred to his portable tape recorder, which he carried everywhere, as his 
“wife”. Such haunted souls seem destined to live on society’s fringes, 
contributing little. And yet, whatever you make of his art, it’s hard to 
conclude thatAndy Warhol <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol>, 
who did all of those things, made no contribution.

A recent book by the science journalist Claudia Kalb is entitled Andy Warhol 
Was A Hoarder <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/371203/>
, and she provides ample evidence for that claim – and for her arguments that 
Marilyn Monroe had borderline personality disorder; that Abraham Lincoln was 
seriouslydepressed; and that George Gershwin suffered from hyperactivity, to 
name just a few. A slight tilt in the course of history, and Warhol might only 
have been famous for 15 minutes – as the subject ofa voyeuristic reality show 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01sfyvj/episodes/guide>.

All of which is another reminder that mental illness is a social construct: 
that what counts as a disorder or a gift, as craziness or genius, is a 
constantly shifting line. (In the new tech economy,it has been argued 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2015/04/03/why-shades-of-aspergers-syndrome-are-the-secret-to-building-a-great-tech-company/>
, some autism spectrum symptoms are the path to prestige and riches.) Kalb’s 
point isn’t that her subjects succeeded despite their afflictions, but that 
their afflictions – if that’s even the right word – helped make them who they 
were. It was no fun being Lincoln: “If what I feel were equally distributed to 
the whole human family,” he once wrote to a friend, “there would not be one 
cheerful face on the earth.” Yet in Kalb’s telling, that same raw sensitivity 
to sadness meant he felt the carnage of the Civil War in a deeply personal way; 
you can’t help wondering how recent conflicts might have unfolded with brooding 
introverts,instead of peppy optimists 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2008/12/08/looking-back-on-president-george-w-bushs-troubled-presidency>
, at the helm.

Give up life’s luxuries? It’s not that easy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/25/why-its-easy-to-give-up-lifes-luxuries>
But our stigmatisation of mental illness has always gone hand in hand with 
romanticising it: we like our geniuses to be “touched with fire”, as Kay 
Redfield Jamison <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touched_with_Fire> puts it in 
her book tracing links between creativity and manic depression. There’s patchy 
evidence for a connection. But as the writing coachRobert Boice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/11/column-change-life-very-expensive-secret-good-writing-oliver-burkeman>
 points out, it leads us astray when it comes to our own creative work, or 
encouraging creativity in children. We glamourise the high-suffering approach, 
telling ourselves that working in exhausting binges, or waiting for 
inspiration, is essential to the process; or that depression’s the price to be 
paid for truly profound art. The odd truth, these days, is that it’s almost as 
embarrassing to admit to being boringly moderate in your habits as wildly 
unstable. And yet, for most people, the way to make a mark, creatively or 
otherwise, involves cultivating the willingness to doggedly plug away, day 
after day, in a dispiritingly sane fashion: patience, not delirium. Figures 
such as Warhol show you can be highly eccentric and also highly creative – not 
that eccentricity is a path to creativity for the rest of us.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 