 A doctor at a children's hospital where thousands of organs were stockpiled by 
a maverick pathologist failed to intervene when presented with early evidence 
of the scandal, the General Medical Council was told yesterday.
John Martin, a former medical director at Alder Hey hospital in Liverpool, had 
been informed in 1994 that pathologist Dick van Velzen had kept a 15-year-old 
boy's organs without parental consent.

Adequate steps at this point would have reduced the scale of the later crisis, 
the hearing in Manchester was told.

Dr Martin, who is 68 and now retired, could be struck off the medical register 
if he is found guilty of serious professional misconduct. The hearing is 
expected to last five days.

More than 12 doctors from Alder Hey were referred to the General Medical 
Council in the aftermath of the Redfern report into organ retention at the 
hospital. The report had concluded that thousands of organs had been stockpiled 
by hospitals, including Alder Hey.

This is the only case that has led to a full hearing before the GMC's conduct 
committee, although other medical professionals have received letters warning 
them of their future conduct.

Dr Martin, from Holywell, Flintshire, is also accused of failing to take 
adequate steps when told of problems with postmortem examinations and tissue 
samples.

Andrew Collender, for the GMC, said Dr Martin was made aware of inadequacies 
in the hospital's pathology services by a written report from Prof van Velzen 
and a letter from another doctor in 1991.

He should also have intervened when he heard that Prof van Velzen had 
disregarded a request on a postmortem con sent form for the 15-year-old boy, 
when he took more organs than the parents had allowed, Mr Collender said.

Dr Martin had been referred to the GMC by the chief medical officer, Sir Liam 
Donaldson, who said such a situation should never be repeated.

Much of the criticism in the Redfern report was levelled at Prof van Velzen, 
who has since been barred from practising in Britain.

Earlier this year, the NHS trust responsible for Alder Hey hospital made a 
public apology to the families of children whose organs were retained. The 
apology was part of a settlement, accepted by nearly all the 1,154 claimants, 
which also included a cash offer totalling Â£5m for the families.

Doctors and researchers who remove or retain human organs and tissue without 
consent were told this month they could face up to three years in jail and 
unlimited fines.
 