
Telecommunications giant AT&T is selling access to customer data to local law 
enforcement in secret, new documents released on Monday reveal.


The program, called Hemisphere, was previously known 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/02/us/drug-agents-use-vast-phone-trove-eclipsing-nsas.html?_r=0>
 only as a “partnership” between the company and the US Drug Enforcement Agency 
(DEA) for the purposes of counter-narcotics operations.


AT&T and Time Warner shares fall as investors' doubts over merger grow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/24/att-time-warner-merger-shares-fall-investors>
It accesses the trove of telephone metadata available to AT&T, who control a 
large proportion of America’s landline and cellphone infrastructure. Unlike 
other providers, who delete their stored metadata after a certain time, AT&T 
keeps information like call time, duration, and even location data on file for 
years, with records dating back to 2008.

But according to internal company documents revealed Monday by the Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/25/at-t-is-spying-on-americans-for-profit.html?via=desktop&source=Reddit>
, Hemisphere is being sold to local police departments and used to investigate 
everything from murder to Medicaid fraud, costing US taxpayers millions of 
dollars every year even while riding roughshod over privacy concerns.

Access to Hemisphere costs local police between $100,000 and more than $1m a 
year, the documents reveal, and its use requires just an administrative 
subpoena – a much lower judicial bar than a search warrant because it does not 
need to be issued by a judge.

Until Monday, Hemisphere’s use was kept secret from the public – and even from 
judges, defense attorneys and lawmakers – by an agreement between law 
enforcement and AT&T which means police must not risk disclosing its use in 
public or even in court.

This means that police take leads from Hemisphere, but then construct cases 
around that lead so that the program can be protected from scrutiny, a practice 
known as “parallel construction”, according to the Beast.

The revelations come as AT&T prepares for its controversial $85bn acquisition 
of Time Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/22/att-buy-time-warner-donald-trump>
, a deal which has been widely attacked as being bad for consumers, with both 
presidential candidatesspeaking out against the merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/trump-att-time-warner-deal-clinton-kaine>
.

Contacted for comment, Fletcher Cook, a spokesperson for AT&T, sent the 
Guardian the same statement they provided the Beast:


Like other communications companies, if a government agency seeks customer 
call records through a subpoena, court order or other mandatory legal process, 
we are required by law to provide this non-content information, such as the 
phone numbers and the date and time of calls.

Asked for further details, Cook did not respond.

The secrecy of Hemisphere echoes that which surrounds the use of the 
sophisticated surveillance devices known as Stingrays, or cell-site simulators, 
which are suitcase-sized devices which work by pretending to be cellphone 
towers in order to strip metadata and content from phones which connect to them.

In 2015, a Guardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/10/stingray-spying-fbi-phone-dragnet-police>
 revealed that police departments had to sign a non-disclosure agreement with 
the FBI in order to use Stingray devices which said that police must hide the 
program’s use from defense lawyers and the public, even mandating that they 
abandon a case if they fear the program’s use might be revealed in court.

Nate Wessler, a staff attorney with the American Civil Liberties Union’s 
speech, privacy and technology project, said that, as with the Stingray 
agreement, “what is so disturbing about these documents is the lengths to which 
the company and law enforcement have gone to keep this secret”.

“The longer these kind of surveillance programs are kept from the public, the 
harder it is to ensure there are appropriate checks and balances in place,” 
Wessler said.

For Wessler, an instructive part of what the documents reveal is that while 
the program was apparently instigated as part of the war on drugs, “this data 
is being used for run-of-the-mill criminal investigation at a local level”.

“Once law enforcement has access to this kind of data it becomes a 
tremendously attractive tool for everything they do.”
 