
Everything about this year’s Academy Awards had something to do with race – 
well, except maybe who was taking home the trophies at the end of the night. 
After the nominations were unveiled and there were no people of color in any of 
the four acting categories, the #OscarsSoWhite protests started a huge 
conversation about diversity in Hollywood. As a result, Jada Pinkett Smith, 
Spike Lee, Al Sharpton and black leaders called for a boycott not only of 
attending the event but also for people watching it.

Oscars 2016: campaigners claim boycott victory as ratings hit eight-year low
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/01/oscars-2016-campaigners-claim-boycott-victory-ratings-eight-year-low>
When the ratings for Sunday night’s telecast came in at 34.3 million, the 
lowest in eight years, Sharptonclaimed a victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/01/oscars-2016-campaigners-claim-boycott-victory-ratings-eight-year-low>
. In ablogpost 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/rev-al-sharpton/the-reviews-are-in-oscars_b_9351664.html>
, he said that the lack of viewership should “send a clear message to the 
Academy and to movie studio executives that we will not tolerate discriminatory 
practices”. While it’s hard to disagree with Sharpton that something has to 
change in the movie business about the number of women and racial minorities 
that get hired (thus leading to them getting more chances at the big awards), 
it’s hard to correlate the lack of viewership directly to the boycott.

The ratings for the Academy Awards are usually directly related to the box 
office gross of the films in contention for best picture and usually the 
biggest ratings are reserved for when a huge film is expected to win. 
Conventional wisdom says that people want to root for a movie they’ve seen and 
they want to see it win. For example, two of the biggest ratings in recent 
memory were in 1998 (57.25 million) when Titanic (more than $600m in the US) 
won. The same happened in 2004 (43.5 million) when Lord of the Rings: Return of 
the King (more than $360m in the US) claimed more gold for Middle-earth.

The ratings this year for Spotlight’s victory are the lowest since 2008, when 
No Country for Old Men won. They made $39m and $74m respectively (though the 
later tally was certainly boosted after the film won). Spotlight is the 
lowest-grossing best picture winner since 2009’s The Hurt Locker. It’s 
precisely this effect of small movies meaning small audiences that led the 
Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences, which throws the big night, to 
expand the best picture nominees from five to a possible 10. The hope was more 
blockbusters would be nominated, thus bringing more viewers. This year only The 
Martian, The Revenant and Mad Max: Fury Road cracked $100m at the domestic box 
office. Nominees Room and Brooklyn tallied only $12m and $35m respectively.

The downturn might have been predictable based on box office receipts, but is 
still surprising because the presence of social media has proved to be a boon 
for live television for several years, as audiences got excited about watching 
their friends’ reactions online as people watched collectively in a living 
room. This led to 2014’s telecast being the biggest since 2000, even though 12 
Years a Slave, that year’s winner, made only $56m. However, the novelty seems 
to have worn off and ratings have once again dipped.

This just isn’t true of the Oscars, but other awards shows as well. The 
Grammys just had theirworst show in six years 
<http://variety.com/2015/data/news/grammy-ratings-down-cbs-show-dominates-but-appears-to-have-hit-a-6-year-demo-low-1201428656/>
 and the Emmys hadtheir worst show of all time 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/news/primetime-emmy-ratings-down-1201598562/>. This 
is part of a trend of the erosion of live television in general, even giant 
television events. The ratings for the Super Bowl this year fell shy of thetwo 
previous years <http://money.cnn.com/2016/02/08/media/super-bowl-50-ratings/>. 
Yes, more than 100 million people watched, but still. NBC has seen the same 
erosion on their live musicals, which were thought to be a savior of live 
television a few years ago when The Sound of Music drew 22 million people, but 
subsequent outings Peter Pan and The Wiz have done only half as well.

The Wiz Live!: Catch all the action from NBC's seasonal sing-along — live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/live/2015/dec/03/the-wiz-live-nbc-tv-all-star-cast-sing-along>
The other irony of the slipping Oscar ratings might have to do with the 
importance of the Oscars themselves. Since so many people are interested in the 
race and prognosticating the winners, more awards shows are televised during 
the same window in January and February. The Golden Globes, the SAG Awards, the 
Critic’s Choice Awards, the Independent Spirit Awards and the all-important 
People’s Choice Awards all are on television in the first two months of the 
year. The Grammys are tucked in around the same time too. Nothing makes people 
want to ignore awards shows like watching more awards shows.

Yes, the boycott against the Oscars did coincide with a dip in viewership and 
probably did have some impact on the those numbers, but there were plenty of 
other factors in play. However even if the viewership had stayed steady or even 
grown, it wouldn’t mean consumers condone the industry’s race problem. If 
anything, awareness of the problem is now at an all-time high, especially after 
host Chris Rock drew so much attention to it. There needs to be a solution and 
that should come whether 2 million or 100 million people watch celebrities in 
pretty outfits get gold trophies.
 