
With the economic downturn and sluggish growth in the west, many young 
professionals are choosing to move abroad for their careers.Statistics show 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/11/12/uk-graduates-braindrain-idUSLNE8AB02020121112>
 that between 2008 and 2011, there was a 27% rise in the number of British 
students moving overseas.

Many British graduates look to Asia and Australasia for employment 
opportunities. China and India are the obvious choices, as the world's second 
and tenth-largest economies respectively. Japan is still an industrial and 
technology powerhouse, while its smaller neighbour, South Korea, is a dynamic 
rival. With an average GDP growth rate of 5% – and a market worth more $2tn 
(£1.2tn) – south-east Asia is a region to watch.

Ideal time

Even if you don't want to stay abroad permanently, now is the best time to try 
it. John Wastnage, a policy adviser at theBritish Chambers of Commerce 
<http://www.britishchambers.org.uk/>, says: "The UK desperately needs young 
people with global business experience, particularly with the cultural 
knowledge of specific Asian markets. It is really important for young people, 
and particularly graduates, to offer flexibility and to make their own luck in 
the labour market.

"There are plenty of countries out there with healthier labour markets than 
the UK at present. Even if it doesn't work out, you will come back to the UK 
with valuable new skills and experience, and probably won't have missed too 
many dream jobs here."

Starting up in China

Paul Afshar, 28, arrived in China in the summer of 2011 not knowing a single 
person and only two words of Chinese ("rice" and "beer"). Now he is the 
managing director of an internet business that he founded, alongside AJ, his 
Chinese business partner.

"Two things brought me here," says Afshar. "The first was the opportunity I 
saw – China is a global powerhouse and developing at breakneck speed and I 
wanted a slice of the pie. The potential for businesses to grow is huge, just 
look atWeChat <http://www.wechat.com/en/> (China's version of WhatsApp 
<http://www.whatsapp.com/>), which had more than 500 million users after nine 
months of operation. The second was that none of my friends were doing it."

His original plan was to spend just six months picking up some of the language 
and gaining experience of working with Chinese companies, before returning to 
the UK to leverage his new skills. But he quickly discovered China to be a very 
entrepreneurial place. Beijing, where he is based, is a hotbed of startups and 
China has a lot of growing businesses with IT, PR and marketing skills 
especially in demand. Many focus on teaching jobs, but more and more 
professionals are finding lucrative positions, as western companies seek to 
expand their operations.

Teaching English

Across the region, teaching English has always been a surefire way of gaining 
employment. Salaries vary but are usually much higher than local wages. Lee 
Owen, 23, is on the prestigiousJET Programme <http://www.jetprogramme.org/> in 
Japan, a highly competitive teaching initiative run by the Japanese government.

With a £26,000 salary, he also has accommodation, travel and business
expenses subsidised. He says working in Japan has involved a lot of adjustment 
but that it's a profitable experience. "I'm hoping that even a short stint 
might help to foster a more globally-minded approach to work and life in the 
future. I would like to stay here for a few years and become comfortable with 
the language, but I'm not going to tie myself down just yet," he says.

Asian media

Business opportunities in Asia are now well-known, but a it is also a great 
place to work in the media. In some countries, simply being foreign could land 
you acting, advertising and even presenting jobs.

Journalism is always very competitive, but there are numerous established 
English-language newspapers and magazines across Asia.Kate Hodal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/kate-hodal>, the Guardian's south-east Asia 
correspondent, advises jobseekers to find out just how much writing you'd be 
able to do in a journalism job, as often English speakers are hired as 
subeditors to help correct copy.

Angela Richardson went to Indonesia in 2009, after a degree in media 
technology. She says: "I came to Indonesia without a job and basically tried to 
meet as many people as I could." Through networking and a touch of good luck 
she is now the editor of theJakarta Expat <http://jakartaexpat.biz/> and Bali 
Expat <http://baliexpat.biz/>, internet publications boasting the country's 
largest expatriate readership. "I got my job really from knowing the right 
people and being in the right place at the right time."

"People are friendly and eating out is much cheaper than in the UK," 
Richardson adds. "There are so many beautiful places to visit in and around 
Indonesia, and I often get away on weekends for diving, hiking and relaxing on 
the beach."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 