
Domhnall Gleeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/domhnall-gleeson> has seen 
the future and he has the fear. In the keep-like cellar restaurant of a Dublin 
hotel, mild panic sets in as a fleeting mention of the Film That Cannot Be 
Discussed escapes his lips, the one that is set in a galaxy far, far away. The 
Irish actor has been listing his extracurricular activities – the short he’s 
written and directed with his actor-brother Brian and actor-father Brendan, the 
online sketch series he’s created called Immatürity For Charity, and the 
feature-length script that he’d get round to finishing, if only film-makers 
such as the Coens and Alejandro Iñárritu didn’t keep calling with job offers. 
But he blows it when he brings up the music video that he and Brian starred in 
for the band Squarehead last November. “We did it for fun over the summer, I 
was on a break from Star Wars. And it just went really well, we got an amazing 
reaction to it.” Star Wars? He squirms as my eyes light up, and I can’t help 
myself.

“Domhnall, are you Luke Skywalker’s son?”

“Ah, I can’t talk about it.”

“Are you Boba Fett’s son?”

“Look, that’s not for me to say.”

“Anything to do with Jar Jar Binks?”

“I can do the voice…” he replies laughing. And, lo, he can. “Whatever that 
tells you! Jar Jar Junior!”

JJ Abrams has cast the 31-year-old actor in Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>, except that no one 
knows exactly who he, or who anyone else, is playing. So now Gleeson finds 
himself in the odd position of having a (presumably) pivotal role in a 
massively anticipated film and yet having to duck every single question about 
it. For a year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Fex-machina-exclusive-clip-oscar-isaac-domhnall-gleeson-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418313461684%2FFace-to-face-...-Alicia-V-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex%20Machina%3A%20watch%20a%20clip%20of%20Oscar%20Isaac%20and%20Domhnall%20Gleeson%20in%20Alex%20Garland's%20sci-fi%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Fex-machina-exclusive-clip-oscar-isaac-domhnall-gleeson-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex%20Machina%3A%20watch%20a%20clip%20of%20Oscar%20Isaac%20and%20Domhnall%20Gleeson%20in%20Alex%20Garland%27s%20sci-fi%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F12%2Fex-machina-exclusive-clip-oscar-isaac-domhnall-gleeson-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418313461684%2FFace-to-face-...-Alicia-V-014.jpg>
It’s going to be even more problematic, given that everyone is going to want 
to talk to him in 2015. First he was Jack O’Connell’s wingman in Angelina 
Jolie’s epic of second world war heroism, Unbroken. Later this month, Brooklyn, 
an adaptation of the Colm Tóibín novel in which he stars alongside Saoirse 
Ronan, premieres at Sundance. And a month or so beforeStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> is finally unveiled, we’ll see him 
in The Revenant, a snowbound western from Birdman director Iñárritu, which 
Gleeson is currently in the midst of filming up a freezing Canadian mountain 
with Leonardo DiCaprio and Tom Hardy.

Right now, though, there’s Ex Machina. The directorial debut of 
novelist-turned-screenwriterAlex Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-garland> (28 Days Later, Sunshine), 
it’s a gripping chamber thriller set in the near-future where the white heat of 
tech innovation is dazzling but also, possibly, blinding. Gleeson plays Caleb, 
a young drone programmer at a Silicon Valley mega-corp called Bluebook who wins 
an internal contest to spend a week with reclusive company founder Nathan 
(played by Oscar Isaac, who is incidentally also on the Star Wars cast list). 
Arriving by chopper at the internet billionaire’s fantastic wilderness home – 
think Wallpaper magazine does Bond villain’s lair – Caleb discovers his prize. 
He’s here to conduct a Turing-style test on the boss’s secret invention: Ava, 
an AI android so advanced “she” just might change the world. And not just 
because Ava is played bewitchingly by his Anna Karenina counterpart, Swedish 
actor Alicia Vikander.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fex-machina-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422009644222%2Fcrop_KP-75726_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex%20Machina%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fex-machina-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex%20Machina%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fex-machina-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422009644222%2Fcrop_KP-75726_640.jpeg>
 Watch a video review 
Ex Machina <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ex-machina> isn’t T2: Rise Of The 
Fembots but it does seem clear where Garland’s sympathies lie. He’s rooting for 
the robot, and for the humanity possibly engineering itself within her; not for 
oddball Nathan, a bro-CEO who’s like Zuckerberg on vodka smoothies.

Does Domhnall fear or embrace the ascension of our robot overlords? “Well, 
this is what’s interesting. So many people talk about it in terms of human 
responsibility and all the bad that can come out it.” He mentions a newspaper 
article he read recently, “and it discussed how, if you give a computer a job 
to do, it’s only mindset is to finish that job. So if it makes thumbtacks, and 
it feels a threat – someone’s gonna turn them off – the more intelligent they 
are, the more resourceful they can be about stopping someone from stopping them 
doing their job.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fdomhnall-gleeson-ex-machina-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420719571395%2F32740e49-fb3d-4211-b56e-1eb180c8b94a-1797x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Domhnall%20Gleeson%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20done%20talking%20about%20Star%20Wars%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fdomhnall-gleeson-ex-machina-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Domhnall%20Gleeson%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20done%20talking%20about%20Star%20Wars%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fdomhnall-gleeson-ex-machina-star-wars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420719571395%2F32740e49-fb3d-4211-b56e-1eb180c8b94a-1797x2040.jpeg>
 Ex Machina. Photograph: Allstar 
“But that’s the pessimistic stance. There could be crazy consequences – but 
there might be a positive side to it too. Everyone talks about how we’re on our 
phones all the time, but the fact remains that when I’m away on a film set for 
two months, I can Skype my family. I remember the phone calls my parent had to 
make when my dad was away for while when I was younger – that once-a-week 
expensive phone call! The time pressure on talking to your father! That’s all 
gone now. That’s an incredibly positive thing.”

Gleeson is also intrigued by the inventions and predictions of “futurist” Ray 
Kurzweil, Google’s director of engineering. These range from “scanners which 
read things out for blind people to computers that live in our bloodstream. 
They’ll be detecting cancers, and you’ll have them in your mind, improving the 
way you think, your perception, rationality. Fascinating guy.”

As an actor, Domhnall is not a scene-dominating force like his father – think 
the troubled priest in last year’s Calvary, or the hitman-in-hiding in 2008’s 
In Bruges. He is engaging rather than commanding, something that was evident 
from his first major movie roles in organ-harvesting dystopian yarnNever Let Me 
Go <https://www.theguardian.com/film/never-let-me-go> in 2010 and in the Coens’ 
remake of True Grit in 2010. A Weasley clan member in the Harry Potter films, 
he’s the first to admit he’s not exactly love interest material, either.

But a shift happened with Joe Wright’s Anna Karenina in 2012. Gleeson was cast 
as Levin, suitor of Alicia Vikander’s Kitty, after a gruelling five-hour 
audition. The graft was partly because this gangly beanpole never considered 
himself to be “that guy”.

“I’d never been up for a romantic part before,” he admits. “It had always been 
for the guy who gets hurt, or is certainly further down the call sheet – a 
smaller role. But Joe showed more faith and imagination in me than I did. So I 
remain truly grateful to him for that.” More diverse roles followed: the 
lovelorn time-traveller in Richard Curtis romcom About Time; the dead boyfriend 
in the Be Right Back episode of Charlie Brooker’s Black Mirror; the hapless 
musician in Frank Sidebottom-inspired road movieFrank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/frank>.

Ex Machina is in keeping with his personality, too – he’s tasked with playing 
the beta-male in a claustrophobic film with only three full roles. He readily 
admits he found that a challenge. “Alex had a word with me cos I couldn’t 
understand why I was getting so frustrated [during filming]. He said it was 
because the script didn’t give me a place to punch the walls, or lash out, or 
to get the upper hand.”

It’s why Garland says Gleeson was his obvious choice to play Caleb. “There are 
some actors who have to be on the front foot…” he begins. But flexing that 
leading-man ego isn’t Gleeson’s way, which Garland thinks makes the actor all 
the more effective onscreen. “In a film like this, what Domhnall can do is be 
on the back foot, then very quietly just start shifting things around in subtle 
ways. Suddenly he’s in a position of real power. It’s a complicated bit of work 
he had to do there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fdomhnall-gleeson-ex-machina-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420719637477%2F067d6d75-c096-40f1-ba59-7d255bebfa70-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Domhnall%20Gleeson%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20done%20talking%20about%20Star%20Wars%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fdomhnall-gleeson-ex-machina-star-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Domhnall%20Gleeson%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20done%20talking%20about%20Star%20Wars%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F10%2Fdomhnall-gleeson-ex-machina-star-wars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420719637477%2F067d6d75-c096-40f1-ba59-7d255bebfa70-1020x612.jpeg>
 Frank Photograph: REX 
Also, he adds, the actor has another secret weapon. “When we were shooting I 
kept getting sidetracked by his ability to really make me laugh, and you forget 
that that may not be what the scene really wants. Somewhere in Domhnall is a 
comedian.”

Wouldn’t that also make Gleeson also the obvious choice to play a role like, 
say, Kylo Ren, the hooded Jedi with the cruciform lightsaber in Star Wars? 
“I’ve literally no idea,” Garland demurs, tactfully. “When all that stuff was 
going down, I absolutely made sure I wasn’t asking questions of him or Oscar 
that would out them on the spot. They’ve had to sign such heavy NDAs 
[non-disclosure agreements], they’re dangerous in career terms if you 
transgress them.”

I decide that a more cunning route of questioning is required. So, as is the 
norm with blockbuster franchises, is Gleeson signed up for three movies?

“I don’t think we’re even allowed to talk about that!” wails the actor, 
squirming again. “Because if I say ‘no’, they’re like, ‘Oh right, you die.’ And 
if it’s ‘yes’, well, you live. And if say I’ve signed up for nine, they’re 
like, ‘Well, you must be a lead…’ I don’t how it works! That’s why [when] we 
finished filming I just hit the switch. I was like, ‘I’m done talking about 
this.’”

Gleeson can, however, gush effusively about JJ Abrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams> and the privilege of being on set 
with him. “He is incredible,” he says. “There was always a sense on the film 
of, like, ‘Let nobody forget that we are making Star Wars. We owe our best in 
every moment for the people [for whom] Star Wars is their whole life.’ There is 
so much love.”

He beams. Having tackled the dilemmas of future civilisations, in galaxies 
both near and far, Gleeson’s own star is rising.


Ex Machina is out on 23 January

The Guardian is hosting a special early screening of Ex Machina and discussion 
on AI and our robot overlords featuring director Alex Garland and Guardian 
journalist James Ball.Click here for tickets 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/15006855910>
 