
The Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> will 
get a fine women's champion on Saturday, whoever wins, because former finalist 
Li Na and little giant-killer Dominika Cibulkova have done all that has been 
asked of them over the past fortnight in negotiating the falling timber in a 
tournament of high temperatures and lowered ambitions.

While there is a lingering sense that it should have been different – and 
anyone who says he or she predicted that neither the world No1, Serena 
Williams, nor the defending champion, Victoria Azarenka, would be contesting 
the Daphne Akhurst Memorial Cup could only have been touched by sunstroke in 
the first week – it is what it is, to borrow from Serena's lexicon. Nobody 
except the player and her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, knew Williams was 
carrying a back complaint and wouldlose so listlessly in the fourth round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/19/ana-ivanovic-serena-williams-australian-open>
 to the 14th seed, Ana Ivanovic – who thencollapsed in the final set against 
the promising 19-year-old Canadian Eugenie Bouchard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/21/eugenie-bouchard-ana-ivanovic-australian-open>
, who in turngave the fourth seed Li Na such a reduced argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/23/eugenie-bouchard-v-li-na-australian-open-2014-live>
 in the first semi-final on Thursday, when the Chinese veteran, 12 years her 
senior, won 6-2, 6-4 in an hour and 26 minutes.

Nor did many see the 5ft 3in Cibulkova rushing with such intent from the 
undergrowth. "It's not about how tall you are," she said. "Even if you are 
tall, it doesn't mean that your are 100% going to make it. You have to really 
want something, to believe in it. There is nothing more important."

The muscular Slovakian, seeded 20th and projected to climb as high as No13 in 
the world whatever the result in the final, is bidding to win her country's 
first grand slam title (Miloslav Mecir was a Czech citizen of Slovak heritage 
when he won his two majors). It is hard to believe Radwanska double bagelled 
her in Sydney a year ago.

Cibulkova cut through her half of the forest like an out-of-control buzzsaw 
and, in her past three matches, she put outan off-key Maria Sharapova in style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/20/maria-sharapova-beaten-australian-open>
, the rising Romanian Simona Halep, bagelling her in the second set, then 
crushed the heavy-legged resistance of the fifth seed, Agnieszka Radwanska, to 
win the second semi-final 6-1, 6-2 in an hour and 10 minutes on Thursday.

"I feel like in slow motion today," said a shattered Radwanska, who earlier 
beat Azarenka to love in their final set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/22/agnieszka-radwanska-beats-victoria-azarenka-australian-open>
, one of the most dazzling seen over the fortnight. "Definitely she did play 
well the whole tournament, but I think I spent twice as many hours on court as 
her."

Cibulkova can hardly be blamed for making such short work of her opposition. 
"It has been nice for me that I didn't spend so much time on court," she said. 
"I'm in the final of a slam and my only three-set match was against Sharapova. 
That's unbelievable."

The brevity of her run does somewhat undermine the argument which has been 
gathering support here that at least the women's semi-finals and finals – and 
possibly the quarters – should be played over five sets. If a tired Radwanska 
couldn't beat a firing-on-all-cylinders Cibulkova in the best of three, it is 
unlikely she could have managed it over five.

Nevertheless, it is a debate that has legs, so to speak. Had the longer 
matches that apply to all rounds of a slam for the men been in place for the 
second week of the women's tournament, Azarenka might have come back against 
Radwanska, and Williams, although hurt, might have found something in a fourth 
or fifth set.

Alongside that scenario, the argument for equal prize money would be more 
sustainable. As it is, rightly or wrongly, each winning finalist will receive 
$2,650,000 (£1.4m), and there are several players on the men's Tour, including 
Andy Murray, who think the women should be asked if they would like to play 
five sets in the final weekend of a slam.

Williams has said in the past she would be willing to do so, and Sharapova, 
another natural fighter, would probably benefit from the longer format.

But we have not arrived at an unexpected climax because of the system. When Li 
Na <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/li-na> and Cibulkova step on to the Rod 
Laver Arena on Saturday night they will do so as legitimate contenders.

The crowd will probably side with Li. She won them over as runner-up in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jan/29/australian-open-kim-clijsters-li-na>
 and again last year,giving her husband as much grief 
<http://sports.ndtv.com/ausopen2012/news/183848-boot-camp-and-cure-for-snoring-helped-li-na>
 as she did her opponents; a bubbly, combative ball of energy who reached the 
summit of her sport bywinning the French Open three years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jun/04/french-open-2011-li-na-francesca-schiavone>
. The predicted explosion of interest in tennis in China has not quite 
happened, but victory on Saturday would probably carry more weight than her 
Parisian exploits, given the cultural and economic links between Australia and 
China.

Whoever wins – and I think it might be Cibulkova – it will not be dull.
 