
I was part of a theatrical movement once. As with most movements, no one who 
was a part of it noticed anything moving at the time. I still wouldn't know if 
a journalist hadn't told me. "In-Yer-Face", it was called, which offended the 
more famous of my fellow movementarians, but I was just glad someone had 
noticed I was alive. As far as I can tell, In-Yer-Face was all about being 
horrid and writing about shit and buggery. I thought I was writing love stories.

Fifteen years on, there doesn't seem to have been another movement, so I 
thought I'd try to start one. Unfortunately, despite being pretty sure the next 
movement will be absurdist in nature, I couldn't think of a snappy name for it 
so I gave up on that. Then I thought I'd write a provocative Dogme-style 
manifesto, but I only came up with four rules, and I've already broken two of 
them in my new show. Then I thought I'd write Ten Commandments for young 
writers but a) that's a little pompous, and b) there's only one commandment 
worth a damn, and it's this: THOU SHALT NOT BORE.

Boring an audience is the one true sin in theatre. We've been boring audiences 
for decades now, and they've responded by slowly withdrawing their patronage. I 
don't care that the recent production of The Seagull at the Royal Court was 
sold out. To 95% of the population, the theatre (musicals aside for now) is an 
irrelevance. Of that 95%, we have managed to lure in maybe 10% at some point in 
their lives, and we've so swiftly and thoroughly bored them that they've never 
returned. They're not the ones who broke the contract. They paid their money 
and expected entertainment; we sent them back into the night feeling bored, 
bullied and baffled. So what are we doing wrong?

The most depressing response I encounter when I'm chatting someone up and I 
ask them if they ever go to the theatre is this: "I should go but I don't." 
That emphatic "should" tells you all you need to know. Imagine it in other 
contexts: "I should play Grand Theft Auto"; "I should watch Strictly Come 
Dancing." That "should" tells you that people see theatre-going not as 
entertainment but as self-improvement, and the critical/ academic establishment 
have to take some blame for that.

Many critics still believe theatre has a quasi-educational/political role; 
that a play posits an argument that the playwright then proves or disproves. It 
is in a critic's interest to propagate this idea because it makes criticism 
easier; one can agree or disagree with what they perceive to be the author's 
conclusion. It is not that a play cannot be quasi-educational, or even overtly 
political - just that debate should organically arise out of narrative. But 
this reductive notion persists and has infected playwriting root and branch.

I can't tell you how often I've asked an aspiring writer what they're working 
on, and they reply with something like: "I'm writing a play about racism." On 
further investigation, you find that this play has no story and they've been 
stuck on page 10 for the past year; yet they're still hell-bent on writing it. 
You can be fairly sure the play, should it ever be finished, will conclude that 
racism is a bad thing. The writer is not interested in exploring the traces of 
racism that may lie dormant within their psyche, nor in making the case for 
selective racism (just to be "provocative"). This is the writer using the play 
to project their preferred image of themselves; the ego intruding on art; the 
kind of literary posing that is fed by the idea of debate-led theatre. And if 
you think that example sounds naive, substitute the word "racism" with "George 
Bush" or "Iraq" or "New Labour". Sound familiar?

Newspapers, or news programmes, are the places for debates, not the theatre. 
The general public don't think: "Should I go to the theatre Friday, or that 
socio-political theory class?" Further education is not the competition. The 
pub is the competition, the cinema, a night in with a curry and a DVD. We are 
entertainers. What we do is not as important to society as brain surgery, or 
even refuse collection. But when the brain surgeon and the refuse collector 
finish work, they come to us and it is our job to entertain them - not 
necessarily just to distract them, but to stimulate, to refresh, to engage 
them. That's our place in the scheme of things, and it's a responsibility we 
should take seriously. To let our egos intrude is like the brain surgeon 
writing "Jake Was Here" on your frontal lobe before he puts your scalp back.

The way to circumvent ego (and thus reduces the risk of boring) is to make 
story our god. Find a story that interests you and tell it. Don't ask yourself 
why a story interests you; we can no more choose this than who we fall in love 
with. You may not be what you think you are - not as kind, as liberal, as 
original as you ought to be - and yes, the story (if you are true to it) will 
find that out. But while your attention is taken up with its mechanics, some 
truth may seep out, and that is the lifeblood of good, exciting art.

I'm not saying we should all be Terence Rattigan. The story you tell can be 
about anything, told in whatever form is most effective. But that brings me to 
my next point: accessibility.

To this day, I still leave plays wondering what on earth they were about. I 
used to feel stupid for not "getting it", but not any more, because this I 
know: it's the artist's failure, not mine.

It's not necessary that every audience member gets every level on which a play 
works (several, if it's good), but it's important that they've understood it, 
from moment to moment, while watching it. Little Red Riding Hood is completely 
understandable to five-year olds and yet academics are still writing papers on 
its deeper meanings. This profound simplicity is what all playwrights should 
aspire to. Not only does it render a play accessible (on at least a narrative 
level) to an inexperienced theatregoer, it also encourages the widest possible 
scope for interpretation. Much as it depresses me, as a living writer, that the 
theatre business is still so in thrall to dead playwrights, this narrative 
clarity is key to the classics' longevity.

So tell your story as you wish - but for God's sake, if it plays best as a 
linear narrative, don't tart it up for the sake of feeling innovative. There's 
no shame in a good story, well told. Contrary to the popular maxim, do think 
about your audience. Ask yourself if your non-theatre-going friends or 
relatives would at least get the gist of it. If they wouldn't, your work is not 
yet done. (That said, never compromise on the grounds of what they may be 
offended by. Truth is not always comfortable but a dishonest play is usually 
dull.)

Two asides. One, dialogue: there's a lot of poetic dialogue around. Sometimes 
a play is narratively accessible but the dialogue is mannered to the point of 
incomprehensibility. Some people like it, but I'm suspicious. Poetic dialogue, 
done badly, leaves no room for subtext. A lack of subtext is fundamentally 
undramatic. And boring.

And two, duration: many plays are far too long. All writers should be made to 
visit the venue where their play is to be performed and sit in the seats with a 
stopwatch. When your arse and spine start to sing, check the watch. That's your 
running time. Exceed it at your peril.

Now - musicals. Much as the synopsis of We Will Rock You sounds abysmal, it's 
pulling in more punters a night than some "serious" shows attract in a week. 
There's a dangerously dismissive response to this uncomfortable truth among 
many of my fellow practitioners, but it's not hard to figure out why this might 
be. Musical theatre offers song and dance, of course; a certain 
unpretentiousness; a tangible sense of "liveness"; magic; and, most 
importantly, spectacle.

It is time the "serious" theatre learns this lesson. We have to give the 
audiences what they can't get anywhere else. Debate they can get in a 
newspaper. Reality - well, they can get that on TV. We can offer them 
"liveness", but few plays, or productions, take advantage of this. Too many 
screenplays masquerading as plays and an over-reliance on mixed media have 
imbued the theatre with a heaviness it's not best suited to. Some may argue 
that technology is the key to spectacle, but most theatres can't compete with 
the West End technologically. The spectacle we can offer is the spectacle of 
imagination in flight. I've heard audiences gasp at turns of plot, at a 
location conjured by actors, at the shock of a truth being spoken, at the 
audacity of a moment. There is nothing more magical and nothing - nothing - 
less boring.

Oh, and if you can get a song or two in there, all the better. My show has 
three.

Â· Anthony Neilson's The Wonderful World of Dissocia is at Dundee Rep (10382 
223530) until Saturday and at the Royal Court, London (020-7565 5000) from 
March 28 until April 21. Then touring.
 