
There are six good reasons to be discomfited by what’s turning out to be a 
very messy and public divorce forAngelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> and Brad Pitt – their kids. 
Apart from those innocent and vulnerable souls (and however much the Jolie-Pitt 
brood strut through their gilded, red-carpeted lives, they remain innocent and 
vulnerable), it seems to be a case of grab your popcorn and enjoy the spectacle.

Let’s not kid ourselves. At base level, this is just a venal hiss of: “Ooh, 
very rich, very pretty people falling out!”Celebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> divorce reimagined as a 
disaster movie. Pathetic rubberneckers, like myself, gobbling up the gossip, 
accusations and fury. Perhaps a little snort at Jennifer Aniston photographed 
“looking solemn”, as though she had imposed a smiling ban on herself, lest 
normal cheeriness be mistaken for spiteful joy at the news.

It’s a PR universe away from the likes of Gwyneth Paltrow and Chris Martin, 
who strove to “uncouple” with so little acrimony or, indeed, emotion, that 
there were times that it came across as less a split, rather a kind of squeaky 
pulling apart of weak Velcro.

But good for Gwynnie and Chris, right? However much we mock their efforts 
(leastways, the vocabulary), they behaved with dignity and protected their 
family. Most would agree that co-operation and mediation are best, especially 
when kids are involved. Sure, but on the other hand, just like regular divorce, 
perhaps there are some celebrity divorces that just couldn’t (and maybe 
shouldn’t) end quietly.

Where the Jolie-Pitt divorce is concerned, whatever the conjecture, right now, 
there’s no way of knowing what’s true or false. However, it’s widely accepted 
that it was Jolie who initiated the divorce and in such a determined manner 
that there could be no hope of pretending that it was amicable. In this way, 
it’s reminiscent of 2016’s other Big Blockbuster Divorce – between Johnny Depp 
and Amber Heard. Then, Heard was widely branded a “golddigger!”, scrabbling for 
a “big pay day”. Such was the venom directed at her, I felt at the time that 
I’d inadvertently signed up for a crash course in synchronised global misogyny. 
A big cheer, then, for Heard, the big ol’ golddigging slut, forannouncing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/18/amber-heard-donates-divorce-settlement-charity-abused-women>
 that all her settlement money would go to charity.

The Jolie-Pitt divorce is totally different. (Just one of the ways it’s 
different is that no one could pelt “golddigger” mud at Jolie.) However, there 
could be said to be a core similarity in the way that both women initiated 
divorce proceedings and both seemed defiant about making a lot of noise. While 
ugly celebrity bust-ups are nothing new, there still seems to be a fresh 
feminist-flavoured attitude, a sense of rebellion here.

It’s a little acknowledged fact that sometimes huge status and wealth can trap 
a person. Put into context, this is a world where fame and money tend to calm 
things down, smooth things over, at least on the surface. The main 
(lawyered/PR-ed/micromanaged) onus is on control and its smiling twin, damage 
limitation – managing and protecting the famous faces and their highly 
lucrative brands. Even when both parties are famous, it takes a certain courage 
to use that very fact not to soothe, calm and conceal, but almost as an 
accelerant.

This is why, while there’s much to be said for the measured, mediated approach 
(not least for any children involved), I find Heard and now Jolie’s brand of 
bolshiness noteworthy and fascinating. I’m not suggesting they have anything in 
common with the powerless or penniless who divorce, but that’s the point – 
women like them appear to be rebelling against the controlling A-list status 
quo (speak no evil/tweet no evil”?) and accepting the public censure that comes 
with that.

Maybe I’m just a sucker for women with fiery gobs and a refusal to go quietly, 
indeed, doanything quietly. Messy it might be, but there’s no denying the 
spirit.

In Liverpool, it seems, you’ll never walk alone

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-celebrity-divorce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f31abedcb4157c11f233ae71caa629833a2165a%2F0_195_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20look%20for%20reason%20yet%20in%20the%20Brangelina%20fight%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-celebrity-divorce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20look%20for%20reason%20yet%20in%20the%20Brangelina%20fight%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-celebrity-divorce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f31abedcb4157c11f233ae71caa629833a2165a%2F0_195_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The 96 victims of the Hillsborough disaster are posthumously awarded the 
freedom of the city last week. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA 
The 96 victims of the 1989 Hillsborough stadium disaster  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/13/hillsborough-disaster-police-south-yorkshire-liverpool>
have been given the freedom of the city of Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/22/hillsborough-victims-posthumously-awarded-freedom-of-the-city-of-liverpool>
. It’s the first time this honour has been given posthumously and also 
receiving the awards were Liverpool FC manager at the time of the tragedy,Kenny 
Dalglish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/kenny-dalglish>and his wife, 
Marina (who have supported the families throughout), plus Professor Phil 
Scraton, whose campaigning helped keep the fight for justice alive.

The bereaved families were cheered and applauded as they received the awards 
in what was described as an “emotional” ceremony. I bet it was.

These honours are a lovely gesture that says a lot about Liverpool. The most 
bittersweet of “victories”, Hillsborough wasn’t only about getting justice for 
those who were killed, it was also about spirit in the face of impossible odds 
and Liverpool showed it had guts to burn.

Time and again, over the years, Liverpudlians have received stick for being 
over-emotional, melodramatic and the rest, when it seems to me that all the 
people there do is try to stick up for each other.

Liverpool is a true flagship city for community spirit and should be applauded 
for that.

Whingers should try self-control too
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-celebrity-divorce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0a50aae158d0b2e1af008f4ca8a4d7e4413ca3d%2F28_35_4179_2508%2F4179.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20look%20for%20reason%20yet%20in%20the%20Brangelina%20fight%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-celebrity-divorce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20look%20for%20reason%20yet%20in%20the%20Brangelina%20fight%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fangelina-jolie-brad-pitt-celebrity-divorce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0a50aae158d0b2e1af008f4ca8a4d7e4413ca3d%2F28_35_4179_2508%2F4179.jpg>
 The Emirates airline was the subject of a complaint by a passenger about his 
overweight neighbour. Photograph: Kamran Jebreili/AP 
An Italian man has brought a case against the Emirates airline after being 
forced tosit next to an obese passenger on a nine-hour flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/30/traveller-sues-etihad-back-injury-obese-passenger>
. The man says that he tried to move seats but was told that he couldn’t and 
that he wasn’t offered compensation or an apology.

These stories happen periodically and they always make me angry – on behalf of 
the people being complained about. Obviously space can be an issue on planes 
and it’s uncomfortable feeling squashed, especially on a long flight. However, 
hasn’t this got a lot more to do with some airlines not giving passengers 
enough room in the first place?

Then there’s the ethical dimension of whether people want to place their 
temporary personal comfort above basic decency, by insulting and humiliating 
another human being in this way. I’d rather plunge my face into boiling tar 
than be the reason an overweight person gets to feel terrible about themselves 
that day.

Overweight people are always being told to exercise self-control over their 
eating habits – how about their tormentors thinking about exercising their own 
self-control, over their manners?

I’ve written before that such levels of intolerance could swiftly get out of 
control both on aircrafts and in wider society. (Overweight people first, then 
start on the next vulnerable group?)

Generally, it’s often suggested that the obese person needs to buy an extra 
aeroplane seat to accommodate their girth, as if money was no object. How about 
flipping this so that the people complaining are the ones who need to buy the 
extra seats, to accommodate their bad attitudes?

If the thin and judgmental are so precious about their “personal space”, then 
they should be the ones shelling out for extra seats.
 