
If you’ve been to an allotment lately, you might have noticed that things have 
changed. Once a place seemingly reserved for silver-haired gardeners to while 
away their retirements, allotments are now increasingly popular with young 
couples and families, but that hasn’t stopped the threat they face from local 
authority closure.


The increase in enforced half-plots 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/local-authorities-cutting-size-of-allotments-in-half-to-allow-more-gardeners-to-share-same-space-10238534.html>
, a tactic to increase numbers who use each space used by local authorities in 
order to cut down their notoriously large waiting lists, is thought to help 
explain the change in demographic. Smaller plots are far easier to manage for 
people with busy lives. As a result, allotments owners are now diverse mix of 
ages, genders and backgrounds, something which theNational Allotment Society 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/> is celebrating this week with its National Allotment 
Week <http://www.nsalg.org.uk/news-events-campaigns/national-allotments-week/>, 
as well as highlighting the importance of protecting plots for future 
generations.

The latter is particularly pertinent to those who look after allotments which 
arethreatened with closure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/17/allotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces>
. While popularity for plots is on the rise, the numbers of allotments being 
closed - with land often sold to developers - is growing.

According to figures released by a freedom of information request by 
campaigners 
<https://www.change.org/p/eric-pickles-secretary-of-state-for-communities-and-local-government-help-protect-the-uk-s-allotment-sites>
, just four out of a total of 198 applications by councils and other owners to 
close sites were turned down between 2007 and 2013. In total 128 were approved 
with the remainder being invalid or withdrawn.

To celebrate National Allotments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/allotments> Week, from 10-16 August, 
and to help highlight why they are important, we want you to share your 
pictures of your local allotment. We’d love to see images which celebrate how 
any age, gender or background can benefit from having one in their community, 
what you’re growing or perhaps just a part of your plot that you’re most proud 
of.

You can share your photographs or videos of your allotment by clicking on the 
blue ‘contribute’ button on this article or you can download the free
GuardianWitness app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> if you have a 
smartphone. Please use the description field to tell us more about the photo or 
video.


 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site.  