
Don Covay, the US singer and songwriter, who has died aged 76, was an 
important figure in the soul music explosion of the 1960s. His composition
Mercy, Mercy was recorded by the Rolling Stones 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tMloUWV3drc> for their third album in 1965, and
Chain of Fools became one of Aretha Franklin’s biggest hits 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NfdEFAbwhpQ> in 1967.

As a performer, Covay enjoyed his own moments in the spotlight. When Atlantic 
Records assembled their top male soul singers in a studio in the summer of 1968 
to make a single under the name the Soul Clan, Covay took his place alongside
Solomon Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/10/solomon-burke-obituary>, Joe 
Tex, Ben E King andArthur Conley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/dec/02/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
. The A-side,Soul Meeting <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rN2h0KdmfPg>, failed 
to make an impact commensurate with its all-star lineup, but the B-side,That’s 
How I Feel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U9o3Wg_-9to>, remains a prime 
example of the southern deep-soul ballad, written by Covay (who also produced 
the session) withBobby Womack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/28/bobby-womack-dies-aged-70> and 
showcasing the church-trained strengths of each of the five singers.

Born in Orangeburg, South Carolina, the son of a Baptist preacher, Covay sang 
gospel music with his family’s group, the Cherry-Keys. A move to Washington DC 
in his early teens brought him into contact with secular sounds in a more urban 
environment, and he joined a vocal group called theRainbows 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mdKZlzjlqW0>, which at various times also 
included two other local boys, the future stars Marvin Gaye and Billy Stewart.

In 1957 he joined Little Richard’s touring show as a singer, warming the crowd 
up for the main attraction, and made his recording debut, under the name of 
Pretty Boy, with a song calledBip Bop Bip 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FXQZ9AEbi7U>, produced by Little Richard and 
released by Atlantic. His first success as a songwriter came in 1961 withPony 
Time, a No 1 hit for Chubby Checker 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JyaxcvHSyZY>, preceding the Twist craze. 
Within a year, Covay’s ability to write an emotional ballad was evident when 
Gladys Knight and the Pips took hisLetter Full of Tears 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7BPCbC41rI> into the top 20.

After recording for numerous companies, including Sue, Columbia, Epic, RCA, 
Big Top and Parkway, it was under the billing of Don Covay and the Goodtimers 
(with the young Jimi Hendrix on guitar), and on a small label called Rosemart, 
that he made his first real impact as a solo artist, when hisoriginal recording 
of Mercy, Mercy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GhQ2GWPwn-Q> reached No 35 in 
the Billboard Hot 100 in 1964. Impressed by its success, Atlantic bought his 
contract and sent him to Memphis, where he recorded two further dance-floor 
favourites,See Saw <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=df487z1t2mk> and Sookie 
Sookie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hwVbOiU5N44>, with the Stax house band 
the following year.

As a member of the Atlantic family, it was natural that Franklin should record 
one of his songs when she joined the label with spectacular success in 1967. 
The driving Chain of Fools was her fifth hit single that year, reaching No 2 in 
the pop chart, topping the R&B chart, and earning its composer a Grammy 
nomination. Franklin also had a hit the following year withSee Saw 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QVlSdY6N7Dk>, on which Covay shared the 
writing credit with Steve Cropper.Wilson Pickett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/jan/20/usa.world>, another Atlantic 
artist, recorded Covay’sThree-Time Loser 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=woIoP3uAc3Q> as the B-side of Mustang Sally.

It was while employed as an A&R man by Mercury Records in 1973 that Covay 
enjoyed a pop and R&B hit withI Was Checkin’ Out (She Was Checkin’ In) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QOu1Tc4Eu4o>, a song exploiting the 
then-popular theme of adultery. The following year he released what many of his 
fans consider to be his greatest record: the rousingIt’s Better to Have and 
Don’t Need (Than Need and Don’t Have) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TCnPxGuqbiM>, an uninhibited meditation on the 
realities of sexual desire precisely pitched in musical terms between the 
church and the street.

He received a Pioneer award from the Rhythm & Blues Foundation 
<http://www.rhythm-n-blues.org/index.php> in 1994. After suffering a stroke in 
the 1990s, he recovered to make further recordings, including the albums Adlib 
(2000) and Super Bad (2009).

Covay’s wife, Yvonne, died in 1981 and a son, Donald, died in 2009. He is 
survived by three daughters, Wendy, Wanda and Ursula, and a son, Antonio.

• Don Covay (Donald James Randolph), songwriter, singer and record producer, 
born 24 March 1938; died 31 January 2015
 