
We’re profiling subject areas to see how they could be affected by a change of 
government and policy priorities. This week our focus is on the creative arts.


The creative industries generate £76.9bn annually 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/creative-industries-now-worth-88-million-an-hour-to-uk-economy>
 – that equates to £8.8m per hour and accounts for over 5% of UK jobs. As the
newly-elected Conservative government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/david-cameron-conservative-government-election-victory>
 make themselves at home at Number 10, we talk to experts in the creative arts 
about what they want – and need – from Mr Cameron.

The key issues:

 * The current university funding model does not support high-cost arts 
courses; 
 * There is concern that higher education cuts are disproportionately 
affecting the arts; 
 * University courses aren’t always aligned with the needs of the industry; 
 * Areas outside of London aren’t getting their fair share of investment in 
the arts; 
 * There are major barriers to entry in creative arts education; 
 * The arts aren’t viewed on equal terms with other subjects. 
What you think


We talk to academics, a vice-chancellor and industry experts about the key 
challenges facing the creative arts – and what theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> can do to support the 
subject better.
 John Kampfner. 
‘The arts are not an optional extra – they’re fueling our economy’


John Kampfner, CEO, Creative Industries Federation, says:


“The creative industries – from music to fashion, from theatre to video games, 
from architecture to publishing – help to make Britain great. They define our 
soft power around the world; they make our towns and cities more liveable and 
likeable. The numbers speak for themselves: our creative industries contributed 
nearly £80bn to our economy. They employ over 5% of the workforce. They grew by 
just under 10% in the last year alone – a feat our hapless financial services 
could not match.


“This has not come by accident or in isolation, but is the result of several 
decades of smart investment and policymaking. To make any further cuts in arts 
and arts education budgets at a time when we have irrefutable evidence of their 
economic value (let alone their social value) would be to bite the hand that 
feeds us. It would be to sustain the flawed assumption that the arts are an 
optional extra. We need to persuade ministers that our great art galleries, 
from Manchester to Margate, our flourishing TV industry, our growing reputation 
for fashion, and all the many other achievements are imperilled if we do not 
invest in the arts and cultural education. They are part of one ecosystem, one 
success story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430918883101%2F442baad1-9189-4ecc-8bc4-5a0e840efa89-662x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20stifle%20creativity%20with%20more%20cuts%20to%20arts%20education%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20stifle%20creativity%20with%20more%20cuts%20to%20arts%20education%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430918883101%2F442baad1-9189-4ecc-8bc4-5a0e840efa89-662x720.jpeg>
 David O’Brien. 
‘We need to address barriers to entry in creative arts education’


David O’Brien, senior lecturer in cultural policy, Goldsmiths, University of 
London, says:


“A vital question for the new government is: who has access to which courses? 
My recent fieldwork with Sam Friedman 
<https://stratificationandculture.wordpress.com/2015/04/27/the-class-problem-in-british-acting-talking-at-camden-peoples-theatre/>
 suggests that in acting, as an example of a creative profession, there are 
major barriers to entry. One of the most important barriers is found in 
education, in particular entry into drama schools. There are similar issues in 
art schools too 
<https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/NALN_Art_for_a_few.pdf>. 
Widening participation has been important to debates about the new fee regime, 
but much more needs to be done around how universities consider applications, 
organise outreach schemes and monitor their progress 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/414645/Data_and_public_policy_trying_to_make_social_progress_blindfolded_report.pdf>
 on these issues. It is clear that creative arts are hugely important to the 
stories we, as a country, tell about ourselves. The government must address the 
potential exclusion, as a result of educational inequalities, of voices that 
are not drawn from the privileged.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431006653554%2F4f13cdb5-277f-4bd3-904a-fe9c16a468a6-1682x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20stifle%20creativity%20with%20more%20cuts%20to%20arts%20education%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20stifle%20creativity%20with%20more%20cuts%20to%20arts%20education%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431006653554%2F4f13cdb5-277f-4bd3-904a-fe9c16a468a6-1682x2040.jpeg>
 John Newbigin. 
‘Foreign students studying creative degrees feel they are being ripped off’


John Newbigin, chair, Creative England, says:


“Good creative arts education can’t flourish on a diet of 60-seat seminars. It 
needs one-to-one tutorial support and buildings with space for making – and for 
making a mess. It flourishes when artists and creatives hang around in art 
schools and students can hang around in real studios and workspaces. That’s 
labour-intensive as well as pricey, but it’s the price of quality – and 
reputation. Almost every foreign student I know doing a creative degree course 
here loves the buzz of British life but feels they’re being ripped off – and 
will say so when they get home.

“Our burgeoning creative industries, the fastest growing sector of the UK 
economy, have a huge appetite for graduate skills, particularly for those that 
bridge the arts/sciences gulf. But the exams advice in schools, the selection 
criteria of our top universities, the rules governing higher education funding 
and the woeful lack of informed careers advice still impede rather than feed 
that growth – it’s mad, and simple to fix.”
 Jane Webb. 
‘It’s time to rethink how we measure the value of the arts’


Jane Webb, director of studies, design, Manchester Metropolitan University, 
says:


“The government must re-examine the concept of value in the way higher 
education in art and design is perceived. Value is about worth and worth cannot 
be abstracted simply through numerical scoring or monetary cost. By measuring 
achievement of educational institutions in part by applicant tariff scores, the 
diversity of talent is hugely lessened. By putting the burden on students and 
their families to pay fees, the subsequent debt limits the way they conceive of 
their future. Art and design is about changing the world not just producing 
more images, objects or working within jobs that already exist.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431015277933%2F3b4fbdc6-2867-4259-8d6d-d60cf4fde713-1020x954.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don't%20stifle%20creativity%20with%20more%20cuts%20to%20arts%20education%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%27t%20stifle%20creativity%20with%20more%20cuts%20to%20arts%20education%2C%20say%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhigher-education-network%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fdont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431015277933%2F3b4fbdc6-2867-4259-8d6d-d60cf4fde713-1020x954.jpeg>
 Nigel Carrington. 
‘We need to put creative education on equal terms with other subjects’


Nigel Carrington, vice-chancellor, University of the Arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/arts> London, says:

“For the foreseeable future, there will be huge global demand for creative 
people – an area of education in which the UK excels. The creative industries 
is one of Britain’s fastest growing sectors. They employ more people in the UK 
than the financial sector or advanced manufacturing. There is an ever-growing 
list of collaborations between creative and science universities, big business 
and government at all levels and between countries. And yet government policy 
comprehensively neglects creative subjects in secondary and higher education. 
Creativity has a big economic impact and it needs to be taught. The new 
government must make the connection, putting Britain’s creative education on 
equal terms with other subjects.”

Join the higher education network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 