
Why should the BBC offer a helping hand to loss-making local TV channels? And 
why shouldOfcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> relax its programming 
regulations for the channels?

According to Jeff Henry, chief executive of Archant, which owns Mustard TV, 
“the model of local TV has to be re-examined in a way that allows fledgling 
operations the chance to actually grow.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/12/bbc-ofcom-help-norwich-tv-station-mustard>

Any genuine re-examination of the business model would, in fact, recommend 
closure and the termination of an experiment that should never have happened in 
the first place.

The whole silly idea, floated by a single government minister as his Big Idea 
for media, was a busted flush from the start.

Forcing the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to extend the 
three-year term in which it must buy content from local TV owners will make no 
difference (and it is also an unfair imposition on the corporation anyway).

Pressuring Ofcom into tinkering with local TV’s public service requirements 
undermines one of the justifications by the then culture secretary,Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, for the launching of such 
stations.

Henry also argues that the cost of a satellite uplink is prohibitive and he 
probably has a point there. But that’s a side issue.

The substantive point here is that commercial local TV broadcast through 
television sets was a non-starter. It was a mistake and has cost its investors 
dear.

Newspaper publishers, like the Norwich-based Archant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>, who felt it necessary to protect 
their markets by bidding for the licences have since been deluged in red ink.

As Henry said with masterly understatement when revealing that Archant took a 
£657,000 hit last year on Mustard TV: “The route to profitability at the moment 
is very challenged.”

His company, like so many others, was fooled by Hunt’s boyish enthusiasm for 
his flawed project: hey everyone, let’s start a TV station, show people weather 
maps and scenes of road closures and then make loadsa money.

Here’s Hunt, now the health secretary, answering his critics in June last year:
“All these local TV stations will be a success 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/a3c84626-f632-11e3-902a-00144feabdc0.html>... There 
will be some that go bust; that is the nature of things.”

No, Jeremy, it is in the nature of things that all of them will go bust 
because they cannot attract audiences large enough to warrant spending by 
advertisers. That was always going to be the case and you were warned of it at 
the time. You ignored the reality of an online future.

So the current culture minister, John Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-whittingdale>, must beware adding 
yet more to the BBC’s woes by increasing its commitment to local TV.

The project is simply not worth bailing out and licence fee payers should not 
have to support stations so few people are watching.
 