
"You dumb donuteatin' cop!" Officer Constantine cuffs Officer Kuchner 
playfully on the back of the head. Kuchner is flirting in Polish with the girl 
behind the counter of the Peter Pan Donut and Pastry Shop on Manhattan 
Boulevard, Greenpoint, Brooklyn. She wears a green A-line dress with 
pastel-pink cuffs and collar. Heavy lashes flicker over her eyes. Constantine 
is tall. Cheekbones strike boldly from a proud handsome African- American face. 
He takes his cap off. A photo of his mother is under the cracked plastic label 
inside. It is shift change at the 94th precinct on Messerole around the corner.

I order an Old Fashioned and a coffee: $1.70. Officers Sanchez and Suarez show 
each other pictures of their kids. Heavy flashlights and dull metal pistols 
hang from their belts. The lashy waitress fills my cup. It is identical to 
eight million others in delis across the city: blue with a Grecian urn on the 
side and "We Are Happy To Serve You" written in Hellenic script. That's not 
always true. She likes my accent. I like hers more - Polish/Brooklyn vowels 
singing the unknown. Green plastic letters punctuated by shamrocks announce St 
Patrick's Day. To Insure [sic] Freshness All Our Products Are Baked On The 
Premises. Suffocating the ventilation grill, stringy dust hangs like a 
sheepskin rug from the lowered ceiling. A guy with a white moustache is 
complaining that he wanted a jelly donut, not a ring. Lashy points to the 
purple injection hole. A stunned jaw drops from a white moustache. "Hey ... 
Something new! Jelly in a ring!" He bites. "That's good. That is good!" He 
gives his wife a sugar-dusted moustache kiss. She grimaces, but her eyes are 
happy as she squeezes his arm.

Fifties cookbook Technicolors pulsate from the stacked glazes. Greens, 
yellows, pinks, hundreds and thousands like interference in the cathode rays. I 
bite off a chunk of Old Fashioned, suck coffee into my stuffed mouth. The dough 
is fluffy and sweet. The surface is crisp, crinkly and undusted. These cops 
aren't dumb. These are the best donuts in New York.

Â· The writer is the lead singer in Franz Ferdinand.
 