
Douvan, who Willie Mullins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willie-mullins> 
lauded as one of the most exciting horses he has ever trained, put up a superb 
performance on his chasing debut at Navan on Sunday which resulted in the 
bookmakers running for cover and quoting him as short as 5-4 for the Arkle 
Trophy in March.

Ruby Walsh had last season’s Supreme Novices’ Hurdle winner  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/mar/10/cheltenham-festival-2015-opening-day-in-pictures>
in front from the off in this 2m1f Beginners’ Chase and apart from a chancy 
jump at the final fence it was a perfect introduction to the larger obstacles.

Mullins said: “It was a relief to get that out of the way. Ruby said he could 
hear horses behind him coming to the last and got revved up. He stood too far 
back off the fence but was cute enough to get his legs over and recover well. 
Otherwise it was a schooling session.”

After this effortless nine-and-a-half length victory his trainer is planning a 
Grade One campaign in novice chases, with the Arkle Trophy at Cheltenham in 
March being the ultimate target.

Coneygree back on track for Hennessy Gold Cup after good piece of work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/coneygree-hennessy-gold-cup-sara-bradstock>
Mullins explained: “I would think the plan will be to go for the Racing Post 
[Novice Chase] at Leopardstown next. We will have a good look at that. We 
probably won’t have time to put another run into him before that.”

The County Carlow trainer reported that he was happy with how his string are 
performing but expectedDouvan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/douvan> to 
come on for the race.

He said: “I am delighted with how my horses are running but they are a little 
short of work. This fellow never looks gross, but he is stronger than last 
year. He is typical of the French breds, tall and angular.”

Vautour, the ante-post favourite for the Cheltenham Gold Cup in March, made a 
winning return at Ascot on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/cue-card-betfair-chase-haydock-vautour-willie-mullins-ascot-cheltenham-gold-cup>
, but his performance in beating Ptit Zig, who was conceding five pounds, was 
laboured.

Mullins felt there were excuses for his exciting chaser: “It was great to win. 
He jumped to the left, but maybe fitness told. He had to go to England which is 
a hard thing to do for the first run against race fit horses. I think he will 
improve for that and go straight to Kempton for the King George on Boxing Day. 
It looks like a cracking race in prospect.”

Annie Power will go straight to Cheltenham after a slight setback. Mullins 
explained: “We gave her a pop over hurdles and she just hit herself. I would 
rather give her more time than less and the only thing I want to do is get her 
ready for March. A lot will depend on how she improves.”

There was mixed news concerning racecourse sponsorship as Betfair announced on 
Sunday that they are the new backers of the Grade One Tingle Creek Chase at 
Sandown.

But of more concern was the news that Betfred will no longer be sponsoring the 
Cheltenham Gold Cup as a direct consequence of theAuthorised Betting Partners 
initiative. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/bookmakers-sponsorship-bha> 
Jockey Club Racecourses will also have to find a backer for the Group One 
Sprint Cup at Haydock, which was part of Betfred’s sponsorship portfolio.
 