
There is a rest area on the way into Young in southern New South Wales that 
has become a makeshift camp for backpackers waiting for the start of the 
Australian cherry-picking season.

At this stage, the campers are young French backpackers, a German and a few 
Australians on their way somewhere else. The backpackers sleep in their cars, 
while coffee pots, cups and cereal bowls sit on a camp table. Helene Chaphuif, 
Brice Lancauchez, Charlotte Loiseau and Romain Quiru are killing time because 
the cherries are about 10 days late this year.

“We were here last year so we came back because it is pretty good money for 
picking cherries,” said Chaphuif. “We can earn A$250 a day [about £150] for a 
very big day from 5.30am to 2pm. Sometimes the cherries are small and light – 
big trees with small cherries – so it’s not that much and sometimes you have 
big cherries, very heavy.
Map of Australia's fruit farming area 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/nov/2016-11-04T16:34:13.html> 
“We have been picking other fruits – apples, oranges, pears – but it is not as 
good because it is heavy work, you need ladders, it’s exhausting. We were paid 
A$30-40 for 500kg of fruit. You do a bin in three hours – so you get about A$20 
for three hours. No good. That’s why we come for the cherries.”

The group will have been in Australia for two years next March, having 
qualified for a second year of working holiday visa after working for 88 days 
on the farms. . They know about the government’s plans to increase the income 
tax on young working holidaymakers from 13% to 19% as it is the talk of the 
fruit trail, all over social media.

“It is affecting people, they are really aware of it,” said Joanne Johnson, 
who runs a temporary recruitment agency in Young. “We had a lot of French 
backpackers last year who were angry about the plan. Now they are telling 
friends to go to New Zealand instead.”

The issue is red hot because the National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) estimates 
young backpackers make up 25% of Australia’s agricultural workforce – for 
seasonal harvest jobs, like cherry picking, growers say it is much higher. Yet 
for almost two years, uncertainty has crippled the industry as the government 
has dithered over the rate of income tax.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Faustralia-cherry-picking-backpacker-tax-agriculture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc278eaab259208c4fed7cb9dace499be8385c8f4%2F0_228_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Down%20on%20the%20farm%3A%20Australia%20at%20war%20with%20its%20backpacker%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Faustralia-cherry-picking-backpacker-tax-agriculture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Down%20on%20the%20farm%3A%20Australia%20at%20war%20with%20its%20backpacker%20workforce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Faustralia-cherry-picking-backpacker-tax-agriculture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc278eaab259208c4fed7cb9dace499be8385c8f4%2F0_228_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Australia’s tourism minister, Steve Ciobo, launches a A$10m campaign to 
encourage more Europeans to take working holidays in Australia. Photograph: 
Lloyd Jones/AAP 
Former prime minister Tony Abbott’s conservative government first proposed a 
32.5% tax in the May 2015 budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-savings-hit-surprising-targets-backpackers-and-fly-in-fly-out-workers>
. This would have changed the current rate from 13%, with a tax-free threshold 
of A$18,200, to 32.5% from the first dollar. Abbott’s Liberal party ruled in 
coalition with the National party – one of the last successful parties in the 
world that grew from an agricultural base, so it was surprising that the tax 
plan ever got past them.

From there the idea remained dormant as industry groups started to agitate. A 
year later, in the lead-up to the 2016 election, the coalition, now led by 
Malcolm Turnbull,announced a review of the tax rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-savings-hit-surprising-targets-backpackers-and-fly-in-fly-out-workers>
.

Finally, in September, treasurer Scott Morrison announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/27/backpacker-tax-scott-morrison-announces-cut-from-325-to-19>
 a 19% tax rate, with an A$5 increase in the passenger movement charge to A$60 
for all travellers leaving Australia and an increase in the departing 
superannuation payment from 47% to 95%. All Australian employees get 9.5% on 
top of their gross wages paid in to a retirement saving fund, but temporary 
workers who leave Australia are liable to a one-off tax.

To balance the package, the government proposed to reduce the visa application 
charge by A$50, increase the working holiday visa age limit from 30 to 35 and 
increase from six to 12 months the time backpackers could work for one employer.

The government also threw in A$10m for a marketing campaign to attract more 
backpackers to Australia.The campaign was launched at London’s Victoria station 
with a few fake Bondi beach lifesavers last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/lifes-a-beach-as-backpacker-tax-fiasco-descends-to-new-lows>
.

But the tax bill remains caught between the lower house and the senate even 
though the change was due to come into force on 1 January.

Backpacker tax: Scott Morrison announces cut from 32.5% to 19%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/27/backpacker-tax-scott-morrison-announces-cut-from-325-to-19>
The industries that rely on backpackers are desperate for some action to slow 
down the falling numbers of young people coming to Australia for seasonal work. 
In a world where every backpacker has a smartphone and is on social media, news 
of the proposed new tax has travelled like a bush fire. At a senate inquiry 
into the bill, forced by Labor and the minor parties, the NFF estimated a fall 
in applications for farm work of between 40% and 90% since the tax increase was 
proposed..

Minor party senator Nick Xenophon said that in his home state of South 
Australia, tourist operators in the Riverland had struggled to fill backpacker 
hostels which were fully booked last year. “That is going to be pretty 
catastrophic for the bush, for the regions,” he said.

The president of the NFF, Brent Finlay, told the committee of a mango farm he 
visited near Humpty Doo in the Northern Territory. “The mango farmers left 15% 
of their crop on their trees last year because they did not have enough 
labour,” Finlay said. “They were planning to plant another 40,000 trees – they 
have the water and they have the infrastructure – to double the size of their 
farm, and they won’t go ahead with that work because they know they cannot get 
a labour force at the current rate.

“I have spoken to that farm a number of times this season, and their mango 
season [began] at the start of August … They are significantly down [in 
workers] again this year.”

In Tasmania, Australia’s southern-most state, Howard Hansen of Hansen Orchards 
and Timothy Reid of Reid Fruits are two of the biggest fruit growers and the 
biggest employers of backpackers in the state.

Reid’s company has invested more than A$30m in the business in the past 20 
years. In the last financial year, he completed 817 tax statements for 
employees at the end of the season and 65% were backpackers.

“All of that has been based on the availability of labour in what is a very 
labour-intensive industry,” Reid said. “We are heavily reliant on backpackers. 
We have a policy of employing locals first, but there are simply not enough 
local people, particularly in that peak period when we require harvest.

“We have over 600 people on our farm during harvest. Again, around 65% of them 
are backpackers. The locals are really good but without the backpackers we do 
not have a hope.” Hansen said that more than 35% of a payroll worth A$6.5m to 
A$7m last year went to travellers on working holiday visas. He said the tax 
plan also threatens the jobs of the Australians who make up the remainder of 
the workers.

“For more than 25 years, we have used the itinerant labour supply as the spike 
of labour we need to help harvest the crops,” Hansen said. “If we cannot 
harvest the crop, we won’t have a crop to pack for the rest of the year, so we 
will not need as many Australians. We will not need to maintain orchards; we 
will not need to prune them; we will not need to make the capital investment. 
It is not just the jobs of the itinerant people that are at risk; it is the 
Australians as well.”

Backpacker tax restores 'balance' with local workforce, Sussan Ley tells Q&A
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/backpacker-tax-restores-balance-local-workforce-sussan-ley-qanda>
Johnson’s agency placed 300 people with local growers last year but she is 
unsure how many will arrive this time. And if the tax does go ahead, it will 
require a change mid-harvest.

“What about the [backpackers] that have already started and have done their 
tax declarations? Do we get a new tax declaration now to override the others as 
they continue picking?” Johnson said. “The ones flying in and out should be 
charged the tax rate but the ones that are staying here, that are earning the 
money to spend on their trip, they will pay their accommodation, get their food 
and drinks and the money goes back into the community.”

Yet the backpackers in Young insist the higher tax plan would not have changed 
their own travel decisions. “It would still be better than it is in France,” 
Chaphuif says. “Yes, it not as good as it was but it is still better than in 
France and it’s easy to get a job. Brice found a full-time job here in 48 hours 
but in France he spent a year not working because he couldn’t find a job for 
his position.”
 