
My aunt Mercy Heatley, who has died aged 94, was an innovative child 
psychiatrist in the Oxfordshire family and child guidance service and an 
indefatigable campaigner for peace, disarmament and the NHS.

Mercy was born in Craigavad, Northern Ireland, daughter of Geoffrey Bing, a 
teacher, and his wife, Irene, who founded Rockport prep school in the town. 
After attending this school as one of only four girls, she went on to Howellâ€™s 
school in Denbigh, north Wales. In 1939 she was admitted to Somerville College, 
Oxford, to study PPE. After interrupting her studies to drive lorries for the 
war effort, she switched to medicine with the support of a then junior don, the 
later Nobel prize winnerDorothy Hodgkin 
<https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/1964/>, who became 
a lifelong friend. While still an undergraduate, Mercy marriedNorman Heatley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jan/08/guardianobituaries.highereducation>
, a biochemist and member of the Oxford team whose work on penicillin helped to 
save countless lives in the second world war.

From 1948 Mercy juggled parenting her five children with a career as a 
consultant psychiatrist, a rare combination in those days. She still found time 
for voluntary activities, which included an interest in teenage refugees, 
displaced by war in Europe and being helped by theOckenden Venture 
<https://www.surreycc.gov.uk/heritage-culture-and-recreation/archives-and-history/surrey-history-centre/surrey-history-centre-help-for-researchers/archives-and-history-research-guides/from-vision-to-venture-the-story-of-ockenden-international>
. At her house in Old Marston, Oxford, one would meet refugees and former 
psychiatric patients. Mercy would break the ice by giving a 30-second biography 
of each guest to every other guest, after which conversation flowed.

As her career developed she specialised in autism, and in the 1970s she 
pioneered, with the teacherSheila Coates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2010/dec/21/sheila-coates-obituary>, 
the idea of integrating children with autism into mainstream classrooms. This 
practice was a key recommendation of the Warnock report in 1978, and became a 
model for practice nationally.

Mercy became more politically active during the Thatcher governments and was a 
staunch opponent of any privatisation in the NHS, a strong supporter of the 
Greenham Common women and of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.

She achieved national prominence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/sep/18/2>
 in 2002 when, as part of the Peace Tax movement, she withheld part of her 
income tax in protest at the prospect of bloodshed in Iraq. When proceedings 
were inevitably taken against her, Mercy calculated that a bench of magistrates 
would not wish to imprison an 80-year-old retired doctor who made her case with 
great politeness and sincerity. As a result, the proceedings were adjourned 
many times and Mercy received enormous publicity. Eventually a well-wisher paid 
what was owed and she was spared prison.

Norman died in 2004. Mercy is survived by her four children, Rose, 
Christopher, Jonathan and Tamsin, and six grandchildren. A fifth child, Piers, 
predeceased her.
 