
Should every school offer cultural opportunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/culture-cuts-blog/2011/feb/15/arts-funding-arts-policy>
? I have worked professionally in the arts in Manchester for 30 years; before 
that I was a drama teacher in Oldham. Currently I am director and CEO of 
Cornerhouse andHOME <http://homemcr.org/> (formerly the Library Theatre 
Company), a charitable business that turns over in the region of £5.5m per 
year. Hopefully you are familiar withour work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/18/romeo-and-juliet-victorian-baths-manchester-review-shakespeare>
.

In spring 2015 we move into HOME. It is a £25m new build on Whitworth Street 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitworth_Street> in Manchester with two 
theatres, five cinemas, a gallery, education facilities, café bar and 
restaurant. It is part of a wider 24-acreeconomic regeneration project 
<http://www.manchester.gov.uk/news/article/6667/milestone_moment_for_90m_regeneration_scheme>
, which when it opens, will have generated almost 200 new jobs and relocated 
almost 2,000. I am very lucky to be leading this project and to be entrusted 
with such an important civic and cultural asset.

My mam, Jean, worked in a shop all of her working life and my dad, Jack, drove 
trucks – tankers to be precise. I am very proud of them both. They both left 
school at 15 and worked hard all of their lives to make sure they did their 
best for their kids.

My wife, Lindsey, has done some family history research and we now know that 
my family worked on the railways, in shipyards, and on the river for 
generations. A number of them lived in the workhouse.

I was the first person in my family to go to sixth form and on to get a 
degree. My future, as someone who attended a secondary modern school in the 
early 1970s, should have been on the railways, in shipyards, or on the river. 
There is nothing wrong with that, apart from the fact that if I had been born a 
generation earlier I would have had no choice about it.

So, how did a spotty-faced teenager in hand-knitted jumpers become a graduate 
art and drama teacher and end up running what will be the largest arts centre 
outside of London? It happened because I was the product of a liberal education 
system and committed teachers. They enabled a working-class lad from a family 
with no tradition of education to have a choice.

They were teachers who opened my mind and eyes. Teachers who encouraged me to 
make choices. I had a choice because Miss Calendar at Bewley Juniors got me 
reading for fun, but was also the most amazing art teacher. I had a choice 
because Miss Johnson, our music teacher at Davey Hall Secondary School, got me 
to learn the Rhythm of Life fromSweet Charity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/may/02/sweet-charity-tamzin-outhwaite>, 
which I can still sing but you wouldn’t want me to, and encouraged me to play 
an instrument.

I had a choice because Mrs Nattrass of Furness Comprehensive School introduced 
me toAlan Paton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/nov/15/southafrica.religion>, Doris 
Lessing, the War Poets and most importantly Shakespeare. I had a choice because 
Mr Sutherland, also of Furness Comprehensive School, encouraged me stay in the 
art room night school to draw, paint and make things. I had a choice because 
Barry Singleton ofBede Sixth Form College <https://www.stockton.ac.uk/src-bede> 
took me on a trip to London to visit the Tate and introduced me toRothko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/dec/07/artsfeatures> and Degas and the
Rocky Horror Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/04/how-we-made-rocky-horror>. I had 
a choice because John Mee at Leeds Polytechnic told me that I didn’t need 
permission to make theatre, just an idea.

I’d love to say thank you to those teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/apr/15/great-actors-drama-teacher>
. I could have mentioned some fantastic science, maths, history and even 
geography teachers who gave me choices too,but they are not endangered species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2012/oct/30/defence-school-drama-arts-curriculum-ebacc>
.

All of our young people deserve to get the chance to have a choice. Should 
every school aim to offer cultural opportunities to their students? Frankly, I 
find it astonishing that in one of the wealthiest nations in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/15/wealth-inequality-uk-ticking-timebomb-credit-suisse-crash>
 we even have to have this debate.
 