
The sudden barrage of a tropical downpour on a tin roof almost drowns out the 
small congregation, before they lift their voices and the sound of Hebrew 
prayers rises above the chorus of insects, the hum of electric fans – and the 
incessant rain.


On a humid Friday night, the last Jews of Iquitos gather in the back room of a 
mattress shop to worship in a language few of them even understand.

Iquitos – the world’s largest city that cannot be reached by road – is home to 
one of the last Jewish communities in the Amazon basin, but that may not be 
true for much longer: a modern exodus toIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> has seen the city’s Jewish 
population drop by more than 80% in the past decade.

“The community may die,” said Jorge Abramovitz, the owner of the shop that 
houses the city’s only synagogue. “Because the majority left Iquitos. And they 
are not returning.”


The city’s first Jews came to Peru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> 
from Morocco, part of a flow of immigrants from Europe, the Middle East and 
Asia who followed the 19th century rubber boom in the hopes of making a fortune 
in the rainforest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Flast-amazon-jews-iquitos-synagogue-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b89b133fc3c6633efea3943e36d030dd2971748%2F0_0_5775_3465%2F5775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dwindling%20Amazon%20Jewish%20community%20keeps%20faith%20despite%20religious%20exodus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Flast-amazon-jews-iquitos-synagogue-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dwindling%20Amazon%20Jewish%20community%20keeps%20faith%20despite%20religious%20exodus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Flast-amazon-jews-iquitos-synagogue-israel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b89b133fc3c6633efea3943e36d030dd2971748%2F0_0_5775_3465%2F5775.jpg>
 Iquitos, Peru. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
At the time, Iquitos’s economy was booming: the world’s voracious demand for 
rubber quickly transformed a remote village into an industrial boomtown filled 
with mansions adorned with hand-painted ceramic tiles from Portugal. Riverboats 
and barges were loaded in the city’s ports, and sent down the Amazon to the 
Atlantic and on to Europe.

The Jewish community saw another boost in the early 1900s, when growing 
antisemitism in eastern Europe drove Ashkenazi Jews to the New World. Among 
them was Abramovitz’s father, who emigrated from Poland.


But by the 1920s, plantations in Malaysia and Sri Lanka had undercut Amazon 
rubber producers, and the boom went bust.

Many immigrants left the city, and by the mid-20th century the capital city 
Lima became the centre of Peruvian Jewish life. Smaller communities across the 
country moved to the capital, where there were synagogues, rabbis and Jewish 
schools.

Iquitos was the only community outside of Lima that managed to hold on.
map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/aug/2016-08-18T20:19:05.html> 
“Almost all the provinces were left without Jews,” Abramovitz said of that 
era. “It was then that the [Iquitos] community slept for some time.”


Then, in the early 2000s came a renaissance. 

With the guidance of rabbis from South America and overseas, the city’s 
remaining Jewish families – many of whom had converted to Roman Catholicism – 
began to revive the faith of their forefathers in the back room of Abramovitz’s 
shop.

“All across the rainforest, you will find Jewish descendants,” said Rivka 
Abramovitz, Jorge’s wife. “But in many cases, they do not know their origins.”

According to Jorge, the backroom synagogue became standing-room only on high 
holidays as the city’s Jewish population began to “wake up”.

Since then, however, the same spiritual revival that drove the community’s 
resurgence is now threatening its future.Hundreds of the city’s Jews have now 
left this rundown Amazon city and madealiyah to Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/aug/07/israel1>.

The Abramovitzes estimate that some 80% of the community has left Iquitos, 
robbing the group of its young adults, including the Abramovitzes’ own children 
and grandchildren.

Today, the congregation – which numbers around 50 people – is largely made up 
of the old and very young. Many are converts, such as Carlos Puglisi, who 
adopted his wife’s religion, and is one of the few Iquiteño Jews who has 
returned to Peru from Israel. “We need support to maintain things,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Flast-amazon-jews-iquitos-synagogue-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F682b58466525598dee8ee1af3db100dae459c898%2F0_406_6016_3610%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dwindling%20Amazon%20Jewish%20community%20keeps%20faith%20despite%20religious%20exodus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Flast-amazon-jews-iquitos-synagogue-israel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dwindling%20Amazon%20Jewish%20community%20keeps%20faith%20despite%20religious%20exodus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Flast-amazon-jews-iquitos-synagogue-israel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F682b58466525598dee8ee1af3db100dae459c898%2F0_406_6016_3610%2F6016.jpg>
 Shabbat service at the Iquitos synagogue. Photograph: Ryan Schuessler 
“We are happy here, my wife and I and our daughters,” said Alberto Pizango 
Arévalo, who helps lead services each week, when asked if he had ever thought 
about moving to Israel.


“We want the community to continue,” Jorge Abramovitz said. “Or at least to 
maintain. There has been a community for more than a century.”


In many ways, Iquitos’s Jewish story echoes that of the city itself. The rows 
of blue plastic chairs in the synagogue are now mostly empty. The rivers around 
Iquitos, once full of impressive barges and ships bound for the Atlantic, are 
empty too.

Boom, then bust.


At Shabbat services, the congregation clears the floor after taking bread and 
wine. They formed a circle – arms around each other’s shoulders – and sing 
Shalom Aleichem, a prayer traditionally sang after Friday night worship.


Then, handshakes and hugs. A kiss on the cheek. A squeeze of the arm. A 
whisper in the ear under the roar of the rain: “Shabbat Shalom.”

 