
Lawyers for Dylan Voller, the teenager shown hooded and bound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/abu-ghraib-images-children-detention-australia-public-inquiry>
 in footage that sparked a royal commission into Northern Territory youth 
detention centres, have called for an investigation into the release of 
confidential documents they say could damage his parole application.

His solicitor, Peter O’Brien, lodged a formal complaint with the police 
commander in Darwin alleging leaks of footage to Channel Nine and incident 
reports to the Australian breached confidentiality provisions in theInformation 
Act (NT) <http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consol_act/ia144/s148.html>, an 
offence that could result in two years in prison.

Dylan Voller could be restrained in chair again, says Northern Territory's 
chief minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/03/an-operational-matter-dylan-voller-could-be-restrained-in-chair-again-says-adam-gilesw>
“We are not asserting to know where the information has come from, but it 
appears to be the case that there has been a coordinated effort to seriously 
tarnish any sort of effort by him towards release,” he said.

Voller, 18, was the focus of an investigation by the ABC’s Four Corners into 
the alleged mistreatment of children at Darwin’s Don Dale youth detention 
centre between 2010 and 2014, when he was a juvenile.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, called for a royal commission the day 
after the program aired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/northern-territory-royal-commission-turnbull-urges-speed-but-labor-backs-full-inquiry>
, urged on by the territory’s chief minister, Adam Giles, and the terms of 
reference wereset two days later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/former-chief-justice-named-as-head-of-northern-territory-juvenile-detention-inquiry>
. Hearings are set to begin next month.

O’Brien said footage shown on that program was fundamentally different to 
video broadcast on the Nine News Darwin evening bulletin on Friday, 12 August, 
or information published in the Australian, because the former related to
incidents that had been subject to inquiries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/northern-territory-youth-detention-no-excuse-for-not-knowing-of-abuse>
 by parliament and the children’s commissioner, and had “become public by 
virtue of the inquiry”.

 The footage shown by Four Corners had not been publicly released, and the 
Department of Correctional Services said it had not consented to the release of 
any of the material.

“The Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> Department of 
Correctional Services remains unaware as to the sources of CCTV imagery 
depicting Mr Voller televised by ABC on the ABC Four Corners Program, Nine News 
reports surrounding Mr Voller, or specific incident reports regarding Mr Voller 
published in the Australian newspaper,” a spokesman for the correctional 
services commissioner, Mark Payne, told Guardian Australia.

“The Department of Correctional Services is supportive of any investigation 
that would assist in identifying the source of this information that has been 
provided to the media.”

The footage broadcast on Channel Nine showed Voller in custody as a juvenile.

The Australian’s Hedley Thomas reported on 6 August that the newspaper had 
obtained more than 800 internal incident reports relating to Voller 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/teenager-in-threat-to-smear-guards/news-story/a16e24132ff1505e98ca5bef623d0956>
, which showed a history of altercations with prison staff and included one 
report from 28 July, three days after the Four Corners program aired, of Voller 
allegedly offering money to a prison officer and making “comments about 
officers and getting their names tarnished in the media”.

O’Brien said the later leaks were “very different in type” to the footage 
obtained by Four Corners, and argued there was no public interest in their 
release. “The only thing that they could be aiming to do, it appears, is to 
publicly smear Dylan Voller with a view to preventing his release,” he said.

“I imagine it will be of serious concern to the royal commission if it is seen 
to be the case that there’s some sort of concerted effort to in some way 
discredit, or publicly humiliate, or publicly marginalise, or publicly 
criticise a whistleblower; someone who has spoken about treatment which is 
subject to the terms of reference of a royal commission.”

The story of the chair: how a brutal device was brought into Australia's youth 
jails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/video-of-boy-strapped-into-restraint-chair-keeps-australia-on-the-edge-of-its-seat>
Thomas told Guardian Australia it was “unsurprising and fine” that Voller’s 
lawyers had objected to “some material, which was not leaked by them, being 
published in the Australian”, adding they were “simply doing their best job as 
fierce advocates for Dylan”.

“The royal commission will receive all of this material and more so,” Thomas 
said. “It was always going to come out in a transparent process.”

A spokesman for NT police said the complaint was being assessed.

Voller is now held at Darwin’s correctional facility and has said the 
attention generated by Four Corners made himfear for his safety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/teenager-in-four-corners-juvenile-detention-expose-fears-for-his-safety>
. O’Brien hasfiled a petition of mercy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/05/dylan-vollers-lawyers-file-petition-of-mercy-seeking-his-release-from-prison>
 with the territory’s administrator pleading for his release but the NT 
government is caretaker mode before the 27 August election, which has 
frustrated the process.

Giles last week accused Four Corners of deliberately delaying its report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/adam-giles-says-abc-report-on-don-dale-juvenile-detention-aired-to-damage-him>
 to cause maximum damage to his election campaign and said the program should 
be “ashamed”.
 