
Dylan Voller could be strapped into a restraint chair again under Northern 
Territory <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> 
legislation because he is now 18, chief minister Adam Giles has told Guardian 
Australia.

Voller featured heavily in last week’s ABC Four Corners program on juvenile 
detention abuse, which prompted theestablishment of a royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/brandis-had-considered-adding-indigenous-commissioner-for-nt-inquiry>
. The footage showed Voller allegedly being assaulted over a number of years 
while incarcerated. He was placed in a spithood and strapped by his wrists, 
ankles and neck to a restraint chair for an hour and 50 minutes last year.

Since turning 18 Voller has been held in the adult prison just outside Darwin.

Timeline of events in the Northern Territory's juvenile detention system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/01/timeline-events-northern-territory-juvenile-detention-system>
Amid the outcry over the footage, Giles ordered a suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/northern-territory-halts-use-of-restraint-chairs-and-spithoods-in-youth-detention>
 of the use of restraint chairs and spithoods in juvenile detention. In 
legislation passed earlier this year the NT government had widened and 
strengthened the scope for their use, but this week new laws were gazetted to 
ban them in the restraint of juveniles.

But Voller is no longer within the juvenile detention system and the chair can 
still be used at the adult facility.

In an interview with Guardian Australia, Giles was asked if he was concerned 
that Voller could again be restrained in the chair. Giles said it was “an 
operational matter”.

“How old is Dylan now?” Giles said. “Well he’s an adult and he’s in an adult 
centre. Adult policies.”

Giles said he did not get involved in operational matters, and that he had to 
stand up for the rights of staff working in the facilities too.

“I mean, there’s a whole lot of things that were missed out of that report. 
There’s 15 staff right now who are on workers’ compensation. Eleven of them, 
I’m told, are permanently incapacitated so they’ll never be able to be a 
frontline prison officer again.”

Adam Giles suggests lawyers who spoke to Four Corners had political motives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/adam-giles-suggests-lawyers-who-spoke-to-four-corners-had-political-motives>
Giles made the comments in an interview at the Garma festival on the 
long-running NT justice crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/22/young-indigenous-imprisonment-in-nt-you-wouldnt-believe-it-in-a-modern-day-society>
, during which he defended his government’s record on justice reform. He 
refused to back away fromquestions he raised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/adam-giles-suggests-lawyers-who-spoke-to-four-corners-had-political-motives>
 about links between lawyers who spoke out about the boys’ treatment and the 
Labor party.

Last week Giles said he was horrified watching Four Corners, in particular 
seeing staff “throwing kids around”.

The Vita review, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/19/damning-report-nt-juvenile-detention-reveals-climate-of-daily-crisis>
 commissioned by the government and released in February 2015,highlighted 33 
serious incidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/01/timeline-events-northern-territory-juvenile-detention-system>
 in the Don Dale and Alice Springs youth detention centres between 2010 and 
August 2014. Several were alleged assaults by staff on detainees. Asked if he 
had inquired about these particular incidents, Giles said he “took advice on 
the recommendations”.

“[John] Elferink was the minister. I took advice from the recommendations and 
said we need to [act on] the whole lot. Same withthe children’s commissioners 
stuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/18/six-teenagers-hooded-and-transferred-to-darwin-adult-prison-report-reveals>
.”

Giles has made conflicting statements about what exactly he was aware of 
before viewing Four Corners. On Friday he told local radio he had seen the 
teargassing footage, before backtracking from the comments later that day.

Timeline of events in the Northern Territory's juvenile detention system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/01/timeline-events-northern-territory-juvenile-detention-system>
He told Guardian Australia he had not seen any of the footage before Monday 
night, including some which had previously screened on ABC bulletins, and had 
no awareness of the incidents that occurred before his party came to office.

“I mean I’m not complaining about this, but there’s been no recognition that 
five of the seven pictures or incidents were before we came to government,” he 
said.

“So to think that I should have seen those things, I mean, I’m not going to go 
through every CCTV camera that the Northern Territory government’s got and 
watch all footage back forever and a day, so I think we’ve got to be fair and 
reasonable in that.”

He took aim at Labor’s decision to build a new adult prison.

“When you were told you needed to build a new youth detention facility, why 
did you not do that and you only built an adult one?” he asked. “You shouldn’t 
be building concrete jungles any more, you should be having more 
community-oriented type centres. Why didn’t you do that?”

Asked why the Giles government did not build a juvenile centre when it came to 
office, if it was already known that one was needed, Giles said he was not 
aware.

Young Indigenous imprisonment in NT: 'You wouldn’t believe it in a modern-day 
society'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/22/young-indigenous-imprisonment-in-nt-you-wouldnt-believe-it-in-a-modern-day-society>
“I wasn’t the leader at the time, which is no excuse, but I wasn’t aware, and 
no one had ever raised to me the need to build a new youth detention facility,” 
he said.

“Now whether it’s been hidden in a report somewhere as a particular line, it 
may have been, I’m not saying it’s not, but it’s not anything that had been 
raised as a particular issue which needed to occur ... Everyone [from Labor] is 
ducking for cover at the moment, saying they never knew about any of this 
footage at the time. Well, why did they commission a review around the time of 
these incidents? Surely someone knew something.”

Amid dozens of incidents, escapes assaults and allegations from within 
juvenile justice during its term, the current NT government has itself 
commissioned two inquiries – including the Vita review – andreceived one other 
from the children’s commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/18/six-teenagers-hooded-and-transferred-to-darwin-adult-prison-report-reveals>
.

Giles pointed to a range of measures under his government which addressed 
issues in the justice system. The Northern Territory is the only jurisdiction 
with justice targets – seeking to halve incarceration and recidivism among 
Indigenous adults and juveniles by 2030.


He said a target of 50% was “pretty good” but “you can’t just do that by 
saying ‘let’s not send people to jail’”.

“That’s why I put a lot of effort into building economies, giving people jobs 
and making sure that there’s not two separate societies which there has been in 
the Northern Territory forever and a day.”

Northern Territory youth detention: no excuse for not knowing of abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/northern-territory-youth-detention-no-excuse-for-not-knowing-of-abuse>
Giles said his government had worked to improve the detention centre system 
for both staff and inmates, including improved training for youth justice 
officers.

He said he acted “immediately” to find out what kind of health access juvenile 
inmates had, and determined to have health workers present at every inmate 
intake to perform assessments. He said the government had “done a deal” with 
Indigenous health service Danila Dilba.

 Guardian Australia understands the organisation was in discussions with the 
Department of Children and Families to have staff on site for a three-month 
contract, but no details of what it would involve had yet been determined. 
Discussions began last Friday.

The Country Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> government has also 
run a successful trial of the Sentenced to a Job program, which Giles said had 
reduced recidivism rates among the 60 Indigenous inmates from 76% to 13%. It 
has not yet been replicated in the youth justice sector, but Giles suggested 
the recently proposed but unfunded youth correctional farm might be the way to 
address recidivism in juvenile detention.


“Many of these kids are broken and it’s going to take a long time. It’s pretty 
bad,” he said.

Giles denied he was accusing the lawyers who appeared on Four Corners of being 
politically motivated when he publicly questioned how many of them were members 
of theLabor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> last 
week, but refused to clarify what he meant.

Asked why it mattered if they were members of the Labor party, Giles said it 
didn’t matter.

Guardian Australia: So why ask the question?

Giles: I never said it was politically motivated.

GA: You suggested it, though, by questioning whether they were members of the 
Labor party.

Giles: No you interpreted my comment as a suggestion. I didn’t say that.

GA: What was the actual meaning of the question then? Why do you want to know 
if they were members of the Labor party if it doesn’t matter?

Giles: I’ve got no comment on that. You can interpret it how you want. I never 
said it, I never suggested it, I never implied it. You interpreted it that way.

Giles said he was inquiring just for himself because it was of interest and 
would “probably make a good trivia question”.
 