
Fewer than one in 10 workers have chosen to opt out of workplace pensions 
under the auto enrolment scheme, but experts warn that the project is still in 
the early stages and too early to call a success, with only the largest 
companies signed up so far.

More than 1 million people have been automatically enrolled into pension 
schemes since the scheme was introduced last October in a bid to tackle growing 
concerns about a poverty crisis among people in old age.

Employees can opt out of the scheme, and the government estimated that about 
30% of those eligible might choose to do so. However, while the latest figures 
show a larger take-up than expected, small and medium-sized businesses have yet 
to be included as the scheme is being rolled out gradually between now and 2018.

About 1,000 of Britain's largest companies have already signed up, and 29,000 
more employers will hit their date in the first half of 2014.

Tom McPhail, head of pensions research at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: "These 
early results are encouraging, but there is still a great deal of work to be 
done. The largest employers were always likely to produce the best results so 
the real challenges still lie ahead. By the end of 2014 we'll have a much 
better idea of whether we really are getting to grips with the pensions crisis."

By 2018, the government estimates that between 6 and 9 million people will 
save more into a pension or join a scheme for the first time.

However, last month's figures showed that fewer people are saving for 
retirement than at any time since official records began. In 2012, just 46% of 
UK employees were in a pension scheme, compared with more than 55% a decade 
ago. Despite the growth in the country's population, membership of workplace 
schemes fell to 8.2m in 2011 according to the Office for National Statistics, 
the lowest level since the 1950s.

Under automatic enrolment, a portion of an employee's pay packet is 
automatically diverted to a savings pot for their pension, assuming they are 
aged 22 or over and earning at least £9,440 a year. For each £100 a worker pays 
in under auto-enrolment, the government adds £25 and their employer adds £75. 
So, for a £100 personal investment £200 is paid into a pension, doubling your 
money.

About 1.7 million workers are not eligible for the scheme because they don't 
fit the criteria, either because they are too young or old, or don't earn 
enough.

However, any worker earning over £5,668 can opt in to a pension and their 
employer is also obliged to pay in. Employers must inform eligible staff of the 
right to opt in to the company pension and get an employer contribution.
 