
The first Americans – the earliest people to cross from Siberia to Alaska and 
begin the colonisation of two vast continents linked by a narrow isthmus – 
could not have simply followed the deer and the buffalo across dry land during 
the last ice age 13,500 years ago. They would have been in the right place, but 
at the wrong time, a new study shows.

What is now the Bering Strait would indeed then have been dry land. There was, 
as scientists have known for many years, an open 1500km corridor of grassland 
between two great ice sheets that would have made migration deep into North 
America possible.

First humans arrived in Britain 250,000 years earlier than thought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/jul/07/first-humans-britain-stone-tools>
But, according to a new study in Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature19085>, this route wasn’t fully 
open for traffic until 12,600 years ago.

This means the very first pre-Columbian settlement of America, perhaps by 
people known to archaeologists as the Clovis culture, must have been either by 
sea, or by hugging the Pacific shoreline, long before the ice sheets retreated 
and the ocean closed in to flood the Bering Strait and separate the Old World 
from the New.

Studies based on radiocarbon dating, pollen, fossils and ancient plant and 
mammal DNA from lake sediments, found that before 12,600 years ago, there were 
no grasses, trees, bison, woolly mammoth or rabbits to serve as food and 
shelter along the corridor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fearliest-americans-could-not-have-arrived-by-dry-land-study-indicates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a43e07f53142dfc32b50b94a5792e105439cf75%2F0_0_2129_2330%2F2129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Earliest%20Americans%20could%20not%20have%20arrived%20by%20dry%20land%2C%20study%20indicates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fearliest-americans-could-not-have-arrived-by-dry-land-study-indicates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Earliest%20Americans%20could%20not%20have%20arrived%20by%20dry%20land%2C%20study%20indicates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fearliest-americans-could-not-have-arrived-by-dry-land-study-indicates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a43e07f53142dfc32b50b94a5792e105439cf75%2F0_0_2129_2330%2F2129.jpg>
 Map outlining the opening of human migration routes in North America as 
proposed by the new study. Photograph: Mikkel Winther Pedersen 
“The bottom line is that, even though the physical corridor was open by 13,000 
years ago, it was several hundred years before it was possible to use it,” said 
Eske Willerslev, an evolutionary geneticist from the University of Copenhagen, 
St John’s College Cambridge and the Wellcome Sanger Institute.

“That means the first people entering what is now the US, Central and South 
America must have taken a different route. Whether you believe these people 
were Clovis, or someone else, they simply could not have come through the 
corridor, as long claimed.”

The corridor ran eastward of the Canadian Rockies between two great and 
retreating sheets of ice, and would have first been steppe, grazed by bison and 
woolly mammoth, and then a “parkland” of trees supporting moose, elk and 
bald-headed eagles. There would have been fish in the lakes. Around 10,000 
years ago, the landscape was claimed by forests of spruce and pine. The ice cap 
retreated, sea levels rose and theAmericas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas> were cut off from the rest of the 
world. Later hunter-gatherers from Asia travelled down the corridor and 
differentiated into a wide range of peoples and cultures, to lose contact with 
the Old World for more than 9,000 years.

Humans arrived in North America 2,500 years earlier than thought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/mar/24/humans-north-america-stone-tools>
“What nobody has looked at is when the corridor became biologically viable,” 
said Willerslev. “When could they actually have survived the long and difficult 
journey through it?”

He and colleagues sampled DNA from the muds of Charlie Lake in British 
Columbia, and Spring Lake in Alberta, sites along the corridor, for traces of 
surviving DNA that would have accumulated with animal excrement and plant 
tissue.

The sequences told their own story. Before about 12,600 years ago, the region 
would have been inhospitable. But since a prehistoric people with distinctive 
stone tools had already colonised what would become the United States 13,000 
years ago, they must have come by another route: perhaps along the shoreline of 
Alaska and Canada, over beaches, dunes and estuaries long since covered by the 
Pacific Ocean. How they did this is speculative: there is no evidence from that 
era of any boat travel.

But Mikkel Winther Pederson, of the University of Copenhagen Centre for 
Geogenetics, and a co-author, sees a possible parallel with the modern Inuit 
peoples of the Arctic region, who find their food and skins both on land and at 
sea.

“In caves along the coast archaeologists have found evidence of bear and 
reindeer dating back 16,000 years; this suggests that the coastal route would 
have been open earlier for human migration,” he said.

“However, as the coastlines at this time have been inundated by the sea level 
rise the majority of the archaeology is now underwater.”
 