
As markets recover some ground following better than expected Chinese data and 
a revival in the oil price,easyJet shares have hit some turbulence.

The budget airline is down 33p or 2% at £14.89 after it reported a 4.3% rise 
in March passenger numbers to 5.7m compared to the same time last year. But 
this represented slightly slower growth than in recent months and the load 
factor - the number of passengers as a proportion of the number of seats 
available - fell from 92.6% a year ago to 91.3%.

It said there were a number of cancellations during the month - 611 in all - 
mainly due to strikes in France. Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo 
Markets, said:

While easyJet points to French strikes as a  mitigating factor for March 
weakness, it is interesting to note that Ryanair did too and yet it still 
managed to post steady growth in both passenger numbers and loads.

Overall the FTSE 100 has climbed 30.54 points to 6121.77, with Shire leading 
the way, up 120p to £41.69. The pharmaceuticals group has been under pressure 
on fears thatthe US tax inversion rules which has scuppered Pfizer’s deal to 
buy Allegan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/05/pfizer-allergan-merger-tax-avoidance-rules>
 could damage Shire’s merger with Baxalta. But analysts at Credit Suisse said:

Shire <https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> has publically stated that 
they expect an ultimate group tax rate for [the merged company] of around 
16.5%, some 3.5 percentage points below where we see the blended rate for the 
two standalone companies (20%). If we assume that profits from sales/costs 
synergies are taxed at 20%, and that the regular tax shield on additional debt 
is also at 20%, this implies other tax benefits of up to $260m by 2020 to get 
to the 16.5% group rate.

If we assume that these extra savings are at risk from heightened US tax 
scrutiny this would reduce our proforma 2020 earnings per share from $7.05 to 
$6.76. These assumptions would delay accretion from 2017 to 2019 and move 2020 
earnings per share accretion from 10% to 5%.

With Shire being an Irish tax domiciled company we are not clear to what 
extent these rules may be important. But we do not see the possible loss of 
this level of tax as likely to derail management’s strong desire to complete 
the transaction.

We believe that Shire trades at an unwarranted discount to peers reflecting 
uncertainty around the scale of the Baxalta transaction, and general biotech 
derating, despite expected double digit 5 year earnings per share growth.

Meanwhile Bank of America/Merrill Lynch analysts suggested Shire itself could 
be a target following the collapse of the Pfizer-Allergan deal.

AstraZeneca has also moved higher, adding 102p to £40.53 on suggestions Pfizer 
could now look for another partner.

Elsewhere Glencore has edged up 0.1p to 142.15p as it unveiled plans to sell a 
40% stake in its agricultural business to Canada Pension Plan Investment Board 
for $2.5bn. Other mining shares benefitted from the positive Chinese service 
sector data, which for the moment eased some of the fears of a major slowdown 
in the world’s second largest economy.

Antofagasta has added 10.3p to 443p while Anglo American is up 4.9p at 530.6p.

Among the retailers Next has added 100p to £53.50 as Haitong Research moved 
from sell to buy. Analyst Tony Shiret said:

Our overwhelming reaction to the [recent] results is of surprise that 
management appeared to have relatively few solutions. Even the terms used to 
describe the travails of the UK Directory spoke to a business that has moved 
from being amenable to management inputs/levers to one more or less reactive to 
market conditions.

In a sense that is the issue here. There is plenty of opportunity to be 
exposed to beta in the General Retail sector but alpha is rare.Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> has drifted out of the exclusive 
club. We have made modest reductions to profit forecasts which now assume full 
deployment of “surplus” cashflow to buy-backs. Our Fair Value is reduced by 2% 
from 6000p to 5900p reflecting Haitong earnings per share forecast changes.

Having said this, the outcome is largely as we expected. We have made modest 
downgrades and the shares are down 30% price relative over four months and now 
stand on a comparable valuation to M&S. So long as the margin structure holds 
at Next we feel they offer decent value and have upgraded from sell to buy.

We believe that the new news here has now been discounted into the share 
price. Clearly there is scope for further newsflow to develop. But on the basis 
of what we have seen we are now much happier that investors understand the 
structural issues facing this company.
 