
On a backstreet in Morioka, northern Japan, I take a deep breath and steel 
myself. I’m at a restaurant calledAzumaya 
<http://www.wankosoba-azumaya.co.jp/foreigner/english/>, about to be inducted 
into the world of competitive noodle eating. I’ve skipped lunch in preparation.

Wanko soba, literally bowl noodles, is a traditional dish in Iwate prefecture, 
and speed-eating competitions are held in the cities of Hanamaki and Morioka 
each year. On 6 November, Morioka will host the31st All Japan Wanko Soba Contest
 <http://www.nihon-kankou.or.jp/iwate/detail/03201ba2212054641>, with 176 
contestants from across Japan descending on the Nanak shopping mall for a 
feasting frenzy. (Hanamaki holds its competition in February.)

The practice dates from the 17th century, when a local lord arrived at an inn 
to find no food available other than cold buckwheat noodles. Ravenous, he 
wolfed down bowl after bowl. And so a tradition of cramming noodles down your 
throat until your insides beg for mercy was born. Today’s record stands at 559 
bowls. When my eyes bulge at that total, I’m told those are small bowls, 15 of 
them equalling one normal-size noodle bowl.
 Photograph: Getty Images 
Visitors can give wanko soba a go without entering the championship. Azumaya 
offers year-round all–you–can–eat deals for about £25. I take my seat in a 
packed tatami-matted room as waitresses arrive carrying trays of cold noodles 
with just a dash of soy sauce to help them go down. I’m motioned to hold up my 
bowl for a small serving. I slurp it down and, following the lead of locals, 
shout “hi” for another helping.

Things grow frantic. Chopsticks clack, breathing is laboured. The staff laugh 
as I slap the lid across my bowl and call time. I’ve eaten 75 bowls. Not bad, 
but a long way off that record.
• 1-Chome-12-1, Morioka, wankosoba-azumaya.co.jp 
<http://www.wankosoba-azumaya.co.jp/foreigner/english/>
 