
Ebay announced on Thursday it’s severing ties with the American Legislative 
Exchange Council (Alec) because of the lobbying group’s views on climate 
change. The online marketplace is the latest technology firm to part ways with 
the rightwing organization over environmental concerns.

“After our annual review of eBay’s memberships in trade associations and 
third-party organizations, we’ve decided not to renew our membership with 
Alec,” aneBay <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> spokesperson said.

In September, Eric Schmidt announced Google would be leaving Alec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/23/google-to-cut-ties-with-rightwing-lobby-group-over-climate-change-lies>
 because “they’re just literally lying” about climate change. This prompted a 
wave of departures fromother tech companies, including Facebook and Yelp, over 
similar concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/facebook-abandons-rightwing-lobby-group-alec>
. Microsoft had previously left Alec in July.

The current exodus from Alec marks a change from a previous round of 
departures, in whichcompanies left Alec over concerns about its stance on 
“stand your ground” legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/alec-funding-crisis-big-donors-trayvon-martin>
.

Environmental activists welcomed eBay’s move. “This is a major victory for 
those of us who have continued to pressure eBay executives to drop Alec,” said 
Ryan Canney, senior campaigner from the NGO Forecast the Facts.


Nick Surgey, director of research at the Center for Media and Democracy, said: 
“[Nearly] Alec’s entire tech membership has abandoned them over climate denial.”

Remaining Alec members include tobacco, telecommunications and fossil fuel 
companies, prompting the question of whether Alec will move away from tech 
issues and focus on the interests of its remaining members.


“You have to question whether Alec will continue to even work on tech issues,” 
Surgey said.

Jonah Sachs, co-founder and CEO of Free Range, said that beneath the surface 
of the decision to leave the conservative group might be a concern over the 
economics of tackling climate change. “Some of these companies are having to 
deal with the issue of whether completely free, unregulated markets can deal 
with the problem of climate change,” Sachs said.

Canney added: “With eBay out, we’re looking to AT&T, Verizon, FedEx and UPS to 
follow suit and distance themselves from Alec’s extreme climate denial agenda. 
If they choose to stay with Alec, we’ll be taking the issue to their customers, 
shareholders and employees.”

Alec wasn’t immediately available to respond to requests for comment as its 
communications team is “home for the holidays”, according to multiple automated 
email replies.

Update: This article has been updated to include more comments. 

The values-led business hub is funded by SC Johnson. All content is 
editorially independent except for pieces labelled “brought to you by”. Find 
out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 