
February is a month with plenty of different types of ebook on offer, as 
publishers continue experimenting to find what strikes a chord with readers.

The Friday Project declares it is reviving the tradition of the political 
pamphlet withSorry, But Has There Been a Coup? 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sorry-There-Been-Coup-ebook/dp/B006P3ACOA> (99p) by 
Steve Lowe and Alan McArthur, authors of the lugubrious humour book Is It Just 
Me, Or Is Everything Shit? The ebook takes a satirical look at the coalition 
and its politics, presented in brief sketches which poke snarky fun at such 
absurd but apparently quite true facts as thateducation minister Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> had a brief TV career 
alongside David Baddiel and once played a chaplain in boarding-school comedy "A 
Feast After Midnight".

Is there a link between the Big Society and the occult, given that Cameron got 
his central idea from writersHilaire Belloc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/hilaire-belloc> and GK 
Chesterton, <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/gk-chesterton> the 
latter a big fan of the Ouija board in his youth, ask the authors? And while 
tough, incisive Corby MP Louise Mensch claims to be the same person as novelist
Louise Bagshawe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/louise-bagshawe>
, author of romance books with titles like Sparkles, has she in fact done away 
with her in some Faustian pact to gain power? Playful and amusing, but with the 
occasional sharp bite.

Meanwhile publisher Transworld says it is reviving another good old literary 
tradition for the ebook age, the serial, by issuingArmistead Maupin's Tales of 
the City <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/armistead-maupin> in 
mini-ebook instalments, reminiscent of the way the stories first appeared as 
daily columns in the San Francisco Chronicle. The first episode – available to 
download for free – sees Mary Ann Singleton arriving in the city as a naive 
young secretary, to discover the delights of 28 Barbary Lane and its pot-loving 
landlady Mrs Madrigal; later instalments, to be charged for, will be released 
weekly. Maupin is instantly captivating and the e-chapters are nicely 
presented, so the idea could take.

February's offering from the Penguin Shorts series 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/static/cs/uk/0/pubsetpages/penguin_shorts/index.html> 
is a collection of Will Self's Real Meals columns from the New Statesman about 
dining out the way most people do it – not in the fancy surroundings of a 
celebrity chef's restaurant, but in McDonalds, Pizza Express, a curry house or 
Nando's. Titled The Unbearable Lightness of Being a Prawn Cracker (£1.99), it 
sees Self take an entertaining trip around the less celebrated of our eateries 
while dissecting his own fast-food addictions. The writer calculates he has 
eaten a running total of 6,530 or 5,128 square feet worth of pizza, mostly from 
Pizza Express, describing it as "for my kids … the staple food in the way that 
sorghum is for subsistence farmers in sub-Saharan Africa". He also muses on the 
reasons for his enduring loyalty to Caffè Nero, and is very funny about that 
curious eating experience, the hotel breakfast. (But can it really be true, as 
the writer claims, that smart French bakery chain Paul is considered, in 
France, the equivalent only of our homely Greggs?)

Ebook original novels come both glossy and gritty this month. Dead Rich 
(£3.99) – from Bedford Square Books, <http://www.bedfordsquarebooks.com/> a 
digital publishing venture run by high-profile agent Ed Victor – is written by 
Louise Fennell, who apparently moves in very glitzy circles, being married to a 
famous celebrity jeweller. It's a buoyant black comedy about beautiful 
A-listers living dissipated lives under the fascinated gaze of the media, and 
it comes with the firm approval of Joanna Lumley, whose "Absolutely Fabulous" 
alter ego Patsy would no doubt also have a good cackle.

Firmly at the other end of the literary spectrum are two crime novels from 
Scottish digital-only publisher Blasted Heath <http://blastedheath.com/>, run 
by Allan Guthrie, himself a crime writer as well as a literary agent. Wolf 
Tickets by Ray Banks (£2.99), a writer known for hard-hitting realism, is the 
tale of a thief who gets a taste of his own medicine when his girlfriend runs 
off with £20k and his favourite leather jacket, leaving him to plot revenge. 
The rather wonderful term "wolf tickets" is, we're told, slang for someone who 
means trouble. MeanwhileThe Unburied Dead 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Unburied-Dead-ebook/dp/B0074EW5J4> by Douglas 
Lindsay (£2.99) is a police thriller about a psychopath stalking the streets of 
Glasgow.

Some publishers seem to be seeing ebooks more as a marketing tool than 
anything else, offering taster-sized digital portions at low cost, and hoping 
to get you keen for more;The Euro Crisis for Dummies 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Euro-Crisis-Dummies-ebook/dp/B0076L9T94> by Julian 
Knight (99p) is a handy little summary of the topic which takes care to remind 
you there are other Dummies titles that can teach you further. Elsewhere Katie 
Fforde has a short story,The Undercover Cook 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Undercover-Cook-ebook/dp/B006ZA280O> (99p), tucked 
in alongside a sizeable sampler of her forthcoming full-length novel.

But the revelation this month of just how well some UK self-published authors 
are doing with their cut-price novels – such as journalist Kerry Wilkinson, 
whose readable Manchester-set detective novelLocked In  
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/products/kerry+wilkinson/locked+in+28ebook29/8810140/>
(98p) was an Amazon.co.uk's bestseller, selling some 250,000 copies in three 
months – is going to keep them firmly on their toes in the months to come.
 