
There are better-known songs about Brisbane and Queensland, for sure.


For one, the Go-Betweens’ Cattle and Cane 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pq1s6FCEoZM> – written by Grant McLennan about 
growing up in northern Queensland, travelling home to his parents’ farm on a 
train “through fields of cattle, through fields of cane”.

The Saints’ (I’m) Stranded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/13/australian-anthems-the-saints-im-stranded>
, for two – released in September 1976 in the middle of rightwing politician 
Joh Bjelke-Petersen’s 20-year tenure as premier – was a hurricane of noise and 
fury, railing against disaffection and the repressive system that this young 
Brisbane band found themselves surrounded by.

The Saints released three albums in as many years, splitting in 1979: singer 
Chris Bailey held on to the band name, while guitarist Ed Kuepper formed the 
trail-blazing Laughing Clowns, a rock band with a strong jazz influence and a 
blistering horn section, following the path laid on the Saints’ second and 
third albums, the incredible Eternally Yours and Prehistoric Sounds.Laughing 
Clowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/jan/28/true-tales-the-laughing-clowns>
 were a band unparalleled in Australian rock history, contemporaries of the 
Triffids, the Go-Betweens, the Birthday Party and the Moodists, with a clear 
(acknowledged) influence on all.

I do not want to talk about any of those fine records today, though. The one I 
do want to talk about – the fiery, inclement, stripped-back helpless swagger of 
Kuepper’s Electrical Storm – is, to my way of thinking, even more evocative of 
my chosen hometown of Brisbane.

The title track of Kuepper’s first solo album in 1985, after the dissolution 
of Laughing Clowns, it was a song that seemed to sum up much of what was 
exciting, enticing and cloying about Brisbane to me. The very studio air around 
Kuepper seemed to crackle with electricity as he attacked his guitar’s 
fretboard, the drums a welter of anticipation, the storm clouds building 
overhead.

Having moved to The Gap halfway through 2008 – and been caught out driving 
right through the heart ofthe area’s worst storm in decades 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skrnDGl1LxQ> (Kevin Rudd later likened our 
battered suburb to a “war zone”) – my young family was well familiar with our 
neighbours’ chosen pastime of sitting out on the deck in the early evening with 
a few tinnies and appropriate clothing. They would watch, hour after hour, as 
the skies flashed with mind-stretching displays of lightning and thunder.

Often, it wouldn’t even rain. It didn’t need to. The tension in the air was so 
extreme.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk6jJoclgPQM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk6jJoclgPQM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk6jJoclgPQM&media=>
I’ve come to realise in the six years since my arrival that Brisbane exerts an 
odd fascination for and hold over its inhabitants. Generations of musicians and 
artists have sooner or later got to thinking that to make any sort of dent in 
the outside world they need to leave behind its comforting foliage and endless 
rolling suburbs for the promised land of Sydney or Melbourne – perhaps even 
further abroad.

All that’s left behind is the stubborn and the surly, the glorious sunshine 
and countless playgrounds. Yet they all come back eventually. It must be 
something about the weather, about the easygoing nature of the city and its 
lack of demands upon the individual.

As Kuepper sings:

Well I had my reservation booked

 On the first bus out of town

 I thought that it would take forever

Just to leave this one-story town

 And I didn’t think of leaving

 No, I’m still here in this house

 Watchin’ this electrical storm

He’s been reworking the song ever since.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8p9xCfk3F4s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8p9xCfk3F4s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8p9xCfk3F4s&media=> 