
If Ed Miliband thought the Saturday headlines were inauspicious, then the 
Sunday front-page headlines were ghastly. “Labour voters say Miliband unfit to 
be PM,”trilled the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/Politics/article1481587.ece>. Shadow 
education minister “plunges in the dagger”, said theMail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2826937/Ed-shadow-minister-plunges-dagger-Tristram-Hunt-joins-Labour-revolt-poll-says-Miliband-liability.html>
. “Labour push to axe Miliband”,alleged the Sun on Sunday 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/6073809/Andy-Burnham-primed-to-replace-Ed-Miliband-as-Labour-leader.html>
.

Alongside the predictable pro-Tory stirrers were splashes in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/08/ed-miliband-crisis-labour-mps-back-leadership-change>
 (“Miliband in new crisis as senior MPs back leadership change”) and the
Independent on Sunday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/labour-funding-crisis-jewish-donors-drop-toxic-ed-miliband-9849299.html>
 (“Jewish donors drop ‘toxic’ Miliband”). Even the normally loyalSunday Mirror 
carried a piece 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/ed-miliband-has-until-christmas-4594216> 
headlined “Miliband’s got six weeks to shape up.”
 More bad news for Ed Miliband. Photograph: AP 
Meanwhile, the TV and radio news and current affairs programmes were following 
custom and practice by using the negative headlines as a peg for interviews and 
speculative analysis, all of it suggesting that theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader was toast.

Nor could Miliband take any heart from Monday’s national newspapers as the 
feeding frenzy continued: “Miliband has lost public confidence, aide admits 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4262918.ece>” (the Times); 
“Labour admits Miliband crisis may cost it election” (Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/11220440/Whats-worse-for-Labour-losing-Ed-Miliband-or-keeping-him.html>
); and “Labour’s turmoil as ‘posse’ plots a coup to replace Miliband” (Daily 
Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/533469/Labour-s-turmoil-posse-plots-coup-to-replace-Ed-Miliband>
).

The Daily Mail carried a two-page article 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2827902/Labour-committing-political-suicide.html>
 claiming Labour was “committing suicide” and an editorial that disingenuously 
denied suggestions that Miliband was being subjected to a rightwing plot. Look 
at the Observer’s report, it said, in which is was claimed that some 20 shadow 
ministers were on the point of calling for Miliband’s resignation.

His supporters may have been lifted just a little by articles in the Daily 
Mirror <http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/big-guns-take-aim-ed-4601813> and 
the Independent claiming that “Labour’s big guns” were telling unnamed critics 
“to put up or shut up”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415635183388%2Ff1a430d5-07ef-4cb4-b73b-fef8069b4183-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20genuine%20crisis%20or%20monstering%20campaign%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20genuine%20crisis%20or%20monstering%20campaign%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415635183388%2Ff1a430d5-07ef-4cb4-b73b-fef8069b4183-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Labour leader Ed Miliband: is he as hapless a leader as the headlines suggest? 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
But such supposedly supportive pieces were fingers in the dyke amid the deluge 
of negative articles. According to the Guardian, even the attempts to shore up 
Miliband’s position were making matters worse.

National newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/national-newspapers>, 
having picked up the knife originally plunged into the Labour leader’s back by 
the New Statesman, have clearly been bent on finishing him off.

Editors have not had to work too hard. They have been aided and abetted in 
their attempt to terminate Miliband’s political career by citing criticisms 
from a range of Labour MPs. In time-honoured, if dishonourable, fashion, most 
of them have chosen to brief reporters on a confidential basis.

Stop there for a moment and ask some pertinent questions. Is Miliband as 
hapless a leader as the headlines and opinion polls suggest? Does the unanimity 
of the reporting across the political spectrum, as the Mail contends, give 
credence to the notion that Labour is suffering from a real internal revolt? Or 
is it all a media-manufactured pseudo-crisis? In other words, is this a genuine 
story?

First, never underestimate the agenda-setting capabilities of a dominant 
rightwing press. Second, consider the fact that Miliband was elected as leader 
without obtaining a majority of his parliamentary party colleagues.

Third, factor in the party’s nervousness engendered by Miliband’s poor poll 
ratings. But, fourth, in spite of Miliband’s personal standing, note also the 
likelihood of Labour doing well at next year’s general election.

Let’s disentangle this complexity. There is nothing new about pre-electoral 
anti-Labour propaganda in Tory-cheerleading newspapers. It is part of Britain’s 
post-war political history stretching back to Clement Attlee.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415636234182%2F8203e5f3-ddc1-41cc-bf13-3bd075741d06-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20genuine%20crisis%20or%20monstering%20campaign%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20genuine%20crisis%20or%20monstering%20campaign%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415636234182%2F8203e5f3-ddc1-41cc-bf13-3bd075741d06-1020x612.jpeg>
 Tony Blair: the only Labour leader to avoid a berating from Tory newspapers. 
Photograph: Adrian Dennis/AP 
Every Labour leader – with the single exception of Tony Blair – has suffered. 
Three modern leaders were subjected to especially harsh treatment. Gordon Brown 
was scathingly lampooned in 2010 as a ditherer, with papers giving huge 
coverage to supposed plotters within the party.Neil Kinnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/neil-kinnock> was savagely mocked in 1992 
as “the Welsh windbag” among many other insults about his competence. Michael 
Foot was witheringly derided for his inappropriate dress sense as well as his 
political stance in 1983.

There was a grain of truth in each case, but the attention paid to the various 
misrepresentations of their characters was disproportionate.
 Michael Foot, Gordon Brown and Neil Kinnock: subjected to especially harsh 
treatment. Photograph: Corbis; Zed Nelson; Getty 
So it is hardly new to witness Labour party leaders being demonised in the 
media. It was significant that Kinnock should havewaded in on Miliband’s behalf 
on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/09/lord-kinnock-critics-ed-miliband-cowardly-politically-suicidal>
.

Aside from his assault on the “anonymity and cowardice” of the critics, he 
dealt head-on with typical portrayals of Miliband as “remote, cerebral and 
weird”. That, said Kinnock, is “a total contrast to the man as he really is”.

Lord Kinnock was speaking from experience and from the heart. He endured a 
prolonged character assassination throughout his party leadership that remains 
something of a political landmark.

After months in which the Mail, Express, Telegraph, Daily Star and the Sun had 
heaped abuse on him, the campaign culminated in an iconic Sun front page in 
which Kinnock’s head was superimposed on a lightbulb with the headline: “If 
Kinnock wins today will the last person to leave Britain please turn out the 
lights.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415635621171%2Ff28b581e-ddf9-4c43-bbb7-dbca6f5bfdf7-1618x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20genuine%20crisis%20or%20monstering%20campaign%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20genuine%20crisis%20or%20monstering%20campaign%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2014%2Fnov%2F10%2Fed-miliband-crisis-monstering-campaign-british-press-labour-leader-rightwing-newspapers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415635621171%2Ff28b581e-ddf9-4c43-bbb7-dbca6f5bfdf7-1618x2040.jpeg>
 Front page of the Sun newspaper during the 1992 election. 
Following that vilification of Kinnock, and the subsequent loss of an election 
Labour was expected to win, the party’s emergent young guard – Peter Mandelson, 
Philip Gould and Alastair Campbell – forged a news management strategy in 
company with Tony Blair.

Spin certainly helped in getting Blair into Downing Street but, once in 
office, its forceful application was resented by newspaper and broadcasting 
editors. Spin was transformed into a four-letter word of abuse that eventually 
undermined Labour.

Labour was so scarred by that experience it dismantled its spin machine and, 
in so doing, has left Miliband to face the consequences. Similarly, the central 
discipline imposed on MPs by Blair’s machine also disappeared.

The resulting lack of control has emboldened MPs to do what was unthinkable in 
the Blair era by offering themselves up to a media ever hungry for a political 
scandal.

They have no clear alternative to Miliband. They know there is no mechanism to 
elect a new leader. But they appear to have been rattled by a gradual decline 
in the party’s electoral chances as evidenced in opinion polls and the possible 
collapse of the party’s Scottish vote.

By contrast, the rightwing newspapers read the situation differently. Labour 
remains, even if narrowly, the party most likely to return the largest number 
of seats in May 2015. It is therefore in their interests to exacerbate any hint 
of internal Labour revolt.

They have latched on to complaints from disillusioned Labour supporters. 
Witness the bitter attack last week by Harold Wilson’s former press secretary, 
Joe Haines. Now aged 86, he has been one of the Labour party’s greatest 
loyalists so his article in the Telegraph, a paper he has long scorned, was 
significant.

He called on Miliband to resign not “because he is a PR disaster, though he 
is”, but because of “his inability to understand how the world of politics has 
changed.”

Haines wrote: “He is not a Marxist but he has some of the Marxist rigidity of 
thinking. Tony Benn is dead but his convictions live on inEd Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>.”

This mention of Benn, yet another figure demonised by a hostile press and who 
also caused deep splits in Labour’s ranks, was calculated to wound and to raise 
alarm bells. As a result, dissident Labour MPs followed Haines’s lead and the 
newspapers, in company with news broadcasters, have had a field day since.

Therefore, claims that the crisis has been entirely confected by the rightwing 
press are not, in this instance, entirely valid. Editors and political 
journalists have taken advantage of the situation, but they did not manufacture 
it out of thin air.

They have been helped to an extent by unguarded statements from MPs who should 
know better or, at least, show have grasped that their words could be twisted. 
For example, the normally reliable and sensible shadow energy secretary 
Caroline Flint was lured into saying “some of colleagues are having jitters”.

Headlines were bound to follow, and did. Far worse, of course, was the 
statement by shadow education secretary Tristram Hunt 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2826937/Ed-shadow-minister-plunges-dagger-Tristram-Hunt-joins-Labour-revolt-poll-says-Miliband-liability.html>
. What on earth did he expect to achieve by saying: “I never believed the 
answer to Labour’s problems was to show people more of Ed Miliband. It was a 
ridiculous idea dreamed up by his advisers who have served him badly.

“It has been a complete failure. It is making things worse, not better. Ed has 
excellent qualities but that is not the way to show them. It is absurd.”

No editor – right, left or centre – could fail to point to the significance of 
that opinion. Hunt’s subsequent Twitter claim that the Mail on Sunday story was 
“nonsense”, along with a pledge of support for Miliband, hardly compensated for 
his mistake. Meanwhile, mischief-making backbenchers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/08/embattled-ed-miliband-labour-plotters-circle-coup>
, including Simon Danczuk, were given ample airtime throughout Sunday with 
their calls for Miliband to step down. The story may not have been “all got up 
by the meedja”, but the media was only too happy to give it legs.

There will be more to come. Despite Tory MPs making life difficult for prime 
minister David Cameron over the European Union, a diversion he could have done 
without while his opposite number was on the ropes, the questioning of 
Miliband’s leadership suitability has become a recurrent media theme.

However, rightwing newspapers do not appear eager to see Miliband removed as 
leader. Better, they clearly believe, to keep him in situ and berate him 
continually in order to undermine Labour.

Witness Boris Johnson’s sarcastic column in Monday’s Telegraph in which he 
suggested the Tories should “save the Panda” – a nickname for Miliband that 
emerged after an unwise description of him by the former Labour justice 
secretary, Jack Straw.

“It would be in our interests to protect the poor beleaguered Lefty,” wrote 
Johnson, “in case he is replaced by someone more threatening.”

The Sun disagreed in its leading article 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/sun_says/4508014/The-Sun-says.html>. 
Despite internal opposition to Miliband, Labour could win the election, it 
said, and implied that the “plotters” should redouble their efforts. It 
concluded: “As the saying goes: when you strike at the king, you must kill him.”

But the Times, in referring to Miliband as a “damaged, beleaguered leader”, 
believes Labour “is stuck with Mr Miliband for now, and he with them”.

That is probably the prevailing view among pro-Tory owners, editors and 
journalists. The rightwing press has Labour on the run and belittling its 
leader will soon become very nasty indeed. And don’t believe that the power of 
the press is on the wane.

Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, despite falling 
print readerships, still set the daily agenda. Broadcasters follow their lead. 
Nor does social media have the collective muscle to combat the fire power 
generated by the press. Users may nit-pick but they have not yet been able to 
challenge the newspaper-generated climate.

Papers will play a crucial role over the coming months and it is obvious that 
editors now scent six months of blood. Doubtless the Sun is already preparing 
for Miliband’s lightbulb moment.
 