
When I was a boy my grandfather, a Kamilaroi man from western New South Wales, 
used to tell me to look around, “this is your country”, he’d say, “they haven’t 
taken it away from us”. This was his small protest, an act of defiance. In the 
same way he’d tell me I didn’t have to salute the flag or stand for the anthem. 
He planted a seed of questioning, wondering: Why were things the way they were? 
What put us here on the fringes of society? What made our people outcasts in a 
land that was ours?

My grandfather had no real western education but he understood something very 
simple, very basic and very human: this was his land, his place, a place his 
people had made theirs for tens of thousands of years. Except this was not his 
anymore, not according to the law.

Tony Abbott praises Eddie Mabo for 'having a go' on visit to Torres Strait
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/24/tony-abbott-praises-eddie-mabo-for-having-a-go-on-visit-to-torres-strait>
From the moment a British flag was placed in this soil, all rights were 
extinguished for the hundreds of nations that existed here. The Wiradjuri, the 
Bundjalung, the Arrernte, the Pitjanjatjarra, the Gunditjmara, the Paredarerme, 
had never seen a white man yet they were now subject to his law. And to the 
British these nations, people with their distinct languages, customs, laws, 
their etiquette, their interconnected trade routes, their song and dance and 
art, were simply invisible: they did not exist. This was the doctrine of terra 
nullius proclaiming this an empty land and free to claim uncontested for the 
crown.

Of course it didn’t have to be this way. The rights to land of native people 
had been recognised for hundreds of years. Throughout the British colonies the 
laws and cultures of the local people were acknowledged under common law. This 
was the case in Africa, North America, New Zealand, where treaties were signed 
conferring sovereignty and tenure. So, why not here?

Our fate was sealed at first sight. The early descriptions of Indigenous 
people dismissed us as wretched and brutish, as treacherous. As one said “the 
Australian nigger is the lowest type of human creature”. In the words if 
another we were “...in a state of moral unfitness for heaven”.

The great European age of discovery brought with it theories of human origins 
and development that placed Europeans themselves at the top of a hierarchy that 
posited the so called savages and primitives at the bottom. In her book
Aboriginal Populations in the Mind: Race and Primitivity in Psychoanalysis 
<http://cup.columbia.edu/book/aboriginal-populations-in-the-mind/9780231125833>
, Celia Brickman explains the term “savage” itself places its subject in the 
realm of nature not culture and “primitive” referred to people at the very 
threshold of the transformation from animal to human.

Christianity identified black skinned people as the descendants of Ham, the 
banished son of Noah. Science developed notions of humans as animals with rank 
according to colour. Later, the skulls of Aboriginal people would be studied 
for alleged proof of our primitive minds and lack of civilisation. In the 
century after settlement, the publication of Darwin’s On The Origin Of Species 
and the growth of the study of anthropology would entrench popular notions of 
Aboriginal inferiority.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftony-abbott-referendum-australia-constitution-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440498590521%2FKP_402840_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Abbott%3A%20we%20can't%20rush%20referendum%20on%20Australia's%20constitution%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftony-abbott-referendum-australia-constitution-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Abbott%3A%20we%20can%27t%20rush%20referendum%20on%20Australia%27s%20constitution%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Ftony-abbott-referendum-australia-constitution-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440498590521%2FKP_402840_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Speaking at the Torres Strait, Tony Abbott defends delays to the referendum to 
recognise Indigenous people in the constitution. Link to video  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/aug/25/tony-abbott-referendum-australia-constitution-video>
To the British, the nations of this land had nothing they could identify as 
civilisation, culture or political organisation. Where were the crops and 
farms? Where were the fishing villages or towns? To British eyes, this was 
indeed an empty land.

When I was a young journalist a story caught my eye of a man, like my 
grandfather, who didn’t believe what British law, now Australian law, said 
about him. Eddie Mabo was from Mer in the Torres Strait and armed with a legal 
team had brought a case all the way to the high court to prove that we were 
here, we had an inheritance passed down over millennia, and that it was time to 
vanquish the myth of terra nullius.

Stan Grant: I can tell you how Adam Goodes feels. Every Indigenous person has 
felt it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
I recall explaining to an incredulous news director that this stood to be a 
moment of history. Despite his scepticism I covered that first day of hearings. 
There were to be many more and Eddie Mabo would not live to see the judgment, 
but more than 30 years later aprime minister has made a pilgrimage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/24/tony-abbott-praises-eddie-mabo-for-having-a-go-on-visit-to-torres-strait>
 to his grave and described it as a sacred place for all Australians.

Eddie Mabo’s victory changed us as a nation. But if terra nullius has been 
struck down as a legal concept it lives still in our minds, our hearts and our 
constitution. The man dubbed the father of reconciliation, Patrick Dodson, said 
to me recently that recognising Indigenous people in the founding document of 
the nation would complete Eddie Mabo’s battle to bury terra nullius.

This is a chance to ask who we are as a nation. To remember that we have a 
dark legacy of denial and injustice, but that our law was bigger than our 
prejudice. To remind ourselves that when footballer Adam Goodes istaunted as an 
“ape” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/i-can-tell-you-how-adam-goodes-feels-every-indigenous-person-has-felt-it>
 that we haven’t yet cleansed ourselves of 18th century notions of Indigenous 
people as blues, savages and primitives.

My Sky News colleague Paul Murray suggested that we celebrate Eddie Mabo with 
a national day, that here is a hero that our children should learn of. Yes, and 
on that day I would remember too my grandfather who taught me that this was, is 
and always will be Aboriginal land. And you are welcome too.
 