
Edgar Wright's next film will be Baby Driver, a project described as "a wild 
spin on the action and crime genre" byEmpire magazine 
<http://www.empireonline.com/news/story.asp?NID=25279>.

Deadline reports 
<http://www.deadline.com/2014/07/comic-con-off-ant-man-hill-edgar-wright-sets-sights-on-baby-driver/>
 that the British director will resurrect the project after his high-profile 
departure from Marvel's comic book movieAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man>. Baby Driver will be put together 
with Working Title, the British production company with which Wright 
collaborated on his "Three Cornettos" comedy trilogy: Shaun of the Dead, Hot 
Fuzz and The World's End.

Wright originally intended the film, for which he also wrote the screenplay, 
to follow 2010's Scott Pilgrim vs the World into production. Deadline says Baby 
Driver, which is reportedly being fast-tracked, will be a "collision of crime, 
action, music and sound". It is not known if Simon Pegg and Nick Frost, who 
appeared in all the Cornettos films, will star.

 Little else is known about the project, but Baby Driver is the title of an 
album track from the iconic 1970 Simon and Garfunkel album Bridge Over Troubled 
Water. The lyrics tell the story of a boy who lives a comfortable life in a 
protected home until he decides to have his first sexual experience. Wright 
suggested the film might focus on music in an interview withTotal Film in 2011 
<http://www.totalfilm.com/news/baby-driver-will-be-edgar-wright-s-next-film>. 
"I've written a script which is kind of like a musical," he said. "A departure 
for me in some ways."

In June, Wright walked away from Ant-Man, which will star Paul Rudd and 
Michael Douglas, after eight years of development due to creative differences 
with Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/16/ant-man-kevin-feige-rejects-marvel-criticism-over-edgar-wright-exit>
. He later tweeteda Photoshopped shot of Buster Keaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/27/edgar-wright-marvel-cornetto-selfie-joss-whedon-ant-man>
 (a victim of the old Hollywood studio system) in an apparent rebuke to the 
studio before deleting it. The British director was thought to be unhappy that 
Marvel commissioned rewrites of his screenplay with Joe Cornish for the film. 
Ant-Man will now shoot next month with Yes Man's Peyton Reed taking over as 
director.
 