
The news that Edgardo Bauza has been appointed Argentina coach has been 
greeted by a general shrug: most seem to regard him as the least worst 
available candidate. That may not be entirely fair on a man who has, in the 
past eight years, done two things that had long been considered impossible – 
leading an Ecuadorian club to the Copa Libertadores and leadingSan Lorenzo to 
the Copa Libertadores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/aug/14/san-lorenzo-copa-libertadores>
 – but it is also revealing.

Lionel Messi, forgiveness and the retirement that divided Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/29/lionel-messi-retirement-argentina-football-team>
In part Bauza’s accession seems underwhelming because all things in 
Argentinian football will untilLionel Messi reverses his decision to retire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/argentina-messi> from 
the national side. In part it seems underwhelming because the mess in which the 
Argentinian Football Association finds itself is so great that a change of 
coach feels pointlessly cosmetic. And in part, perhaps rather provingHarry 
Lime’s point about chaos and creativity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nyuJQ_UO7OE>, Bauza seems underwhelming 
because Argentina has such a wealth of high-class coaches.

The great stream of playing talent that brought Argentina five under-20 World 
Cups between 1995 and 2007 may be drying up – Messi, Sergio Agüero and Ángel Di 
María stand at the end of that great tradition, but Argentinian coaching has 
arguably never been stronger. Five of the quarter-finalists at the 2015 Copa 
América were coached by Argentinians; six were this year. The great surge of 
Conmebol’s Pacific nations described by Sergio Levinsky inIssue 18 of The 
Blizzard <https://www.theblizzard.co.uk/product/issue-eighteen/> is built on 
Argentinian expertise.

And it’s that, of course, that makes the 23-year drought since their last 
trophy so galling. It’s painful not because Argentinian football is bad – it 
hasn’tstumbled into grouchy senescence like Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/28/brazil-copa-america-paraguay>
; it’s painful because it’s so good and, realistically, the good times can’t 
last for ever.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fargentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentina's%20Lionel%20Messi%20retires%20from%20international%20football%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fargentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentina%27s%20Lionel%20Messi%20retires%20from%20international%20football%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fargentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video&media=>
Argentina’s Lionel Messi retires from international football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/27/argentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video>
If there was ever a good time for Argentinian football administration, it is 
long forgotten. It will be some time before the present AFA extricates itself 
from the shadow of its former president Julio Grondona, whodied shortly after 
the World Cup in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/31/fifa-julio-grondona-dies-argentina>
 and so avoided a range of corruption charges. Even on the day of his funeral, 
AFA’s offices were raided by financial investigators. No permanent president 
has been appointed to replace him, an election last December producing a 38-38 
tie despite there being only 75 delegates. A Fifa normalisation committee is in 
charge.

Armando Pérez, the head of the normalisation committee, insisted Bauza was the 
best of the candidates interviewed, although he rather undermined his claim by 
forgetting Bauza’s name. Bauza is not Marcelo Bielsa, who perhaps was never a 
realistic candidate, and he is not Jorge Sampaoli, who might have taken the job 
had he notbeen appointed so recently at Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/jorge-sampaoli-appointed-manager-sevilla>
, but he is an experienced coach with a recent history of success. In the 
context of the modern game, in which international management tends to be for 
the old, the inexperienced and the patriotic, it could even be argued that at 
58, he is nearer his peak than many.

Bauza is also a realist, something evident in the pragmatic football his teams 
tend to play, but also in his willingness immediately to address the Messi 
issue. Although Bauza hasn’t spoken to Messi yet, he said he was “optimistic” 
about his chances of persuading him to return. “Hopefully the talk I have with 
him will help him to continue in the national team,” he went on. “I want to 
explain to Messi my ideas.”

Brazil fail to reach World Cup? Don’t rule it out as they head to Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/12/brazil-world-cup-qualifer-argentina>
Those ideas are relatively easily summarised. In his playing days at Rosario 
Central, when he gained the nickname “el Paton” – Bigfoot – Bauza was heavily 
influenced by his coach Carlos Griguol, a pioneer of video analysis noted for 
his beret and his habit of slapping players before they left the dressing room. 
He specialised in getting the best out of smaller sides, winning the league 
with Central and Ferro Carril Oeste. “I am among those who think that everybody 
has to attack and everybody has to defend,” Bauza said. “Football today is like 
this. You can defend in the attacking half if the pressure is high. But it’s 
easier when you have quality players like theArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> team. The options they offer 
are many.”

That, perhaps, hints at the biggest concern. Bauza is not used to options. 
Like Griguol, his greatest triumphs have come when triumph has not been 
expected, when players have been prepared to stick to a system – even if his 
San Lorenzo had a reputation for being a little slower and more traditional 
than the general mass of clubs in Argentina’s post-Bielsa era. He may argue 
that Messi is used, at Barcelona, to close down space, but he no longer does it 
with the ferocity he used to and, besides, it’s one thing to follow 
instructions from Luis Enrique at Barcelona, quite another to buy wholly into 
the plan of somebody whose highest-profile jobs have been at San Lorenzo and 
São Paulo.

But then, as Euro 2016 demonstrated, basic solidity garnished with a little 
flair can go a long way in international football. Bauza may not be the most 
charismatic or exciting of choices, but against the background of chaos, he may 
not be the wrong choice either.

Jonathan Wilson’s history of Argentinian football, Angels with Dirty Faces 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Angels-Dirty-Faces-Footballing-Argentina/dp/1409144437/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1470149461&sr=1-1>
, will be published in two weeks
 