
The world has just been profoundly shocked by a particularly senseless and 
cruel example ofpolitical assassination 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/03/29/Doumer_assassination_Guardian_7_May_1932.jpeg>
; unless the Governor of Alabama intervenes with a reprieve which will allow a 
much-discussed case to be carried to the Supreme Court of the United States 
there is the gravest risk that all those who care for law, order, and the 
decencies of civilised life will suffer another horrid shock.


Friday, June 24, has been fixed for the execution of seven negro youths 
<http://www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/article/h-1456>, not one of them older 
than twenty years, who were tried at Scottsboro, Alabama, a year ago on a 
charge of having raped two white girls of bad reputation. In the beginning nine 
negro boys were arraigned on the same charge of rape, after being arrested in 
the first place on a charge of vagrancy arising out of a fight with some white 
youths. The charge of rape was added later when two of the negroes’ travelling 
companions were found to be white girls of the looser sort.


Black church bombed in Birmingham, Alabama: from the archive, 16 September 1963
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/16/16th-street-baptist-church-birmingham-alabama-1963>
In the case of one boy – aged fourteen – the jury could not agree; the 
remaining eight were sentenced to death. One of them – a child of thirteen when 
he was charged – has been put back for another trial; the remaining seven, 
whose sentence has been confirmed by the Supreme Court ofAlabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, are to die on June 24.


It is a tangled and evil tale of negroes, “poor whites,” and racial jealousy, 
complicated by this time with Communist propaganda and disputes over the 
conduct of such defence as there has been. But the main point is this; that in 
no other civilised country could such a trial have been held and such sentences 
pronounced.


Even a month ago the “Times” New York correspondent was writing:

Outside the South the case is very generally regarded as an example of “legal 
lynching”; and even in the South there are many who admit that the evidence 
against the boys is as flimsy as it well could be, and only support their 
conviction on social and political grounds.

The truth is that if these seven boys are done to death next month a blacker 
chapter will have been written in the history of the Southern States than any 
which records the numerous mob lynching in those regions, for this lamentable 
affair has every appearance of mass lynching by legal process.

There is still time for the word of restraint – not from the voice of mercy, 
but from the voice of reason, justice, and self-respect.

Following several US Supreme Court appeals and retrials, five of the nine 
Scottsboro Boys were found guilty. They have all since been pardoned.
 