
Prominent activists ranging from Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> to Pussy Riot plan on 
Friday to spread online protests against growing government restrictions on 
citizens’ expression, marking an annual world day against cyber censorship.


In one message, Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, 
who has been in self-imposed exile in Russia since 2013 afterrevealing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/edward-snowden-nsa-whistleblower-surveillance>
 via the Guardian that the US government ran secret and illegal domestic and 
international surveillance programmes, will tell the public: “Even if you’re 
not doing anything wrong, you’re being watched and recorded.”

The Chinese artist Ai Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> will also take part. One 
of his messages will read: “Without freedom of speech there is no modern world, 
just a barbaric one.”

Ai has long suffered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/video/2015/sep/08/ai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech>
 from various forms of oppression and censorship by China’s government.

Other messages will be published from citizens of North Korea. Amnesty 
International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> says 
North Korea subjects its people to the highest levels of censorship in the 
world, with the vast majority of citizens denied any access to the internet.

The online messages are part of activities to mark World Day Against Cyber 
Censorship 
<http://en.rsf.org/world-day-against-cyber-censorship-12-03-2010,36566>, an 
annual online event started in 2008 by Reporters Without Borders and Amnesty 
International.

This year, Amnesty has teamed up with the controversial online 
advertisement-blocking company AdBlock to bring activists’ voices to the public.

On Friday, when users of AdBlock begin browsing online they will be presented 
with an announcement asking if they would like to see messages from Amnesty 
International where ads would normally appear, if they were not blocked.

According to a statement from Amnesty International, if users click through, 
they will see the notes written by the activists as well as content from 
ordinary people “whom governments have tried to silence”.

“Authorities don’t just use handcuffs and arrests but also media attacks,” the 
message fromPussy Riot <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pussy-riot> will read.

Pussy Riot, an activist female punk collective that has had frequent 
high-profile run-ins with Russian authorities, released its latestprotest song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/russia-pussy-riot-latest-punk-protest-prison-selective-weapon>
 last month.

Many governments around the world are “avidly” seeking to control “ever 
greater” aspects of their citizens’ online communication, Amnesty warned on 
Friday, while some seek laws empowering their authorities to carry out 
intrusive mass surveillance while censoring what people see online.

“Others are trying to acquire technologies that allow them to spy on people, 
hack their devices or censor free expression online,” the Amnesty statement 
said.

In 2015, Amnesty recorded people being arrested in more than 16 countries for 
saying or doing online what would in most countries be regarded as normal 
freedom of expression.

“Some states are engaged in Orwellian levels of surveillance, particularly 
targeting the lives and work of the people who defend our human rights – 
lawyers, journalists and peaceful activists,” said Salil Shetty, Amnesty 
International secretary general.

“This continuing development of new methods of repression in reaction to 
increased connectivity is a major threat to our freedom of expression.”

Gabriel Cubbage, chief executive of AdBlock, said the company would show 
Amnesty’s online banners in place of ads to its 40 million users for one day 
only.

The rise of advert blocking software has prompted great anxiety in the online 
news media, which relies on ad revenue, especially when content is free.

The controversy over ad blocking does not seem to have deterred the likes of 
Snowden and Pussy Riot from participating in AdBlock’s event with Amnesty.


 