
No explanation has yet emerged for why EgyptAir flight MS804 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egyptair-flight-ms804> crashed en route from 
Paris to Cairo with 66 passengers and crew on board. Although Egypt conceded 
that terrorism seemed more likely to have caused the disaster than a technical 
error, no group has claimed responsibility.

So what are the theories investigators could be looking at? 


A bomb

Body part and seats from EgyptAir flight MS804 found, says Greece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/egyptian-military-says-debris-from-egyptair-flight-ms804-found-in-sea>
A terrorist motive is highly plausible, given recent attacks in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> and the downing in Egyptian 
airspace of theRussian Metrojet airliner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/egypt-plane-crash-bomb-jet-russia-security-service>
 last year that killed 224 people. Russia declared in mid-November it had found 
sufficient evidence of an improvised explosive having caused that disaster.

Security experts fear that airport staff with access to sensitive areas pose 
as much of an inside threat in major European hubs such as Paris’s Charles de 
Gaulle as in north African airports.

The EgyptAir plane should have been searched repeatedly on its last 24-hour 
itinerary via Cairo, Eritrea and Tunisia. But French ministers acknowledged 
that a bomb could have been smuggled aboard at Charles de Gaulle, despite 
heightened security measures, and any lapse would be a serious blow to 
passenger confidence in air travel.

Some experts have said the final movements of the plane – a 90-degree turn to 
the left followed by a 360-degree rightwards turn, according to data from Greek 
military radar – could indicate a plane out of control after an explosion, 
although others have cautioned against reading too much into the movements.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Missing%20EgyptAir%20flight%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Missing%20EgyptAir%20flight%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer&media=>
Missing EgyptAir flight: what we know so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/19/egyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer>
A missile

Jean-Paul Troadec, the former president of France’s air accident investigation 
bureau, said a missile was a possibility.

Although the EgyptAir flight was not flying over a war zone, the shooting down 
offlight MH17 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh17> 
from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur in 2014 demonstrated the vulnerability of 
passenger airliners, even at 33,000 feet (10,058 metres).

While Nato military exercises have been conducted with aircraft carriers and 
jets in the eastern Mediterranean, potential jihadi terrorists are not believed 
to have weapons with sufficient range, even over land, and the EgyptAir flight 
was at an altitude of 37,000 feet.

A British holiday jet travelling to Egypt last autumn reportedly came close to 
an army missile that was later discounted as a flare from military exercises, 
while the government denied there had been any risk to the plane.

A deliberate act of sabotage

The swerving of the plane could suggest a struggle for control, perhaps in a 
hijack situation or even between crew members.

After 9/11, hijackers have had a harder task to reach the flight deck since 
locked doors were introduced – but the locks have made it easier for a pilot or 
an intruder to sabotage a flight.

The lack of a mayday or a response to air traffic control requests for a 
12-minute period before the plane spiralled down will be a question for 
investigators.

The pilot of flight MS804, Mohamed Said Shoukair, had more than 6,000 flying 
hours, while the co-pilot, Mohamed Mamdouh Ahmed, had almost 3,000.

Since the disappearance of flight MH370, pilots have been under suspicion – 
and the deliberate crashing of aGermanwings plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germanwings-flight-4u9525> by its co-pilot 
in 2015 has demonstrated the terrible possibilities, which airline bosses at 
Lufthansa admitted they could take no real measures to avert.

International investigations into the 1999 EgyptAir disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/nov/01/egyptaircrash.usa1> concluded 
that the co-pilot of flight 990 from LA to Cairo deliberately crashed the plane 
into the Atlantic, although Egypt rejected the findings.

Mechanical failure

What do we know about why EgyptAir flight MS804 crashed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/may/19/what-do-we-know-about-why-egyptair-flight-ms804-crashed>
Industry wisdom is that the chances of anything suddenly going wrong on a 
modern plane are extremely slim: the A320 is the workhorse of short-haul 
aviation and anAirbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> mantra is 
that one such model takes off or lands somewhere in the world every two seconds.

At cruising altitude in good weather, the probabilities are even more remote. 
But the history of aviation shows that technical failures have led to disaster.

A combination of events

The increasing sophistication of planes has in some circumstances left pilots 
even more susceptible when things go wrong: when readings have not tallied or 
the controls don’t function as they should.

Only 18 months ago, an Indonesia AirAsia Airbus A320 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/airasia-flight-qz8501> crashed in the Java 
Sea after stalling during an abnormally steep climb. Investigators found that a 
malfunction in rudder controls and an automated warning triggered a chain of 
events that saw the pilots mishandle the plane.

A similar combination of abnormal readings, warnings and overreaction by 
disoriented pilots was found to be behind theAir France 447 disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/27/air-france-crash-inquiry>. 

Tony Cable, a former AAIB investigator, worked on A320 incidents and said: 
“With electrical system problems, you get absolute mayhem in the cockpit with 
all sorts of messages and cockpits and alarms and it can be difficult for the 
crew to work out what’s going on. The action you can take is to flick a switch 
to reset the controls.

“But in some cases the crew haven’t operated this, and in my view they have 
got quite close to catastrophe – if it was at night they could have turned out 
badly.”
 