
"I have observed that male writers tend to get asked what they think and women 
what they feel," Eleanor Catton oncenoted in a Guardian interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/16/eleanor-catton-male-writers-female-luminaries-booker-2013>
 following her Man Booker win.

“People got very annoyed at that comment,” Catton said in a panel at Sydney 
writers' festival. “What is she doing, having an opinion? Why isn’t she 
grateful? Why doesn’t she just shut her mouth and feel something?”

The session, Judging Women 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3920/task,view_detail/>
, included Stella Prize executive director Aviva Tuffield and judge Tony Birch, 
yet the most striking aspect of the event was the correspondence in experience 
of the two female prize winners on the panel:Eleanor Catton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/eleanor-catton> and this year’s Stella Prize 
winner Clare Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/apr/30/clare-wright-worthy-stella-prizewinner>
. Women from two different countries, writing in very different literary forms 
– one fiction, one non-fiction, winning distinct literary prizes – had 
remarkably similar experiences in the reception of their works.

“We throw at female artists this expectation that their work has to speak to 
the female experience.” Catton noted, “And if it doesn’t, you’re letting the 
side down. Throwing this stumbling block in the way of female artists is 
counterintuitive.”

Wright sympathised. When the historian began her research on the Eureka 
stockade,The Forgotten Rebels of Eureka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/31/the-forgotten-rebels-of-eureka-by-clare-wright-book-review>
, she comments that colleagues asked, “‘What could you possibly say about the
Eureka stockade 
<http://australia.gov.au/about-australia/australian-story/eureka-stockade> that 
hasn’t been said in 150 years? Unless you find a stack of letters in a 
renovated house in Ballarat.’ But I went back to the same set of archives with 
a different set of questions. Women were there, other historians had just not 
seen that as in any way significant or pertinent.

“My books are seen to be about women.” Wright noted, “People don’t say 'Your 
book is about democracy.' If it’s seen to be gendered then the topic itself is 
diminished and it’s not seen to be about the big issues.”

It is an experience Catton relates in the early reception of her work as well, 
a friend advising her after reading a draft ofThe Luminaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/11/luminaries-eleanor-catton-review>
, “Because you’re writing about 12 men, it’s a book about astrology. If you 
wrote 12 women, it would be a book about women.” Catton comments, “I think 
there’s something invisible about the male experience, they’re archetypal in a 
way.”

Wright recounts a story about such invisibility. While travelling to book 
signings around the country for the release of The Forgotten Rebels of Eureka, 
she spent much of her time in bookshops around Australia, particularly airport 
bookstores. “The books placed with most prominence were always books written by 
men about male topics: sports people, politicians, war.”

Wright took photos of these prominent displays, referring to them as “dick 
tables” and began taking her book from the W section of non-fiction and placing 
it alongside others on the display. “There were two other books on Eureka by 
male authors at the time:Peter Fitzsimons’ Eureka 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/arts/review/not-quite-everymans-rebellion/story-fn9n8gph-1226536090995>
 andThe Sons of the Southern Cross by Grantlee Kieza 
<http://www.harpercollins.com.au/books/Sons-Southern-Cross-Grantlee-Kieza/?isbn=9781743097168>
 and it seemed appropriate to put it with them.”

Following the Stella win, however, she notes that her bookshelf activism is no 
longer necessary, as the work now occupies a new table, “Prizewinners, 
alongside Eleanor’s The Luminaries.”

Though Wright and Catton’s works are entirely different in form, they both 
centre on life in the goldfields. The session ends with Wright’s advice to 
Catton: “One problem I had with your book was that the two female characters 
are a prostitute and a former brothel owner. I felt what you needed was a book 
like mine so you would have the courage to cast the women in a different way.”
 