
Elton John <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> has sold more than 
250m records since launching his career, aged 15, as a pub pianist at the 
Northwood Hills hotel, close to the council house in Pinner where he grew up. 
Since then, his songwriting partnership with lyricist Bernie Taupin, formed in 
1967, has produced some of the best known records in pop-rock history, 
including Rocket Man, Tiny Dancer and Candle in the Wind. His collaboration 
with Taupin continues on his 30th solo album,The Diving Board, produced by 
T-Bone Burnett, which he has described as "the most piano-oriented album of my 
career".

THE RECORD MY MUM PLAYED TO ME

Heartbreak Hotel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=71fuhzYDeT4>, Elvis Presley 
(1956)

My mum always used to buy a record every Friday. She came home and she had the 
78 ofElvis Presley <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elvispresley>, and she 
said, "I heard this in the record shop and I've never heard anything like it!" 
She played it to me and I'd never heard anything like it either. It was weird, 
because, about 10 days before, I'd had my hair cut in the local barbers, where 
I went as a little boy, and I'd noticed aLife magazine. I was reading this 
article on a man who looked like an alien but was so handsome – I'd never seen 
anything like him, and I put two and two together and said, "That was the man I 
saw in the magazine!" So that was the record that really changed everything.

THE SONG THAT INFLUENCED HOW I PLAYED PIANO

Great Balls of Fire <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7IjgZGhHrYY>, Jerry Lee 
Lewis (1957)

Up until this song, the piano playing that I had heard had been more sedate. 
My dad collectedGeorge Shearing <http://www.georgeshearing.net> records, but 
this was the first time I heard someone beat the shit out of a piano. When I 
saw Little Richard at the Harrow Granada, he played it standing up, but Jerry 
Lee Lewis actually jumped on the piano! This was astonishing to me, that people 
could do that. Those records had such a huge effect on me, and they were just 
so great. I learned to play like that.

THE RECORD THAT I LISTENED TO WITH BERNIE

Bridge Over Troubled Water <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C-PNun-Pfb4>, Simon 
& Garfunkel (1970)

The piano playing on this track was by a guy called Larry Knechtel. Apart from 
it being one of the most beautiful songs I've ever heard, the piano is just 
sublime. Bernie and I used to listen to that whole album on headphones. When 
it'ssung by Aretha Franklin <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_DBl5gAs6WI>, this 
is just the most amazing song. But the piano playing made it, for me: it stayed 
with me for ever. I once saw them sing at the Royal Albert Hall – it was just a 
magical time.

THE SONG THAT INTRODUCED ME TO AN IDOL

A Song for You <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37dw2r45Xzg>, Leon Russell 
(1971)

When I heard that voice, I just went "Oh my god". Then I met Leon. He was my 
idol and I went to America and I toured with him. I played second on the bill 
to him and he was so nice to me. Instead of being offhand with me, and jealous, 
he was so supportive and encouraging and I played on stage with him. Many years 
later, I paid him back by making a record calledThe Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/21/elton-john-leon-russell-union-review>
 and salvaging him from the waste bin of life, because everyone had forgotten 
about him and I was so angry about it.

THE ONE THAT MADE ME SEEK PERFECTION

I Can't Make You Love Me <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nW9Cu6GYqxo>, Bonnie 
Raitt (1991)

The song is incredible, but the piano playing, by Bruce Hornsby, is sublime; 
it's perfection. Hornsby is one of the best pianists – if notthe best – out 
there. I love sad songs, and Bonnie's voice… I could listen to her singing the 
phonebook. I always veer towards her songs, and if there's a piano playing on 
it I just go nuts.

THE SOUNDTRACK TO MY HOLIDAYS

Songs in the Key of Life 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6nz533qNoQ&list=PL30032A76E46991A2>, Stevie 
Wonder (1976)

This is probably one of the greatest albums ever made. David [Furnish] and I 
have a very small apartment in Venice, and it's a tradition that every time we 
go there, before we do anything else, we putSongs in the Key of Life on and 
look out the window.Living for the City 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vfbvm52G8fE> [from Wonder's Innervisions album, 
of 1973] is also a brilliant song, a brilliant groove. To me, he's one of the 
most inspirational performers, songwriters and musicians there has ever been.

THE SONG THAT WAS DIFFICULT TO RECORD



Snowed in at Wheeler Street <http://vimeo.com/32776587>, Kate Bush (2011)

I did a duet with Kate Bush on this track for her last album. That session 
with her was hard, because she doesn't write easy songs. She's a complex 
songwriter and this is a weird song, but I love it so much. I'm so proud to be 
on a Kate Bush record; she's always marched to the beat of her own drum. She 
was groundbreaking – a bit like a female equivalent of Freddie Mercury. She 
does come out socially sometimes and she came to my civil partnership occasion 
with her husband. There were so many stars in the room, but all the musicians 
there were only interested in saying, "You've got to introduce me to Kate 
Bush." I remember Boy George saying, "Oh my God, is thatKate Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kate-bush>?" I said, "Yeah!"


Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/guardianmusic/playlist/677D8vQjDJmwbvem4l8suv>

Elton John's new album, The Diving Board 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Diving-Board-Mint-Pack/dp/B00DGOL6QE/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1377684256&sr=8-1&keywords=elton+john>
, is released on Mercury Records on 24 September
 