
If all goes according to plan, next year construction will begin on a 
30-storey residential tower in Austin, Texas. Nothing new in the daily life of 
a booming city, except for one thing: the apartment tower willoffer no parking 
spaces 
<http://www.mystatesman.com/news/business/30-story-car-free-apartment-tower-planned-on-congr/nq5sN/>
 to residents.


Whether you gauge it by the growth of car-free homes 
<http://ns.umich.edu/new/releases/21923-hitchin-a-ride-fewer-americans-have-their-own-vehicle>
, a steadydrop in drivers’ licences 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2016/04/america-fewest-16-year-old-drivers-1960s/477135/>
 for younger age-groups, or therise in car-sharing 
<http://www.shareable.net/blog/new-research-confirms-carsharings-rapid-worldwide-growth>
, metropolitan areas across the US have lately made strides in getting 
residents out of – and rid of – their cars.


In Austin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> and elsewhere, what’s 
made this possible? The short answer is technology: it’s hard to overstate the 
impact ride-hailing services such as Uber and Lyft have had on urban 
transportation in the past five years.


Those technologies arrived amid a renewed emphasis by city and regional 
planners on improving public transit and encouraging non-car modes of 
transportation.


“Technology plays a big role in how transportation works here in Austin,” says 
Austin Nelsen, a vice-president for Nelsen Development and the project manager 
for developing The Avenue tower. “Our [targeted] residents are people who live 
downtown, work downtown; they’re not trying to travel seven miles to north 
Austin to go shopping. We’re trying to help build a dense, liveable and 
walkable city – and I think that’s what a lot of cities are striving to do 
right now.”


A hard sell: the industries that can't get millennials buying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/a-hard-sell-the-industries-that-cant-get-millennials-buying>
If you live downtown, you can use a ride-hailing service to get around quickly 
and relatively cheaply. If your destination is farther afield, those same 
services – or car-sharing schemes such as Zipcar or the Austin-based Car2Go – 
can get you there. And perhaps most importantly of all from a long-term 
perspective, these services can solve what’s known as the “first mile, last 
mile” problem: getting people from their front doors to transit without needing 
their own car.


Living in, working in and visiting cities without a car eases the demand for 
parking, which in turn allows city planners to slow or stop the construction of 
new parking facilities – an about-face that makes buildings such as The Avenue 
possible.


In 2015, the city of Chicago eliminated parking ratios 
<http://chi.streetsblog.org/2015/09/28/new-tod-ordinance-will-bring-parking-lite-development-to-more-of-chicago/>
 for new residential projects within a quarter mile of transit. The Austin city 
council similarly eliminated off-street parking requirements for its downtown 
business district – the future home of The Avenue tower – in 2013. A 
crowdsourced map created in 2015 identified93 cities in North America 
<https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/crowdsourced-map-cities-parking-minimums-change>
 that have eliminated, or are considering eliminating, parking minimum 
requirements.


“[In most cities], there’s a perception that you can’t find a parking spot 
right where you want to go, so there’s no parking,” says Lindsay Bayley, a 
senior planner at the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning. “But what we 
find in communities is that there’s underutilised parking – we just do a poor 
job managing it. Requiring developers to build parking when there is 
underutilised parking is not the best policy.”


People look to mobile phones as a way to have freedom rather than needing a 
car to see friends

There are many reasons for cities to eliminate these parking requirements. For 
one, it’s inordinately expensive to build parking spaces – Bayley estimated a 
cost of $30,000 per space, while Nelsen priced it at $40,000 – which increases 
the cost of living in those buildings and discourages affordable housing.


A recent study from the Center for Neighborhood Technology found only 
two-thirds of parking required by building codes 
<http://www.cnt.org/publications/stalled-out-how-empty-parking-spaces-diminish-neighborhood-affordability>
 was ever in use at one time. “That really hurts affordable housing,” Bayley 
says. “If you are building affordable housing [and you have to include 
parking], you will move toward cheaper areas, pushing the developments into a 
few neighbourhoods.”


The other big factor behind the car-free shift extends beyond the thriving 
cities of Austin, Chicago, Portland or San Francisco is millennials. Signs 
abound that the younger generation has a different relationship to car 
ownership.


A 2014 report by the US Public Interest Research Group found that young people 
were driving less <http://www.uspirg.org/reports/usp/millennials-motion>, 
driving shorter distances and using more transit, biking and walking to get 
around. And while naysayers hypothesised that those trends arose from the 
global recession and high oil prices, ongoing studies show young people are
buying fewer cars 
<http://cityobservatory.org/young-people-are-buying-fewer-cars/> and getting 
fewer drivers’ licences 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2016/04/america-fewest-16-year-old-drivers-1960s/477135/>
 than ever before.


'We're just getting started': inside Austin's contentious clash with Uber and 
Lyft
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/10/uber-lyft-austin-ann-kitchen-sxsw-texas>
“Part of it is just due to finances – people can’t afford to purchase cars,” 
says Catherine Duffy, chair of the American Planning Association’s 
transportation division. “There’s also a shift toward experiences, with people 
wanting to be around a lot of stuff [as they are in cities]. And also, studies 
have looked at people’s dependence on mobile phones as a way to have freedom 
rather than needing a car to see friends.”

Young people are the target market for ride-hailing services: a 2014 survey 
from UC Berkeley found that73% of such rides <http://tsrc.berkeley.edu/node/797>
 were taken by 15- to 34-year-olds. And although Austin is in the midst of a
showdown with Uber and Lyft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/09/uber-lyft-austin-vote-against-self-regulation>
 over the regulation of drivers, San Antonio resolved a similar,four-month 
shutdown last year 
<http://www.mysanantonio.com/news/local/article/Everything-you-need-to-know-about-San-Antonio-s-6115142.php>
.

Whatever the long-term outcome in Austin, it highlights the fragile state of 
affairs as city dwellers’ relationships with the automobile evolve. “I’m still 
kind of mind-blown about the shutdown,” says Nelsen. “We still have Car2Go, but 
[not havingLyft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lyft> and Uber] is 
detrimental to my lifestyle, and the lifestyle of the city.”
 