
The issue of England, reverse swing and Alastair Cook's team's manipulation of 
the ball in pursuit of it resurfaced again at The Oval on the eve of Wednesday's
ICC Champions Trophy <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/iccchampionstrophy> 
semi-final. South Africa's AB de Villiers is the latest international captain 
to express if not concern, then at least a degree of curiosity over England's 
ability to get the white ball to reverse swing earlier than other teams.

De Villiers even appeared to suggest the ICC might consider conducting an 
investigation into the facts, although the ICC subsequently confirmed that it 
will act only when requested to by match officials, and that no concerns have 
been raised by any of the standing umpires in England's tournament matches.

"It's something that the umpires and the ICC will probably look into, why 
England and some of the other teams might get it to reverse quicker," De 
Villiers said after South Africa's final pre-match training session. "All that 
is really not up to me to decide or to comment on. But if there is something 
funny happening then it's definitely a concern, yes."

Indeed, only the former England captain Bob Willis has so far suggested 
anything funny is happening 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jun/15/england-ashley-giles-denies-ball-tampering>
, in effect accusing England of tampering with the ball â€“ without, it must be 
said, any actual proof. Previously Australia's stand-in captainGeorge Bailey 
had also flagged up England's facility with reverse swing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/jun/12/george-bailey-england-australia-reverse-swing>
 as "something to watch" following his team's defeat at Edgbaston. At the time 
Bailey's comments were downplayed by Australia's national selector, John 
Inverarity. And beyond that they were rather buried within the lingering 
Anglo-Aussie suspicion over techniques for engendering reverse swing, which 
dates back to 2005 and the talk of rogue pocket-mint-infused saliva.

To have a second opposing captain talking about the issue again before what is 
arguably England's biggest 50-over match since their last semi-final four years 
ago will only add to a sense of frustration at an issue that refuses to go 
away. De Villiers, asked a leading question on the issue, stopped some way 
short of making any accusation of wrongdoing, offering instead some smilingly 
bestowed praise for England's bowlers.

"If they are doing something funny with the ball then it's definitely a 
concern, yes, but we've got no proof of that. They seem to get it to reverse a 
bit quicker than the rest of the teams so maybe they've just got really good 
skill in their bowlers. We've tried as well, I think all teams try to do that, 
and we haven't really managed to succeed in that."

Cook was not asked to respond to the remarks during an eight-minute ICC press 
conference at The Oval shortly afterwards. Outside of which England refused to 
offer any further comments on an issue that has already become a niggling minor 
theme of the early summer. The coach Ashley Giles has, of course, strongly 
denied anything outside the laws is taking place, and even gone so far as to 
defend (without naming him) Ravi Bopara's good name as chief ball polisher in 
this England team.

Graeme Swann, who did not bowl in the nets, looks unlikely to feature. Tim 
Bresnan, whose wife is still heavily pregnant, will travel to The Oval on the 
morning of the match and is available for selection.
 