
Why is the scrum an issue in this match? 

England and Australia have history when it comes to arguments over the scrum. 
The buildup to their pool match in last year’s World Cup was dominated by 
Australian accusations that Joe Marler, England’s loosehead, angles in 
illegally on the tighthead. In a series of articles and counter-articles, which 
continued after the match, one commentator would authoritatively explain with 
stills why Marler’s angles were illegal, only for another to use the same 
scrums to demonstrate how the problem was the opposition. And so on.

Then, in the summer series, it was Dan Cole’s angles, on the other side of the 
scrum, that Australia objected to. For this Test, Eddie Jones has got his 
retaliation in first, pronouncing after the Argentina Test that Australia’s 
scrum is illegal, shortly followed by more finger-pointing at Cole from Michael 
Cheika, the Australia coach suggesting he has scrummaged illegally for the 
entirety of his nine-year career. Cue various indignant Englishmen insisting 
otherwise. And so on and on.

Eddie Jones stings Australia’s Michael Cheika into firing both barrels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/29/eddie-jones-stings-australias-michael-cheika-into-firing-both-barrels>
Is Dan Cole an illegal scrummager? 

He is a tighthead, and therefore operating in just about the most thankless 
position on the field, where his raison d’être is to be outnumbered at the 
scrum. Before him, England’s most celebrated scrummaging tighthead was Jeff 
Probyn. “Like all props, Cole will cheat if he gets the chance,” he says. “But 
he’s not overtly illegal and he’s not the worst.” Probyn explains some 
scenarios in which a tighthead will turn inwards. 1) His loosehead breaks off 
and his hooker pulls away. 2) The opposition loosehead dominates him and he 
tries to stay where he is. 3) He dominates the loosehead, whereupon the 
loosehead slips up the side of him. In other words, dominate or be dominated, 
the tighthead will tend to turn in.

“But Cole stands with both feet back. Normally, if you’re trying to turn 
inwards, you put one foot forward.” When 16 gargantuan men start pushing 
against each other, a certain amount of twisting is inevitable, but the desired 
outcome is a scrum that goes forward. England’s has not been doing that so 
reliably this autumn.

Why has England’s scrum struggled? 

That Jones initiated the war of words this time tells its own story. England 
have had their scrummaging wobbles against all three opponents, culminating in 
Cole’s yellow card at the end of the first half against Argentina. But Probyn 
is not so sure Cole was the problem. “There is a player who has not played much 
club rugby, walks straight into the England team and occupies a position in the 
middle of the front row. As soon as Dylan Hartley was replaced by Jamie George, 
England dominated the scrum. Hartley isn’t as good a scrummager as George, and 
he’s not match fit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fengland-australia-long-standing-scrum-battle-eddie-jones-michael-cheika%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c114b8a8e554fdd73752b1eb849fb93c1dd3f6%2F0_0_4392_2634%2F4392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20and%20Australia%20set%20to%20renew%20long-standing%20scrum%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fengland-australia-long-standing-scrum-battle-eddie-jones-michael-cheika%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20and%20Australia%20set%20to%20renew%20long-standing%20scrum%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fengland-australia-long-standing-scrum-battle-eddie-jones-michael-cheika%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c114b8a8e554fdd73752b1eb849fb93c1dd3f6%2F0_0_4392_2634%2F4392.jpg>
 Former England tighthead Jeff Probyn says Mako Vunipola is not as effective as 
Joe Marler. Photograph: Andrew Fosker/REX/Shutterstock 
Neither, says Probyn, is Mako Vunipola as good there as Marler, although the 
former has many other qualities. When George and Marler came on against 
Argentina, England’s scrum, with Cole still in situ, started to go forward, but 
it should also be pointed out that Ramiro Herrera and Agustín Creevy came off 
for the Pumas at the same time. Likewise, England’s earlier problems coincided 
with the loss of Billy Vunipola’s bulk at the base.

England’s winning run ignites sense of deja vu before Australia clash | Robert 
Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/02/eddie-jones-england-winning-run-australia-clive-woodward>
What role does the referee play? 

Too much. Not that it’s his fault, particularly. It is often suggested that 
front-row forwards are the only people who should referee the scrum, but the 
implication of that idea is that they’re the only ones who know the truth, 
which means they should all agree with each other – and they don’t. Certainly, 
referees, for all their hours of tuition in the subject, are doing little more 
than guessing. But in real time events take place too quickly for anyone, 
expert front-row forward or not, to be sure.

Are these just media mind games? 

Basically. Both teams go into this game with question marks over this set 
piece. There are fewer scrums these days than in Probyn’s but the pressure on 
each has increased and not just from a physical point of view. Coaches know 
that an unfortunate slip and/or a referee’s guess can be the difference between 
winning and losing. No wonder they get jumpy when the propaganda war starts. 
The scrum is unfathomable and sometimes brutally unfair, which is why it 
retains such legendary status in rugby’s firmament.
 