
No England player wants to discuss the prospect of an unbeaten calendar year 
before Saturday’s final fixture but there is one other milestone they would 
love to achieve. Never has an England team secured a full house of four 
consecutive autumn Test victories, and beating Australia for a fourth time 
inside six months would be no hardship either.

As England’s captain when the host nation lost convincingly to the Wallabies 
anddropped out of last year’s World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, Chris Robshaw has even more incentive to end 2016 on a high note; but it is a 
rare quartet of wins over southern hemisphere opposition that is the squad’s 
primary motivation. Achieve that little nugget and all sorts of other 
statistical gems will follow.

England’s sweeping statement: from grand slam to whitewash to beach party | 
Eddie Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/25/england-sweeping-statement-whitewash-australia-eddie-jones-vunipola-robshaw-rugby-union>
It would also enhance England’s reputation as a side on an upward curve 
regardless of whom they play. “For us it is very much about this series,” said 
Robshaw. “In the past we’ve always had the ability to win big games but it is 
about being ruthless and being able to back it up week on week. We wantedto win 
3-0 in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/25/eddie-jones-england-whitewash-australia-michael-cheika>
 and we managed to achieve that. Now it’s about this target and winning 4-0. It 
is about breaking it down to this four-game series, rather than the whole year.”

There is also a belief, according to Robshaw, that the squad have not yet 
delivered to their full potential – “We feel we have more to give” – either in 
attack or defence, accompanied by a collective wish not to remove their feet 
from Australian throats. “No, we don’t and I think these guys, having lost last 
week, will be feeling a bit of that,” agreed Robshaw. “They wanted to come for 
a grand slam, they’ve been playing pretty good rugby and they are dangerous. We 
need to make sure we start the game well and then finish it off.”

Silencing one or two of their Australian critics would be an additional bonus, 
withEddie Jones having already made reference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/michael-cheika-eddie-jones-vitriolic-australia-tarnish-legacy-england-rugby>
 to the “disrespectful” comments England attracted from certain quarters before 
their summer series win. “That is quite satisfying,” acknowledged Robshaw. “We 
went down there and had a fair bit of abuse come our way. As a group that makes 
you tighter, especially on the other side of the world. We are in a different 
position now, at home with 80,000 people behind us, and looking forward to 
giving it everything.”

Having been a regular room-mate of Dan Cole over the years, Robshaw reckons 
the Leicester prop will be wholly unaffected bythis week’s unflattering comments
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/england-dan-cole-eddie-jones-australia-michael-chieka-illegal-scrum-rugby-union>
 from the Wallabies camp about the alleged legality of his scrummaging. “I know 
what a threat he is to opposing scrums and what a strength he is to have in 
your side. He’s been around a long time so I don’t think he’s too fazed. He’ll 
go out there and produce like he does every single weekend, whether that’s for 
club or country.”

The character Robshaw has shown to bounce back from being relieved of the 
national captaincy should be a similar lesson to any young professional. The 
tireless flanker is not the type to dwell endlessly on emotional highs or lows 
but nominates the second Test win in Melbourne, which was also his 50th cap, as 
his favourite moment in his seven previous outings (W5 L2) against the 
Wallabies. “It was the way we won it and the whole emotion of the week. Before 
that I’d not won a game in the southern hemisphere so to win a series down 
there was special.”

England are due to meet the match referee, Jaco Peyper, on the eve of this 
Saturday’s Twickenham rematch but the forwards coach, Steve Borthwick, declined 
to expand on Jones’s comments about Wallaby scrum illegalities. “Jaco’s an 
excellent referee and he will referee the game as he sees it,” Borthwick said. 
“We have no doubts about that.”
 