
Mike Brown, Full-Back 7/10 If only he’d consummated his performance with the 
try it deserved. Could have been two, as would have finished the penalty try. 
Rock solid and metres galore. Great battle with Cordero.

Jonny May, Wing 8/10 England’s best player in our opinion. When his mate went 
off he had twice the work and did it. Defence remarkable, pace and support 
lines deadly. Well-deserved try. He’s back. And better.

Jonathan Joseph, Centre 6/10England’s defence was solid, which is some 
achievement given the circumstances. Hints of the flashing feet, but not that 
sort of game. Hands as sweet as ever.

England and Owen Farrell dig deep to win 14-man battle with Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Owen Farrell, Centre 6/10 Actually missed four kicks, but none were easy. 
Still, he sets his own standards. That said, with another kicker England might 
not have built such a lead. Missed a couple of tackles.

Elliot Daly, Wing 4/10 What can you do? Was having a good game. Then you 
blink. Shouldn’t happen. If we could give World Rugby zero for scapegoating 
honest players we would.

George Ford, Fly-Half 6/10 The imp was as wicked as ever, prompting and 
releasing. A couple of off-sides were unfortunate and one over-chip. Kicking 
otherwise deadly and went blind nicely for England’s second try.

Ben Youngs, Scrum-half 8/10 Another blinder. Hanging drop kicks, game-reading 
interventions, clearances, slick service. And with England down to 14 for the 
match, his darts kept Argentina drift honest. Not sure he made a mistake.

Mako Vunipola, Prop 7/10 Flashy pivot stuff present and correct, but his work 
with ball in hand, and particularly in defence, was fabulous. Scrum was a mixed 
bag for England but got stronger.

Dylan Hartley (captain), Hooker 6/10 Did miss one lineout, but first this 
autumn and as much due to Petti’s excellence. Scrum mixed, but two turnovers 
won along with fair share of tackles. Best game this autumn.

Dan Cole, Prop 4/10 Who’d be a tighthead? Another game without touching the 
ball. Had to wait until 36th minute for first scrum, then five of them and he’s 
yellow-carded. Had a better time in second half.

Battle with Argentina reveals England’s enormous progress | Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-twickenham-eddie-jones>
Courtney Lawes, Lock 7/10 Tackle after tackle. It’s all hands to the pump when 
you go down to 14 at start, and his performance embodied that. Safe hands in 
the lineout, too.

George Kruis, Lock 7/10 No sign of any hangover from ankle surgery. Did have 
one lineout nicked from him, but had so many to deal with. Safe on the rest, 
and up there on the tackle count.

Chris Robshaw, Flanker 8/10 So influential. For once not top of the charts on 
the tackle and/or carry count, but read the game like a book and every 
intervention was a telling one.

Tom Wood, Flanker 8/10 They’re not the quickest pair of flankers, but work 
rate unimpeachable. Was England’s top tackler. Won a turnover and popped up in 
support as well. Enjoyed himself and deserves it.

Billy Vunipola, Prop 7/10 Looking as authoritative, powerful and skilful as 
ever. One of the first in the chase for the penalty try. Was injured at end of 
first half in goalline stand and England suffered.

Replacements

Teimana Harrison 6 (for B Vunipola, 39) Not the presence of Vunipola at base, 
but tackle count very high. Dropped a restartJamie George 5 (for Hartley, 60) 
Sound basicsJoe Marler 4 (for M Vunipola, 60) Yellow card a shame but took one 
in face wellDanny Care (for Youngs, 70 n/a) Henry Slade (for Brown, 76 n/a) 
Charlie Ewels(for Kruis, 79 n/a)

ARGENTINA

Cordero 8 (Estelles 75, n/a); Orlando 3, Moroni 6, González Iglesias 5 (De La 
Fuente 8,5), Estelles 5; Hernández 5, Cubelli 7 (Landajo, 68, n/a); Noguera 6 
(Botta 64,n/a), Creevy (capt; Montoya 62 n/a) 6, Herrera 7 (Pieretto 62, n/a), 
Petti8, Alemanno 4, Matera 6, Ortega Desio 6, Senatore 5 (Isa 6, 7)
 