
It does not feel like 13 years ago that Dorian West was sitting in 
Aix-en-Provence discussing his surprise at being named captain of England for 
the first – and, as it turned out, only – time. Clive Woodward’s side had not 
lost in 18 months and, even with a few reserves playing, there was no 
expectation of his squad’s 14-game unbeaten run approaching its end.

If England could have their time again, would they have taken that distant 
2003 game in Marseille more seriously? In many ways France’s 17-16 win did not 
matter hugely, a warm-up game swiftly forgotten in the celebrations of their 
subsequent Rugby World Cup triumph. The highlight, apart from an enthusiastic 
Beatles tribute band in the main stand, was England’s then-kitman, Dave “Reg” 
Tennison, inadvertently getting in the way as France’s goal-kicker, Frédéric 
Michalak, lined up a touchline conversion. For all that, it will for ever be 
recorded as the warm Mediterranean night when England surrendered a potential 
world record that, otherwise,could have extended to 25 matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/oct/05/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion2>.

It has taken a while for another England team to draw within touching distance 
of Sir Clive’s champions, coincidentally one under the command of the man who 
coached against them onthat momentous night in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/nov/22/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion12>. 
Should Australia be beaten at Twickenham it would be England’s 14th straight 
victory, 13 in the same calendar yearunder the stewardship of Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/eddie-jones-australia-england>. 
No one is suggesting his England are the finished article but entering 2017 
still unbeaten would further underline their status as a gathering force.

For that reason this latest Wallaby encounter is not just any old game. 
Australia, remarkably, will rise back up to second in the world rankings if 
they win, only months after being widely dismissed as England’s bunnies during 
the June seriesthat ended 3-0 in the visitors’ favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
. The last time England had a “perfect” year was in 1992, when they played just 
six games, one of them against Canada at Wembley. Even without a possible 
Wallaby tour grand slam on offer, there has been a discernible crackle all week.

England’s players can also sense another potentially defining outcome, to add 
tothe second Test victory in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/australia-england-match-report>, 
whichclinched their first series win in the southern hemisphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/eddie-jones-england-back-row-balance-australia-melbourne>
. According to the lock George Kruis, one of the key rocks around which their 
success has been constructed, the players still refer back to the moment 
shortly before half-time when Billy Vunipola kicked the ball dead having 
wrongly assumed time was up. It condemned his team-mates to a “dark few 
minutes” under the defensive cosh that has become the template for much of what 
has followed. “You get patches when you are building a team and get to 
understand what each other are all about,” said Kruis. “It stood there in a lot 
of people’s minds as a ‘together’ moment.”

There have been other snapshots off the field to encourage the captain, Dylan 
Hartley, that something is developing: “If you go down to the training centre 
for a morning session there are people there an hour beforehand warming up. If 
you go down an hour afterwards there are guys stretching or having ice baths 
without any staff policing it. It’s another area of the team that’s improved 
drastically. Every day we talk about being the best team in the world. I don’t 
say that loosely. If we have an OK training session, OK is not good enough. If 
we have a good session, it’s not good enough.”

There are increasing echoes of the Woodward era, with people going the extra 
mile out of sheer personal desire rather than any managerial decree. They 
could, however, do with a few more ball-carrying forwards for this particular 
contest,the absence of Billy Vunipola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/england-billy-vuniploa-six-nations-knee-ligament-operation>
 a huge one in every sense.His replacement, Nathan Hughes, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/nathan-hughes-two-changes-england-rugby-union-face-australia-team-twickenham>
 is a slightly different type of attacking runner and is starting a Test match 
for the first time, another reason why Jones has been keener tofocus attention 
on the Wallaby scrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/29/eddie-jones-stings-australias-michael-cheika-into-firing-both-barrels>
 rather than dwell at length on his own slightly denuded pack.

Maro Itoje is back for Saracens on Saturday but it would have been much 
handier for England had he been available a week earlier and Joe Launchbury not 
been suspended. Both Kane Douglas and, apart from the first 69 minutes of the 
first Test, David Pocock were conspicuous absentees at crucial times in the 
summer series and No8 Lopeti Timanialso brings a powerful fresh dimension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/australia-michael-cheika-not-revenge-england-eddie-jones>
. If Will Genia’s return to Stade Français is a blow, there is a renewed air of 
self-belief about the Wallaby backline, with the centre Tevita Kuridrani having 
scored a try in all four Tests of his side’s current tour.

In short they are more like the Wallaby sides of the Jones era: clever, 
motivated, sharp. Michael Cheika is no fool and neither is his backs coach, 
Stephen Larkham, a former lieutenant of Jones at the Brumbies. It falls to 
England to revert to type as well and be the no-nonsense, snarling territorial 
bulldogs unwilling to be pushed around their own manor.

The scene is set, consequently, for a serious collision, one to linger longer 
in the memory than any of their three November successes. The South African 
referee Jaco Peyper must have imagined he had already endured his toughest 
assignment of the autumn but may yet be disappointed. If England’s disciplinary 
prayers – “Give us not this day our Daly red 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
” – are answered their prospects will soar substantially.

Maybe it will benefit Jones’s side, at some stage, to lose a game, to regroup 
as Woodward’s 2003 side did and to escape statistical distractions. The sight 
of Jonny Wilkinson helping fine-tune Owen Farrell’s goal-kicking on a chilly 
Twickenham lunchtime, however, did little to dilute the slight sense of deja vu 
that this modern England side are generating. High-profile coach, ace 
goal-kicker, motivated pack, the scent of Wallaby danger? The more things 
change, the more they stay the same.

Australia’s Bernard Foley back to best and ready to beguile England again | 
Gerard Meagher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/02/bernard-foley-wallabies-australia-england> 