
Jimmy Anderson believes AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> has seen his pre-match 
comments “bite him on the backside” after inflicting the South Africa captain’s 
third successive duck in Test cricket.

England stare at defeat as South Africa roll over top order at Centurion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/england-south-africa-fourth-test-day-four>
Trapping the right-hander lbw second ball with an inswinger was a moment of 
satisfaction for the 33-year-oldon a tough fourth day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/25/south-africa-v-england-fourth-test-day-four-live>
 that has left England staring at defeat, with De Villiers having suggested 
before the match that “some guys” in Alastair Cook’s attack were down on speed.

Anderson, who claimed three wickets for 47, said: “We don’t need any extra 
motivation but it was mentioned when he got a pair today. It is one of those 
things. You have to be careful what you say in the media because it can bite 
you on the backside.”

Asked if he had lost his nip, Anderson said: “I don’t see the speeds come up, 
I’ll have to check but I feel like the balls coming out all right.

“It’s nice to get the captain but it’s frustrating we couldn’t capitalise on 
those early breakthroughs. I don’t think he’s lost the ability to bat in that 
time. It’s one of those things.”

Temba Bavuma, who made an unbeaten 78 in South Africa’s second innings of 248 
for five declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/england-south-africa-fourth-test-day-four>
, said: “I never thought three ducks for AB was possible but then he is human, 
he makes mistakes. He will bounce back in the one-day series coming up.”

Despite being three wickets down with 98 overs to survive, Anderson said 
England will once again look to pull off another great escape even if the 
deteriorating pitch at Centurion means that rain remains their greatest hope of 
securing a draw in the fourth Test.

Anderson, who has featured in four famous England fifth-day rearguard actions 
in the past seven years including one on this ground in 2010, conceded the 
surface that has led to deliveries both shooting up or staying low means some 
luck will be required.

“We will be giving it a good go,” said Anderson. “It will be tough especially 
on that pitch. We’ve seen plenty of deterioration but the batsmen left are 
naturally positive so will give it a good go and see where we get to.”

Asked the key to such defiance, he replied: “It’s the attitude and the 
character. We have those players, not just how they score their runs but people 
who can bat the whole day. They have the skill. You’ll need luck on that pitch. 
We’ve seen variable bounce but we have to be positive.”

Gulam Bodi banned for 20 years for Ram Slam match-fixing attempts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/gulam-bodi-banned-20-years-ram-slam>
On the match situation Bavuma said: “We believe the score we’ve set England is 
more than enough on that wicket. We’ll try to exploit that variable bounce as 
much as possible.

“They were big wickets we got late on, especially a guy like Alastair Cook who 
leads from the front. We would have loved Joe Root, too, but we will come with 
heads held high tomorrow, firing on all cylinders and looking to finish the 
game as soon as possible.”

Kagiso Rabada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/kagiso-rabada-south-africa-makhaya-ntini>
, aged 20 years and 246 days, is one wicket away from becoming the youngest 
South Africa player to take 10 in a Test following his late strikes to remove 
Alex Hales and Nick Compton. Bavuma sees himself and the fast bowler as being 
key to inspiring future black cricketers in the country.

He added: “We understand the climate here in South Africa in terms of cricket 
and transformation and getting a better representation in terms of our country 
and its demographics. It can only have a positive effect. Hopefully it can 
spark some fire in other people.”
 