
Three minutes from full time, the crowd roused itself for one last blast of 
Swing Low. Not in exhortation, now, but celebration. England were leading by 16 
points, and Australia, a man down after Dane Haylett-Petty had been sent to the 
sin-bin, were scrambling to escape from underneath their own posts. The only 
question left washow many England were going to win by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
. Soon enough, the final whistle went and the international year was over. 
England finish it undefeated, with 13 wins out of 13, through the Six Nations, 
the summer tour and the autumn series. It is the first time in the professional 
era that they have made it through a year without losing a match. They won 16 
matches in 2003, but lost to France in the run-up to the World Cup.

Unbeaten Eddie Jones says England short of 2003 World Cup vintage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-unbeaten-england-2003-comparisons>
Jones said, quite rightly, that 2003 team was “a much better side than we are 
at the moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-unbeaten-england-2003-comparisons>
”. Eddie’s England are unbeaten, but even he wasn’t about to claim they look 
unbeatable. They have not yet played a game when they have sustained the high 
standard they reach in patches for an entire 80 minutes. The most impressive 
thing about Saturday’s this Test, like many of the other 12 they have won this 
year, was, as Jones said, how “composed, resilient, and adaptable” the team 
have become. England battled back from a desperately poor first-quarter when 
they seemed to be fazed by the furious pace of Australia’s play,just as they 
were in Brisbane back in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/australia-england-first-test-match-report>
.

“We weren’t working hard enough off the ball,” said Jones. “We weren’t working 
hard enough on the gainline.” He told the team that too, during the half-time 
interval. He also felt his side were scatty in the first half and wondered if 
they were suffering from the kind of nerves that had affected themduring their 
Six Nations grand slam match against France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
. It felt like Australia had started so fast that England were scrabbling to 
stay in touch. After 15 minutes they were trailing 10-0 and had not even made 
it into Australia’s 22. Sefa Naivalu scored after the ball bounced off Dylan 
Hartley’s knee during England’s put-in at a scrum five metres from their own 
line. It ricocheted across into Australia’s possession and they worked it along 
the line for a simple try.

England backs cut loose against Australia to complete their perfect year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
It could have been worse. Australia had three tries ruled out. The first when 
Tevita Kuridrani touched down in the fifth minute after another slapstick 
passage of play. Owen Farrell dithered over Haylett-Petty’s chip and was 
collared by David Pocock before he could get the ball away. It broke loose over 
England’s try-line. Mike Brown missed it once with his hands and then again 
with his boot as he tried to kick it into touch. Kuridrani pounced, but the 
replays showed Pocock had knocked the ball on as he tackled Farrell. Then, 
after George Ford fumbled a chest-high pass in midfield, Australia came again 
after winning the ensuing scrum.

Sekope Kepu barrelled over the try-line this time. But George Kruis somehow 
managed to squeeze his knee in under the ball, and the television match 
official decided that he could not award the try because the footage was not 
clear enough.

A similar thing happened again soon after when Kuridrani slipped through. This 
time it was Jonathan Joseph who wrapped him up in a tackle, and, once again, 
the TMO decided that the replay was not conclusive. Australia had crossed 
England’s try line four times in 15 minutes then, but scored once.

As Michael Cheika said: “You don’t win 14 Test matches in a row out of luck.” 
England won the match in the 15 minute period after the break. Marland Yarde 
scored after Joseph kicked a cunning little curving chip between Reece Hodge 
and Israel Folau and then Ben Youngs scored. This after Nathan Hughes palmed 
off Michael Hooper, as though he were staying a flailing axe before it hit the 
bough. Youngs took a quick tap-penalty and fooled Nick Phipps with a feint to 
Yarde – this autumn, Youngs has sold more dummies than Mothercare. Both were 
converted, so England had scored 14 unanswered points.

England 37-21 Australia: how the players at Twickenham rated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-twickenham-ratings>
It was a wild swing. England were as bad at the start of the first half as 
they were excellent at the start of the second. Jones knows there will come a 
day when they need to match that standard for 80 minutes because sooner or 
later 15 poor minutes will cost them the match. Despite that inconsistency, 
they have risen from eighth in the world at the start of this year to second at 
its end. They are still behind New Zealand, but have beaten every other team in 
the top 10 along the way. Which makes them the second side in history to go 
undefeated in a year when they have played 11 games or more.

Predictably, the other are the All Blacks, who went one better and won 14 
Tests out of 14 in 2013. In this record then, England are again second behind 
New Zealand, as they are in the current rankings.

“We’ve still got a hell of a lot of work to do to become the best team in the 
world,” said Jones, “but the great thing is we are developing a real desire to 
go there.”

Sadly, we have a long wait to see whether they can become No1, because they do 
not play New Zealand until 2018. In the meantime, Ireland, and the Six Nations 
await.
 