
In a newspaper interview this week, independent publisher Adrian Searle cast 
the the referendum debate in terms of publishing opportunities for Scottish 
writers: "What the majority want the majority gets," he said. "I've seen it 
again and again over the last three years. Writers having their work rejected 
by London publishers because it's Scottish in theme or content, which isn't the 
London publishers' fault. There is just less of a market."

As the man behind Freight Books <http://www.freightbooks.co.uk/>, a 
three-year-old imprint specialising in Scottish books, Searle has been busy 
righting the balance, publishing a mix of the old and new, the familiar and 
less familiar.

Chairing the Society of Authors in Scotland, my role is also is to promote, 
support and champion writers working from Scotland, and as a novelist I have a 
great and supportive relationship with both my southern publishers.

My main forensic crime <http://www.rhonamacleod.com/books.htm> series is 
undeniably Scottish and features a forensic scientist,Dr Rhona MacLeod 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/sep/13/crime.easy.kill.books>, who 
travels about Scotland using her expertise. In the latest novel, due out in 
August, much of her time is spent in Orkney. I don't use Orkney dialect, but 
the locations are authentically named, and described. I used to live and teach 
there.

The first book in the series, Driftnet, was published by Edinburgh-based Luath 
Press. Although they swiftly sold it into numerous European countries, and 
Russia, they did not succeed in getting it into bookshops south of the border. 
It seems at times that Europe is much more open-minded regarding "Scottish" 
books than London is.

My second and most recent series is set in Cannes in the south of France and 
features Patrick de Courvoisier, whose father was French, mother Scottish, 
while he is an Englishman. I love reading books set in Italy, or France, or 
Switzerland, or Norway, and relish their place names and character names, even 
though I could never hope to pronounce them properly. They are not a barrier to 
the story, rather they are the colour and essence of it.

It is not easy to have a book published. Any published author will testify to 
that. There can be many reasons for a publisher to reject a book, not least 
that it simply isn't good enough. Many years ago, I attended a class at 
Edinburgh University entitled Characters in Action. One evening a fellow 
student revealed he had read a manuscript for a publisher which he thought was 
fantastic, but, he declared, it would never be published, because people 
wouldn't understand it, as it was written in Edinburgh patois. That book was
Trainspotting <https://www.theguardian.com/books/trainspotting>and I'm glad to 
say it did get published and became an international success despite being very 
Scottish.

More recently, I was contacted by the Bookseller to comment, on behalf of the 
Society of Authors in Scotland, on difficulties experienced by authors in 
Scotland in finding big London publishers. It was strange timing as we had 
recently discussed this topic at a committee meeting. The general feeling was 
that the predominant reason for rejecting work was that, even when publishers 
thought it excellent, it was deemed to be "too Scottish" and therefore less 
likely to have an audience.

Publishers will of course rightly point to the success of Scottish crime 
writing both in the UK and internationally.The Bloody Scotland international 
crime festival <http://www.bloodyscotland.com/>, of which I am a co-founder, 
was created to promote "our other national export". At its launch in 2012 in 
Stirling,Ian Rankin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/11/ian-rankin-portrait> – one of 
its biggest stars – said: "Scandinavia doesn't have better writers. It has 
better PR." It seems that being "too Scandinavian" is not a barrier to entering 
the London market.

But does the existence of a few famous Scottish writers such as Ian Rankin, 
Denise Mina <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jul/29/crimebooks.features>,
Val McDermid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/12/val-mcdermid-life-in-writing> 
andAlexander McCall Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/mar/06/fiction.features2> really mean 
English readers now have enough? I was interested in a quote in the Bookseller 
article, which said "publishers have defended their record, saying that 
Scottish writers have done 'disproportionately well' in recent years".

What does "disproportionately well" mean? That we produced too many good books 
and that should be curtailed? That we exceeded our population percentage? 
Surely a good book is a good book. We read to be entertained and informed, 
excited and enthralled. Good storytellers do that wherever they come from, and 
whatever the setting, in the language of the place.

So, if you are already publishing two Scottish writers, is that a valid reason 
to turn down a book you love?
 