
Perhaps the most unusual of the numerous watery sports you can do in or next 
to an English forest is to be found on Coniston Water, besideGrizedale Forest 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/grizedale> in the Lake District. Coniston is, of 
course, the setting for Swallows and Amazons (you can hire a canoe fromConiston 
Boating Centre <http://www.conistonboatingcentre.co.uk> and paddle to the 
book's Wild Cat Island), but we're not sure what Arthur Ransome would have made 
of its latest craze: paddleboarding.

Armed with a long oar and something resembling a windsurfing board (but no 
sail), you must row while standing upright – and if that sounds easy, it's not. 
Keeping your balance is the main challenge for a beginner. Yet paddleboarding 
is a great way to explore a big lake like Coniston.

"I tried it in Australia two years ago and suggested giving it a go here," 
says Jack Holmes from the boating centre, which hires out paddleboards at £15 
for a taster session of two hours. "We introduced paddleboards last season and 
they're getting more popular all the time. People are keen to try it because 
it's something different."

There isn't any tuition provided, but the boards are very user-friendly and 
you'll be kitted out with a buoyancy aid to keep you afloat when you fall in. 
You can bring your own paddleboard if you want; the experience of being out 
alone on a quiet lake in the early morning is extra special.

If you are seeking a more remote setting, Ennerdale Water, the most westerly 
lake in the Lake District, offers the chance to try canoeing against rugged 
mountainous backdrops, with ancient oak woodland climbing the valley. The lake 
can be reached from car parks at Bowness Knott or Bleach Green.

Much further south, take a spectacular ride in a Canadian canoe from Symonds 
Yat through theForest of Dean <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestofdean> along 
the beautiful river Wye (look out for the resident peregrines of Symonds Yat 
rock). Canoes can be rented from theCanoe Hire Company 
<http://www.thecanoehire.co.uk/>. More experienced canoeists can attempt the 
grade-two rapids at Symonds Yat, or test their skills on the sheltered water of 
Mallards Pike Lake, with raft building on offer atWay2Go Adventures 
<http://www.way2goadventures.co.uk/>.

For a less frenzied time on the water, try coarse fishing in the New Forest, 
or fish for trout inKielder Water <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/kielderforestpark>
, Northumberland. You can also fish atDalby Forest 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/dalbyforest> in Yorkshire and in the Forest of 
Dean, but note that fishing permits, and in some cases rod licences, will be 
required at all sites.

More forest sports

Climbing and abseiling
There are sites for experienced climbers on Forestry Commission land, but what 
about the total novice? As well as its luxurious cabins in the Forest of Dean, 
Forest Holidays offers the chance to climb the mighty limestone Symonds Yat 
crag, then abseil back down to earth again – with instructors controlling a 
backup safety line. Ages eight-plus, seebit.ly/16ysLVX 
<http://www.bit.ly/16ysLVX>.

Dog racing
Did you know that sled dog racing – otherwise known as "mushing" – has taken 
place in England for 40 years, mainly on Forestry Commission sites such as 
Thetford and Haldon forests? Siberian huskies pull three-wheeled sleds along 
the forest trails. There's also the newer sport of canicross, in which runners 
are attached to a faithful friend! Children aged 10+ and dogs over a year old 
can compete.

Archery
Once the supreme British military tactic, archery is still enjoyed in many 
English forests with tuition for budding William Tells. Try, for example, Look 
Out Archery's "complete archery experience for beginners and intermediate 
archers" inThetford Forest <http://www.bit.ly/1e83IMf>. Alternatively, what 
more appropriate place to learn to fire a bow is there thanSherwood (Pines) 
Forest <http://www.bit.ly/14xw9NN>?

Orienteering
The first public orienteering competition was held in Sweden in 1910; now the 
sport has spread around the world and there is pressure to include it in the 
Olympic Games. Train up a future champion on one of the regular ranger-led days 
at forests such as Alice Holt, Chopwell and Guisborough, or the permanent 
courses at Sherwood Pines and Whinlatter.
 