
The South Africa one-day captain AB de Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ab-de-villiers> thinks England are "a 
batsman light" as they look to knock the hosts off the top of the world 
rankings for the second time this summer.

"I think they are a little bit light in the batting department â€“ that may be 
something that we will be attacking. We'll see," De Villiers said as South 
Africa prepared for Friday's opening game in Cardiff.

"They've got [Tim] Bresnan that I think they rely on quite a bit coming in at 
seven. The reason why they're playing conservatively up front is because 
they're a batter light. They don't go with the wicketkeeper at seven like most 
teams do.

"But I don't think they've got a set blueprint. They can play around with 
options and they've got a wonderful ODI side."

After knocking England off their coveted Test perch De Villiers denied that 
taking over at the top of the 50-over format was the main objective of the 
five-match series.

South Africa will go top with a series win, or if they draw 2-2, but De 
Villiers, who took over the captaincy last June, is more concerned with 
developing a new-look side.

"It's definitely not our main goal. We're not here focused on world rankings, 
certainly not as much as the Test series," he said. "It would be nice to get 
that as a bonus but we feel we've got other stuff to focus on. We're trying to 
build a brand of cricket that we want to play.

"We want to play attacking, good cricket. I'd like to think of us as a team 
who have done fairly well under pressure so when we are put under pressure this 
series we will be looking to attack that's for sure."

The all-rounder Albie Morkel was giving cause for concern heading into 
Friday's game and needed a fitness test on an ankle injury picked up in 
Wednesday's tour win over Gloucestershire.
 