
Odd little memories stand out crystal clear from the great mêlée of Saturday’s 
match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/england-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-international-live>
, which was otherwise one long blur of flying bodies, boots and balls, reset 
scrums, rolling substitutions, red and yellow cards. One is from 25 minutes in, 
when Facundo Isa leapt to catch Ben Youngs’ box kick. Isa spilled the ball 
forward and it landed slap in the lap of Chris Robshaw. He puffed out his 
cheeks, punted it 30 yards downfield and set off in pursuit. Robshaw galumphed 
along like a happy labrador chasing a stick on a beach, passing tacklers as if 
he was dodging promenaders. It was a brilliantly exuberant bit of play and, 
when it was done, Robshaw of course buried himself neck deep in the nearest 
ruck.

Autumn internationals: five talking points after England’s win over Argentina 
| Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/autumn-internationals-five-talking-points-england-win-argentina>
“If ever there was a day we needed a dog,” Dylan Hartley said after the match, 
“it was today.” And, Hartley said, that dog had been Robshaw. “Head down, 
grafting, working, doing a lot of the dog work none of us see.”

Steve Borthwick <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-borthwick>, who 
played with Robshaw when the latter made his England debut in Argentina in 2009 
and coaches him now, made a more flattering comparison before the match. He 
said last week that Robshaw reminds him of one of England’s great blindside 
flankers. “People used to talk about Richard Hill and how much work he did, how 
he just got on with it, the really important work, the stuff that people don’t 
necessarily see until it’s not been done. That’s what I see Chris doing.”

Twickenham has been in good voice all autumn because the crowd have had a lot 
to cheer about – but the loudest roar the 80,000 let loose on Saturday may well 
have been one that sounded round the ground when the stadium announcer said 
Robshaw had been picked asthe man of the match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
.

This time last year Robshaw and his team were being booed during the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. If the crowd love him now, it is not only because Englandare winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 but because over the years they have seen Robshaw in both victory and defeat 
and they know that, whatever mistakes he has made along the way, he has never 
once stopped trying, never given anything less than everything he has to offer.

“Magnificent,” was Eddie Jones’s verdict of Robshaw on Saturday. “Again his 
work off the ball was exceptional.”

It was not long ago that Jones memorably described Robshaw as a player who “
carries OK, tackles OK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/rugby-world-cup-australia-team-england>
” but is not “outstandingly good in any area”. And he is right, Robshaw never 
was, never will be, England’s strongest, cleverest, quickest or most skilful 
forward. However, Jones still got it wrong when he said that he felt Robshaw 
lacked a “point of difference”. He has clearly realised as much since he 
started working with him because Robshaw has started 11 of England’s 12 games 
under Jones and missed only the one-off match against Wales before the 
summer tours.

It is Robshaw’s strength of character that marks him out. “He keeps getting 
better, that’s the thing that impresses me,” Jones said. “He’s the most 
professional player and the most diligent player. He works so hard at his game 
and he always wants to see ways he can get better.”

The very same qualities that Stuart Lancaster saw in Robshaw when he picked 
him to be England’s captain in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/30/chris-robshaw-england-captain-stuart-lancaster>
 are still serving him well now that Jones has demoted him back into the ranks.

Borthwick says Robshaw has been “phenomenal” in the past 12 months. “When you 
pull out examples of selfless play, the ones you want to show to everybody to 
say: ‘This is the kind of thing that epitomises us,’ inevitably Robshaw is 
involved,” Borthwick said. “That’s the type of player he is.”

Borthwick also points to the work Robshaw does away from the playing field. 
“The example he sets in training, in his preparation and the diligence of 
people learning, sat down at the computer learning and asking questions, he’s 
been phenomenal.”

Robshaw is 30. This is, in fact, his testimonial year at Harlequins, to mark 
his 10th year in professional rugby. Typically he is using it to raise funds 
for three favourite charities, Teenage Cancer Trust, Walking With The Wounded 
and Canine Partners, who provide trained dogs for people with disabilities.

Battle with Argentina reveals England’s enormous progress | Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-twickenham-eddie-jones>
Looking back on that match in Salta in 2009, Borthwick remembers his first 
impression of Robshaw being that he “seemed like a guy determined to have a 
great England career”.

Robshaw’s story has turned out much more complicated than that. It was three 
years before he even won another cap and then he ended up playing 42 matches as 
captain, a run that finished with two humiliating defeats during the group 
stages of the World Cup.

He never was a Churchillian leader but he is still the living epitome of one 
of the prime minister’s most famous lines: “I have nothing to offer but blood, 
toil, tears and sweat.” Robshaw has given freely of all four – and will carry 
on giving more until it is finally time for him to quit.
 