
Opportunism knocks for England, who finished the year unbeaten by recording 
their highest score over Australia here in their 14th consecutive victory since 
they were knocked out of the World Cup they hosted by the Wallabies 14 months 
ago. Having had a knack then for finding a way of losing big matches, no hole 
now appears too deep for them to clamber out of.

There were times in the opening minutes on Saturday when the England players 
appeared to have adopted the clown imagethe newspaper the Australian painted of 
Eddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/02/eddie-jones-clown-michael-cheika-england-australia>
 bumbling, fumbling and blundering their way to a 10-point deficit. Some of 
their play was comical, such as when Owen Farrell and Mike Brown treated the 
ball as if it were a grenade as it bobbled near their line, but those wearing 
green and gold were not laughing at the end.

At the end of a week in which the Six Nations announced there will be a trial 
of bonus points this season, England reached the four-try mark for the third 
time out of four this series.Where South Africa were naive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/12/england-v-south-africa-rugby-union-autumn-internationals-live>
,Fiji easily outwitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/19/england-v-fiji-rugby-union-autumn-internationals-live>
 andArgentina stretched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/england-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-international-live>
 despite having a man advantage, Australia were a significant step up from what 
had gone before, resourceful and purposeful.

As in the first Test in Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/australia-england-first-test-match-report>
 back in June, they took an early 10-0 lead. England overturned that, as they 
did again, by not becoming distracted. In last year’s World Cup,they twice led 
Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 by 10 points and ended up losing. A majority of the players that day were 
involved against Australia but such is the belief suffused by Jones, allied 
with a growing ruthlessness, that a team that seemed deserted by luck now make 
their own.

Two of England’s tries came from opposition mistakes and a third was down to 
Ben Youngs’s decision to take a quick penalty when the Australian players 
around him expected a kick at goal with only four points separating the teams. 
Youngs was named man of the match having been his side’s catalyst, the player 
who led them out of a chronically slow start through accurate box-kicking and 
the threat he offered around the fringes, and one of the differences Jones has 
made is in getting the most out of players whose form oscillated before his 
arrival.

Youngs is now consistently, rather than intermittently, good; Courtney Lawes 
again put himself where he was needed, no lurking on the look-out for a 
prominent hit; Tom Wood was another stoker, as crucial to the victory as more 
prominent players, such as the centre Jonathan Joseph, who scored two tries and 
created another.

Jones uses creative tension to get the best out of his charges. Joseph was 
dropped earlier in the series; so was Wood. No one feels secure:Semesa 
Rokoduguni was dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/england-fiji-samesa-rokodugini-autumn-internationals>
 after scoring two tries and winning the man of the match award against Fiji. 
It is all about performing and if England in the last four weeks did not find 
the perfect performance, when they were good, they were very good.

Even when they were shambolic in the opening 20 minutes here, they clung on 
grimly, twice preventing Australia tries by getting under the ball-carrier over 
the line and preventing a grounding. George Kruis foiled Sekope Kepu and Joseph 
thwarted Tevita Kuridrani, who had been denied in the opening minutes following 
Brown and Farrell’s Laurel and Hardy impersonation by David Pocock’s knock-on 
after he had tackled Farrell.

Instead of four tries, Australia had just the one. It came, ironically given 
the accusation levelled at the Wallabies’ scrummaging technique by Jones in the 
buildup, from an England scrum, after Pocock’s knock-on. Youngs’s feed hit 
Dylan Hartley on the leg and bounced under Australia’s locks. With the wing 
Marland Yarde positioned in midfield to chase a clearing kick, Sefa Naivalu had 
no one to beat on the left wing.

A Foley penalty put Australia 10-0 ahead. By that stage, they had enjoyed 95% 
territory and England had made 57 of the game’s 59 tackles. The scrum was not 
an issue, with the referee largely letting both front rows getting on with it. 
Youngs’s box-kicking helped England gain a foothold and after Farrell had 
kicked two penalties, they took the lead after cashing in on a mistake by the 
scrum-half Nick Phipps.

Forced to make a detour at a ruck to avoid Mako Vunipola, who the Wallabies 
protested was offside, he was off balance when he lobbed a pass at Kepu. The 
prop dropped the ball and compounded his error by flicking it backwards. It was 
hacked on by Farrell then it bounced perfectly for Joseph. Luck was not 
something enjoyed by the previous regime, but the image has changed.

When Marland Yarde beat a dawdling Israel Folau to Joseph’s cross-kick four 
minutes into the second-half, the referee, Jaco Peyper, asked the television 
match official to review the try. The wing knocked the ball on with his left 
hand before touching it down with his right. The contact was ruled to be 
simultaneous, yet in the same corner four years before, in Stuart Lancaster’s 
first year as head coach, David Strettle was denied a try on review that would 
have givenEngland the chance of drawing with Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/25/england-wales-six-nations>, who 
went on to win the grand slam.

England trailed 16-13 at half-time with Foley kicking two more penalties, but 
they were even more dominant in the second period than Australia had been in 
the first. Youngs scored his try five minutes after Yarde, tapping a penalty 10 
minutes out and dummying Phipps. Farrell’s third penalty extended his side’s 
lead to 14 points with 24 minutes to go.

It was not quite game over. Kepu spotted a fellow prop, Joe Marler, in front 
of him after a Folau surge and beat him on the outside. It was Australia’s last 
shot: Dane Haylett-Petty was sent to the sin-bin for a late challenge on Brown 
and Joseph intercepted Pocock’s lofted pass for his second try. Australia had 
trained in the week at Harrow, Churchill’s alma mater, but it is England who 
are signalling V for victory.

Unbeaten Eddie Jones says England short of 2003 World Cup vintage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-unbeaten-england-2003-comparisons>
England 37-21 Australia: how the players at Twickenham rated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-twickenham-ratings>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fengland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc06fa784086d2e914a663e68104a3f7e14255a9c%2F640_580_4268_2561%2F4268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20backs%20cut%20loose%20against%20Australia%20to%20complete%20their%20perfect%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fengland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20backs%20cut%20loose%20against%20Australia%20to%20complete%20their%20perfect%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fengland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc06fa784086d2e914a663e68104a3f7e14255a9c%2F640_580_4268_2561%2F4268.jpg>
 Ben Youngs takes the match out of Australia’s reach after selling Nick Phipps 
a dummy. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
ENGLAND Brown; Yarde, Joseph, Farrell (Te’o 67), May; Ford. Youngs (Care 63); 
Vunipola (Marler 59), Hartley (capt; George 59), Cole (Sinckler 67), Lawes, 
Kruis (Ewels 73), Robshaw (Harrison 69), Wood, Hughes.Tries Joseph 2, Yarde, 
YoungsCons Farrell 3, Ford Pens Farrell 3

AUSTRALIA Folau; Haylett-Petty, Kuridrani, Hodge (Cooper 69), Naivalu (Speight 
69); Foley, Phipps (Frisby 69); Sio (Robertson 58), Moore (capt; Latu 73), Sepu 
(Slipper 58), Douglas (Mumm 61), Simmons, Pocock, Hooper, Timani (McMahon 68).
Tries Naivalu, Kepu Cons Foley Pens Foley 3 Sin-bin Haylett-Petty 72

Twickenham 81,787

Game rating 8/10 Referee Jaco Peyper (SA)
 