
The UK economy could grow by billions of pounds a year if underachieving 
youngsters all obtained basic skills at school and boys and girls achieved 
similar levels of educational attainment, according to a new reportcommissioned 
by the OECD <http://www.oecd.org/>.

Currently 20% of pupils in England, Scotland and Wales leave school lacking 
basic skills in areas such as numeracy, whileboys and girls achieve uneven 
results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/aug/21/gcse-results-2014-biggest-gap-11-boys-and-girls-a-c-pass-rate>
 in subjects such as maths and science. But efforts to reduce those gaps over 
the next 15 years would more than pay for themselves, according to the OECD’s 
analysis.

The figures were compiled by two economists, Eric Hanushek of Stanford’s 
Hoover Institution and Ludger Woessmann of the University of Munich, and based 
on the international rankings of 15-year-olds using the OECD’s triennialPisa 
tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/06/oecd-pisa-tests-education-joy-of-learning>
 across 76 countries.

Spread over the working lifetime of students in school by 2030, the economists 
project that bringing all pupils up to the same minimum level of achievement 
would increase the UK’s national output by more than £2tn by 2095, spread over 
65 years.

The additional costs would be more than covered by the expanding economy and 
income, the authors argued.

“The economic output that is lost because of poor education policies and 
practices leaves many countries in what amounts to a permanent state of 
economic recession – and one that can be larger and deeper than the one that 
resulted from the financial crisis,” the report’s commentary said.

John Nash, reappointed as an education minister by David Cameron, said in 
response: “We still have children brought up in communities on the coast or 
mining towns who just live in a world of unemployment: their parents are 
unemployed, their grandparents are unemployed.

“It’s shocking that for generations we’ve allowed that to happen. We have to 
break that cycle, partly by welfare reform but mainly through education.”

The report put the UK 20th in its rankings of 76 countries by percentage of 
national workforce lacking basic academic abilities and problem-solving skills, 
such being able to accurately convert currencies.

Singapore, Hong Kong, Estonia and South Korea topped the charts with fewer 
than 10% of pupils lacking such skills, while in Ghana, Honduras, South Africa, 
Morocco and Indonesia more than two-thirds of students fell below the measure 
of basic skills.

The report found that reducing the gap in performance by gender would also add 
billions to national income, although at a slower rate than ending the long 
tail of underperformance among the bottom 20%.

A report by Ofsted 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-level-subject-take-up> published 
on Tuesday found that girls were far less likely than boys to take physics at 
A-level and much more likely to drop the subject after their first year.

Just three girls for every 10 boys took physics at AS-level in the first year 
of sixth form in 2013 and only 57% went on to take a full A-level compared with 
71% of boys.

In biology, more girls than boys took the subject at AS-level but more girls 
then gave it up in their final year of A-level.

However, girls outnumbered boys in subjects such as English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/18/girls-physics-boys-other-subjects-gender-disparity>
, history and law. There was a wide gender imbalance in favour of girls in 
modern languages such as French, while there were three girls to every boy 
taking art or sociology at AS-level.
 