
The death of Eric Hobsbawm <https://www.theguardian.com/books/eric-hobsbawm> 
at the age of 95 leaves us bereft of a great historian, a masterly writer of 
muscular readable prose, and a scholar whose intellectual curiosity and range 
had few if any equals. He was already well past retirement age when I came to 
know him – first at Birkbeck College, the old workingmen's college in whose 
ideals he always took enormous pride, and then at meetings ofPast and Present 
<http://past.oxfordjournals.org/>, the journal he had helped found. But despite 
being well on the wrong side of 80, he was still very active.

He had taught at Birkbeck since the late 1940s, and as he kept a small office 
at Birkbeck 50 years on, I think it was in the narrow corridor outside it that 
I first saw him, lean, slightly stooping. The already frail shoulders under the 
sportsjacket made one feel protective of him but that feeling disappeared as 
soon as he began to talk. Hobsbawm needed no protection, and his mind retained 
a quite extraordinary energy and clarity up to the very end. And then there was 
his voice – crisp, almost military, the characteristic barked interrogative – 
"Not really a first-class mind, what?" – that summoned up a vanished 
mid-century Britain that was as much a part of Hobsbawm as the endlessly 
commented on Marxism.

Certainly, it is hard to think of another Marxist who more richly deserved the 
Companion of Honour bestowed on him in 1998, for what Hobsbawm gave this 
country was more than it gave him. He had arrived as a schoolboy in 1933, 
having spent most of his life till then in Vienna and Berlin (a story he would 
recount in his wonderful autobiographyInteresting Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/oct/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview4>
), where he had already witnessed the rise of the Nazis and discovered Karl 
Marx. At Cambridge, where he studied in the 30s, he had a reputation for 
omniscience. Running the local Communist party cell from the set of college 
rooms beneath Wittgenstein's, the youthful Hobsbawm was invited to join the 
exclusive Apostles society. His was the anti-fascist generation, and once he 
had made his political choice, he stuck with it his entire life and never 
apologised for it.

Looking for a job once the war was over, he was hamstrung by his party 
affiliation; a mild McCarthyism hung in the air even in England. Cambridge 
turned its back on him, but Birkbeck welcomed him in. Above the Garibaldi 
restaurant in Saffron Hill, he was a member of an extraordinary club – the
Communist Party Historians Group 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communist_Party_Historians_Group>. If today 
British historians are among the most outward-looking sections of the academy, 
that is in large part due to the work of the CPHG. After 1946, its members 
helped transform what had been a crusty coterie of constitutionalists and 
kings-and-queens types, popularising the study of ordinary people, and putting 
social and economic history at the centre of the profession.

The journal Past and Present was a breath of fresh air, and a conduit for new 
ideas from abroad. The parochialism of English intellectual life started to 
lift. That Marxism was the intellectual generator of this revolution was, as 
Marxists once liked to say, no accident. It provided a natural bridge to other 
social sciences – notably sociology and economics – where exciting things were 
happening, and while it made England, home of the industrial revolution, the 
centre of historical action, at the same time it inculcated a global view.

Hobsbawm was at the heart of this. Even as he was pursuing his other passion, 
jazz – about which he wrote superbly well under the pseudonym Francis Newton – 
he was forging contacts with French, German and Italian historians, and 
allowing their ideas and interests to shape his own. The historian who had cut 
his teeth on the history of the Fabian movement began to write about Italian 
peasants and South American bandits. And then he embarked on the extraordinary 
quartet of books which still provide a compelling and unparallelled 
introduction for thousands of readers to world history from the French 
revolution to the end of the 20th century (The Age of Revolution, The Age of 
Capital, The Age of Empire, The Age of Extremes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780349106717/the-age-of-extremes-the-short-twentieth-century>
).

Rereading those books it is hard not to be overwhelmed by Hobsbawm's skill. 
One of the hardest things for a historian is to make an argument readable; he 
does it better than anyone. Not for Hobsbawm, the turn to narrative, the urge 
to tell stories. He had plenty of his own. But his histories are about trends, 
social forces, large-scale change over vast distances. Telling that kind of 
history in a way that is as compelling as a detective story is a real challenge 
of style and composition: in the tetralogy, Hobsbawm shows how to do it.

To be sure, some bits work better than others. Age of Empire remains a tour de 
force; no other Europeanist was at home writing about South America one minute 
and China the next.Age of Extremes – the volume on the 20th century suffers by 
comparison; what it really tells isthe story that emerges more openly in his 
autobiography <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v24/n19/perry-anderson/the-age-of-ejh>, and 
his political sympathies get in the way. In retrospect that is scarcely 
surprising and hardly worththe fuss that was made at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/01/history.politics>.

One would not read Hobsbawm for a clear-eyed assessment of communism's 
limitations, just as one would not find much in his work on the role of gender 
in history (another blind spot). But what few of us can point to is the kind of 
extraordinarily sweeping achievement, the transformation of history into a 
global story, that Hobsbawm pioneered. His legacy continues in the shape of a 
thriving and outward-looking historical profession, a legacy the more 
impressive for emanating from a man uninterested in founding any kind of school 
of his own. To anyone who loves history his death is very sad news. May his 
books be read for many years to come.
 