 Esmond Wright, who has died aged 87, was one of the pioneers of the post-1945 
development of American studies in British universities. Emeritus professor of 
American history at London University since 1983, he was also a broadcaster, 
and he won a memorable byelection for the Conservatives at Pollok, Glasgow in 
March 1967.
Educated at Durham University, two experiences shaped his life. In 1940, while 
a Commonwealth Fund fellow at the University of Virginia, he met Franklin 
Roosevelt when the president made his "hand which held the dagger" speech, 
condemning the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini's declaration of war on 
Britain and France. Wright's fascination with US history and politics never 
left him - and nor did his love of Virginia and a somewhat romantic view of the 
south.

Then, there was his army service (1940-46), much of it in the Middle East. He 
rose to lieutenant-colonel, which brought him to the fringes of the military 
and political establishment. Its methods of operation fascinated him for the 
rest of his life.

Appointed to a history lectureship at Glasgow University in 1946, by 1957 he 
was professor of modern history. The first American history specialist to be 
appointed to a general chair of history at a British university, he became 
successively secretary and chairman of the British Association for American 
Studies.

In his self-deprecatory way, he protested that he was not a genuine scholar, 
but both in the spoken word and in print, he possessed a graceful, informal 
style well-suited to the works of synthesis aimed at students and wider 
audiences. Fabric Of Freedom (1962) stands out as an elegant overview of the 
American revolution. His fascination with Benjamin Franklin produced a number 
of works, culminating in Franklin Of Philadelphia (1986), a substantial, 
beautifully written biography. In 1995 he published a three-volume history of 
the US, The Search For Liberty, An Empire For Liberty and The American Dream. 
It was a monumental effort, although not an altogether successful one.

Having become a professor at 42, he confided to friends his concern about what 
he was going to do with the rest of his life. He plunged into the media, 
writing for newspapers, particularly the Glasgow Herald, and he featured on 
television. As an interviewer, he was courteous and emollient, rather than 
aggressive.

It was a surprise to many when he stood as the Conservative candidate for the 
Labour seat of Pollok in 1967. He described it as the first big gamble of his 
life - and he won. Regarded as a star recruit to the Conservative benches in 
1967, he did not find it easy, as an established professor in his 50s, to come 
to terms with Westminster. His party colleagues were unaccustomed to 
professors, and he later confessed that he received more help in adjusting to 
the ways of the House of Commons from former Glasgow students like Labour's 
Donald Dewar (obituary October 12 2000).

From 1972-76, he was principal of the Conservative party college at Swinton. 
But with no prospect of a major political career, he returned to academic life, 
and, as director of the Institute of United States Studies, University of 
London (1971-83) he struggled to preserve the establishment in the face of cuts 
imposed by the Conservative government. After a brave recovery from a road 
accident, he remained restlessly active. Despite his lingering view that the 
American revolution had been a tragic mistake, he loved America and had many 
American friends.

In 1976 he became vice-chairman and, from 1981-85 was chairman of Border TV. 
His links with the west of Scotland business community, particularly through 
his friendship with Lord Fraser of Allander, opened other doors. He became 
treasurer and vice-chairman of the Automobile Association (1971-85) and was 
vice-president from 1985, although he did not own a car and did not drive.

Wright possessed a wonderfully relaxed, informal manner and an effortless 
personal charm which made it almost impossible to have an argument with him, or 
to persist in any kind of grievance He drew for more than 50 years on the 
devoted support of his wife Olive in what was a remarkably close partnership.

 Brian Wilson writes: That victory by Esmond Wright at Pollok in 1967 - one of 
the most celebrated Scottish byelections of recent decades - was hailed as a 
new dawn for the Scottish Tories. It turned out to be more their last hurrah in 
Glasgow.

Wright was highly regarded as a teacher and communicator; indeed he could 
reasonably claim to have been the first media academic, presenting current 
affairs programmes for Scottish Television and the BBC from the late 1950s. 
Since he was regarded as a middle-of-the-road academic and pundit, he took 
everyone by surprise when he emerged as Tory candidate for the by-election.

The Labour candidate, Dick Douglas, who later became a Labour MP only to 
defect to the Scottish Nationalists, was a disaster. The Scotish National Party 
vote surged, paving the way for their landmark victory in Hamilton later that 
year, and Wright held the Tory vote to regain what had for many years been one 
of the most marginal seats in Scotland.

Scottish Toryism was still dominated by the landed old guard which was under 
challenge from the working-class populism epitomised by Teddy Taylor. In this 
company, Wright was a complete one-off. He was certainly the only Scottish Tory 
MP who would have called on the Labour government in his maiden speech "to 
think in terms of tax reform such as Robert Peel alone ever carried through in 
this country".

Wright lost Pollok by only a couple of hundred votes in 1970, but it was the 
end of his parliamentary career and, indeed, the focus of his life and work 
moved south thereafter. One of the John Smith-Dewar generation at Glasgow 
University, Lord Gordon of Strathblane, also has fond memories of Wright 
through being STV's political correspondent in the late 1960s. "He was a 
godsend to me - trying to get a Scottish Tory to interview was hard enough; 
trying to get an articulate one was more so!"

Professor Parish died last year, his obituary has been subsequently revised. 

Â· Esmond Wright, professor of history, media personality and politician, born 
November 5, 1915; died August 9 2003.
 