
My Monday morning commute in early November wouldn’t be worthy of tracking on 
a FitBit; it’s just two flights of stairs from my bedroom to the sun-drenched 
minimalistic office, where several of my co-workers have already kickstarted 
the day, heads down to their Macs or discussing their freelance projects, cups 
of espresso beside them.


So far, perhaps a typical office in 2016. Except, these aren’t just my 
co-workers, they’re also my housemates. Welcome to the world of co-living, 
spaces designed to cater to freelancers and remote workers roaming the globe 
seeking super-charged Wi-Fi connection in soul-stirring backdrops.

Unable to commit to another full-blown holiday this year (no paid holiday for 
freelancers means holidays are always a battle) but still yearning for some 
downtime in a picturesque environment, I decide to take my laptop and swap the 
dull grey skies of London for Lisbon’s Mediterranean climate with temperatures 
close to 20C in November and where alfresco dining is still very much in vogue. 
This way, I can still work but also experience living in another city during my 
free time.

That’s how I find myself at company retreat and occasional co-living space 
Surf Office <https://www.thesurfoffice.com/> in the now trendy Cais do Sodre 
neighbourhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/09/lisbon-city-guide-day-in-cais-do-sodre>
 of Lisbon. Decked out in Ikea furniture, it has four floors consisting of 
bedrooms (light-filled affairs with high ceilings and wooden floors), kitchens, 
bathrooms and workspaces. On previous adventures in Berlin and New York, I’ve 
rented an Airbnb and worked from there but this space feels very different. 
Here my productivity shoots up. Maybe it’s just actually having a dedicated 
office space to work from or just working alongside hardworking people 
thrashing out business plans or developing their startups, but whatever the 
reason I find I’m much more focused. It’s the reason others are staying here 
too as opposed to an Airbnb.

“I’m staying here because I’ve got a project I want to make good progress on,” 
says David Stefanides, a 25-year-old freelance designer from Slovakia, who is 
spending five days at Surf Office. It’s his second time at the Lisbon branch 
after he stayed there last year for two weeks. “It’s a better environment than 
an Airbnb. It’s geared towards workers. If I stay in anAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> then I’d be too comfortable 
there. Here there’s more creativity and I’m focused. I stay later here and work 
more. And it’s nice to be with other like-minded people with a similar mindset.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fespressos-networking-co-living-has-me-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39f425159002734e46fc1bc47fe2992c836bd27a%2F0_95_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Espressos%20and%20networking%3A%20co-living%20has%20me%20hooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fespressos-networking-co-living-has-me-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Espressos%20and%20networking%3A%20co-living%20has%20me%20hooked&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fespressos-networking-co-living-has-me-hooked%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39f425159002734e46fc1bc47fe2992c836bd27a%2F0_95_750_450%2F750.jpg>
 Freelance journalist Susie Bearne and her co-workers at Surf Office Lisbon. 
Photograph: PR 
Another of my co-workers is Marek Hrabe, a software engineer from Prague who 
works remotely. He’s also a fan of the working environment. “Within such an 
office space, you tend to work harder.”

Apart from the productivity factor, there’s also the community aspect. When 
I’ve worked abroad before, I often arrive armed with a few contacts through 
work and friends, but this time I immediately have a social group. One evening 
we’re having dinner at Time Out Market, the next night we find ourselves 
enjoying drinks on a rooftop bar at LX Factory, an old industrial site now home 
to art spaces and restaurants, another and we’re drinking ginjinhas (a 
Portuguese liquor) at a local trattoria. One evening Surf Office co-founder 
Peter Fabor organises dinner at a Chinese restaurant and brings his friend who 
works in the tech sector so I can pick his brains about some features I’m 
writing. We swap details. And so this social aspect carries on, some of us 
swapping details and becoming friends on social media.

Co-living has won over Stefano Ceccon, a data journalist and founder of startup
SkipQ <http://www.skipq.io/>, who stayed at Surf Office for a total of three 
weeks. “I’ve enjoyed the sense of community here,” he says as he’s making his 
pasta lunch in the communal kitchen. “I’ve met people who are doing something 
interesting. People are working hard but then there’s also the opportunity to 
go out.” There’s also the connections he’s made. “I’ve met other freelancers 
and I might need web developers in the future for my startup so it’s also been 
good for networking.”

I see first hand the collaboration between the people staying. One morning 
James Marshall, who is using the space as a co-working place, helps Stefanides 
with a design for his surf skincare startup,Sett Surf. <https://settsurf.com/> 
“It’s nice to be able to take the time to help each other and give each other 
feedback,” says Stefanides.

By its very nature, co-living will not appeal to everyone. Surf Lisbon proved 
to be a fairly quiet office environment but some co-living spaces may be fully 
subscribed so it might be worth checking in advance so you’re prepared to fight 
over plugs and desk space. And for some, living in close proximity with others 
might provoke the usual minor gripes. When I depart, seven days later it’s 
minus a few food items after they’ve gone missing from the fridge – immediately 
bringing back memories of my backpacking days.

But co-living is on the rise with rooms with communal workspaces cropping up 
around the world. TakeRoam <https://www.roam.co/> allowing people to live in 
co-living spaces in Miami, Madrid and Bali for around $1,800 (£1,425) per 
month. There’s alsoBedndesk <http://www.bedndesk.com/> in Mallorca, with rates 
starting from €29 (£24) a day, andColiving.at <http://coliving.at/> in Austria.

When I leave it’s for an Airbnb in Graça, another part of Lisbon. It’s a 
fairly noisy four-bedroom apartment with a revolving set of Airbnb guests who 
are mainly here on holiday. It is of course a very different environment to 
Surf Office, which has now spurred me to consider co-living on future trips 
when a whole holiday is too much of a luxury. Maybe next year’s co-living break 
will be an exotic destination where lunch breaks involve a dip in the sea 
followed by a quick nap on a sun lounger. That’s a good work-life balance, eh?


Suzanne Bearne was a guest of Surf Office

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 