
How can we overcome the stigma of apprenticeships?

“There is often a misconception about the range of apprenticeships, the roles 
available and careers they can lead to,” explains Jason Jones-Hall, head of 
development atCreative Skillset <http://creativeskillset.org/>. “While there 
are tons of good apprenticeships in traditional industries, it’s not all about 
high-vis vests and hardhats – there are possibilities including roles in film 
and TV, tech, engineering and more.”

Apprentices can also end up earning more than some graduates. The Sutton Trust 
found that people who had completed level five apprenticeships were expected to 
earn £52,000 more over their lifetimesthan graduates from non-elite universities
 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/newsarchive/best-apprentices-earn-50000-more-than-many-graduates/>
. “There’s security too: 90% of apprentices stay in employment, with seven in 
10 staying with the same employer,” says Julie Taylor, careers adviser for the
National Careers Service <https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/>.

What are degree apprenticeships?

Another option for school leavers is taking on a degree apprenticeship 
<http://www.allaboutschoolleavers.co.uk/articles/article/288/what-is-a-degree-apprenticeship>
. “It’s the best of both worlds,” says Emma Finamore, editor of
AllAboutSchoolLeavers.co.uk <http://allaboutschoolleavers.co.uk/>. “You get 
onto one of these programmes by completing A-levels, or building up through the 
various levels of apprenticeship. Apprentices on these programmes study toward 
a degree, usually while on release from their day jobs. So you avoid student 
debt, while getting ahead of your peers in terms of the career ladder and 
salary.”

University v apprenticeships

Although Russell Group university graduates do tend to earn more than those 
who attended apprentice schemes, in 2015 working-age grads earned an average of 
£32,500compared with £22,000 for non-graduates 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/458101/BIS-15-484-graduate-labour-market-statistics-Q2-2015.pdf>
. There are advantages to taking on an apprenticeship, says Samantha Parry, 
talent manager forAccorHotels 
<http://www.accorhotels.com/gb/united-kingdom/index.shtml>: “First, you are 
able to earn while you learn and gain a qualification in what you do. Second, 
it gets you on the career ladder straight from school – I can quote many 
examples of individuals who have advanced quicker in their career than those 
who gained a degree and then entered the world of work,”. So apprenticeships – 
from higher level to degree apprenticeships – are a feasible alternative to 
university.

You don’t need work experience to get ahead

Don’t worry if you don’t have any previous work experience. “Apprenticeships 
are a great first step in a career,” says Charlotte Domanski, knowledge and 
research manager forBusiness in the Community <http://www.bitc.org.uk/>.

But don’t underestimate the value to employers of other skills and experience 
you might have gained. “This could be organising an event, supporting people 
with different levels of needs or leading a team,” she adds.

Volunteer and show transferable skills

The best way to have a strong application is to highlight experience you’ve 
gained, even if it wasn’t in a formal job. “For example, have you led a school 
project? Been the captain of your football team? Anything you can do to show 
you have gained valuable, transferable skills will help candidates stand out,” 
says Tiana Locker, youth engagement officer for theCity & Guilds Group 
<https://www.cityandguildsgroup.com/>.

Volunteering work can also be used to show passion for your chosen industry. 
“The best way for applications to stand out is to include any volunteer work 
that you may have done or to get extended work experience in the area you wish 
to work in. This shows a willingness and passion that other applicants may not 
have thought of,” adds Stephanie Palmer, apprentice ambassador forGetMyFirstJob 
<https://www.getmyfirstjob.co.uk/>.

​Apprenticeships: a guide to options, applications and jobs – live chat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/mar/13/options-job-hunting-and-applications-a-guide-to-apprenticeships-live-chat>
Show an interest in your chosen field

“As with any job application, passion, enthusiasm and knowledge of who it is 
you are applying to and what it is they do will take you a long way,” says 
Jones-Hall. “Whether that’s through voluntary work or stuff you do off your own 
back – for example blogs, YouTube channels, joining local groups, attending 
events, following the right people and seeking out opportunities on social 
media.”


What employers really want to see is a raw talent and enthusiasm to work in 
that particular environment, agrees Liz Carter, talentum consultant forO2 
<http://www.o2.co.uk/>. “A well-researched application is also key.”

Are apprenticeships only for 16-24 year olds?

Although you may think apprenticeships are aimed at the younger workforce the 
truth is that 79% of apprentices in 2015 were aged over 19, says Lynette Daly, 
publisher of thenotgoingtouni.co.uk Apprenticeships Guide 
<http://www.notgoingtouni.co.uk/advice/apprenticeship-guide-2016-561>. “The 
drive for younger apprentices should be understood more as a method of 
increasing the uptake for those under 19,” she says.

In fact, there is no upper age limit for apprentices. However, “current 
funding of 16-18 apprenticeships is higher than the 19 plus age range”, says Jo 
Pretty, principal and chief executive ofLowestoft College 
<https://www.lowestoft.ac.uk/>.

It’s worth remembering that apprenticeships aren’t just for teenagers and 
there is no maximum age limit on applying, adds Finamore.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 