
A group of European newspaper editors have united in an appeal to the European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> to take decisive action to deal 
with the refugee crisis.

Ahead of meeting of EU ministers in Brussels next Monday (14 September) called 
to negotiate solutions to the crisis, the editors have set out several demands 
to solve what they call “the worst refugee crisis the world has seen since the 
second world war.”

They point out that more and more people displaced from war-torn Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> are dying in their desperate attempts 
to flee the country.

The Independent, one of the signatories, said that “with each passing month 
Europe has done too little, too late 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/refugee-crisis-europes-leading-newspapers-urge-governments-to-act-now-in-open-letter-10493502.html>
. We are experiencing a refugee catastrophe, but unwillingness to act has also 
unveiled a serious political crisis.”

It has joined with Germany’s Die Zeit, Italy’s La Repubblica, Spain’s El Paìs, 
France’s Libération and papers in Sweden,Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>, Norway, Poland, Hungary, Cyprus 
and Slovakia to make a set of demands of the EU’s political leaders:

*Establish simple, safe and practical ways for refugees to seek asylum in 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> without risking their 
lives to come here. This is the best way to eliminate human trafficking and 
reduce casualties.

*Show solidarity toward the countries at Europe’s outer borders, where 
refugees and migrants first arrive, by funding and organising a safe, dignified 
and coordinated reception system at Europe’s edges with a fast and fair 
assessment of applications for asylum.

*Suspend the Dublin agreement which return asylum-seekers to their first point 
of entry, so long as large numbers of refugees continue to arrive in Europe.

*Support a fairer distribution of refugees among EU member states. All 
European countries must participate in a relocation programme far more 
ambitious than we have seen so far. The UN High Commissioner forRefugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, António Guterres, has suggested 
that Europe takes responsibility for 200,000 refugees. This should be the 
starting point of the discussions.

*Increase financial and humanitarian aid to Middle Eastern nations affected by 
the Syrian conflict. An aid package must cover not only the immediate needs of 
food, water and medical supplies, but should commit Europe to helping rebuild 
local communities in the long term, thereby offering people in the Middle East 
hope and opportunities for a safer and better future in their own countries.

*Put increased pressure on other key international players, such as Iran, 
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United States, to do their utmost to bring 
the parties in the Syrian conflict together for UN-led peace negotiations.

Our leaders must show courage and insight if they are not to fail this test of 
our shared European civilization. We need to act, and we need to act now.

Bernd Ulrich, Die Zeit, Germany; Ezio Mauro, La Repubblica, Italy; Antonio 
Caño,El Paìs, Spain; Johan Hufnagel and Laurent Joffrin, Libération, France;

Amol Rajan, The Independent, UK; Oliver Duff, i, UK; Lisa Markwell, 
Independent on Sunday, UK; Christian Broughton, independent.co.uk; Andreas 
Paraschos, 
Kathimerini, Cyprus; András Murányi, Népszabadság, Hungary;

Matúš Kostolný, Denník N, Slovakia; Adam Michnik, Gazeta Wyborcza, Poland; Jan 
Helin,Aftonbladet, Sweden; Christian Jensen, Information, Denmark; Anna B. 
Jenssen,Morgenbladet, Norway.

Source: The Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/refugee-crisis-europes-leading-newspapers-urge-governments-to-act-now-in-open-letter-10493502.html>
 