
The European Space Agency will host a press conference today to announce that 
they are a partner onAsteroid Day 2016 <http://asteroidday.org>. Taking place 
on 30 June 2016, this is a global initiative to raise awareness of the threat 
from near-Earth objects.

Asteroids <https://www.theguardian.com/science/asteroids> are the left-over 
remnants from the formation of the planets 4.6 billion years ago. We know that 
they have hit our planet in the past, causing mass devastation, and will 
continue to do so in the future.

However, it is a natural disaster that can be predicted by monitoring space to 
find these faint objects. The European Space Agency runs theNear Earth Object 
Coordination Centre <http://neo.ssa.esa.int> that continually assesses the risk 
from nearby asteroids.

We also know of several ways that could deflect any asteroids found on 
collision course, though no techniques have ever been tried in practise. ESA is 
working to help change this.

It is studying the Asteroid Impact Mission 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Space_Engineering_Technology/Asteroid_Impact_Mission/Asteroid_Impact_Mission2>
. If approved later this year and awarded funding, AIM would launch in October 
2020 and travel to the binary asteroid system Didymos, which consists of an 
800m-diameter main asteroid and a 170 m moon, nick-named ‘Didymoon’.

NASA may also contribute to the mission by launching the Double Asteroid 
Redirection Test (DART). This would smash into Didymoon in an attempt to alter 
its orbit slightly. As yet, NASA has not partnered with Asteroid Day.

I am chairing today’s press event, having been asked by Grig Richters, the 
co-founder of Asteroid Day. I chaired ascience panel at the Science Museum 
<http://resources.asteroidday.org/videos/asteroid-day-panel-discussion-at-the-science-museum-in-london/>
 for last year’s inaugural event.

You can watch today’s press conference live at 1400 GMT (1500 CET) in the 
viewer below.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudtvQqjuHJg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudtvQqjuHJg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudtvQqjuHJg&media=>
 The press conference will be broadcast live at 1400GMT (1500CET). 
Asteroid Day takes place on 30 June because this is the anniversary of the 
Tunguska impact in Siberia 1908. The resulting explosion flattened 2000 square 
kilometres of forest in the scarcely populated region.


There were no known casualties but the devastation covered an area the size of 
a large city.

Richters started Asteroid Day with Queen guitarist and astrophysicist Brian 
May last year, having worked on the film51° North 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxlSkotTkiw>, which details the days leading 
up to a devastating asteroid strike.

Stuart Clark <http://www.stuartclark.com/> is the author of The Unknown 
Universe 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Unknown-Universe-About-Chapters/dp/1781855749/ref=tmm_hrd_title_0>
 (Head of Zeus), and co-host of the podcastThe Stuniverse 
<https://www.acast.com/stuniverse> (Bingo Productions).
 