
Some of Europe's largest industrial companies gained billions of euros from 
the carbon emission rules they lobbied fiercely against, new analysis reveals 
today.

Ten steel and cement companies have amassed 240m carbon pollution permits from 
generous allocations, according to a report bySandbag, the carbon trading 
thinktank <http://www.carbonfatcats.eu>, seen by the Guardian.

The free permits, granted to companies with a market value of €4bn (£3.5bn), 
can be sold or kept for future use. The European commission estimates that the 
entire energy-intensive sector will haveaccumulated allowances worth €7bn-€12bn 
by the end of 2012 
<http://ec.europa.eu/clima/documentation/ets/docs/benchmarking/explanatory%20_paper_en.pdf>
.

"More and more businesses see that Europe's future lies in a highly efficient 
economy with low pollution," Baroness Worthington, Sandbag's founding director, 
said. "But a small group of carbon fat-cat companies are trying to stop this, 
in spite of making billions from a windfall of free pollution permits."

The steelmaker ArcelorMittal leads the list of companies in the report, with a 
current surplus valued at €1.7bn, followed by Lafarge, the cement group.

Tata Steel, in third place with a surplus valued at €393m, last month announced
1,500 job losses at its plants in Lincolnshire and Teesside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/20/tata-steel-job-losses-yorkshire-teesside>
, blaming emissions regulations as well as the economic downturn. Karl-Ulrich 
Köhler, chief executive of Tata Steel Europe, said at the time: "EU carbon 
legislation threatens to impose huge additional costs on the steel industry." 
Tata Steel declined to comment on the report.

The European Union emissions trading scheme 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emission_Trading_Scheme> (ETS) 
puts a cap on the carbon pollution emitted by energy and industrial companies. 
Those reducing their emissions can sell their spare permits to those who do 
not. But a combination of initial over-allocation by national governments and 
the economic decline has left the steel, cement, chemical, ceramic and paper 
sectors with many more permits than they need. The industries have lobbied hard 
against calls from governments including the UK for the tightening of the ETS 
and other emissions targets.

Eurofer, the lobby group representing all of Europe's steelmakers, said last 
month: "To remain competitive in the free, global steel markets, European steel 
needs … legislation that does not harm its competitiveness. But we aregravely 
concerned that EU climate change policy will do precisely that 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCAQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.eurofer.org%2Findex.php%2Feng%2Fcontent%2Fdownload%2F12565%2F64815%2Ffile%2FOpen%2520letter%2520of%2520the%2520EU%2520steel%2520industry.pdf&rct=j&q=eurofer%20To%20remain%20competitive%20in%20the%20free%2C%20global%20steel%20markets%2C%20European%20steel%20needs&ei=q4b7TZyDFcewhAfHsZGDAw&usg=AFQjCNEfoHRB_y_RXAy3spfAdXDrZvaOGw&cad=rja>
."

Cembureau <http://www.cembureau.be/>, which lobbies for the cement industry, 
takes a similar line, stating: "It would beirresponsible to shift the 
[emissions] goalposts 
<http://www.cembureau.be/newsroom/article/energy-intensive-industries-why-setting-co2-targets-2050-unrealistic>
."

In the UK, the government has proposed incentivising low-carbon innovation by 
setting a British floor price for carbon from 2013. But this is opposed by the 
CBI. John Cridland, the director general of the employers' group, said: "It 
risks tippingenergy-intensive industries over the edge 
<http://www.cbi.org.uk/ndbs/press.nsf/0363c1f07c6ca12a8025671c00381cc7/470e82f74b3130db802578ae00570348?OpenDocument>
."

The government has made some concessions, promising to produce plans later in 
2011 tocompensate businesses for any competitive disadvantage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/may/17/uk-halve-carbon-emissions>.

However, independent analysis by Bloomberg New Energy Finance found that the 
carbon permits held by the steel industry would cover its emissions for the 
next 12 years. "If the steel sector [on aggregate] did not sell any of its 
surplus, it would not have a need to purchase emissions until 2023," said Guy 
Turner at Bloomberg NEF.

The Sandbag report, based on public data, also found that nine of the 10 
"carbon fat cats" bought between them 24.4m permits from the cheaper 
international market, mainly from companies in China and India. These can be 
used within the EU's trading scheme, enabling companies to retain the more 
valuable European ETS permits. Furthermore, despite the European companies 
claiming that tougher emissions rules would drive business overseas, some were 
paying overseas steel and cement companies for their international carbon 
permits.

"Purchasing carbon offsets from foreign competitors would not seem to be the 
actions of businesses genuinely concerned that the ETS will drive business 
abroad," said Worthington.

Not all companies are resisting the tightening of the European ETS. Five major 
energy groups, including Britain's Scottish and Southern Energy, last week
called for spare permits to be withdrawn 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2011/06/14/us-eu-energy-climate-idUKTRE75D4FO20110614>
, a proposal supported by Sandbag.

"Failure to do so could severely hamper business incentives to invest in 
low-carbon technologies, as the price signal will be skewed in favour of 
fossil-based solutions," their statement said.

The Guardian contacted all the companies named by Sandbag. Those who responded 
argued that the surplus permits arose from decreased production and might be 
needed when the economy recovered. They said that without protection, steel and 
cement making would be driven to countries with less CO2-efficient 
manufacturing practices. Many called for global regulation of emissions

A spokesperson for ArcelorMittal <http://www.arcelormittal.com/> said: "As 
part of our corporate responsibility strategy, we have decided that any sale of 
such surplus allowances will be reinvested into projects aimed at the 
improvement of our energy efficiency footprint, as this will help to reduce our 
overall CO2 emissions."

Erwin Schneider, at the steelmaker ThyssenKrupp <http://www.thyssenkrupp.com/>
, said: "Companies make decisions based on expected future developments. Any 
earnings from the past will either have been reinvested already or paid out to 
shareholders. Therefore it seems to be very misleading to use historic numbers 
to address our future position."
 