
What are gravitational waves?

Ripples in spacetime, a bit like ripples on a pond, that propagate out at the 
speed of light. Throw something really big into the stillness of space – like 
two black holes colliding, or two pulsars merging – and gravitational waves 
created by the event should spread not just across the galaxy, but ultimately 
through all of spacetime.

Have they been found?

Yes. At a press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
 on Thursday, physicists from theLaser Interferometer Gravitational-wave 
Observatory (LIGO) <https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/> revealed that they had 
detected gravitational waves.

Watch this spacetime: gravitational wave discovery expected
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/09/watch-this-spacetime-gravitational-wave-discovery-expected>
Why did we think they exist?

Gravitational waves were predicted by Albert Einstein’s general theory of 
relativity, 100 years ago. Almost everything the theory predicted has been 
confirmed by observation or experiment, except gravitational waves.



Hang on, hadn’t they already been detected?

For a blissful few weeks in 2014, physicists working on the BICEP-2 telescope 
in Antarctica were sure they had seen a sign ofprimordial gravitational waves 
left over from the big bang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/mar/14/gravitational-waves-big-bang-universe-bicep>
. Hope ebbed though as it became increasingly possible that they had instead 
seen an artefact created by dust in distant space afterclaims of a flawed 
analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jun/04/gravitational-wave-discovery-dust-big-bang-inflation>
.

Two physicists got a Nobel Prize in 1993 for studies of a binary pulsar which 
behaved in a way that could best be explained by Einstein’s prediction: gravity 
waves would drain away the orbital energy of the two massive bodies and these 
would then spiral ever closer. But that was seen as inference, not definitive 
evidence.


Why persevere?

Because scientists were convinced they had to be there – if their version of 
cosmic physics made any sense. If they exist, then two exquisitely accurately 
measured lengths at right angles would fleetingly change as a gravitational 
wave rippled past. On Thursday, that was shown to have happened.

The hunt for them has been going on for decades. Fifty years ago Joseph Weber 
dangled metal bars in the hope of detecting telltale movement that could only 
be explained by a passing warp in spacetime. Nasa even sent a lunar surface 
gravimeter to the moon on Apollo 17 in 1972.

In the 90s German and British scientists began work on GEO600 at Hanover in 
Germany; the Italians have an experiment, as do the Japanese. Gravitational 
wave detection at LIGO - which has an L-shaped detector that uses a laser and 
mirrors -began in 2002 <https://www.ligo.caltech.edu/page/facts>. But accuracy 
remains the problem: a wave from millions of light years away would distort a 
four kilometre laser beam by less than a thousandth of the diameter of the 
nucleus of an atom. Which is hard to spot.

So is the experiment big enough?

Physicists proposed LISA, the ultimate Laser Interferometer Space Antenna: a 
trio of satellites huge distances apart in orbit, keeping a laser eye on each 
other for evidence of gravity waves. Europe last year launchedLISA Pathfinder 
<http://sci.esa.int/lisa-pathfinder/>, to see if the experiment was even 
possible with present technologies.

Why bother at all?

Because gravity waves can answer questions about the moment of creation. 
Astronomers look back in time as well as space. To see something 13 billion 
light years away, they capture light that began its journey 13 billion years 
ago. But no matter how perfect the telescope, an optical astronomer could never 
peer into the first 400,000 years of the universe, because it would have been 
so dense and murky that even light could not break free of the primeval soup. 
But gravity waves must have been there, right from the beginning.

What is a black hole?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2016/feb/01/what-is-a-black-hole-stephen-hawking-reith-lectures>
Now that gravitational waves have been found, is that it? Is that the end of 
physics?

No. The questions multiply. Why is the visible universe made of matter, and 
not antimatter? And why is 96% of the universe invisible and undetectable, 
existing as dark matter, and even more mysterious dark energy? Why does it seem 
to be stable? Is this all there is, or are we one of a zillion universes? Why 
does it exist all? This ultimate confirmation of Einstein’s theory would be the 
end of one set of questions, but it would open up a whole new set of puzzles.
 