
Everton want Ronald Koeman to succeed Roberto Martínez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roberto-martinez> and hope to lure the 
Southampton coach with the promise of the biggest transfer budget in their 
history.

Farhad Moshiri, Everton’s new major shareholder, sacked Martínez on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/roberto-martinez-sacked-everton>
 and has earmarked Southampton’s manager as his preferred replacement. The 
British-Iranian billionaire faces a challenge to prise the 53-year-old from 
St Mary’s, however, even with Koeman yet to commit to a new contract and having 
just over 12 months remaining on his deal.

Roberto Martínez sacked by Everton after disappointing season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/roberto-martinez-sacked-everton>
But Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> hope a transfer 
budget swelled by Moshiri’s investment, the new broadcasting deal and lucrative 
player sales – with Romelu Lukaku and John Stones likely to leave this summer – 
will persuade Koeman to move to Goodison Park.

Koeman’s agent is Guido Albers who, intriguingly, touted another of his 
clients – Frank de Boer – for the Everton job last weekend. Ajax announced on 
Thursday that De Boer is to leave in the aftermath of theirfailure to make it 
five titles in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/psv-eindhoven-clinch-eredivisie-title-ajax-fail-to-win>
 on the final day of the Eredivisie season, losing out to PSV Eindhoven .

De Boer, who won four league titles during his five and a half years with the 
Amsterdam club, is also under consideration by the Everton board. Albers said 
the 45-year-old “would love to join a club like Everton” but there has been no 
approach for the former Holland defender so far. De Boer will joinAjax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> on their end‑of‑season tour of 
China on Friday and part company on their return next Thursday.

Moshiri brought Martínez’s three-year reign to an end following a dire run of 
form, a second poor Premier League season and clear evidence of support for the 
manager draining from the fanbase, players and the boardroom, although the 
chairman, Bill Kenwright, was reluctant to part company with the former Wigan 
Athletic manager.

Everton have won only one of their past 10 matches and their latest anaemic 
away performance, Wednesday’s3-0 reverse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/sunderland-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 at Sunderland, came with the manager demanding a reaction to afeeble 3-1 loss 
at Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/leicester-everton-premier-league-match-report>
City on Saturday.

Martínez and his players were on a scheduled day off from the club’s Finch 
Farm training ground on Thursday, when the board discussed his position once 
again. It had been precarious since April, when what the Catalan had described 
as a “defining week” produced a shambolic defeat at Liverpool in the derby plus 
a stoppage-time loss to Manchester United in the FA Cup semi-final.

The decision was taken on Thursday to spare the 42-year-old from a hostile 
Goodison in the final game of the Premier League season on Sunday. Everton also 
postponed the club’send-of-season awards dinner at St George’s Hall on Thursday 
in the wake of the sacking after some fans planned to protest against the 
running of the club. Duncan Ferguson and David Unsworth, the first-team coach 
and under-21 coach respectively, will take charge of the final game against 
relegated Norwich City, along with the former manager and striker Joe Royle.

Everton put Roberto Martínez out of his agony amid the Wigan parallels | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/12/everton-roberto-martinez-wigan-parallels>
“Everton Football Club regrets to announce that Roberto Martínez has left his 
position as first-team manager with immediate effect,” said a statement. “The 
chairman and the board of directors would like to place on record their thanks 
for the dedication and commitment Roberto has shown during his three seasons 
with the club. Roberto has been a great ambassador, conducting himself, at all 
times, with the utmost integrity and dignity. He secured the club its highest 
ever Premier League points total, a place in the last 16 of the Europa League 
and appearances in both domestic cup semi-finals. He has also played a key role 
in the development of several young players, managing their progression to the 
Everton first team and international honours.”

Confirmation of Martínez’s departure followed the resolution of talks between 
Everton and the Spaniard’s representatives over a severance payment. The 
manager had three years remaining on the lucrative contract he was given by 
Everton at the end of his first season in 2014. He is believed to have earned 
at least £3m a year and the club will be left with a substantial severance 
payment for him and his backroom staff. The assistant manager, Graeme Jones, is 
believed to have already left while the first-team development coach, Dennis 
Lawrence, goalkeeping coach, Inaki Bergara, and chief scout, Kevin Reeves, are 
also expected to leave.

Everton are 12th in the Premier League and lost both of this season’s domestic 
cup semi-finals. Last season’s 11th-place finish was their lowest in nine years 
and having won 21 league games during his debut campaign, Martínez oversaw only 
22 league wins in the past two seasons. The former manager has worked 
tirelessly on improving the academy and training-ground facilities but results 
cost him support and ultimately his job.
 