
Madness, coming from Anthony Neilson, made perfect sense. His last commission 
for the Edinburgh International festival, the 2004 hit The Wonderful World of 
Dissocia, dramatised the consciousness of a woman with a dissociative disorder 
- and this exploration of mental breakdown seemed perfectly natural from a 
writer notorious for his studies of deviance, perversity and the darkest 
recesses of the human mind. But with his follow-up, Realism, Neilson is set to 
explore "the flipside of that - the mental state of someone who is ostensibly 
normal". Which raises the question: if you're looking for a play about 
normality, isAnthony Neilson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyneilson> 
really the writer to whom you would turn?

A cursory glance at his oeuvre suggests not. Though he is only 39, this Scots 
playwright is the grandaddy of "in-yer-face theatre", the 1990s movement based 
at Stephen Daldry's Royal Court, favouring visceral, experiential drama. 
Neilson was a collaborator of, and in some ways mentor to, the likes of Sarah 
Kane and Mark Ravenhill. But his plays are entirely his own. Rough diamonds of 
dark, dramatic poetry, they mine for beauty in the dimly lit shaft of our 
secret sexual fantasies and fears. In 1997, he took The Censor, in which a 
woman defecates on stage, to the West End. In 2002, he weathered a media storm 
over Stitching, which brings together Auschwitz, sexual roleplay and a woman 
who sews up her vagina.

One suspects, then, that this man's normal may not closely resemble the normal 
of anyone else. "And that's the point," says Neilson. "We don't really know 
what normal is." With Dissocia, a mesmerising Alice in Wonderland trip through 
one woman's delusional mind, he created a theatrical language to express 
insanity. Now he's examining normality as if it, too, were a pathological 
condition. After all, he says, "in normality, the way in which your thoughts 
move would be considered insane if you were to physicalise them, if you were to 
act on them. The only difference is in the taking action."

Neilson's keeping his cards close to his chest about the content of Realism, 
but let me watch an hour's rehearsal by way of a sneak preview. The play, says 
its writer/director, "tells the story of a day when nothing in particular 
happens. One of those days when people say to you, 'What did you do today?' And 
you say, 'I did fuck all.' And this is to make people think again about what 
that actually means." In rehearsal, it means protagonist Stuart interacting 
with Question Time on the TV, sheltering from bombs outside his house and 
leading the cast (which includes Neilson's dad, Sandy) in a Busby 
Berkeley-style musical number whose only lyric is: "What a bunch of fucking 
cunts."

"If you look at where people go mentally in a day," says Neilson by way of 
justification, "it's quite wide-ranging." Mainstream art doesn't always reflect 
this. "The convention of realism is reductive," he says. It is part of "the 
larger societal attempt to normalise us, to reduce normality to a series of 
elements that we can then deviate from or not. But that leaves people in a 
state of confusion as to how much they deviate from normality, and with a sense 
of mystery about each other." Neilson prefers the ostensibly odder aesthetic 
of, say, David Lynch. "I remember an interview in which Lynch was asked, 'Why 
is your stuff so weird?' And he answered, 'Actually it's not weird, it's just 
closer to real life than you're used to seeing.'"

The play opens tonight at the Lyceum and no one, Neilson included, knows quite 
what form it's going to take. That's partly due to its experimental nature. 
"This may or not be an entertaining hour and a half in the theatre. It's 
probably impossible to do what we're trying to do. The show is almost doomed to 
fail." But it's also because Neilson writes his plays collaboratively, together 
with his actors, throughout rehearsals. And continues to do so until the hours 
before opening night.

It's a working practice that has caused him problems in the past, but he's 
sticking with it. "I don't have much appetite for sitting in front of a laptop 
for six months writing a play, just so somebody else can do all the fun stuff. 
And if you work alone over that long a period, what you write tends not to come 
from the gut, nor from a passion." Neilson isn't interested in rational, 
cerebral theatre. His work is instinctive, animal, sensational. And that comes, 
in part, from the spontaneous atmosphere of the rehearsal room. Creating 
theatre is "a sort of playtime", he says. "To me, the process should be fun, it 
should be silly and it should be imaginative."

But the major British theatre institutions aren't structured to allow 
playwrights this freedom. "I can understand that," says Neilson, with 
uncharacteristic diplomacy, "because it's risky, and it's costly." He's less 
diplomatic about his experience at the Royal Court in 2002, when he was 
strong-armed (he claims) to produce his Christmas farce, The Lying Kind, by 
more conventional means. "I wasn't able to work the way I wanted to work," he 
says. As a result, the play was "critically mauled. And that's fucked me up in 
London, you know?" (The happy coda is that The Lying Kind is now very popular 
in Europe, and Neilson is "like Ray Cooney in Greece".)

Neilson blames that flop for the fact that, two years after its Edinburgh 
premiere, Dissocia has yet to be given a London run. Being out of favour in 
London is the current chip on his shoulder. I think he'd be unhappy without 
one, but the anti-establishment identity is hard to sustain when you're also 
the darling of the Edinburgh International festival (for whom he also directed 
the opera Death of Klinghoffer last year) and the new NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> of Scotland, who are co-producing 
Realism. He is also (notwithstanding the London embargo) developing a play at 
the Cottesloe.

"I don't see any contradiction," he says, with barely a hint of defensiveness. 
"And in any case, my firm belief is that I'll be back in Fringe-land after 
this. I don't imagine I'll ever do anything for the International festival 
again."

This temporary elevation to the big league has come at the right time for 
Neilson. "It's been a fantastic opportunity to work on a larger scale, and I've 
learned so much." Besides, he claims to have outgrown what might be termed his 
more Fringe-bound concerns. "There's not much more I need to say about dark 
sexuality at the moment. I often get people saying, 'So is there anal sex in 
this one?' But I don't have much more to say."

If Neilson's abjuring of scary sex feels like the closing of a chapter of 
theatre history, never fear - he's penning a new one. "I think the next 
movement in theatre is going to be into absurdism. I already see it happening. 
And its patron saints will be people like Caryl Churchill" - whose electrifying 
2001 play, Far Away, I notice, is echoed in the Realism rehearsal room. Neilson 
cites The Wonderful World of Dissocia and Realism as exercises in this new 
absurdism, as attempts, he says, to "address serious issues somewhat in the 
language of variety theatre. I think we have to cross-breed these issues with 
musicals and learn from the success of the West End show."

Such is the new and unexpected emphasis from a man who spent a decade sending 
emotionally violated audiences sobbing into the night. It's surprising enough 
that he should be interested in normality, but now he's sounding positively 
cuddly. "In some ways," he says, "you don't really feel you've seen a show 
unless it has songs and dancing in it." Brace yourself, then, for Normality: 
The Musical. "Of course, I want to be able to think at the theatre," he says, 
"but only as an adjunct. First and foremost, I want to laugh and I want to feel 
things. I want to feel that I'm watching a show."

Â· Realism is at the Royal Lyceum Theatre until August 19. Box office: 0131-248 
4848.
 