
James Mycroft is a troubled genius who has an obsession with forensic science. 
His neighbour and best friend Rachel Watts just wishes she could go back to the 
countryside but she finds herself being dragged into Mycroft’s dark and 
exciting world when he asks her for help in solving a murder. What starts out 
as an innocent investigation into the death of a friend begins to turn into 
something much more dangerous.

The concept of this book is rather compelling. The Sherlock Holmes links were 
really fun and it was interesting to see the Holmes and Watson relationship 
taking a new form and direction.

Rachel, the narrator, was quite a bland character; her family and her longing 
to leave the city didn’t resonate like Mycroft’s backstory and personality did. 
As a result, the scenes with Mycroft were much more engaging and the scenes 
without him seemed flat and boring in comparison.

That being said, the majority of the novel was built around the investigation 
that they embark on. This was actually really fascinating especially when they 
were discussing the forensics of the murder and the inferences they could make 
from it. This was where the novel was at its strongest, as it was generally 
fast paced and explored Mycroft and Watts’ relationship both in solving cases 
and as friends.

The twists in the story were well executed and unexpected, reminiscent of 
Arthur Conan Doyle himself. Overall this novel was enjoyable to read but its 
narrator weighed the story down and prevented it from having more of an effect 
on the reader.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/every-breath-266549.html> 
Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 