
Awards such as the Man Booker International prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/man-booker-international-prize> are doing 
their job if they bring relatively unknown authors to new readers. If you’ve 
missed out on László Krasznahorkai’s writing so far, here’s a potted history.

This Hungarian novelist and screenwriter has long been an open secret in some 
circles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/13/hari-kunzru-new-york-literary-hipsters>
, and was described by Susan Sontag as the “contemporary Hungarian master of 
the apocalypse”. If you are among his admirers, we’d love to hear from you in 
the comments.

For starters, how do you pronounce his name?

[ˈlaːsloː krαsnαhorkα.i 
<https://translate.google.com/#hu/en/L%C3%81SZL%C3%93%20KRASZNAHORKAI>] That’s 
in phonetic English – for other languages, the author himself has providedsome 
help <http://www.krasznahorkai.hu/myname.html>. 

Who is he?

Considered by many to be the most important living Hungarian author, 
Krasznahorkai was born on 5 January 1954, in Gyula, Hungary, to a lawyer and a 
social security administrator. He studied law and Hungarian language and 
literature at university, and, after some years as an editor, became a 
freelance writer. His first novel,Satantango 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/09/satantango-laszlo-krasznahorkai-review>
 (1985), pushed him to the centre of Hungarian literary life and is still his 
best known. He didn’t leave Communist Hungary until 1987, when he travelled to 
West Berlin for a fellowship – and he has lived in a number of countries since, 
but returning regularly to Hungary.

In the early 1990s, he spent long periods of time in Mongolia and China, and 
would later explore Japan – all of which resulted in aesthetic and stylistic 
experiments and changes in his writing. While writing the novelWar & War 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/War_and_War.html?id=HOLUZOKlj_4C&hl=en> 
(1999), he travelled in Europe and lived in Allen Ginsberg’s flat in New York, 
where the legendary Beat poet advised and helped him. According tohis publishers
 <http://www.ndbooks.com/author/laszlo-krasznahorkai>, he now “lives in 
reclusiveness in the hills of Szentlászló”. His main literary hero is,he says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/13/man-booker-international-prize-2015-the-finalists-speak>
, Kafka: “I follow him always.”

Which are his main translated works, and where should you start?


He’s known for his uncompromising style (the 12 chapters of Satantango each 
consist of a single paragraph) and is often labelled as postmodern. Don’t let 
that put you off, though.Five of his fictional works 
<http://www.ndbooks.com/author/laszlo-krasznahorkai/> have been published in 
English so far, in translations byOttilie Mulzet 
<http://www.ndbooks.com/author/ottilie-mulzet/> and George Szirtes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/03/george-szirtes-bilingual-poetry-translation>
, who will share the £15,000 translation prize that goes with the Booker.

Satantango (1985)

His first and most famous novel. It tells the story of life in a 
disintegrating village in a dystopian communist Hungary, where a man called 
Irimias, long thought dead and who may be a prophet, a secret agent or the 
devil, appears out of nowhere and begins to manipulate the remaining citizens. 
According tothe Guardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/09/satantango-laszlo-krasznahorkai-review>
, this is “a monster of a novel: compact, cleverly constructed, often 
exhilarating, and possessed of a distinctive, compelling vision – but a monster 
nevertheless. It is brutal, relentless and so amazingly bleak that it’s often 
quite funny.” It won the 2013 best translated book award in the fiction 
category.


The Melancholy of Resistance (1989)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fman-booker-international-prize-laszlo-krasznahorkai-who-he-is-and-why-you-should-read-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432050280399%2F992402e9-0a03-4371-a7d6-d9b8ebaeb92f-668x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20L%C3%A1szl%C3%B3%20Krasznahorkai%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20Man%20Booker%20International%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fman-booker-international-prize-laszlo-krasznahorkai-who-he-is-and-why-you-should-read-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20L%C3%A1szl%C3%B3%20Krasznahorkai%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20Man%20Booker%20International%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fman-booker-international-prize-laszlo-krasznahorkai-who-he-is-and-why-you-should-read-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432050280399%2F992402e9-0a03-4371-a7d6-d9b8ebaeb92f-668x1020.jpeg>
This comedy of apocalypse 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/07/04/madness-and-civilization> is set 
in a town where a mysterious circus, whose only attraction is an enormous whale 
mounted on a truck, unnerves inhabitants and gives the local would-be tyrant 
Mrs Eszter what she sees as a perfect opportunity to manipulate the populace.

The form is stream of consciousness, with minimal punctuation. Translator 
Szirtes described it as “a slow lava flow of narrative, a vast black river of 
type”.

It won the book of the year award in Germany in 1993.


How about the films?

Both these novels have been made into films by his friend, Béla Tarr, in a 
collaboration which began withKárhozat 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K%C3%A1rhozat> (Damnation) in 1988, and includes a
seven-and-a-half-hour black-and-white 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d8vRfiMejoM> version of Satantango. This took 
seven years to make and was released in 1994. Their collaboration continues.

 A still from Satantango Photograph: PR 

What do the International Booker judges say about him?



Krasznahorkai was chosen from 10 contenders for the £60,000 prize for “an 
achievement in fiction on the world stage”.

The official citation:

What strikes the reader above all are the extraordinary sentences, sentences 
of incredible length that go to incredible lengths, their tone switching from 
solemn to madcap to quizzical to desolate as they go their wayward way; epic 
sentences that, like a lint roll, pick up all sorts of odd and unexpected 
things as they accumulate inexorably into paragraphs that are as monumental as 
they are scabrous and musical.

Chair of judges Marina Warner said:

László Krasznahorkai is a visionary writer of extraordinary intensity and 
vocal range who captures the texture of present day existence in scenes that 
are terrifying, strange, appallingly comic, and often shatteringly beautiful. 
The Melancholy of Resistance, Satantango and Seiobo There Below are magnificent 
works of deep imagination and complex passions, in which the human comedy 
verges painfully onto transcendence.


What about his other prominent admirers?


“The contemporary Hungarian master of apocalypse who inspires comparison with 
Gogol and Melville” – Susan Sontag

“The universality of Krasznahorkai’s vision rivals that of Gogol’s Dead Souls 
and far surpasses all the lesser concerns of contemporary writing” –WG Sebald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald>

The New York literati love him too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/13/hari-kunzru-new-york-literary-hipsters>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fman-booker-international-prize-laszlo-krasznahorkai-who-he-is-and-why-you-should-read-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432046525018%2Fc5f1b984-8325-4096-84a2-592326b39202-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20L%C3%A1szl%C3%B3%20Krasznahorkai%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20Man%20Booker%20International%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fman-booker-international-prize-laszlo-krasznahorkai-who-he-is-and-why-you-should-read-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20L%C3%A1szl%C3%B3%20Krasznahorkai%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20Man%20Booker%20International%20prize&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fman-booker-international-prize-laszlo-krasznahorkai-who-he-is-and-why-you-should-read-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432046525018%2Fc5f1b984-8325-4096-84a2-592326b39202-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Susan Sontag in 1979. Photograph: Sophie Bassouls/Sygma/Corbis 

In his own words


He told the Guardian: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/13/man-booker-international-prize-2015-the-finalists-speak>

If there are readers who haven’t read my books, I couldn’t recommend anything 
to read to them; instead, I’d advise them to go out, sit down somewhere, 
perhaps by the side of a brook, with nothing to do, nothing to think about, 
just remaining in silence like stones. They will eventually meet someone who 
has already read my books.

Letters; then from letters, words; then from these words, some short 
sentences; then more sentences that are longer, and in the main very long 
sentences, for the duration of 35 years. Beauty in language. Fun in hell.

I’m not interested to believe in something, but to understand the people who 
believe.” ―in a Q&A 
<http://lareviewofbooks.org/review/dancing-with-the-devil-laszlo-krasznahorkais-satantango>

Quotes from the novels

However apparently insignificant the event, whether it be the ring of tobacco 
ash surrounding the table, the direction from which the wild geese first 
appeared, or a series of seemingly meaningless human movements, he couldn’t 
afford to take his eyes off it and must note it all down, since only by doing 
so could he hope not to vanish one day and fall a silent captive to the 
infernal arrangement whereby the world decomposes but is at the same time 
constantly in the process of self-construction.” ― Satantango

Get it into your thick head that jokes are just like life. Things that begin 
badly, end badly. Everything’s fine in the middle, it’s the end you need to 
worry about.” ― Satantango

“ [...] What one ought to capture in beauty is that which is treacherous and 
irresistible” ― War & War

Useful links for further reading

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * This Guardian interview from the 2012 Edinburgh book festival (“This is the 
result of 10,000 years? Really?” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/24/laszlo-krasznahorkai-interview>) 
 * This review of Satantango 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/09/satantango-laszlo-krasznahorkai-review>
, from when it was published in English in 2012. 
 * Madness And Civilization: The very strange fictions of László Krasznahorkai 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/07/04/madness-and-civilization>, from 
the New Yorker. 
 * This interview in the White Review 
<http://www.thewhitereview.org/interviews/interview-with-laszlo-krasznahorkai/> 
(“The similarity [betweeen the time he started writing and the present] is 
astounding. Everything seems to have changed and yet everything is essentially 
the same.”) 
 * He Rarely Stops Writing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/09/books/laszlo-krasznahorkais-novels-find-a-us-audience.html>
: a New York Times piece on how he found a US audience. 
 * The Man Booker International 2015 contenders in their own words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/13/man-booker-international-prize-2015-the-finalists-speak>
 * His own website <http://www.krasznahorkai.hu/> is very extensive and a 
brilliant source for all things Krasznahorkai.

Have you already read Krasznahorkai, in Hungarian or in translation? Do let us 
know your thoughts in the comments.
 