
Right out of the gate, Flockstars was on the back hoof. On paper, ITV’s brazen 
attempt to co-opt the classic One Man and his Dog byremaking it with a gaggle 
of second-string celebrities in Hunter wellies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/08/itv-brendan-cole-tony-blackburn-sheepdog-contest-flockstars>
 seemed both disrespectful and a little desperate. Executives had somehow 
signed off on an entire eight-week run predicated on what should probably just 
have been a single Ant v Dec round on Saturday Night Takeaway. The final 
product, which awkwardly combines the presentational razzmatazz of a 
shiny-floor ITV gameshow with the rather more muddy, mulchy reality of a giant 
echoey showground containing live animals, seemed a little too sincere to be 
enjoyably silly, and rather too arbitrary to be genuinely exciting.

The reviews of last month’s first episode formed an exceptionally loud chorus 
of baa humbug, branding the format “garish”, “silly” and “embarrassing”. On 
Twitter, the real-time reaction was similarly dismissive and often actively 
appalled, as if watching Brendan Cole coax a quartet of jet-black Hebridean 
sheep round a peacock-shaped hedge was some atrocious new low in 
livestock/celebrity-related content. That, of course, would be to conveniently 
forget the bottom-of-the-barrel pork scratching of Channel 5’sThe Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/oct/06/realitytv.broadcasting>. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLNwLJYoCXU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLNwLJYoCXU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgLNwLJYoCXU&media=>
 Flockstars trailer 
The powerful spectre of Monkey Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/quiz/2015/may/29/monkey-tennis-britains-hardest-grafters-real-tv-shows>
 was also repeatedly invoked, adding yet more credibility to the theory that a 
shadowy cabal of TV commissioners has secretly formed a Templar-like 
brotherhood sworn to ensure every one of Alan Partridge’s panicked TV pitches 
comes to pass. In a world where we can watch Tony Blackburn ineffectually 
yelling “Come by!” on primetime ITV, perhaps it’s no surprise thatYouth 
Hostelling with Chris Eubank has become thrillingly, terrifyingly real 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/aug/20/youth-hostelling-with-chris-eubank-alan-partridge>
.

If Flockstars has become a sheepdog trial in the court of public opinion, the 
audience has apparently rendered its verdict. Despite cute dogs, a couple of 
hunky shepherd mentors and Gabby Logan gamely shouting “Release the sheep!” 
while dressed like she’s about to set the straw-covered floor ablaze at a 
rooting-tooting line dance, Flockstars has receded from an opening high of 2.5m 
viewers down to a rather more threadbare 1.5m at the halfway point.

But here’s the thing: Flockstars isn’t actually a terrible idea. There’s a 
substantial core audience of 6m viewers who tune in to Countryfile every 
Sunday, making the pastoral magazine programme a consistent ratings heavyweight
since going peak-time in 2009 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/tv/news/a641346/countryfile-and-poldark-lead-sunday-ratings-for-bbc-one.html#~pmsQICfV7HZiWO>
.

Why shouldn’t ITV try and go after some of those eyeballs? To that end, the 
sheepdogs consciously get as much of a spotlight as their human partners, so 
even if you’re unmoved by the prospect of seeing Wendi Peters from Corrie 
attempt to drive four stubborn Leicesters over a replica stone bridge, you 
might still be impressed by the fluid, watchful movements of her plucky partner 
Bill.

Some of the celebrities have even risen to the challenge. Richard Rawson – aka 
Fazer, the third wheel in N-Dubz – has cheerfully and unexpectedly thrown 
himself into his Flockstars role, rocking a natty tweed suit and waistcoat that 
makes him look every inch the country gent. Crafty old fox Lesley Joseph 
instinctively understood that what viewers really wanted to see was how Dorien 
from Birds of a Feather might flounder in the countryside, so she tottered 
haughtily through basic training and dolled up her faithful herder Gyp with a 
leopardskin kerchief.

Admittedly, the past four weeks could be criticised for being repetitive, as 
the original pool of eight contestants has been whittled down to four through a 
series of solo showcase rounds. But I’ve begun to find the visual sweeps and 
rhythms of watching livestock get hustled round a large paddock strangely 
soothing. It helps that the anxious calls of “lie down!” and “away!” are 
accompanied by the comforting tones of Jim Rosenthal, bringing his commentating 
A-game to what is really a pretty self-explanatory spectacle. And, crucially, 
it’s all over in a tight half-hour. There are no viewer votes, no training in 
real-time, no artificial expansion of the core concept to fill up acres of 
airtime. It’s just one also-ran and their dog, and that deserves some respect.

Things are about get a little more intense with the start of the semi-finals 
tonight. For one thing, the celebs will compete in parallel, racing against 
each other rather than the clock. There’s also an escalation in terms of 
livestock, swapping out placid, biddable Hebrideans and Suffolks for geese, 
those wilful, long-necked, firebrand non-conformists of the farmyard. Will any 
of this faze Fazer? Can Kelle Bryan from Eternal go all the way? For those 
about to flock, I salute you.

Have you been watching Flockstars? Let us know in the comments below
 