
The former boss of Channel 4 television has taken up a new position at the 
wheel of luxury car dealer HR Owen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/sep/07/andy-duncan-joins-hr-owen>.

Andy Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, 48, is swapping 
digital strategy and multiplatform media to run 10 luxury and supercar 
franchises, including Maserati, Ferrari, Lamborghini, Bentley, Bugatti and 
Rolls-Royce.

Duncan is a marketing specialist, who ran Unilever's Flora spreads business 
before switching to broadcasting. Today, the new chief executive, who is also a 
non-executive director of music chain HMV, said he was attracted by HR Owen's 
"heritage and brand" and was looking forward to selling "exciting products to 
an eclectic mix of customers".

The upmarket dealer traces its roots back to 1932 and its outlets include the 
landmark Jack Barclay showroom in Mayfair – which has a salesman dedicated to 
finding buyers for the £1m Bugatti Veyron 16.4.

Duncan – who currently drives an Audi S5 Cabriolet and says his new company 
car "has yet to be confirmed" – intends to develop a strategy that will iron 
out the peaks and troughs caused by the wider economy. "The business needs a 
long term strategy … something less cyclical."

Duncan quit Channel 4 a year ago after five years in which he oversaw the 
broadcaster's digital strategy and the launch of channels including E4 and 
More4. However, he was widely criticised during theCelebrity Big Brother Shilpa 
Shetty racism row in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jan/18/bigbrother.raceintheuk> and 
failed to do a deal with BBC Worldwide to secure alternative funding for the 
business.

Prior to joining Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> Duncan 
worked at the BBC, as director of marketing and communications, where he was 
also the architect of digital TV and radio and internet services and was the 
founding chairman of the Freeview digital TV platform.

HR Owen's shares were unchanged at 83p. In the depths of the recession last 
year they plunged to 48p, but the company recently reported improved sales – 
300 prestige cars sold in the first six months of the year, compared to 250 
over the same period last year – and a £1m return to profits.

The dealer has had a substantial boardroom reshuffle since appointing former 
Lex Vehicle Leasing executive John Walden as chairman. Longstanding chief 
executive Nick Lancaster, who still owns 20% of the business, quit in May and a 
number of non-executives – including former Pink Floyd drummer, car enthusiast 
and 2% shareholder Nick Mason – followed him out of the door.

Lancaster is not the only big shareholder. Bentley also owns a 27% stake. 
Duncan said he would like to see more shareholders: "If the base can be 
broadened that can only be a good thing."
 