
Alan Rusbridger has been awarded the Marie Colvin prize 
<http://awards.pressgazette.co.uk/> for improving the reputation of British 
journalism during his 20 years at the helm of the Guardian.

Judges of the British Journalism Awards called Rusbridger, now principal of 
Oxford University’s Lady Margaret Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/29/farewell-readers-alan-rusbridger-on-leaving-the-guardian>
, a digital visionary who had “overseen some of the biggest journalism 
investigations of our time”, citing thephone-hacking scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking>, WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>, Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> and the HSBC files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/hsbc-files>.

The Snowden coverage led to the Guardian becoming the first non-American news 
organisation to win the Pulitzer prize, while the Guardian also won landmark 
libel battles during his time in charge, including those brought by Neil 
Hamilton andJonathan Aitken <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/aitken>.

Judges in the awards, organised by the Press Gazette, said: “In an industry 
where editors often like to keep their heads down, he has always stuck his 
above the parapet and been a vocal supporter of press freedom and of journalism 
in general.”

Accepting the award on Tuesday night, Rusbridger said: “I’m very humbled to 
win this award. So few of us could hope to live up to what she [Colvin] risked 
for journalism. What she was trying to do was to tell people important things 
about what mattered. And she took the ultimate risk to do that.”

In a good night for the Guardian, the HSBC Files, the paper’s investigation 
into the tax scandal at the bank, was named investigation of the year, while 
its environmental campaign,Keep it in the Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground>, won 
campaign of the year.



The Guardian’s Patrick Kingsley was named foreign affairs journalist of the 
year forThe Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/jun/09/a-migrants-journey-from-syria-to-sweden-interactive>
, which followed a Syrian refugee across the Mediterranean.

Patrick Wintour, Nicholas Watt and Severin Carrell were nominated in the 
politics journalism category while Owen Gibson received a nomination in the 
sport category.

Jonathan Calvert of the Sunday Times won overall journalist of the year, 
partly for theFifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> corruption 
scandal and also for the investigation into the use of blood doping in 
athletics.

Separately, Keep it in the Ground has won a New York Design award 
<http://newyorkdesignaward.com/NYC15/news_details.asp?AssetId=33250> in the 
Film, Video, Viral category.
 