
The qualification regulator is investigating six errors that have appeared in 
exam papers this summer.

The latest error was found in a geography AS-level paper set by the exam board 
AQA. A graph showing the velocity of a river was incorrectly labelled as 0.5 
rather than 0.05.

The regulator has already written to exam boards warning them to ensure their 
papers do not contain errors. It said four of the errors being investigated 
were in AS-level papers and two were in GCSE papers.

In one case all the answers were wrong to a multiple-choice question in a 
biology AS-level paper set by Edexcel.

The question was worth one mark out of a possible 425 and the board has 
promised that markers will adjust scores to ensure no candidate is 
disadvantaged.

In a Computing AS level paper, set by AQA, an arrow in a diagram was shorter 
than it should have been.

A business studies paper set by the AQA exam board left out crucial 
information so pupils were unable to answer one question, worth three marks. It 
asked students about the profits that a fictional chocolate company was making 
but examiners failed to include all the information about the company.

The OCR exam board included an "impossible" question in a maths AS exam. 
Students were asked to solve an equation without the information needed to do 
so.

In her letter to exam boards, Glenys Stacey, Ofqual's chief executive, wrote: 
"The recent run of exam errors are disappointing and unacceptable. While the 
vast majority of question papers taken so far have been free from error, there 
have been a number of question papers that have included errors. We take 
instances like this very seriously. I am calling on awarding organisations to 
take steps now to protect students from further disruption and anxiety."

Students fear the time wasted on rogue questions may mean they fail to achieve 
the grades they need for places at their preferred universities.

One student who took the business studies paper told a tutoring website the 
exam started "with a bang. Then came the killer blow â€“ I wasted quite a bit of 
time looking for the information." He had answered the rest of the paper "in an 
agitated, nervous manner".

Another on thestudentroom.co.uk <http://www.thestudentroom.co.uk/> website 
suggested a boycott of the exam boards. "Nothing can rectify these mistakes 
except rerunning the paper. And when will exam boards stop making these stupid 
mistakes. University places DEPEND on these exams! It seems as if no one 
actually checks these papers. Maybe we could boycott AQA and OCR until they 
rerun the papers?"
 