
A British exit from the European Union would be severely damaging for both 
parties and like a divorce, the head of one of the biggest insurers and 
chairman of the influentialBilderberg group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg> has warned.

Henri de Castries, chairman of Axa, said a so-called Brexit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/14/brexit-what-would-happen-if-britain-left-eu-european-union-referendum-uk>
would “diminish both the status and influence of the UK” and leave the country 
as a “big Switzerland”.

In a wide-ranging interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/07/axa-boss-henri-de-castries-on-coal-do-you-really-want-to-be-the-last-investor>
, de Castries also compared the recent slide in the Chinese stock market to the 
Wall Street Crash of 1929 and said the private sector had a decisive role to 
play in tackling climate change.

De Castries is a key voice in the debate about Britain’s future in the EU 
given Axa is one of Europe’s biggest companies and he is chairman of the 
secretiveBilderberg <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg> group of 
political and business leaders from Europe and North America. The group also 
includes the British chancellor, George Osborne, the Google chairman, Eric 
Schmidt, and Douglas Flint, chairman of HSBC.

Axa boss Henri de Castries on coal: 'Do you really want to be the last 
investor?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/07/axa-boss-henri-de-castries-on-coal-do-you-really-want-to-be-the-last-investor>
De Castries said the EU had provided “growth, peace, social stability” over 
the last 70 years but that “every rational person understands that there are 
flaws in the model and there are shortcomings”.

He said: “Everybody recognises the fact that there are things which need to 
change, but after all isn’t it the Brits who invented ‘don’t throw the baby out 
with the bathwater’? So don’t throw babyEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> out with the bathwater.

“There are very positive reasons to think that even if the baby is still not 
fully satisfactory, there are things which can be improved. It is better to 
face the challenges of this next century together rather than being like the 
former Gallic tribes trying to face the Romans one by one.”

De Castries held talks with Osborne last month when the chancellor visited 
France as part of hispush to reform the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/may/12/greek-liquidity-bailout-european-finance-ministers-osborne-live-updates>
. The Axa boss added: “I think this country has joined Europe for much more 
than pure economic reasons, not being part of it would clearly at the end of 
the day diminish both the status and influence of the UK.

“It would make the UK a big Switzerland. Switzerland is pretty prosperous but 
I would say it never had the ambition of being a model for the world.

“It’s like a divorce. Of course it would be severely damaging. But rather than 
looking at that, I prefer to look at the half-full bottle. What I would like to 
see is more people explaining pretty vocally why it is good for the UK to stay, 
rather than saying why it would be pretty bad to leave.”

De Castries also said that a fall in Chinese share prices was “more worrying” 
than the Greek debt crisis and that it could hit household incomes in China.

“The number of households who have participated in the market is not 
insignificant,” he said. “Nobody knows exactly, but people say 100m probably. 
So the number of people affected by a very sharp decline [in share prices] is 
not an insignificant number.

“The key question for me is to what extent is this going to affect Chinese 
consumer spending, because a large part of the world’s growth relies on Chinese 
consumer spending. Are the Chinese households who are buying German cars or 
American cars going to stop buying them because of lost money in the stock 
market? I would be surprised if it had no influence. I am sure it will. The 
optimistic people are saying: ‘Well, not as bad as New York in ’29.’ I hope so, 
we all hope so.”
 