
CHRIS LEWICKI
President and CEO of leading US asteroid-mining company Planetary Resources  
<http://www.planetaryresources.com/#home-intro>

American 'space pioneers' deserve asteroid rights, Congress says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/13/congress-claims-space-resource-rights-for-americans-to-exploit-new-frontier>
I left Nasa to join Planetary Resources because I was excited about what we 
could provide for the broader development of space: ice from near-Earth 
asteroids could provide oxygen, drinking water, rocket fuel, radiation 
shielding, while metals could be used to construct things in space. We’ve 
already operated our first spacecraft and by 2025 we hope to have robotic 
spacecraft produce the first litre of water in space.

Mining <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mining> asteroids is technically 
possible, but it’s not going to happen by itself; it needs innovators like 
ourselves to create the reality from what was previously science fiction. The 
new law has tackled the issue head on, and while there will always be people 
who worry about it, one of the exciting things for me is conveying to people 
that this isn’t something that might happen in the future – it’s under way.


PROFESSOR LINDA FRENCH
Planetary astronomer at Illinois Wesleyan University

How would asteroid mining work? A visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/feb/06/how-would-asteroid-mining-work-a-visual-guide>
People have been talking about asteroid mining for 10 years or so, and back 
then I felt we should just leave things alone because we’ve not done all that 
good a job of stewarding our own planet. But what with the Osiris-Rex mission 
and the support from the Obama administration, it seems like this is the 
direction that things are moving in, and the major players involved in 
developing it seem to have advisers who are good scientists, so I haven’t 
decided to man the barricades against it.

Harvesting water from asteroids, instead of lifting it off the Earth’s 
surface, would be a huge saving. But I have some concerns about the feasibility 
of, say, bringing platinum back to Earth. Still, more data is always welcome – 
we learned so much from bringing back the moon rocks.

DR GBENGA ODUNTAN
Senior lecturer in international commercial law, University of Kent 

Asteroid mining could be space’s new frontier: the problem is doing it legally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/06/asteroid-mining-space-minerals-legal-issues>
I was surprised when the new US Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Act was signed into law with very 
little debate. I have the rather nasty impression that it was all hurriedly 
done. People might not notice what it really represents, which is the 
beginnings of unilateral claims over natural resources in outer space. This is 
out of line with the letter and spirit of space law, which are based on common 
ownership by mankind.

My hope is that some member states will raise an issue about this at the next 
UN general assembly, because the same argument that allows the US to do this 
will also avail China and any other countries with the technical capability. 
The environmental concerns are also very frightening. I am not a scientist but 
I don’t see how you can employ swarms of robots to attach themselves to 
asteroids without contamination taking place. And when you’re dealing with 
private companies it’s much more difficult to attribute responsibility for 
potential damage.

DR LEOPOLD SUMMERER
Head of advanced concepts team <http://www.esa.int/gsp/ACT/index.html>, 
European Space Agency

Rosetta mission: Philae's landing site on comet 67P – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2014/nov/13/rosetta-mission-philae-landing-site-comet-67p-pictures>
We already harvest resources from space to help with space exploration – solar 
energy, gravity etc – in my view it’s just a matter of time before we use other 
materials. At the ESA we’ve studied various forms of in situ resources 
utilisation, including fuel-production and 3D printing of habitats from lunar 
material.

It’s impressive how much public interest and private funding have been 
generated around asteroid mining in the US. At theESA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency>, we have been 
exploring public-private partnerships since last year and, while none of them 
concerns asteroid mining, it might yet come. The ESA is the only one that has 
landed on an asteroid and is currently preparing an asteroid mission that would 
include the deployment of microlanders.

Whatever we do, we have to do it responsibly, respecting the rights of future 
generations and the protection of scientifically valuable places.
 