
Throughout the Rio 2016 Olympic Games, the Guardian Mobile Innovation Lab 
<https://medium.com/the-guardian-mobile-innovation-lab> is sending experimental 
web notifications to users of Android devices who sign up and have a Chrome 
browser installed on their phones.

These alerts will supplement (but not replace) the alerts sent from The 
Guardian’sAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> app, and 
will arrive at different times and frequencies.


We’re sending four types: 

A Daily leaderboard: These notifications will arrive around 11:30 EST after 
the close of each day’s competition, and show the top three countries in the 
standings with their total number of gold, silver, and bronze medals won. Don’t 
worry about these waking you up: we’ve set them so they will not make noise or 
vibrate.


Real-time medal alerts: We’ll send real-time updates when countries of your 
choosing win gold, silver, or bronze. Important: The outcome of theRio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> Games is anyone’s guess, so we 
can’t say just when or how often you’ll receive notifications. Also be aware 
that these alerts may contain spoilers!

Morale meter: We’ll send notifications either just before, or during select 
big events to poll people about who they’re rooting for or who they think will 
win.

Olympics quizzes: We’ll send a handful of quiz notifications to test your 
knowledge. We’ll track your score and let you know how you ranked against other 
quiz takers.

Want to sign up? Web notifications are currently only available on Chrome on 
Android devices. If you have an Android mobile phone (Samsung, included!), open 
this page in a Chrome browser and sign up belowor here 
<https://www.gdnmobilelab.com/olympics/>.

Questions, suggestions or observations? Drop us a note: 
innovationlab@theguardian.com
 