
Has Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> finally struck 
the fatal blow in the long, slow demise of Flash by switching to HMTL5 video by 
default?


The social network has switched to HTML5 for all Facebook web video, meaning 
videos you upload or publish on your profile or fly through on your news feed 
will no longer require Flash. The experience will mirror that seen on mobile 
devices and the Facebook apps.

In a damning indictment of the much maligned Flash, Daniel Baulig, engineer at 
Facebook,said <https://code.facebook.com/posts/159906447698921>: “Not only did 
launching the HTML5 video player make development easier, but it also improved 
the video experience for people on Facebook. Videos now start playing faster. 
People like, comment, and share more on videos after the switch, and users have 
been reporting fewer bugs. People appear to be spending more time with video 
because of it.”

Facebook continues to support Flash-based games, which titles such as 
Farmville and others typically require, but for video and adverts Flash is now 
dead to the social network.

Following YouTube’s switch to HTML5 video, Facebook’s dumping of Flash for its 
8bn video views a day means that the majority of web video watched is now 
Flash-free. A few other video-streaming sites still use the plugin, but the 
number holding out is shrinking fast.

Even Adobe is moving away from Flash. Like Microsoft with Windows XP, Adobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> has been trying to migrate 
companies away from using its own tools while putting out fires left, right and 
centre. Recently it dumped “Flash” from the name of its creative tools, which 
shows just how toxic the Flash brand has become.

For Facebook users it will be business as usual, for the most part, just a 
little faster and without having to worry about vulnerabilities in an ageing 
outdated video system.

 * Warning over Adobe Flash vulnerability revealed by Hacking Team leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/08/warning-adobe-flash-vulnerability-hacking-team-leak>
 * Flash is dying a death by 1,000 cuts, and that’s a good thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/24/adobe-flash-dying-amazon-google-chrome>
 