
Like Geoff Simmons (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/27/afghanistan-wikileaks-war-legitimacy>
, 27 July), we applaud WikiLeaks for exposing the bloody war in Afghanistan, 
and the Guardian for publishing it (Report, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/25/afghanistan-war-logs-military-leaks>
 26 July). The UK affection for US warmongering goes hand in hand with 
Cameron's further development of a war economy (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/25/david-cameron-india-enhanced-relationship>
, 25 July). Is this why the government wants to end universal jurisdiction, 
which allows the arrest of suspected war criminals regardless of where their 
crimes were committed? To end wars and economies based on war, we need brave 
insiders – like Bradley Manning, the US intelligence officer who allegedly blew 
the whistle, andJoe Glenton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/mar/07/barbara-ellen-joe-glenton-awol>
, the first soldier in Europe just released from prison for refusing to serve 
in Afghanistan.

But our responsibility outside is to protect whistleblowers and refuseniks. To 
his credit WikiLeaks founder Assange has hired lawyers to defend Manning (Report
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/21/wikileaks-founder-julian-assange-breaks-cover>
, 21 June). There are many other ways to show support. Pick one.

Michael Kalmanovitz

www.refusingtokill.net <http://www.refusingtokill.net/>

 

• Having lived for the past four years on the Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> border with Afghanistan, I was 
pleased to see details of the "true Afghan war" published. From the Pakistani 
side the worst aspect is the US's violations of international rules with its 
unmanned drones which relentlessly kill civilians who are promptly labelled 
militants. This, plus the fact that the Pakistani military and ISI created the 
Taliban at the west's behest to fight the Russians, explains Pakistan's seeming 
ambivalence. On both sides of the border the issue is simple: when will the 
Nato forces quit? This will be the pre-condition for any talks with the Taliban.

Dr David Gosling

Cambridge

• With the furore caused by the leaked US documents on Afghanistan, it may go 
unnoticed that the 130th anniversary of the battle of Maiwand, which took place 
during the second Afghan war on 27 July 1880, occurred this week. 

We have forgotten this battle, but it remains of huge significance to the 
Pashtun tribes in southern Afghanistan. The clash took place between a 2,500 
British force under General Burrows operating out of Kandahar, and an Afghan 
force led by Ayub Khan. 

Although the Afghans suffered high casualties, the final result was a rout for 
the British army that lost more than 950 men on their retreat back to 
Kandahar.  

Coupled with the total annihilation of the 6,000 strong British army 
retreating from Kabul en route to Kandahar in 1842 in the first Afghan war, 
history tells the Pashtuns that foreign invaders are vulnerable – something the 
Russians too learned to their considerable cost. 

It's a pity politicians did not read their history before venturing into the 
hostile, fiercely independent Helmand and blundering into the fourth Afghan war.

Incidentally, there was a third Afghan war in 1919 – totally forgotten by us 
too.

Geoff Cowling

Vice-consul Kabul 1970-73, diplomatic service 1966-2005

• Simon Jenkins (A history of folly, from the Trojan horse to Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/jul/27/folly-war-wikileaks-afghanistan>
, 28 July) is absolutely right in his assessment of the Afghanistan disaster. 
However, there are a number of questions that he does not address. Why was it 
that, when anyone "who visited Kabul in the last eight years knew that a 
western war of occupation would end in tears", most of the media continued 
reproducing the official line that the war was a success. Related to this is 
the question of how, after the Iraq catastrophe, Labour was able to get away 
with the dispatch of troops to Afghanistan in 2006 and involve us so quickly in 
another American war. They achieved this by simply denying it was a war until 
it was too late, a lie as despicable as the earlier weapons of mass destruction 
scam.

John Newsinger 
<http://www.bathspa.ac.uk/about/profiles/profile.asp?user=academic%5Cnewj1>

Professor of modern history, Bath Spa University

• Simon Jenkins makes some persuasive points about the conflict in 
Afghanistan. However, some of his references to the Vietnam war are a little 
wide of the mark. The idea that "American citizens withdrew their consent" from 
the war after seeing it on TV is an outmoded one. Public support for the 
Vietnam war was shaken by the communist Tet offensive of 1968, but recovered 
under President Nixon with his policy of cutting US troop numbers. Beginning 
with Daniel Hallin's The Uncensored War, most recent scholarship tends to play 
down the impact of media coverage on public opinion. Jenkins also claims that 
the Pentagon papers in 1971 "revealed the deception of the Johnson and Nixon 
governments" during the war. In fact, the version of the Pentagon papers that 
was leaked in 1971 related only to events between 1945 and 1967, two years 
before Nixon took office.

Professor John Dumbrell <http://www.dur.ac.uk/sgia/profiles/?id=4423>

Durham University 

• The leaks about Afghanistan are a graphic illustration of why David Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidmiliband> cannot lead Labour to 
victory in a general election. Iraq and Afghanistan will never go away. 
Miliband is identified with both the discredited Blair and the unfortunate 
Brown, and the wars will never be exorcised since they are not just expensive 
and unpopular but amoral. Iraq was condemned by both the Anglican and Catholic 
churches as an unjust war. To start a war that kills hundreds of innocent 
people cannot be justified by pointing to the evil of others. In Afghanistan 
the original justification for war, the capture of Osama bin Laden, has long 
been exposed. Now the leaks of allied malpractice open up years of accusation 
for Cameron and Clegg to exploit.

Graham Taylor

London

• Given Britain's high ideals and profound regret over the unintended killing 
of innocents by the allied troops in the fog of war, is it not time to build a 
national war memorial in memory of the Innocent Civilian?

Bill Wolmuth

London
 