
Why are unexpected visitors so popular in children’s books? My three-year-old 
hates the story of Goldilocks. Since we read it, she has been terrified that 
when we return home we might find that Goldilocks has visited our house. Are 
there any stories of nice visitors who behave well who might help to redress 
the balance?

However Goldilocks 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/goldilocks-and-the-three-bears-41.html> is 
told, it is a difficult story. In some versions she is just an inquisitive 
child with an under-developed sense of what she is entitled to; in others she 
is more threatening and sinister – especially for the littlest bear with whom 
the child reader most identifies since it is his/her chair which is broken, 
porridge which is eaten and bed that Goldilocks is finally discovered asleep in.

Whatever the emphasis, there is nothing very likeable about a kid who breaks 
into someone else’s home and tries out their things. How the story is perceived 
has changed over time. In The Annotated Classic Fairy Tales 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/classic-fairy-tales.html> Maria Tatar noted 
that in contemporary versions the Goldilocks story is “typically framed today 
as a discovery of what is ‘just right’, but for earlier generations, it was a 
tale about an intruder who could not control herself when encountering the 
possessions of others.”

As a morality tale for children – and adults - who like a sense of justice the 
fact that in many versions Goldilocks gains only a short term satisfaction and 
is ultimately forced to jump back out of the window and run away from the 
comfortable lives of the three bears can be satisfying. But even that 
satisfaction generally has an unpleasant aspect to it as it implies “good 
riddance to bad rubbish” which fails to give children any sense of tolerance or 
understanding.
 Anthony Browne’s version of the Goldilocks story is a little less frightening 
than the original. Photograph: Anthony Browne 
 In Me and You <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/me-and-you.html> Anthony 
Browne gives a more thought-provoking and less frightening version of the story 
in his subtle and sophisticated illustrations.

The first recorded version of the story is credited as being published 
anonymously in 1837 by the poet Robert Southey, but versions of the story with 
different animal protagonists were in circulation before.

Judged simply in terms of its story telling, Goldilocks fares much better 
which is why it remains so popular and has been retold in so many ways. The 
repeated sequences delight children as they can anticipate Goldilocks audacity 
and revel in the mounting disapproval.

Although all unexpected visitors can be menacing, few are as unsettling as 
Goldilocks. In some cases such as with the Big Bad Wolf in versions of The 
Story of the Three Little Pigs because their attempts at forced entry are – at 
least in some versions – repelled by the Three Little Pigs so that the story 
comes to be about bravery and resilience against the intruder. In others, the 
intruder turns their unexpected arrival into something positive. Jon Sieszka’s
The True Story of the 3 Little Pigs 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/true-story-of-the-three-little-pigs.html>, 
illustrated by Lane Smith, is highly recommended!

Snow White is a less worrying intruder than Goldilocks. When she is abandoned 
in the forest she comes across a cottage and enters to find shelter. Far from 
disrupting things as Goldilocks does Snow White sets about being helpful to the 
dwarves and being valued by them.

However, all stories about an outsider arriving without invitation and without 
warning, even a much-loved story such as Judith Kerr’s classicThe Tiger Who 
Came to Tea <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tiger-who-came-to-tea-9.html>, 
carry an underlying message about security and control which are integral to 
child development.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fgoldilocks-scary-fairy-tales-unexpected-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428911269175%2Ff838cc9c-c7ba-4048-91b6-e381a798f031-1004x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fairytales%20of%20the%20unexpected&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fgoldilocks-scary-fairy-tales-unexpected-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fairytales%20of%20the%20unexpected&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fgoldilocks-scary-fairy-tales-unexpected-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428911269175%2Ff838cc9c-c7ba-4048-91b6-e381a798f031-1004x1020.jpeg>
If these most forceful examples of outsiders becoming insiders are too 
frightening there are other stories which show how outsiders or “intruders” can 
be managed such as John Burningham’s wonderfulMr Gumpy’s Outing 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mr-gumpy-s-outing.html>. 

Here, Mr Gumpy invites the animals onto his boat on condition that they 
behave. Of course, they do not! But the catastrophe that follows is itself 
under control – more or less- and all ends happily with a picnic. Reassuring in 
every possible way it also shows that surprise can be fun too!

Do you have a question for the Book Doctor? Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose it on Twitter@GdnchildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>, using 
#BookDoctor. If you are under 18 and not a member of the Guardian children’s 
books sitejoin here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
, we’re packed full of book recommendations and ideas.
 