
The ancient human ancestor known as Lucy may have met her death more than 3m 
years ago when she tumbled out of a tree and crashed to the woodland floor, a 
team of US researchers claim.

A fresh analysis of the “grandmother of humanity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/27/obama-ethiopia-lucy-fossil> 
points out a number of cracks in the fossil bones that the scientists say match 
traumatic fractures seen in humans who suffer serious injuries from high falls 
on to hard ground.


“The consistency of the pattern of fractures with what we see in fall victims 
leads us to propose that it was a fall that was responsible for Lucy’s death,” 
said John Kappelman, an anthropologist who led the study at the University of 
Texas in Austin. “I think the injuries were so severe that she probably died 
very rapidly after the fall.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpanU91eq1pU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpanU91eq1pU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpanU91eq1pU&media=>
 A hypothetical scenario for Lucy’s fall out of a tall tree and the subsequent 
vertical deceleration based on the patterning of bone fractures. The first 
segment depicts about the last half of the fall from 7.4 m with a real time 
duration of 0.45 seconds. The second segment shows a close-up of the last 2.2 m 
of the fall. The third segment shows as low-motion (about 1/5 speed) close-up 
of the last 1.7 m of the fall. The last frame illustrates the fractures. 
Credit: John Kappelman, University of Texas at Austin 
But the claims, published in the prestigious journal Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature19332>, were roundly dismissed by 
scientists who spoke to the Guardian. They point out that a lot can happen to a 
skeleton in 3.2m years. Lucy’s body may have been trampled by stampeding beasts 
before sediment covered the bones and gradually encased them in rock.


“There is a myriad of explanations for bone breakage,” said Donald Johanson at 
Arizona State University, who discovered Lucy more than 40 years ago in the 
Afar region of Ethiopia. “The suggestion that she fell out of a tree is largely 
a “just-so story” that is neither verifiable nor falsifiable, and therefore 
unprovable.”


Tim White, a paleoanthropologist at the University of California in Berkeley, 
said the cracks were no more than routine fossil damage. “If paleontologists 
were to apply the same logic and assertion to the many mammals whose fossilised 
bones have been distorted by geological forces, we would have everything from 
gazelles to hippos, rhinos, and elephants climbing and falling from high 
trees,” he said.


Lucy was discovered in 1974 when Johanson and his student, Tom Gray, were 
searching for ancient animal bones on the parched terrain near the village of 
Hadar in northern Ethiopia. The chance finding of a piece of arm bone led them 
to uncover more remains of an ape-like animal. Eventually, they gathered about 
40% of the skeleton.


That evening as the team celebrated at camp the Beatles song Lucy in the Sky 
with Diamonds <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xxaOItEmu3U> came on providing 
the scientists with a name for their discovery. The species,Australopithecus 
afarensis, meaning “southern Ape from Afar”, walked upright, but had long, 
strong arms and curved fingers, making Lucy more adept at life in the trees 
than modern humans.


Kappelman became intrigued by some of the cracks in Lucy’s bones after 
examining high resolution x-ray scans of the fossils. The cracks had been 
described before and put down to natural processes such as erosion and 
fossilisation. But Kappelman thought there might be another explanation.

Working with Stephen Pearce, an orthopaedic surgeon, the scientists identified 
cracks in more than a dozen bones, ranging from the skull and spine to the 
ankles, shins, knees and pelvis, which look like compressive fractures 
sustained in a fall. One injury to the right shoulder matches the kind of 
fracture seen when people instinctively put their arms out to save themselves, 
the scientists believe. Kappelman calls it “a unique signature” for a fall and 
evidence that the individual was conscious at the time.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffamily-tree-fall-human-ancestor-lucy-died-in-arboreal-accident-say-scientists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29d61f3228f8c5c99741a8fdc1561adc90bfd262%2F0_202_1200_1396%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Family%20tree%20fall%3A%20human%20ancestor%20Lucy%20died%20in%20arboreal%20accident%2C%20say%20scientists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffamily-tree-fall-human-ancestor-lucy-died-in-arboreal-accident-say-scientists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Family%20tree%20fall%3A%20human%20ancestor%20Lucy%20died%20in%20arboreal%20accident%2C%20say%20scientists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Ffamily-tree-fall-human-ancestor-lucy-died-in-arboreal-accident-say-scientists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29d61f3228f8c5c99741a8fdc1561adc90bfd262%2F0_202_1200_1396%2F1200.jpg>
 3D printouts of Lucy’s right humerus reconstructed Photograph: John 
Kappelman/University of Texas at Austin 
From the scientists’ calculations, Lucy, who weighed less than 30kg, could 
have suffered similar injuries in a fall from about 15 metres. If
Australopithecus afarensis climbed trees to nest, the animals could have spent 
hours a day at this or even greater heights. “We know that chimps fall out of 
trees and often it’s because they step on a branch that turns out to be rotten, 
and boom, down they come,” said Kappelman.

“Based on clinical literature these are severe trauma events. We have not been 
able to come up with a reasonable way that these could be fractured postmortem 
with the bones lying on the surface or even if the dead body was being trampled 
on. If somebody is trampled on the bone breaks in a different way. It doesn’t 
break compressively,” said Kappelman.


But Johanson is not impressed. The cracks on Lucy’s bones are similar to the 
damage seen on other early human and ancient mammal fossils throughout Africa 
and the rest of the world, he said. “We don’t know how long the fossilisation 
process takes, but the enormous set of forces placed on the bones during the 
build up of sediments covering the bones is a significant factor in promoting 
damage and breakage,” he added.


Jaw bone fossil discovered in Ethiopia is oldest known human lineage remains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/04/jaw-bone-discovery-in-ethiopia-is-oldest-ever-human-lineage-remains>
One of White’s major complaints is that the scientists fail to prove beyond 
doubt that the cracks in Lucy’s bones occurred around the time of death. “Such 
defects created by natural geological forces of sediment pressure and mineral 
growth are very common in fossil assemblages. They often confuse clinicians and 
amateurs who imagine them to have happened around the time of death,” White 
said. “Every single element of the Lucy fossil has cracks. The authors cherry 
pick the ones that they imagine to be evidence of a fall from a tree, leaving 
the others unexplained and unexamined.”


Kappelman concedes that we can never know for sure what happened. “None of us 
were there. We didn’t see Lucy die,” he said. “Thinking about testing this 
idea, it’s hard to get someone to fall out of a tree, but we have tests going 
on every single day in every emergency room on planet Earth when people walk in 
with fractures from falls,” he said.


In pondering Lucy’s death, she came back to life, Kappelman added. For the 
first time she became a living, breathing individual, because I could 
understand what I propose to be her death. We have all fallen down. For an 
instant in time you can identify with her and imagine exactly what this 
individual, who lived over 3m years ago, was doing at that instant.”
 