
Family of the late R&B singer Aaliyah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aaliyah> are reportedly planning to block a 
made-for-TV biopic. Complaining that they were not consulted about the film, 
its broadcaster or its casting, Aaliyah's former manager will attempt to sink 
the recently announced feature, according to reports.

On Tuesday night, the official Aaliyah memorial Twitter account indicated 
<https://twitter.com/AaliyahHaughton/status/479046086456115200> that her family 
had not yet confirmed their involvement in Aaliyah: Princess of R&B, a movie 
which Lifetime hopes to begin production this summer. But representatives for 
the estate also called on fans to go easy on Zendaya, the 17-year-old Disney 
star who has been cast in the lead role. "[Please be] respectful to the artist 
playing the role," they wrote, "for [she] may not fully have or know the 
details about this role and her family's involvement."


On Wednesday, TMZ reported 
<http://www.tmz.com/2014/06/18/aaliyah-tv-movie-zendaya-actress-lifetime/> that 
Barry Hankerson, Aaliyah's uncle and former manager, had "hired lawyers" to 
stop the TV project. Her relatives are apparently unhappy that they were not 
contacted about the film and have already vowed to deny any requests to license 
Aaliyah's music. "The family is not opposed to a big, theatrical film, but 
thinks a TV movie is too small for someone as big as Aaliyah," TMZ wrote.


"I can't please everybody," Zendaya said in an interview with the Associated 
Press. "But what I can do is work really hard and just continue to show 
[Aaliyah's] legacy. That’s all I’m focused on is really, really portraying her 
in the best light possible. That’s all it’s about." The Oakland-born actress, 
who starred in the Disney Channel series Shake It Up, has previously referred 
to Aaliyah as "one of her biggest inspirations".


The announcement of this project, and the family's response, recall a 2012 plan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/08/aaliyah-family-posthumous-album>
 to release unheard Aaliyah tracks with new music by Drake and producer Noah 
"40" Shebib. "I was naïve to the politics surrounding Aaliyah's legacy,"Shebib 
later said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/08/drake-noah-shebib-cancel-aaliyah-album>
. "[Aaliyah's] mother saying 'I don't want this out' was enough for me. I 
walked away very quickly."


Aaliyah released three albums, including 16 top 50 UK singles, by the time she 
was 22. She died in a plane crash in 2001.

 