
Far from the Madding Crowd 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=ar+from+the+Madding+Crowd&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 has been called the “warmest and sunniest” ofThomas Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy>’s novels. In contrast to the 
inexorable tragedy ofTess of the D’Urbervilles 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Tess+of+the+D%E2%80%99Urbervilles&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 or the nihilistic horror ofJude the Obscure 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Jude+the+Obscure&order=relevance&dir=desc>
, it indeed has a conventional happy ending. The narrative follows the fortunes 
of the spirited “woman-farmer” Bathsheba Everdene and her three suitors: the 
sturdy, steady shepherd Gabriel Oak; Sergeant Troy, a dangerous Don Juan in 
uniform; and the repressed gentleman farmer William Boldwood. Gabriel is 
ultimately rewarded for his constancy, and the book ends with his wedding to 
Bathsheba.

However, the plot also contains elements which are far from warm or sunny: 
murder, insanity, a macabre coffin-opening scene featuring the corpses of a 
mother and her baby, life-threatening elemental eruptions of fire and 
thunderstorm, numerous violent animal deaths, and sexual symbolism so brazen 
that it can only have been intended to cock a snook at Victorian prudery.

How to square the novel’s contradictory impulses was a puzzle to its first 
readers, and remains so, newly thrown into relief by the release ofThomas 
Vinterberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/thomas-vinterberg>’s film version, 
starringCarey Mulligan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan>. 
AlthoughFar from the Madding Crowd was Hardy’s first resounding literary 
success, reviewers could not agree on how to read it. When it originally came 
out, anonymously in serial form in the Cornhill Magazine in 1874, one critic 
thought he could detect the hand ofGeorge Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot>, who was already known for her 
realist treatments of rural life in works such asSilas Marner 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Silas+Marner&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 andAdam Bede 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Adam+Bede&order=relevance&dir=desc>
. Yet the Westminster Review concluded that, on the contrary, it had more 
affinity with the “sensation” school of fiction as practised by Mary Braddon, 
the bestselling author ofAurora Floyd and Lady Audley’s Secret, who specialised 
in convention-busting female characters, in melodramatic twists and in 
subverting bourgeois complacency. The comparison was meant to be unflattering, 
as the sensation school – despite its sophistication in the hands of writers 
such as Braddon and Wilkie Collins – was felt by the Victorian literary 
establishment to lack both moral and aesthetic legitimacy.

Despite its happy ending, Far From the Madding Crowd is an unsettling, 
unstable book. Its very title – a quotation from Gray’s “Elegy written in a 
Country Churchyard” – is an ironic literary joke. Gray idealises the 
“noiseless” and “sequestered” calm of country life, where “sober wishes never 
learned to stray”; Hardy disrupts the idyll, and not just by introducing the 
sound and fury of an extreme plot into the pastoral world. Like Braddon and 
Collins, he was out to subvert his readers’ complacency.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWCm1XNVD_0c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWCm1XNVD_0c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWCm1XNVD_0c&media=>
 Trailer for Far from the Madding Crowd 
Born in 1840 in a tiny Dorset hamlet, Hardy’s own origins were as obscure as 
those of his fictional Jude. The son of a builder and a former domestic 
servant, born shortly after their shotgun wedding, he was fortunate in having a 
determined, ambitious and unusually well-read mother who prioritised his 
education. Although university was out of the question, he found work in an 
architect’s office, and, after moving to London, began to write in his spare 
time. His first novel,The Poor Man and the Lady (now lost), was rejected by 
publishers because it exposed too readily – and too radically – the author’s 
own class insecurities and resentments in its treatment of a star-crossed love 
affair between a young architect from a working-class background and a girl of 
higher status. Its angry depiction of the upper classes was thought too likely 
to stir political “mischief”. In response, Hardy turned to the “pastoral” as 
what he called “the safest venture”.

Hardy’s unique literary calling-card was his intimate, first-hand knowledge of 
the countryside where he grew up. He was so excited at times while writingFar 
From the Madding Crowd at his parents’ cottage that, while out walking, he had 
to grab a leaf or a stone on which to scribble phrases. But his was no 
untutored natural genius welling forth.Far from the Madding Crowd astonishes 
with its craft. It also shows Hardy surreptitiously redirecting his seditious 
instincts into experimentation with literary technique. The peasants in the 
story are generally presented as happy with their lot; it is the novel form in 
Hardy’s hands that resists the order of things.

Socially, Hardy was a man on the margins. Aesthetically, he also disrupted 
genre boundaries. Unlike Gray’s sober peasant who never learned to stray, he 
created a hybrid voice, which moved between pastoral, social realism, 
melodrama, gothic and sensation. It is as if Hardy wants to keep his readers in 
suspense not just as to which of her three suitors Bathsheba will choose, but 
as to which literary mode he is writing in. It is an index of his genius that 
he does so without sacrificing readability.

John Schlesinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jul/30/guardianobituaries.film>’s 
classic 1967 film version (withJulie Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/juliechristie> as Bathsheba, Alan Bates as 
Oak,Terence Stamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/terence-stamp-i-was-in-my-prime-but-when-the-60s-ended-i-ended-with-it>
 as Troy and Peter Finch as Boldwood) takes risks by embracing the original’s 
atmosphere of extremes. Vinterberg’s film, in contrast, which has a screenplay 
by David Nicholls, is a realist, “George Eliot”-version of Hardy that pushes 
the more mannered elements of the story to the margins, almost as if in 
embarrassment. In doing so, it “normalises” what is in reality a deeply 
unsettling book, and, despite some good performances, neutralises much of its 
power.

In the novel, for example, the unrequited lover Boldwood becomes a fetishistic 
obsessive, secretly stockpiling women’s clothes labelled with Bathsheba’s name, 
driven to madness – and ultimately murder – not just by frustration but by his 
cruel and calculated sexual humiliation at Troy’s hands. Finch in the earlier 
film renders him as twitchily psychotic by the end. Michael Sheen in the new 
version turns in a beautifully underplayed performance, but the result is a 
character who would not seem out of place in a novel by Mrs Gaskell, and whose 
final murderous act seems out of character and perfunctory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Ffar-from-the-madding-crowd-hardys-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429803455745%2F47896443-2455-4b11-a5f3-ef88b666a30e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Far%20from%20the%20Madding%20Crowd%20%E2%80%93%20does%20the%20film%20live%20up%20to%20Hardy's%20novel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Ffar-from-the-madding-crowd-hardys-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Far%20from%20the%20Madding%20Crowd%20%E2%80%93%20does%20the%20film%20live%20up%20to%20Hardy%27s%20novel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F24%2Ffar-from-the-madding-crowd-hardys-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429803455745%2F47896443-2455-4b11-a5f3-ef88b666a30e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bathsheba with Troy, played by Tom Sturridge, in Far from the Madding Crowd. 
Photograph: Allstar Collection/Fox 
Significantly, one of the scenes from the novel omitted by Vinterberg is the 
extraordinary one in which Sergeant Troy – who has married Bathsheba but 
disappeared, presumed drowned – re-appears having joined a low-life travelling 
theatre-cum-circus troupe. At the local country fair, Bathsheba joins the 
audience in the tent and watches him in the role of Dick Turpin, unaware of his 
true identity. In its theatricality – and implicit commentary on the novel as 
an entertainment – the scene could have come directly from sensation fiction, 
where masquerade is a frequent theme (as in Collins’sNo Name, in which the 
strong, amoral heroine Magdalen uses her talents at stage-acting to pursue her 
goals). In Schlesinger’s hands, the events teeter as boldly on the edge of 
surreal absurdity as they do in Hardy’s original (which is probably why 
Vinterberg avoids them as an affront to his more naturalistic sensibility).

Schlesinger’s greater willingness to engage with Hardy’s sensational side 
means that, even when he departs from the novel, he gets closer to its spirit. 
The famous scene in which Troy dazzles Bathsheba with his phallic swordplay 
takes place on a barren hillside, not in the sexually symbolic “hollow amid the 
ferns” where, in the book, she waits “trembling and panting” for him to 
“produce his sword” like a “living thing” so that he can “thrust” at her. 
Vinterberg, in contrast, faithfully films the scene in a fern hollow, but it is 
reduced to just that, a fern hollow. His Troy, Tom Sturridge, has none of the 
dangerous sociopathic erotic energy harnessed by Stamp’s stagey yet dangerously 
disinhibited performance.

Like much sensation fiction, Hardy’s novel deals in gender ambiguity and in 
role play, with its powerful heroine who rides astride like a man. Yet the 
original Bathsheba is also masochistically accepting of her female fate, 
determined to “stand [her] ground and be cut to pieces” rather than leave Troy 
when her marriage to him becomes torture. Hardy’s heroine is a paradoxical 
character, designed to provoke, tease and confuse the reader just as she does 
her suitors. The new film, in contrast, presents a Bathsheba who is “hygienic” 
for modern audiences: an empathetic, egalitarian modern feminist, 
self-empowered but not motivated by power.

Is Far From the Madding Crowd really warm and sunny? The happy ending may seem 
to fulfil the will of some benign natural Providence, in contrast to the cruel 
fatalism found in Hardy’s later works. But there are hints that he is already 
moving in that direction. In one of the dialogues between two farm workers, the 
question of fate comes up. When the gloomier man complains “Your lot is your 
lot and Scripture’s nothing: for if you do good you don’t get rewarded,” his 
more optimistic fellow rejoins: “No, no; I don’t agree … God’s a perfect 
gentleman in that respect.” For the author ofThe Poor Man and the Lady the idea 
of God as a gentleman can only be a bitter joke. The Hardy ofJude the Obscure 
is already there in embryo.

 * Far From the Madding Crowd goes on general release on 1 May.
 