
Farewell then Adam and Joe, who are taking a sabbatical from their 
award-winning <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/apr/04/television1> BBC 
6Music show.

Their absence is a blow for me – what else am I supposed to do on a Saturday 
morning? – and a blow for digital radio, Adam and Joe being the single best 
reason to invest in adigital audio broadcasting (DAB) set 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2009/dec/01/uk-digital-radio-sales>
.

The pair have taken breaks before – rather selfishly, they have many other 
work interests <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0180428/> besides appearing on the 
radio – but Cornish's farewell hinted that this absence could be a lengthy one.

"Thank you to everyone who has listened and particularly everyone who has 
contributed to the show," he told listeners. "But we will be back!"

To what, exactly? BBC 6Music is currently being reviewed by the BBC Trust, 
along with its rather older sister station, BBC Radio 2. BBC Trustee David 
Liddimenthas already hinted at the changes to be expected at Radio 2 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/nov/30/bbc-radio-2-ambition-ratings>. But 
what will he say of 6Music?

BBC director general Mark Thompson has also said the BBC is looking at cutting 
some of its digital TV and radio services after the analogue TV signal is 
switched off in 2012 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/nov/26/mark-thompson-bbc-shut-digital>.

There are a few gems to be found in 6Music – Adam and Joe, Guy Garvey's Finest 
Hour, and the Sunday afternoon guest slots recently given over to the likes of 
Simon Pegg and Edgar Wright – but the feeling persists that for a station with 
an annual budget of £9m it is punching below its weight.

In the last official listening figures, it had an average weekly reach of 
624,000 listeners in the third quarter of this year, up from 552,000 in the 
same time last year, and 485,000 in the third quarter of 2007.

Big audiences aren't everything, of course, as Liddiment recently told Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2, but 6Music, with all its 
financial and marketing muscle, might reasonably be expected to have as many 
listeners as the 708,000 who tune into one of the digital radio success 
stories, Planet Rock.

George Lamb was long a bone of contention with some of the station's 
listeners, but he has beenswitched from weekday morning to weekend breakfast, 
with Lauren Laverne taking over the morning slot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/nov/02/george-lamb-leave-6music-daytime>.

How's she settling in? What do you make of Lamb's breakfast? What is it about 
Adam and Joe that makes their 6Music show so good, and who else would you 
recommend on a Saturday morning? Frank Skinner on Absolute Radio? Or Danny 
Baker onBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 5 Live?
 