
I first met Tony Howard (Obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/dec/20/anthony-howard-obituary>, 21 
December) when we were fellow undergraduates at Oxford. We became friends, and 
worked together both at the Union and in the Labour Club. After we both went 
down, I got him a job as assistant in the bookshop of the Fabian Society, where 
I was assistant general secretary. One of his – to me – principal duties was, 
each week, to parcel my laundry to send for washing to my mother in Leeds. He 
carried out this assignment with, justifiably, ill-grace, but he carried it 
out. As both of us went into journalism, we remained close, and I found him a 
flat in the same block where I lived, in St John's Wood. As a religious person 
himself, he was vocal in his respect that, after my mother died, I went to 
synagogue every morning for a year to mourn her.

Our friendship did not mean that he favoured me against his judgment. When I 
offered him a travel piece for theNew Statesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-statesman> about India, he rejected it 
on the grounds that readers of the magazine could not afford to go there. He 
had a cutting sense of perspective: when a Washington correspondent, he 
dismissed British parliamentary and governmental manoeuvrings as "Toytown 
politics".

I last saw him on Charing Cross Road a few weeks ago, when he was returning 
from one of his regular lunches at the Beefsteak Club. He told me I was wearing 
well. Very sadly, it turned out he was not.

Gerald Kaufman MP

Labour, Manchester Gorton

• Brian Hanrahan (Obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/dec/20/brian-hanrahan-obituary?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 21 December) was one of the best reporters I have worked for as a freelance 
interpreter in Poland since 1989. He was also a fine human being. Brilliant, 
brimful with energy, friendly, cheerful, and possessing a wonderful sense of 
humour. Excellent with words, always hitting the nail on the head, a real 
master communicator. His ethical conduct was spotless.

The BBC has lost one of its best professionals. In September 1989 we got the 
very first interview with Tadeusz Mazowiecki, the Solidarity PM nominee. And I 
will never forget Brian's line whenPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> was accepted into Nato in March 1999 
and we went to the Polish/Ukrainian border to report. It was damn cold, snow 
was falling and he, standing in front of the border post, said: "From today 
Britain will have to defend this border just like its own beaches."

His last mission in Poland was reporting from Warsaw this April after the 
tragic Smolensk plane crash when Poland's president and 95 politicians died. He 
worked in pain for several days but at the time did not know the nature of his 
illness. He wrote to me in May after the operation and was optimistic as usual.

In view of his great achievements, I would like to appeal to the BBC to 
establish the Brian Hanrahan Reporter award to be given every four years to a 
reporter who has distinguished themselves in the field. This will keep Brian's 
spirit alive and help maintain the highest professional, ethical and humanistic 
standards which theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> should continue 
to foster. Thank you, Brian. Farewell.

Jacek Dobrowolski

Poet, critic and translator, Warsaw, Poland
 