
BBC2's Autumnwatch returns next week, but one of its star presenters, Simon 
King, will not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2010/sep/27/media-monkey-diary>
. How will the show fare without him?

The wildlife cameraman extraordinaire 
<http://www.simonkingwildlife.com/index.html> has been a fixture on Springwatch 
and the show it spawned, Autumnwatch, since 2005. Kate Humble and Chris Packham 
are the presenters, but King is the soul of the show – he's the one out there 
getting buffeted by gale-force winds, drenched in buckets of rain, and dreaming 
up soppy names for rutting deer. I always enjoyed spotting a dipper, but I 
never cared about them quite so much as I didwhen King told me about them 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p007xr0s>. 

You can tell he's impossible to replace because the BBC has lined up a whole 
host of people to take over from him, including Gordon Buchanan, taking a break 
fromspotting tigers up mountains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/sep/20/wild-tigers-bbc-bhutan>, 
andnew signing Nick Baker <http://www.nickbaker.tv/>, who you may know from 
Channel 5 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9x98HgtEMio> or – more likely – his 
shows' appearances on Harry Hill's TV Burp.

If Baker's signing can bag Autumnwatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/autumnwatch> a few mentions on 
primetime ITV1, that can only be a good thing. But King's exit is a blow to the 
show, which changed its format last year. Instead of being presented "on 
location" from a wildlife reserve and stripped across a couple of weeks, it is 
presented from the BBC's Natural History Unit, once a week for eight weeks. If 
that wasn't to do with budget cuts then it certainly felt like it. Now King – 
off to pursue "other interests" – has gone as well.

Still, I fretted about the loss of Bill Oddie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/may/26/springwatch-bill-oddie-chris-packham-kate-humble>
 last year, and the show hassurvived his absence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jan/30/bill-oddie-leaves-bbcs-springwatch>
 – somemight even say it thrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/26/springwatch-tv-ratings>. Not 
only that, you get tospot song names by Packham's favourite bands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2009/jun/03/springwatch-chris-packham-kate-humble>
.

In this case: King's exit – What Difference Does It Make? 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FcOH5OqEMQ4&feature=fvst>

• Autumnwatch returns to BBC2 on 7 October
 