
Has the nation ever bid such a fond farewell to a sexist, racist, homophobic 
bully? The final ever episode ofAshes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes> tonight sees actor 
Philip Glenister bow out as Gene Hunt, the macho star of the timewarp TV cop 
show who has become an unexpected, toxic crush for millions of viewers.

Despite his unrepentantly plainspoken views, or just as likely because of 
them, Hunt struck a chord from the minute he appeared in BBC1's Life on Mars in 
2006, the series that precededAshes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes>.

So broad is the appeal of the gruff detective that he even became a political 
tool in the election campaign last month – albeit one that proved 
characteristically unpredictable.

Labour unveiled a poster that depicted David Cameron as Hunt perched cockily 
on the bonnet of his red sports car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/02/david-cameron-gene-hunt-labour-poster>
. The slogan read: "Don't let him take Britain back to the 1980s." It looked 
like a masterstroke. The message was clear: a Tory vote would mean a return to 
an era of high unemployment, bitter strikes, social inequality and unpalatable 
attitudes – just the sort of world depicted in the 1981-83 setting of Ashes of 
Ashes.

But the strategy immediately appeared to backfire when the Conservatives took 
it as a compliment. Seizing on the widespread affection for Hunt, they produced 
their own version of the poster, even cranking out Hunt's much bellowed 
reference to his beloved car: "Fire up the Quattro. It's time for change." 
Cameron himself declared he was flattered by the comparison.

But that endorsement looked equally unwise when the following episode of Ashes 
to Ashes showed Hunt beating up ANC supporters and telling them to "go back to 
bongo-bongoland" – a reminder that for every genuinely funny wisecrack ("She's 
as nervous as a very small nun at a penguin shoot" or "Drop your weapons, you 
are surrounded by armed bastards"), Hunt delivered another line that evoked the 
views of an unreconstructed bigot.

What exactly was Hunt's appeal? Fans would say he harked back to a time when 
men were flawed but fearless heroes – proper blokes whose sideburns whiffed of 
Brut, who had a semi-permanent hangover, and a fag or a smutty innuendo always 
on their lips. He said what he thought and felt – and tough if you didn't like 
it because his word was law.

Matthew Graham, the show's co-creator, has described the police force during 
the era in which Life on Mars was set, 1973, as"a state within a state" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/13/genderissues.broadcasting>. He 
and Glenister drew on various alpha males to create their beast – the archetype 
of the western sheriff, Jack Regan from The Sweeney and football manager Brian 
Clough.

Glenister recalled a scene that defined Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/15/gene-hunt-last-stand-ashes>
: "He's in his office and he's looking at this poster of The Good, the Bad and 
the Ugly with a scotch and a fag in his hand, and Sam Tyler walks in and says, 
'Which one are you?' And Gene replies, 'I'm all three.' I love that, it just 
sums him up."

But even Graham and Glenister appear surprised by the feverish admiration from 
online fan groups such as Hunt's Housewives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/may/21/ashes-to-ashes-final-episode>
. "I'm still amazed that girls find it romantic, this big hulking bloke in a 
dated suit, that there could be anything even closely resembling a sex symbol," 
said Graham.

Life on Mars and Ashes to Ashes played a neat trick: they were a fancy dress 
version of The Sweeney, delivered with a hefty punch of comedy and a cheesy, 
ironic wink. And what an arresting trick – Hunt became an appalling charmer 
that you could disapprove of but not genuinely hate. Dick Emery, a genuine 
stalwart of BBC comedy in the 1970s, coined a reaction for people exactly like 
him: "Ooh you are awful – but I like you."
 