
For almost five years, Little Bulb theatre <http://www.littlebulbtheatre.com/> 
have been based in a lovely, green, picturesque market town calledFarnham 
<http://www.farnham.gov.uk/> in Surrey. About five minutes (if you run, as I 
always do) from the train station isFarnham Maltings 
<http://www.farnhammaltings.com/>, a thriving community arts hub and quietly 
unassuming creative powerhouse of artists, producers, craftspeople and 
theatre-makers working simultaneously on a local, national and international 
level. Living, quite literally, on its doorstep is a unique experience. I watch 
the seasons pass from my window, not only from the colours of the leaves but by 
seeing which craft festival is setting up outside my garden.

Little Bulb: natural born lyres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/27/little-bulb-natural-born-lyres> 
If it’s the knitting festival, Unravel 
<http://craft.farnhammaltings.com/portfolio/unravel-festival/>, then I know 
it’s nearly the end of winter. If it’s the cake festival, Sugarcraft, I know 
that spring is on its way. If the whole car park has been transformed into a 
garden, it’s sure to be summertime. You don’t have to be a genius to know what 
the Christmas fair might indicate. Naturally as we live and work so close to 
the place, we inevitably end up being part of such festivals. This year, we’ve 
played some outdoor gigs for summer barbecues, and in the past we’ve found 
ourselves announcing raffle prizes, benefitting from the more obscure unclaimed 
items ourselves (a knitted cactus being one of them).


It also works the other way round, with the locals bringing their craft skills 
to our productions, too. For example, in our forthcoming children’s Christmas 
show atBristol Old Vic, The Night That Autumn Turned to Winter 
<http://www.bristololdvic.org.uk/nightautumnwinter.html>, the chosen aesthetic 
for the woodland animals is knitwear, so a local knitting group,Knitwits 
<http://knitnell.com/tag/knitwits/>, have kindly agreed to make hedgehog 
slippers and rabbit hats for us (from patterns we found in a book in the 
Maltings shop one lunchtime). Our producer, Fiona, is also a master knitter – 
she’s on the squirrel hats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffarnham-maltings-tiny-closely-knit-arts-community-farnham-little-bulb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441986395139%2F9be6d588-435b-4eb4-835a-97865d55e759-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farnham%20Maltings%3A%20the%20craft-loving%20community%20that's%20a%20close-knit%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffarnham-maltings-tiny-closely-knit-arts-community-farnham-little-bulb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farnham%20Maltings%3A%20the%20craft-loving%20community%20that%27s%20a%20close-knit%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ffarnham-maltings-tiny-closely-knit-arts-community-farnham-little-bulb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441986395139%2F9be6d588-435b-4eb4-835a-97865d55e759-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Everyone respects everyone else’s craft … Little Bulb 
We rehearse nearly all of our shows here at some point, so it’s only natural 
that the environment infiltrates the process. A couple of years ago,Gavin Stride
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/03/artists-must-think-more-about-who-their-audiences-might-be>
, the director, lent us his old double bass to test out, and now years later, 
having never played one before then, I play one inOrpheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/21/orpheus-review>. There’s also a 
costume store above the offices, which despite being a bit of a feat to get to, 
is a treasure trove of items once you’re in there. Most recently we’ve been 
reaping the benefits of the damsel dresses and villainous capes for a 
Victorian-style melodrama we’re making to open next year’s courtyard theatre at
Battersea Arts Centre <https://www.bac.org.uk/>. And our go-to prop maker and 
good friend Max Humphries has his workshop right next door, so if we need an 
emergency set of antlers, then we couldn’t be any closer to the best person for 
the job.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0F1idjtBB8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0F1idjtBB8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd0F1idjtBB8&media=>
Of course, living so close to the building also has its benefits on a 
practical level, too. I’d be ashamed to tell you the amount of times that the 
duty managers (who have a spare key) have let us into our own house. And the 
fact that our rehearsal rooms are on our doorstep hasn’t necessarily meant that 
we’re any more on time. But still, working here has such a charm to it, and the 
other residents are all so supportive of what we do and vice versa. Everyone 
respects everyone else’s craft, and, dare I say it, it’s a rich tapestry and 
one we’re very fortunate to be a part of.

 * Little Bulb theatre are produced by Farnham Maltings. Orpheus is at the 
Royal Opera House Linbury Studio theatre, London 
<http://www.littlebulbtheatre.com/>, 15-19 September. Then touring.  