
Oliver Postgate's Bagpuss, the Clangers and the Pogles – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2014/oct/11/oliver-postgates-bagpuss-the-clangers-and-the-pogles-in-pictures>
They are remembered as hospitable cave-dwelling aliens with a very whistley 
way of communicating, but could the Clangers also have a hitherto unknown 
association with the 60s fashion world?

A new exhibition <http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/exhibitions/clangers-bagpuss-co/> 
exploring the magical worlds of the children’s television series created by
Oliver Postgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2014/oct/11/oliver-postgates-bagpuss-the-clangers-and-the-pogles-in-pictures>
 andPeter Firmin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/13/interview-peter-firmin-co-creator-bagpuss-the-clangers>
 suggests theClangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/18/william-shatner-the-clangers-childrens-tv>
 costumes were inspired by Paco Rabanne as worn by Twiggy.

Alice Sage, curator of the display at the V&A’s Museum of Childhood 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/> in east London, said Joan Firmin, wife of Peter and 
dresser of the Clangers, told her that the costumes were based on a photograph 
she had seen of Twiggy in the 60s.

That sent Sage to the Victoria and Albert Museum’s fashion archives. “I went 
through costume images thinking, what could it have been that she’d seen? And 
then I came across the dressesPaco Rabanne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/jun/01/features11.g22> was making 
in the late 60s with jointed pieces of fabric and leather.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9171bf9bc531aaa803cb17e2f861e343224fac7%2F0_241_3358_4722%2F3358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashionista%20Clangers%20were%20inspired%20by%20Twiggy%20and%20Paco%20Rabanne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashionista%20Clangers%20were%20inspired%20by%20Twiggy%20and%20Paco%20Rabanne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9171bf9bc531aaa803cb17e2f861e343224fac7%2F0_241_3358_4722%2F3358.jpg>
 Stylesetter … French actor Genevieve Thenier wears a dress composed of 
metallic rectangles linked with wire by Paco Rabanne in 1967. Photograph: 
Popperfoto/Getty Images 
“I thought that must be it. It is our V&A twist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/06/bagpuss-noggin-the-nog-clangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-museum-of-childhood>
 on the Clangers.”

The display includes original puppets, archive footage, sets, storyboards and 
scripts relating to the series made by Firmin and Postgate’s influential 
production company Smallfilms. As well as Clangers there is Bagpuss,Ivor the 
Engine <http://www.doyouremember.co.uk/uploads/raw-1366302978.jpg>, Noggin the 
Nog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/28/noggin-the-nog-peter-firmin-edinburgh-festival>
 and, for any grandparents visiting, Pogles Wood.

The fact that there are tightly dialogued Clangers scripts on display may 
surprise some who remember the pink knitted creatures and their swanee whistle 
voices.

“Oliver Postgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/nov/28/oliver-postage-clangers-bagpuss>
 wrote everything out, everything they said,” said Sage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47967d03d367a568e5049dcba2db619dfbd588c2%2F0_1085_4992_4544%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashionista%20Clangers%20were%20inspired%20by%20Twiggy%20and%20Paco%20Rabanne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashionista%20Clangers%20were%20inspired%20by%20Twiggy%20and%20Paco%20Rabanne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47967d03d367a568e5049dcba2db619dfbd588c2%2F0_1085_4992_4544%2F4992.jpg>
 Mr and Mrs Pogle. Photograph: Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Smallfilms 
So the exhibition includes a script of the Clangers squabbling about a rope. 
“You rotten rodent!” says Clanger 1. “No it’s mine … I’ll drag you down, let go 
you horrible thing,” replies Clanger 2. “Stop! Stop! Oh you bad Clangers,” says 
Clanger 3. “Come over here at once and help us work.”

And they do. Because one of the show’s central themes was the successful and 
amicable working out of problems.

Hand-knit alien puppets and William Shatner: the Clangers' recipe for 
stateside success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/18/william-shatner-the-clangers-childrens-tv>
It was a big part of the show’s appeal, said Sage. “In the Clangers, someone 
would visit the planet and rather than defend themselves or close the borders 
they said, ‘Who are you? What are you bringing?’


“The stories that Oliver Postgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oliver-postgate> made up were very 
open-ended, they often start with reality before going into a fantastical 
world. There is lots of magic, lots of dragons, lots of flying machines.

“When I used to watch them I’d watch them again and again and again … and they 
stay with you.”

Sage spent a good deal of time rummaging through the Kent barn of the Firmins, 
now in their 80s, and found many original treasures wrapped in newspaper.


It means that all the Bagpuss characters are in the show: Professor Yaffle 
<https://images.duckduckgo.com/iu/?u=http%3A%2F%2Fmedia-cache-ak0.pinimg.com%2F736x%2F72%2F1f%2F64%2F721f64d91c65859352fe693128faef74.jpg&f=1>
, the wooden woodpecker that was based, the exhibition reveals, on the 
philosopherBertrand Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/dec/07/bertrand-russells-10-lessons-for-a-creative-happy-life-in-pictures>
; Gabriel the banjo-playing toad;Madeleine the rag doll 
<https://images.duckduckgo.com/iu/?u=http%3A%2F%2Fnewsimg.bbc.co.uk%2Fmedia%2Fimages%2F45281000%2Fjpg%2F_45281826_ragdoll_2.jpg&f=1>
 who never moves from her wicker chair; the cleaning- and mending-obsessed 
mice; and, of course, Bagpuss himself, who is not quite the “old fat furry sag 
puss” that the programme makes out: his internal workings are made fromMeccano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/08/kickstarter-indiegogo-coolbox-cognitoy-xoxo-meccano>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed023b95af3f70099638051a0352e1be44cdccbe%2F0_0_4798_3120%2F4798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashionista%20Clangers%20were%20inspired%20by%20Twiggy%20and%20Paco%20Rabanne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashionista%20Clangers%20were%20inspired%20by%20Twiggy%20and%20Paco%20Rabanne&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fclangers-oliver-postgate-peter-firmin-v-and-a-exhibition-twiggy-paco-rabanne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed023b95af3f70099638051a0352e1be44cdccbe%2F0_0_4798_3120%2F4798.jpg>
 Curator Alice Sage with Bagpuss at the Museum of Childhood. Photograph: 
Jonathan Hordle/Rex/Shutterstock 
Bagpuss is a particular favourite for Sage. “The characters have this idea 
that no object is ever unloved or lost, there is a place for everything, all 
can be mended and loved. For me, as a museum professional, that’s really 
appealing.”

Children seeing the show may have no idea about Bagpuss or Ivor the Engine but 
they should recognisethe Clangers after its 2015 revamp on CBeebies, voiced by 
Michael Palin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/31/michael-palin-clangers-oasis-of-calm>
.

There are also tablets allowing children, or their parents, to have a go at 
animating characters and learning to speak Clanger.

• Clangers, Bagpuss & Co  
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/exhibitions/clangers-bagpuss-co/>is at the V&A Museum 
of Childhood, London, 19 March to 9 October, free.

 