
It is such a thrill to be in the same room as Patsy Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/dec/11/joanna-lumley-patsy-absolutely-fabulous>
’s beehive. I’m on the set ofAbsolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/absolutely-fabulous--the-movie>, in the 
basement of a London hotel on a rainy November evening. The room is purporting 
to be a casino in the south of France, all leopard-print furnishings, roulette 
tables and chandeliers the size of cars. Between shots, a woman is zhuzhing
Joanna Lumley <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joanna-lumley>’s blond 
bouffant with a tail comb. Around her, dozens of octogenarian women in evening 
dresses sip ginger ale, pretending it’s champagne.

Jane Horrocks: “It would be odd and churlish if I wasn't part of it.”
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/19/jane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it>
Next to Lumley is Jennifer Saunders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jennifer-saunders>, playing Edina at 
her most Edinaish. She wears a shiny azure trousersuit, slogan T-shirt (“Frack 
Me,” it shouts) and earrings that look like Christmas tree baubles. Although 
the cameras can’t see it, Saunders is barefoot, making the distinctive gait she 
employs as Eddy all the more noticeable. It is slow, stuttery, stunted. It 
suggests a woman who has never bought a pair of shoes she can walk in.

Unlike the bitchy assistants and formidable editors that populate most films 
and TV programmes about fashion, Absolutely Fabulous has always gone beyond 
cliche in its depiction of the industry. In Patsy, it presents the business at 
its most unhinged – a magazine editor whohides drugs in her beehive 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NGx78HMB7Ks> and describes an upcoming issue 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-RNByjE-_bQ> as “Sex Bitch Aristo Sex Punk 
Whore Bitch Prozzy Lezzy Slut ... with lovely shoes”. As anyone who has peeked 
behind the distressed jute curtain of the fashion industry knows, such 
behaviour is far from preposterous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c4fa4f50aa636853b3de0a21cf6eae30740c7ce%2F0_238_5110_3065%2F5110.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c4fa4f50aa636853b3de0a21cf6eae30740c7ce%2F0_238_5110_3065%2F5110.jpg>
 Absolutely Fabulous has always gone beyond cliche in its depiction of the 
fashion industry. Photograph: Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
Ab Fab also illustrates the two main industry archetypes. There are the Patsys 
– insiders who set fashion rules but haven’t changed their own personal style 
since the 1980s. And there are the Edinas – who try all too hard to make the 
latest trends work regardless of self-doubt, camel toes and blisters. She is 
the patron saint of fashion victims.

Celebrity cameos: has the joke worn thin?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/30/celebrity-cameos-absolutely-fabulous-has-the-joke-worn-thin>
Speaking to Saunders, it becomes clear that fashion is a complicated industry 
to send up. Certain unnamed designers have resisted lending the show clothes, 
which puts pressure on budgets. “If you want free things, you’ve got to pay for 
them,” she says. “So the best thing is always to pay for them, and not pay the 
other price, which is having to be nice, or do things. Or else someone gets 
upset. If you buy the clothes, you can take the piss out of whatever you want.”

There is also the issue of cosiness. Certain sectors of the fashion industry 
are keen to capitalise on the publicity viral clips can generate. The resulting 
humour tends to be gentle and celebratory.

Anna Wintour <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour>, for example, 
starred in avideo <https://youtu.be/5Av3ZKrDxKM> with Amy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> last week. And when Zoolander 
2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/zoolander-2> was released earlier this 
year, Wintour,Valentino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/nov/27/valentino-big-love-england-couture>
 and otherfashion heavyweights appeared in cameo roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/10/zoolander-returns-ben-stiller-and-luke-wilson-bring-blue-steel-to-paris-fashion-week>
 and were involved in splashy marketing stunts. Many of the film’s worst 
reviews stemmed from accusations that it was too close to the modelling 
industry it was supposedly satirising.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31913482f10817659588f94bbae927c1cc5e2585%2F0_54_3896_2337%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31913482f10817659588f94bbae927c1cc5e2585%2F0_54_3896_2337%2F3896.jpg>
 Saunders and Lumley with Emma Bunton, one of the film’s many celebrity cameos. 
Photograph: Courtesy Ev/REX/Shutterstock 
Cosiness could be an issue for Ab Fab, too. The film was not available for 
review – a slightly worrying sign – but it appears to have more fashion cameos 
than regular cast members.

The plot hinges on Edina accidentally killing Kate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/27/absolutely-fabulous-the-movie-trailer-jennifer-saunders-joanna-lumley>
 – with whom Saunders is on first-name terms (“I realised I had written most of 
the film and sold it without ever actually asking Kate if that was OK,” she 
says, “but she was just like: ‘Yeah, yeah’”).Alexa Chung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung>, Jean Paul Gaultier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/jean-paul-gaultier>, Stella McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/stella-mccartney> and Jerry Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jerry-hall> are among many who appear.

The film has already proved controversial. In December, comedian Margaret Cho 
accused it of “yellowface” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/margaret-cho-twitter-storm-accusing-ab-fab-movie-yellowface-racism>
 when it emerged that Janette Tough – akaJimmy Krankie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Krankies> – was playing a Japanese fashion 
designer named Huki Muki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/margaret-cho-twitter-storm-accusing-ab-fab-movie-yellowface-racism>
. “I love AbFab but #YELLOWFACE is something I cannot watch – I just can’t,” 
Cho said on Twitter. “It’s sad when heroes are no longer heroic. Too bad. 
#racism.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40e28cc27a2ce41776003912e7bf9d1e2ea92ed7%2F149_180_3411_2046%2F3411.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40e28cc27a2ce41776003912e7bf9d1e2ea92ed7%2F149_180_3411_2046%2F3411.jpg>
 Ab Fab’s fashion front row, featuring Lulu, Game of Thrones’s Gwendoline 
Christie, Saunders,
Abigail Clancy, Lumley, Sadie Frost and Tinie Tempah. Photograph: Courtesy 
Ev/REX/Shutterstock 
Saunders says this was a misunderstanding. “The whole film is about people 
being what they’re not,” she says. She thinks the criticism came about because 
the casting agent had put a call out for a “Japanese designer”. “But I’d always 
thought it was going to be Janette because I just thought that was hilarious. 
Huki Muki is a brand, she is the designer and she looks a bit Japanese, but the 
moment she opens her mouth she’s from Glasgow. It was just a silly little joke 
– in no way are we pretending she is Japanese, no yellow makeup or slitty eyes 
or any silliness.” As for Twitter? “This nonsense that everyone can be offended 
by the idea of someone else being offended by something. It’s just ridiculous.”

Edina finds herself at the eye of a Twitter storm in the film, too, and 
alienation from the modern world is one of the film’s big themes. It’s quite a 
departure for a comedy that has always excelled at pillorying the zeitgeist.

Saunders claims she has lost touch with all of that of late: “There is so much 
that’s new, I don’t think I can take any more.” She also says that she is not 
trying to write about fashion, really, or satirise the darkest sections of the 
industry. In the series, she says fashion was “a convenient way of showing 
people’s constant need for change. Also, there is something innately funny 
about people wearing something that makes you think: ‘What the fuck have you 
come as?’ until they tell you it’s Gucci or Prada and you go: ‘Oh, it’s 
wonderful!’”

Joan Didion and Céline: why old age is having a fashion moment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2015/jan/07/joan-didion-and-celine-why-old-age-is-having-a-fashion-moment>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F815ff069c620f793b09fb1cfbe70f4cf3338b9ef%2F317_163_1358_815%2F1358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%2C%20%E2%80%98yellowface%E2%80%99%20and%20growing%20old%20disgracefully%20%E2%80%93%20on%20set%20of%20Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20The%20Movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Ffashion-growing-old-absolutely-fabulous-kate-moss-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F815ff069c620f793b09fb1cfbe70f4cf3338b9ef%2F317_163_1358_815%2F1358.jpg>
 ‘The film is about Patsy and Eddy reaching an age where the world isn’t that 
kind to them any more.’ Photograph: Courtesy Ev/REX/Shutterstock 
Instead, Saunders says the heart of the film is about Patsy and Eddy “reaching 
an age where the world isn’t that kind to them any more. A sort of loss of 
expectation. Running towards nostalgia and towards a comfortable world that 
they imagine the south of France will be. It’s rather sad.”

In the casino scene, our Bolly-fuelled heroines confront the ghosts of 
Christmas future. They wobble around, peering at the older women with overt 
disgust. At a roulette table, a woman wears sparkly oversized spectacles in the 
manner of nonagenarian fashion iconIris Apfel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/mar/13/iris-apfel-muse-new-york>.

I ask: was this a reference to the trend for older women as fashion figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2015/jan/07/joan-didion-and-celine-why-old-age-is-having-a-fashion-moment>
? “Oh, yes!” says Saunders. “That thing. Ooh, look how great you can look when 
you’re old! There seem to be trends for old people nowadays: lots of eye makeup 
and giant jewellery, bright-orange lipstick, a bright-orange coat, great big 
things over your little wrists.” Her joyful cackle suggests she may have a barb 
or two up her sleeve for the fashion industry, after all.

 * Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie is out on 1 July.
 