
I turn into the shuttered Arab Street of Singapore and realise I don't know 
what day of the week it is. I celebrate my stupidity with a Thai coconut I buy 
from a guy by Bugis station. With a machete crack, he scalps the fawn shell and 
drops in a straw. I sip the sweetness, cool against the dense humidity. A 
skinny man with silver headphones tosses thousands of tiny, dried silver fish 
in an open-weave basket, white dust coating his flip-flops. Chinese sausages 
hang translucent in oily finger bunches from bright twine. Hardened bright 
orange shrimp are piled high by blackened sea cucumbers.

Somehow the Yuk Kee Duck shop doesn't appeal. I turn on to Liang Seah Street. 
Vivid lilac baby aubergines catch my eye from Nasi Lemak, a Singapore buffet. I 
take a selection back to a quiet corner of the lobby of the hotel where I'm 
staying. The violet Brinjal is delicious, but the real highlight is Utah, a 
paste of coconut, chilli and fish, wrapped in a banana leaf and roasted. The 
heat is sweet, but the best bit is unwrapping the leaf. There is a side of Kang 
Hong, a spinach-like vegetable stir-fried with the shrimp I saw in Victoria 
Street. They are pungent, intense with the texture of rice crispies. Silver 
fish are sprinkled over the top as a crunchy, salty condiment.

I'm engrossed in stimulating new flavours when an apoplectic face bounces up 
like a pompous red balloon. Boiled eyes peer down a sneering nose. A lip curls 
in open contempt. "Do you mind not eating in my lobby?" I don't like snobs. "Do 
you know who I am?" I don't like boors. "I'm the General Manager!" I don't like 
bullies. I feel faintly embarrassed and mildly humiliated.

Three hours later I'm onstage, inviting the 6,000 audience members to the 
hotel for a fast food party. They arrive as a grinning mob, clutching greasy 
cartons and trampling morsels into the bewildered balloon's beloved deep-pile. 
Very puerile, but it's more fun to serve it fast instead of cold.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 