
They squirmed, they dithered and they blathered. But eventually, Henry Paulson 
and Ben Bernanke ran out of options - they bowed to Congress and agreed to 
clamp down on telephone number-sized Wall Street pay packages.

In return for being bailed out by the US taxpayer, banks will be obliged to 
curtail "golden parachute" payoffs for departing executives, to tone down the 
most egregious of their bonus schemes and perhaps even to adopt British-style 
"say on pay" votes for shareholders. These aren't the biggest of concessions - 
but at least they're something.

If there's one silver lining on an otherwise unremittingly bleak cloud over 
the economy, it is the possibility that the crisis will change the obscene 
culture of self-enrichment among the top echelons of financial institutions. 
Both on Wall Street and in London's square mile, soaraway remuneration has 
closely correlated with a shift towards reckless financial "innovation" over 
the last decade.

The figures are absurd - when Merrill Lynch's Stan O'Neal was ditched last 
year for encouraging a culture of risk which led to $12bn (Â£6.6bn) of losses on 
mortgage-related securities, he took $161m of stock and options with him into 
retirement.

Citigroup's Chuck Prince, who went a similar way, took $39.5m. Even Lehman's 
Dick Fuld, whose bank has actually gone bust, received $35m to reward him for 
his wonderful work last year.
About the only one who could truly claim he had a successful year was Goldman 
Sachs' boss, Lloyd Blankfein, who duly scooped $68.5m, as the bank profited by 
betting that lots of struggling families would lose their homes.

True to its laissez-faire philosophy, the Bush administration has been 
extremely reluctant to do anything about this. This reluctance must have a 
little bit to do with the fact that both Paulson and the White House chief of 
staff, Joshua Bolten, are former senior executives at Goldman Sachs.

At Congressional hearings this week, some of the wriggling on the issue was 
truly ludicrous. At one point, the Senate banking committee's Democratic 
chairman, Christopher Cox, asked the Federal Reserve's chairman why pay limits 
weren't in the government's initial draft of its plan to buy up distressed 
assets from struggling banks.

"We can't impose punitive measures on institutions which choose to sell 
assets," replied Bernanke. "That would discourage companies from participating 
and it would cause the programme to fail."

Let's analyse that for a moment. Bernanke was suggesting that senior bankers 
might jeopardise the future of their organisations by refusing to participate 
in a rescue plan simply in order to protect their personal pay packages. What 
worse indictment could there possibly be of the habit of doling out big bonuses?

Given that the banking sector has been highly instrumental in wrecking the US 
economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy>, it has become 
impossible to defend nonsensical pay policies. The US Chamber of Commerce gave 
up - its vice-president of government affairs, Bruce Josten, admitted this week 
that remuneration would need to be addressed. He told the Wall Street Journal: 
"If we're taking huge infusions of your money and my money, there's got to be 
some limitations."

So did HSBC's chairman, Stephen Green, who told the BBC: "There has been far 
too much focus on payments that are very short-term focused, people who pick up 
the tab for short-term profits, without having to bear the costs of long-term 
impairments."

Anger about Wall Street's excesses has been palpable for years - and it spilt 
over this week. Sherrod Brown, a Democratic senator from Ohio, demanded: "Why 
are we bailing out companies whose leaders got rich while gambling with our 
economy?"

Tim Johnson, a fellow Democratic senator, said the government's bail-out 
should not simply be a "gift". It was right and proper, he argued, to ask for 
something in return: "When you make mistakes, as many of these companies have, 
you should be held responsible for those decisions."

In the face of scepticism, Paulson, Bernanke and the White House's press 
secretary, Dana Perino, have kept up a constant (albeit deliberately vague) 
mantra about the "dangerous" and "devastating" economic consequences of failing 
to act quickly.

To some, it was an all too familiar message from an administration which has 
cried wolf before. Luis Gutierrez, an Illinois congressman, said it reminded 
him of the all-out propaganda war waged by the White House to bully Congress 
into backing the Iraq war.

"It's hard being trusting," he said. "You feel like you're always getting 
hoodwinked, because they say the consequences if you don't do it is a complete 
demise and collapse of the system."
 