
New York bombing: no indication of wider cell


Ahmad Khan Rahami, the 28-year-old naturalized US citizen who was arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
 after a brief shootout on the streets of New Jersey, has so far been 
uncooperative with investigators looking into evidence of a wider conspiracy. 
FBI agent Bill Sweeney said the agency had “no indication that there’s a cell 
operating in the area or in the city”, although the investigation in New York 
and New Jersey was “ongoing”. Rahami is a suspect in the weekend bombing in 
Manhattan and has so far been charged with five counts of attempted murder of a 
police officer.Customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/fried-chicken-store-new-jersey-new-york-rahami-bomb-suspect>
 at the Rahami family’s First American Fried Chicken store in Elizabeth, New 
Jersey, express their shock at the idea he was involved in the bombings.

Ahmad Khan Rahami: New York bombings suspect arrested after shootout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>

Trump calls Rahami’s punishment ‘not what it once would have been’

Looking to promote himself as tough on immigration, terrorism and crime, 
Donald Trump suggested Rahami should be treated as an enemy combatant, saying 
the US should use “whatever lawful methods are available” to obtain information 
from him and Congress “should pass measures to ensure that foreign enemy 
combatants are treated as such. These are enemies.” Trump concluded by noting 
Rahami’s possible punishment “will not be what it once would have been. What a 
sad situation.” Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton said Trump’s rhetoric about 
terrorist attacks “gives Isis what it wants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/hillary-clinton-new-york-new-jersey-attacks-trump-muslims>
”.

Trump laments that New York bombing suspect will get ‘amazing’ treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/trump-ahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-bombing-immigration>

UN suspends all aid convoy movements in Syria after airstrike

The United Nations suspended all Syrian aid convoys after a UN convoy 
delivering food relief to a rebel-held area near Aleppo was targeted in an 
airstrike, as a week-old ceasefire brokered by Russia and the US collapsed with 
a new surge of Syrian government bombing. The US blamed Russia for the attack, 
whether or not Russian planes were involved, arguing Moscow was responsible 
under the ceasefire agreement for reining in Bashar al-Assad’s government 
forces. The attack, which killed 12, destroyed 18 trucks laden with food 
destined for an area west of Aleppo. “Let me be clear: if this callous attack 
is found to be a deliberate targeting of humanitarians, it would amount to a 
war crime,” warned Stephen O’Brien, the UN’s emergency relief coordinator.

US blames Russia after UN aid convoy in Syria is targeted by air attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/syria-ceasefire-is-over-says-countrys-military>

George HW Bush ‘voting for Hillary’


George HW Bush is reportedly voting for Hillary Clinton in November, according 
to a Facebook post from John F Kennedy’s niece. The post by Kathleen Kennedy 
Townsend – the former lieutenant governor of Maryland and daughter of Robert F 
Kennedy – shows her posing with the former US president with the caption: “The 
President told me he is voting for Hillary!!” A Bush family spokesman said only 
that the former president will vote “as a private citizen in some 50 days. He 
is not commenting on the presidential race in the interim.”

George HW Bush ‘voting for Hillary’, claims member of Kennedy family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/george-h-w-bush-voting-for-hillary-claims-member-of-kennedy-family>

Wage gap worse than 1979


Black Americans today earn even less relative to their white counterparts than 
they did in 1979, according to a new report by the Economic Policy Institute 
(EPI). Black men’s average hourly wages went from being 22.2% lower than those 
of white men in 1979, to being 31% lower by 2015. For women, the wage gap 
increased from 6% in 1979, to 19% in 2015. Valerie Wilson, one of the report’s 
authors, said the disparity exists despite the fact people in this country 
“think or at least believe that [racism is] getting better”.

 Wage gap between white and black Americans is worse today than in 1979  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/wage-gap-black-white-americans>

Dr Dre back in court over headphones

Dr Dre faces the prospect of a grueling lawsuit after a California appeals 
court allowed a former hedge fund manager to go ahead with his case against 
Beats Electronics over royalties for Beats headphones. Steven Lamar first 
brought his case two years ago, arguing that he was “the founder of Beats 
headphones”, and is demanding a cut of royalties on future sales of headphones 
derived from the original design, instead of just the 4% he gets on past 
models. Beats is currently owned by Apple, which in other news has applied for 
a patent for a new,improved paper bag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/20/apple-patent-recycled-paper-bag>
.

Dr Dre faces return to court in Beats headphones case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/20/dr-dre-new-court-case-beats-headphones>

Man v rat 

According to Bobby Corrigan, the world’s leading expert on rodent control, 
many of the world’s great cities remain totally overcome by rats. “InNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, we’re losing that war in a big 
way,” he says. Combat metaphors have become a central feature of rat 
conversation among pest control professionals. In Robert Sullivan’s 2014 book 
Rats, he described humanity’s relationship with the species as an “unending and 
brutish war”, a battle we seem always, always to lose. But why? Jordan Kisner 
attempts to answer that question in our Long Read.

Man v rat: could the long war soon be over? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/20/man-v-rat-war-could-the-long-war-soon-be-over>

In case you missed it …

It is estimated that robots will eliminate 6% of all US jobs by 2021. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/13/artificial-intelligence-robots-threat-jobs-forrester-report>
 But what if robots eliminated work entirely, asks Ryan Avent: “Just as a 
lottery check does not free the winner from the shackles of the human 
condition, all-purpose machine intelligence will not magically allow us all to 
get along. And what is especially tricky about a world without work is that we 
must begin building the social institutions to survive it long before the 
technological obsolescence of human workers actually arrives.”

A world without work is coming – it could be utopia or it could be hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/world-without-work-utopia-hell-human-labour-obsolete>
 