
The video begins innocuously enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/sep/25/cctv-washington-navy-yard-shooter-fbi-video>
. A blue Toyota Prius rental car pulls into the parking garage of the 
Washington navy yard at 7.53am on 16 September, then a man wearing a blue 
striped shirt with a backpack over his shoulder enters building number 197.

Suddenly, the mundane events of an ordinary Monday morning turn to images of 
horror. In the next clip the man is captured walking down a corridor, 
apparently calmly, with a Remington 870 shotgun in his hands. He pokes the 
barrel of the gun, sawed off for maximum impact, into the offices he passes at 
the start of the one-hour rampage that would end with the killing of 12 random 
victims, four wounded survivors and his own death.

The man is Aaron Alexis, 34, the shooter in the Washington navy yard tragedy 
who was trapped in the delusion, FBI agents said, that he was controlled by 
Extremely Low Frequency (ELF) electromagnetic waves. Stills imagesreleased by 
the bureau 
<http://www.fbi.gov/news/navy-yard-shootings-investigation/image/photo-gallery-navy-yard-shootings>
 give clues to that delusion, and that he was prepared to die in carrying out 
his actions.

Etched into the left side of the receiver of the gun was the expression: "My 
ELF weapon!" Alongside it was the phrase: "Better off this way!" On the other 
side of the receiver the sentence had been scratched: "Not what y'all say!" And 
on the barrel itself was written: "End to the torment!"

The FBI released the video footage along with the still pictures of Alexis's 
movements 
<http://www.fbi.gov/washingtondc/press-releases/2013/law-enforcement-shares-findings-of-the-investigation-into-the-washington-navy-yard-shootings>
 and the shotgun and a new timeline of the carnage in the navy yard, It said 
the intention was to provide "greater understanding of the recent movements and 
activities of the deceased shooter". The video also provides a shockingly 
intimate window into the navy yard disaster as it unfolded.

In the final clip of the released footage, Alexis is seen running down a 
stairwell and entering a lower corridor, more urgently now. He enters the 
hallway, takes cover behind a wall, as a stream of people can be seen running 
at the end of the corridor; then he begins running towards them.

As the investigation into the navy yard rampage has progressed, the extent of 
Alexis's mental health problems have become apparent as well as numerous holes 
in safety procedures through which he fell. Earlier this week it was revealed 
that the federal contractors who carried out a background check on him in 2007 
were aware that he lied on his application form and that he had covered up a 
previous arrest and charge for a firearms offence; yet Alexis was still granted 
secret security clearance in the navy.

The new details released by the FBI show Alexis's movements leading up to and 
during the rampage. Fifteen minutes after he entered the parking garage, he 
entered building 197 and went up the elevator to the fourth floor. He visited 
the men's bathroom, leaving his backpack and clipboard in a cubicle there.

At about 8.15am Alexis crossed the hallway into the 4 West area of building 
197. He carried the Remington shotgun which he had bought just two days earlier 
at a gun shop in northern Virginia. That same day he also bought a hacksaw for 
using in sawing-off the barrel and stock.

His first victim was shot at 8.16am in the 4 West area, and a minute later 
calls started flooding in to 911 emergency lines. Over the next hour he moved 
to the first floor and the third floor, where he was shot and killed by 
officers at 9.25am.

FBI agents have carried out forensic examinations of the contents of the 
backpack, the Toyota Prius, and the Residence Inn in south-west Washington 
where he stayed from 7 September. In the course of their searches they 
discovered a roll of purple duct tape in the backpack which Alexis used to wrap 
the end of the sawed-off stock. They also found several documents stored on 
items of electronic media that included a phone, laptop and thumb drives.

Those documents have given investigators a sense of his state of mind at the 
time of the shootings, yielding clues to his intentions. In one of the 
documents, Alexis had written: "Ultra-low frequency attack is what I've been 
subject to for the last three months, and to be perfectly honest that is what 
has driven me to this."

Valerie Parlave, assistant director in charge of the FBI's Washington field 
office, said that the electronic documents indicated that "Alexis was prepared 
to die during the attack and accepted death as an inevitable consequence of his 
actions." She added that there was no evidence that he had targeted specific 
individuals â€“ his victims were randomly selected.

The electronic communications did not indicate, Parlave said, that Alexis had 
been in touch with anyone before the rampage to alert them to what was to come.

The FBI said that it was aware that ELF electromagnetic waves were the subject 
of conspiracy theories. In a statement on its website, the bureau said: "ELF 
technology was a legitimate program for naval sub-tonal submarine 
communications; however, conspiracy theories exist which misinterpret its 
application as the weaponization of remote neural frequencies for government 
monitoring and manipulation of unsuspecting citizens."
 