
The FBI agreed to help an Arkansas prosecutor unlock an iPhone and iPod 
belonging to two teenagers accused of killing a couple, just days after the 
federal agency announcedit had gained access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/28/apple-fbi-case-dropped-san-bernardino-iphone>
 to an iPhone linked to the San Bernardino gunman.

The FBI announced on Monday that it had gained access to an iPhone belonging 
to Syed Farook, who died with his wife in a gun battle with police after they 
killed 14 people in San Bernardino in December. The FBIhas not revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/22/apple-fbi-san-bernardino-iphone-method-for-cracking>
 how it cracked Farook’s iPhone. Authorities also have not said whether the 
iPhone and iPod in the Arkansas case are the same models or whether the FBI 
will use the same method to try to get into the devices.

US used tactic from Apple encryption fight in 60 other phone-unlocking cases
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/30/us-apple-encryption-tactic-all-writs-act>
Faulkner County prosecutor Cody Hiland said the FBI agreed to the request from 
his office and the Conway police department on Wednesday afternoon. A judge on 
Tuesday agreed to postpone the trial of 18-year-old Hunter Drexler so 
prosecutors could ask theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> for 
help. Drexler’s trial was moved from next week to 27 June.


Drexler and 15-year-old Justin Staton are accused of killing Robert and 
Patricia Cogdell at their home in Conway, 30 miles north of Little Rock, in 
July. The Cogdells had raised Staton as their grandson.

Hiland said he could not discuss details of the murder case in Arkansas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas>, but confirmed the FBI had 
agreed less than a day after the initial request.


 “We always appreciate their cooperation and willingness to help their local 
law enforcement partners,” he said.

Drexler and Staton have both pleaded not guilty to capital murder, aggravated 
robbery and other charges in the deaths of the couple, who were both 66.

Patrick Benca, Drexler’s attorney, confirmed that he was notified that the FBI 
had agreed to help unlock his client’s phone.

“We’re not concerned about anything on that phone,” Benca said. 

An after-hours phone call to the public defenders’ office where Staton’s 
attorney works was not answered.

Oregon senator threatens to filibuster any attempt to weaken encryption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/30/oregon-senator-ron-wyden-filibuster-encryption-rightscon>
Prosecutors have had possession of the iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> they say belongs to Drexler 
since he and two other teenagers were arrested in Texas and brought back to 
Arkansas days after the July shootings. Staton’s defense attorney was ordered 
last week to hand over the teen’s iPod, which was in the defense’s evidence 
locker.

Prosecutors said recorded phone conversations between Staton and others since 
his arrest indicated he had used the iPod to communicate about the homicide 
plans and that there may be other evidence on the device.


 