
Picking A-level subjects has always been a big decision, but for students 
starting sixth form this month, it has been even tougher. “It’s confusing 
because I’m not sure what universities will accept,” said Samantha Onyekwere, 
who lives in Kent and has chosen maths, further maths, economics and physics at 
King’s Maths school, London. “I know AS exams are really important for 
university applications. It’s OK, because I am doing them, but other people 
won’t be.”

Reforms to be introduced this year will change the courses students take and 
the way they are assessed. In many subjects, AS exams – sat at the end of year 
12 and a key part of university applications – have been decoupled fromA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> and will no longer make up half 
of students’ final grades.

Some sixth forms hit by severe funding cuts will not be entering any students 
for AS-levels. This means the information available toadmissions tutors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/15/oxford-university-tutors-intervierws-admissions>
 will be patchy and, for some applicants, greatly reduced. Universities have 
said no students will be disadvantaged by the changes, but details of how they 
will judge applicants are hazy – and need to be worked out soon.

“The AS is a piece of concrete information about how the candidate is 
performing, so when you’re making the decision you have a fairly good idea of 
how they’re doing,” says Angela Milln, director of admissions at Bristol 
University. The removal of the AS will make things harder for tutors, she says.

Bristol, like many universities, says that if a student does not have an 
AS-level, it will judge them on GCSE performance, personal statements, teacher 
predictions and references. Not only will this add to the pressure for 
teenagers, but it is hardly an ideal way to assess candidates intending to go 
to university two years or more after GCSEs.

Oxford University tutors open up about admissions interviews
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/15/oxford-university-tutors-intervierws-admissions>
About half of teachers’ predicted grades are wrong, according to a study by 
OCR, one of England’s biggest exam boards, and the shakeup of the A-level 
system is likely to make them even less reliable. “Virtually every bit of the 
exam system is in flux at the moment,” says Brian Lightman, general secretary 
at Association of School and College Leaders. “It is extremely difficult for 
teachers to make grade predictions in a time of change when we don’t know what 
the new exams will look like and we’re not used to them.”

To complicate matters further, GCSEs are also being reformed. From 2017, the 
grading system for GCSEs will change from A*-G to 9-1. It’ is unclear how these 
new grades will map on to the old ones, meaning that, for future sixth formers, 
universities may have even less reliable information available.

The systems that admissions teams have carefully developed to help guide 
decisions will go out of the window, says Alison Mullan, director of admissions 
at Lancaster University. “Each institution has got a lot of analysis on 
predicted grades versus actual outcomes for different subjects, so that they’ve 
got a sound understanding of how reliable they are. Now we’re going to be 
starting from scratch.”

Not all subjects are changing at the same time, and not all sixth forms are 
responding to the changes in the same way. About half will still be offering
AS-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> in all subjects, 
according to a survey of 500 schools released by Ucas in January.

Last year, Cambridge University wrote to schools and sixth forms urging them 
to stick with AS-levels. But some have already ditched the exam, and more are 
likely to do so. This poses a major challenge for institutions that judge 
candidates on a tariff score system, allowing students to use AS marks to top 
up their Ucas score.

Stewart Harper, head of admissions at Leeds Beckett University, says the 
university is still deciding how to respond. “Our requirement hasn’t changed, 
but once the reforms comes in, we will need to keep looking at it.” He says the 
university cannot make a decision until it knows how many schools and colleges 
are definitely scrapping the AS.

Even where institutions offer places on a grade basis, rather than tariff 
system, it is questionable whether they should continue to look at AS-level 
performance. “It would be unfair if you had two candidates with similar GCSEs 
and the same predictions, but one had AS-levels and the other didn’t,” says 
Lynsey Hopkins, head of admissions at the University of Sheffield.

“It’s very hard to unknow what you know” agrees Paul Teulon, director of 
admissions at King’s College London. Both Sheffield and KCL say an AS grade 
would not make or break an application, but that the universities would look at 
other indicators such as GCSEs and predicted grades.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Funiversity-admissions-as-levels-sixth-form-exams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d7af9d6a2e6d5c14308cdf01b75e7e321e19cdc%2F55_114_2415_3625%2F2415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fears%20over%20unfair%20university%20admissions%20as%20AS-levels%20disappear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Funiversity-admissions-as-levels-sixth-form-exams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fears%20over%20unfair%20university%20admissions%20as%20AS-levels%20disappear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Funiversity-admissions-as-levels-sixth-form-exams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d7af9d6a2e6d5c14308cdf01b75e7e321e19cdc%2F55_114_2415_3625%2F2415.jpg>
 Samina Khan, director of undergraduate admissions at Oxford University 
Oxford University fears the changes will stop students from disadvantaged 
backgrounds applying. “In autumn 2012 universities were invited to respond to 
the consultation from Ofqual and we said that we supported the AS,” says Samina 
Khan, director of undergraduate admissions. “This wasn’t listened to.

“We know from our experience that we’ll get students who wouldn’t have 
considered Oxford who are from families where no one has gone to university – 
they will get their AS results and suddenly feel Oxford is in their sights.”

The impact of removing the AS is an “unknown” she says, adding that admissions 
staff would be monitoring application rates from poorer students closely.

About 90% of Oxford applicants already sit at least one admissions test, adds 
Khan. “We’ve got a few more departments thinking about introducing an 
admissions test, and we do this with some rigour and discussion because we know 
we’re putting an extra requirement into a process.”

Cambridge University is also believed to be considering bringing back entrance 
tests, but declined to comment on what its admissions policy would be.

Not all medical schools – which previously asked for a fourth AS-level – have 
announced how they will adapt their entry requirements. Some, such as King’s 
College London, will ask students not sitting an AS to complete the extended 
project qualification.

Mary Curnock Cook, chief executive of Ucas, says some universities are already 
issuing advice to students. “The fact that we’ve got around 35 universities 
that have put public statements out on the Ucas website, and many more have 
said something about the reforms on their own websites, shows they are ahead of 
the game.”

University league tables 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>
However, about 100 universities have not yet said what they will do. Ucas 
expects them to put out admissions requirements for the following year by 
January, but this will be of little help to students who have already been 
asked to decide what to study.

“The problem is, there isn’t one view,” says James Kewin, deputy chief 
executive of the Sixth Form Colleges Association. “The diversity of the higher 
education sector, plus the fact that it’s regarded as something that will 
happen in a few years’ time, means it is hard for teachers to offer advice to 
students.”

Samantha, meanwhile, is not sure that students understand the changes. “Most 
of what I know is from searching online. For some people the subjects they’re 
choosing are based on what they can or can’t do based on the new AS structure. 
But that can affect what they can do at university.”

She has kept her options open by moving to a school that will enter her for AS 
exams in all subjects, but it is far from clear how important these will be to 
her university applications. “I’m still going to have to be revising for my 
economics and physics AS, which don’t actually count, at the same time as my 
maths and further maths, which do.”
 