
Libel actions are becoming increasingly rare, it would appear from an analysis 
on the Inforrm website 
<http://inforrm.wordpress.com/2014/12/29/media-and-law-review-of-the-year-2014-part-1-the-cases-defamation-privacy-and-google/>
. And privacy actions are rarer still.

A relatively quiet 2014 in the English media law courts followed a relatively 
quiet one the year before. It says that “the predicted flood of litigation” 
seeking to explore the meaning of the 2013 defamation act failed to materialise.

According to its table of media law cases, there were only 43 decisions in 
defamation cases in 2014 (compared to 52 in 2013).

There were no libel jury trials last year and only one full trial by judge 
sitting alone. (That was Antonio Serrano Garcia’s action against Associated 
Newspapers over an item in Kelvin MacKenzie’s Daily Mail column in April 2012:
Serrano won £45,000 in damages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/oct/14/medialaw-dailymail>).

As for privacy, the blog cites the official statistics 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/358274/privacy-injunctions-statistics-january-june-2014.pdf>
 as showing only one was launched against a mainstream media title: AMM v News 
UK in November 2014. That involved the seeking (and granting) of an injunction 
against the Sun on Sunday to prevent its publication of information about a 
sexual relationship.It was the first such action against the media in nearly 
two years. 
<http://inforrm.wordpress.com/2014/12/07/news-privacy-injunction-granted-against-sun-on-sunday-first-against-the-media-for-nearly-two-years/>

It is also a reminder that superinjunctions - the subject of a great press 
outcry a couple of years ago - are no longer a matter of controversy.

Inforrm points out that the most important media law case of the year occurred 
outside Britain - in Luxembourg at the European Union’s court of justice - 
between Google and Mario Costeja González,the “right to be forgotten” ruling. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/13/right-to-be-forgotten-have-you-ever-wanted-something-deleted-from-the-web-google>

Then there is the little matter of no-win, no-fee arrangements. It was 
suggested, by Inforrm and others, that recoverable success fees and 
after-the-event insurance would be abolished in defamation and privacy cases.

 In fact, as Inforrm notes, libel conditional fee agreements “have, against 
the odd, survived another year”.

Source: Inforrm blog 
<http://inforrm.wordpress.com/2014/12/29/media-and-law-review-of-the-year-2014-part-1-the-cases-defamation-privacy-and-google/>

 