
The eccentric family drama has been a compelling fictional formula since 
Little Women, and Natasha Farrant's After Iris 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571278213>
 (Faber £6.99) has the wit and charm ofHilary McKay 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/search.do>'s Exiles books with 
the added emotional depth of Annabel Pitcher'sMy Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece
 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444001839>
. Since the death of 13-year-old Bluebell's twin sister, her parents have 
poured themselves into their work, frequently leaving Blue and her siblings 
with their Bosnian au pair, Zoran. Blue records on film her grief, her 
unrequited love for the boy next door and her bullying by her former best 
friend, with her mini-screenplays capturing moments of comedy and tragedy. 
Highlights in a touching study of family life are Blue's spiky and tender 
relationship with her older sister and chief rival, and Zoran's care beyond the 
call of duty for his charges, who begin to understand his own troubled past.

Blue's family chaos appears picturesque and resolvable next to Eddie's in Anne 
Fine'sBlood Family 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857532404>
 (Doubleday £12.99). Imprisoned in a squalid flat with his abused mother, Eddie 
seizes on vintage children's TV for parenting, education and life skills. 
Mother and son are separated after rescue by social workers, and while the 
established system of fostering, adoption, counselling and school offers Eddie 
a second chance at childhood, rehabilitation is elusive. The multiple 
narratives of the professionals and carers involved in Eddie's future, with the 
notable absence of his mother's voice, reflect the fragmentation of a 
vulnerable individual's world. Eddie reveals in his own voice how the most 
apparently disinterested parties, such as his straight-talking, belligerent 
adoptive sister, can make the most effective difference simply by sticking 
around.Blood Family is realistic about what can and can't be healed but ends on 
a hopeful note with a young adult Eddie about to take control of his recovery.

If You Find Me 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780621524>
 by Emily Murdoch (Indigo £8.99) is another tale of slow recovery from early 
abuse, narrated by Carey, who takes care of her younger sister while living 
rough with their drug-addicted mother in a corner of a Tennessee national park 
she calls "Hundred Acre Wood" in a grasp at conventional childhood. When the 
girls are rescued by Carey's father and absorbed into his new family, her 
adjustment to home comforts and the social minefield of high school is erratic. 
Sustained by books, music and new friends, she reconstructs the most painful 
chapters of her past but also some of its joys. UnlikeBlood Family, Carey's 
story is sustained by her own narrative voice, engaging enough to draw the 
reader through difficult material. Both novels will comfort teenagers who had 
an unpromising start in life and enlighten those more fortunate.

If You Find Me is a striking debut novel, as is Alexia Casale's The Bone Dragon
 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571295616>
 (Faber £9.99). Casale also examines an adopted teenager's recovery from past 
trauma, adding an element of fantasy. When Evie has her shattered ribs removed, 
her uncle helps her carve a dragon from her own bones. The dragon, representing 
her own inner strength, takes her on after-dark expeditions to do battle 
against her foes. The metaphor is not overlaboured and the dragon breathes fire 
into the fantasy adventure episodes, which have a flavour of Alan Garner.

Winter Damage 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408835838>
 by Natasha Carthew (Bloomsbury £10.99) is also a first novel, introducing a 
resourceful teenage heroine in bitter circumstances. This gripping quest tale 
is set in Cornwall in a near future suffering the effects of climate change and 
social collapse. Ennor sets out across the frozen moors to bring her mother 
home for Christmas, learning survival skills and the meaning of friendship from 
a gypsy girl and eventually joined by her younger brother and a childhood 
friend. Ennor makes a series of commitments and tough choices en route to an 
ending that just about transcends bleakness.

The first novel published by Malorie Blackman since she became children's 
laureate will be eagerly scrutinised.Noble Conflict 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780385610421>
 (Doubleday £12.99) is a powerful thriller embracing a thoughtful examination 
of propaganda and how concepts such as heroism, terrorism, sacrifice and a just 
war are constructed. Kaspar, a farm boy recruited to his country's elite 
peacekeeping force, buys wholesale his commanding officers' account of the evil 
Insurgents kept at bay without bloodshed by the righteous Guardians, until he 
encounters his first "terrorist".

The Guardians' barrack-room banter could be straight from British soldiers 
heading for Afghanistan. These scenes, and the scrapes Kaspar gets into as he 
wanders off-piste on his early missions, lighten the harrowing material to 
come. When Insurgents kill his buddy and Kaspar's dreams stray into "enemy" 
territory, it becomes clear that truth is the peacekeepers' first casualty and 
asking questions a dangerous pursuit.

Monkey Wars 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781406346107>
 by Richard Kurti (Walker £7.99) delivers more on the art of war and the trials 
of forming bonds across battle lines. Readers who might be drawn toWatership 
Down but prefer a faster pace will relish the antics of the monkey tribes of 
Kolkata. The Langur have built up a military machine, with corrupt leadership. 
The Rhesus have been ousted from their home by the Langur. A young Langur 
monkey becomes a whistleblower after witnessing his first bloody attack. An 
exciting plot with an occasionally flat style.
 