
"Who do you think should take the credit for the economic prosperity of our 
country? It should be kept in mind that there are hidden sacrifices by many."
Chun Tae Il, Korean Labour Movement Activist and Martyr, 1969

"It was foreigners who made our 40 year-long period of exports successful and 
filled our pockets with dollars. It's high time we repay themâ€¦"
Kim Seung-wung, director of Borderless World Corp., 2009

In April 2004, Jeong, a 34-year-old Chinese immigrant living in Korea, 
committed suicide by throwing herself under a subway train. According to a 2006 
report by Amnesty International, Jeong had been working 12-13 hour shifts in an 
embroidery factory where her employer was withholding her wages and refused to 
allow her to move to another workplace. When she complained, he threatened to 
sack her. Before ending her life Jeong wrote, "I want to go home, but the 
company is not paying me. I went to the employment security centre, but they 
did not solve my problem. I have chosen to kill myself as there is no other 
way."

In November 1969 a Korean factory worker named Chun Tae Il ended his life 
through self-immolation. Like Jeong, he believed there was no other way. Having 
tried, without success, to improve factory conditions through surveys, 
petitions and demonstrations, he finally turned to suicide in one last 
desperate bid to open the eyes of the world to the suffering of a generation of 
workers. Through the movement triggered by his death, Korean labour law was 
reformed and Chun's demands for working conditions were realised. In the 
intervening decades Korea enjoyed rapid economic success. Yet behind the leaps 
and bounds of this Asian Tiger lies a shadow world all too similar to the one 
decried by Chun thirty years ago: the world of the migrant worker.

Korea's 400 000 migrant workers come from a wide range of geographical, 
cultural and linguistic backgrounds, but are united by the social exclusion 
they face as foreign labourers. In recent years human rights watchdogs have 
become increasingly concerned about the serious abuses experienced by migrant 
workers, ranging from work-related incidents such as unfair dismissal, unsafe 
working conditions and reduction of wages without notice, to general 
ill-treatment in the form of sexual, psychological and physical abuse.

Outside the workplace the perception of migrant workers as "job-stealers" and 
"dirty criminals" prevails. In recent years Korea has made significant progress 
in opening up to foreigners, but whilst English teachers and international 
students enjoy a good standard of living and a certain degree of respect, 
migrant workers continue to face prejudice and exclusion. In a street survey 
conducted by Migrant Workers TV most participants showed little interest in the 
lives of migrant workers, whilst others complained that they "smelled" and 
"took over everything".

Contrary to popular misconception, the majority of workers enter the country 
legally, through a Korean broker. Once they reach Korea, however, their job is 
often very different from the one promised, with lower wages and "3D" (dirty, 
difficult, dangerous) conditions. The Amnesty report describes how one Ghanaian 
worker lost his hand in an accident at work whilst being verbally abused by his 
employer, who refused to cover his medical bills and later disappeared. The 
worker was discharged before the treatment was complete, and is now unable to 
work. In another case a group of female workers from Thailand were exposed to a 
toxic chemical which left them unable to walk. Significantly, the Korean 
employees worked in a separate room and were never exposed to the chemical.

The Labour Standards Act of Korea exists to protect workers by limiting 
working hours (Art. 49, 54), and prescribing a minimum wage (Art. 7). However, 
there are certain loopholes in the law. For example, working hours may be 
increased twice over using provisions for 'standard overtime' and 'flexible 
working time', with the agreement of the worker. Also, the minimum wage does 
not apply to workers on probation or those who undergo training. The bottom 
line is that a worker knows that if s/he complains s/he risks being dismissed 
and forced to look for another job in a country where the language, job 
culture, and even his/her own rights as a worker are unfamiliar.

In addition, Korean law gives workers a two month time limit in which to seek 
employment. Migrants unable to leave or still struggling to pay back their 
broker must then work illegally, risking exploitation and arrest. The treatment 
of migrant detainees is also a serious concern: 20 per cent of detained migrant 
workers questioned by Amnesty had experienced beatings and nearly 40 percent 
had suffered verbal abuse.

Today the social exclusion of migrant workers is rapidly gaining recognition 
both internally and internationally, mainly due to the efforts of the workers 
themselves. In 1995 the struggles of Nepalese industrial trainees brought 
together migrant workers, religious charities and human rights groups to form 
the first Joint Committee for Migrant Workers in Korea. Ten years later Korea's 
first ever Migrant Trade Union was established in affiliation with the Korea 
Federation of Trade Unions.

Support has also come from private enterprises such as the Borderless World 
Corporation, which provides interpretation services for bank transactions, and 
Nonghyup Bank, which provides legal fees and advice for migrants wanting to 
adopt a Korean name. These tend to be more practical and user-focused than 
government initiatives, which are often aimed at western teachers looking for 
English-speaking dentists and subtitled cinemas.

Despite targeted crackdowns on its leaders, the Migrant Trade Union continues 
to fight for migrant rights, urging the government to ratify the UN 
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers 
and their Families, which came into force in 2003. As with all cases of social 
exclusion, genuine change depends not only on government policy but on the host 
society's willingness to empathise with migrant workers. Nevertheless, the 
ratification of the Convention could be an important first step in promoting 
social inclusion and protecting the rights of migrant workers in Korea.

This longlisted article was published on 23 July 2009. It was written for the 
Guardian's International Development Journalism Competition between 1 April and 
22 June 2009.
 