
When it comes to digital exposure, how much is too much for today’s teenagers? 
Fears about sexting, cyberbullying and access to inappropriate violent or 
pornographic images are being linked with other evidence pointing to 
communication disorders, spatial awareness issues, sleep disorders, stress and 
anxiety, eyesight damage and posture issues.

The blue light from screens has been linked to depression as well as insomnia. 
Rates of mental health issues experienced by schoolchildren are rocketing, with 
fingers being pointed at the pressures of social media or hours spent while 
online gaming.

Last week Joan Bakewell was found “loosely speculating” that narcissism was so 
rife among social media-obsessed young people that it could be linked to the 
rise in eating disorders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/13/joan-bakwell-criticised-eating-disorders-narcissism>
, something for which she quickly apologised after there was a backlash of 
criticism from affected young people and their families.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists <http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk> has previously 
said that increases in hospital admissions for eating disorders could be due to 
social pressure made worse by online images. Whatever the cause, there is no 
doubt that rates of such illnesses are growing. The most common age for female 
admissions is now 15; nine times more females then males are being admitted to 
NHS wards.

A robust study by the World Health Organisation <http://www.who.int/en/>, 
published this month, found high levels of stress and anxiety among 11- to 
15-year-olds, especially related to school. It also found that British young 
people were some of the most dissatisfied in the world.

The pop star Nicola Roberts, of the band Girls Aloud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/girlsaloud>, has also intervened to 
highlight the government’sfailure to understand the extent of the 
technology-spawned issue of “sexting” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/girls-aloud-star-nicola-roberts-7587200>, 
pointing out that the time allocated to social and health education had dropped 
by a fifth in three years and still didn’t require children to be taught about 
the dangers of sexting.

“As the problem is getting bigger, the level of support needed is not growing 
with it,” Roberts, an ambassador for the children’s charityBarnardo’s, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/barnardos-support-children/graphic/helping-children-move-beyond-care>
 told theTimes.

But as the debate continues about whether technology is damaging or enhancing 
young lives, the problem remains for grown-ups: should we – or can we – do 
anything about a stressed-out, sexed-up digital environment?

The phrase “digital natives” <http://marcprensky.com/digital-native/> was 
coined in 2001 by US education consultant Marc Prensky in an attempt to show 
that the generation born into the web revolution was simply living life 
differently to the older generation of “digital immigrants”.

Dr Kimberly Young, the American founder of the Center for Internet Addiction 
<http://netaddiction.com/>, says she does believe that the push and pressures 
to stay online could be directly linked to stress.

“I think that digital natives know what they are doing with technology but 
less so with people,” she says. “We are more detached due to technology, and 
especially young children who use technology. It is just too soon and too young 
without developing their social skills. We are more isolated and, yes, stressed 
because of this constant need to stay connected.”

She has produced a diagnostic questionnaire for children to gauge the depth of 
their issues, and believes the number of internet addicts is steadily rising.

Strict parental control is key, according to Young. That is far from 
impossible to achieve, according to Kevin Avison, executive officer at the 
Steiner Waldorf Schools Fellowship, which actively keeps technology at bay, 
certainly during early years education. He said that the independent education 
group was attracting more and more parents who feared that over-exposure to 
online media early on is far from helpful.

“It’s very difficult to draw lines between social media and the less wholesome 
uses,” he says. “We try to have a critical attitude towards technology and 
encourage parents to at least set limits on use.

“We’re not about taking people away from the world in which we live, but 
children’s development is not helped by restricting their access to things like 
running around in nature and flexible playing, engaging with other people. 
There’s a great deal that can be lost if a child is brought up thinking there 
is only one main way of communication, using some form of device.”

Steiner schools argue for a different approach, introducing technology to the 
classroom at about the age of 12. “Children need to develop the wisdom to 
manipulate these devices when they come to use them, to understand how they 
work and therefore to make them work for them, rather than interfacing in a 
passive way,” Avison says. He added that parents were often guilty of setting 
poor examples with their use of tablets and phones. “Things are moving at a 
bewildering speed, so a device a child is using now will not be the ones they 
will be expected to use in a future workplace.”

Misplaced adult understanding of what children are dealing with is prevalent, 
according toBaroness Beeban Kidron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/beeban-kidron>, a film producer who was 
horrified by what she found while documenting young people’s online lives.

She has started a campaign to support young people to access technology 
responsibly, calling for a charter of “iRights “ for children to be able to 
delete their online profiles. The notion that children are comfortably surfing 
their lives through social media is very wrong, she says.

“This idea of the digital native in the bedroom taking down a fascist regime 
and building a billion-dollar company is a very attractive image, but actually 
if you look at the research, young people are on the lowest rung of digital 
opportunity,” she said.

Others are loathe to dump too many problems that are societal in nature at the 
door of the internet.

Sonia Livingstone, professor of social psychology at the London School of 
Economics, 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/WhosWho/AcademicStaff/soniaLivingstone.aspx> 
said the implication 
<https://theconversation.com/if-we-cant-prove-the-internet-makes-children-unhappy-we-shouldnt-lay-the-blame-at-its-door-56395?utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Latest%20from%20The%20Conversation%20for%20March%2018%202016%20-%204525&utm_content=Latest%20from%20The%20Conversation%20for%20March%2018%202016%20-%204525+CID_f6616f82ebb312710df575255751dcf2&utm_source=campaign_monitor_uk&utm_term=If%20we%20cant%20prove%20the%20internet%20makes%20children%20unhappy%20we%20shouldnt%20lay%20the%20blame%20at%20its%20door>
 that the internet is responsible for children’s problems ignores many of the 
alternative causes. “The increased exam pressure, for example, or expectations 
for success weighing children down,” she wrote in the Conversation.com.

“We should also consider the debate over the reality of what internet or 
gaming ‘addiction’ might really mean. The statistics are slight, to say the 
least, and don’t really bear out the public’s concerns.”

Blaming the internet for everything underplays all the potential benefits, for 
mental health or otherwise, from internet use, which may actually compensate 
for any drawbacks, she argues.

For example, the Children’s Commissioner for England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jan/22/anne-longfield-childrens-commissioner-cuts-services>
 reported that young people are seeking mental health advice online in 
preference to consulting their doctor or school nurse. AndChildLine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/07/online-pressures-unhappy-children-cyberbullying>
 reported that 82% of their children’s counselling sessions concerning suicide 
in 2013-14 were conducted through email or by means of a one-to-one online chat.

Technology itself has the potential to tackle some of the issues – 
cyberbullying can be spotted with software and apps are now being developed to 
allow parents to “time-out” their children’s devices. Technology is proving 
invaluable in the classroom in helping children who have learning difficulties, 
autism and any other disabilities.

Dr Kaska Porayska-Pomsta of the Institute of Education at University College 
London says that the term “digital native” is not a helpful one, suggesting 
that young people had an innate skill to deal with technology thanks to some 
kind of speeded up human evolution.

“We need to be looking at technology in a very different way. At how to use it 
as a means to support education,” she says. “These questions about how 
technology is impacting on young people are really only starting, they’re 
gathering momentum but there is a lot of work to be done yet.

“How will this blunt the next generation’s critical thinking, how will this 
hyper-connectivity change us as human beings? We are being changed at a very 
fundamental stage, as babies, by this technology. It’s vast and we’re only 
making baby steps in understanding it.”

TANGLED WEB

■ 46% of teachers say pupils are distracted by their mobile phones and other 
technology while in class

■ 41% of 11- to 19-year-olds report having seen something on the internet in 
the past year that worried or upset them

■ One in five pupils report that they have missed food or sleep to keep using 
their phone or other device

■ 72% of parents are happy for their kids to regularly use a smartphone or 
tablet

■ 64% of parents say that they worry about behavioural issues related to their 
children’s use of mobile phones, tablets or computers

■ Cyberbullying is a massive issue for young people. Reports suggest 50% to 
80% of school-age children have experienced it in some form, 25% repeatedly, 
and well over half don’t tell their parents

Sources: NHS Choices; ChildLine; UK Safer Internet Centre; Parentally 
Challenged; 5Rights
 