
Line up all the female superheroes who have appeared on screen, silver or 
small, and what similarities do you notice? Amazonian bodies contorted into 
spine-snapping action poses? An unsettling mish-mash of opposing desires and 
stereotypes, somehow both sexually deviant and virginal? Empowerment bound up 
in an “enhancing” costume? And that’s before you’ve even opened a comic book.

Does The Man in the High Castle prove that the best TV is now streamed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/18/jessica-jones-netflix-amazon-hulu-streaming-television>
Consider Hollywood’s superbad attempts so far at giving us superhero women to 
believe in. When it wasn’t being cheesy, the 1984 Supergirl movie was leering: 
the weird shower scene that lingers for longer than is comfortable being just 
one example. Understandably, it bombed at the box office. Fast-forward to 2004 
andHalle Berry’s turn as Catwoman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1276885,00.html>
 was an embarrassment of innuendos and weak dialogue (“Cats don’t come when 
they’re told,” Berry purrs at one point; if that doesn’t make you want to burn 
her silly leather bra, not much will). Just a year later,Jennifer Garner’s 
Elektra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,4267,1394763,00.html>
 – a spinoff from the equally limp Daredevil starring Ben Affleck – was a 
muddle and critically panned.

Elektra is now more than a decade old and, not counting Charlize Theron’s 2005 
spy assassin flick Æon Flux, also the last time a female comic-book superhero 
had her own film. Despite Marvel and DC movies’ Hulk-sized domination in recent 
years, studios have been wary about trying lead women again. One particular 
exchange between a Marvel and a Sony Pictures CEO, unearthed during 2014’s Sony 
hackstorm, highlighted the view of them as box office poison.Titled simply 
“Female movies” <https://wikileaks.org/sony/emails/emailid/121981>, top dog Ike 
Perlmutter had written to Michael Lynton and variously described these films as 
“very very bad” and “a disaster”.

“According to the people behind the camera, the reason Elektra and Catwoman 
did not do well was because they starred female superheroes. Which is such 
bullshit!” former Dexter showrunner and Twilight writer Melissa Rosenberg hoots 
with laughter. “They were just bad movies! How many bad movies die with male 
leads? We don’t say: ‘Hmm, well, you had a white male in the lead role…’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447929111167%2F011c504c-c2ac-4887-900f-737ee03823a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447929111167%2F011c504c-c2ac-4887-900f-737ee03823a7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Keeping up with the Joneses: Jessica Jones laying the smack down. Photograph: 
Myles Aronowitz 
In 2015, however, the tide is finally starting to turn. Rosenberg is behind 
Marvel’s new female-led TV seriesJessica Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jessica-jones>, and her thoughts are 
echoed by Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige. In an interview last year he 
said: “I very much believe that it’s unfair to say, ‘People don’t want to see 
movies with female heroes’, then list five movies that were not very good, 
therefore, people didn’t go to the movies because they weren’t good movies, 
versus [because] they were female leads.” He then reeled off a number of smart, 
successful films that point to a new and growing appetite for strong leading 
women, including The Hunger Games franchise, Frozen and Divergent, all of which 
have been released since Elektra. “These are all female-led movies,” Feige 
continued. “It can certainly be done.”

And suddenly, it is being done: women are muscling in on the superhero 
universe, especially on television. Of the DC and Marvel live-action (ie 
non-animated) series in the last 15 years, 27% had women in main roles. It 
doesn’t sound like much but consider that this year has brought with it three 
at the same time: Marvel’sAgent Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/agent-carter> on Fox UK, DC’s 
Supergirl on Sky1, and Marvel’s Jessica Jones on Netflix. All three shows 
recognise the world they’re coming into.

Agent Carter’s post-second world war setting is a vehicle to ridicule 
contemporary misogyny, with sassy US spy Peggy constantly surprising 
slack-jawed men when she reveals herself as neither the secretary nor the 
waitress (not much change there, then).The new Supergirl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/29/supergirl-review-shes-got-the-krypton-factor>
, meanwhile, bubbles with tween-friendly feminist references; in the pilot, the 
titular hero even worries her alter ego’s new name is “antifeminist”. Her boss, 
Cat, played by Calista Flockhart, raises an eyebrow. “I’m a girl. And your 
boss, and powerful and rich and hot and smart. So if you perceive Supergirl as 
anything less than excellent, isn’t the real problem...you?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72e2fde24106787f098807ef4e52145d7a3d144e%2F0_0_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72e2fde24106787f098807ef4e52145d7a3d144e%2F0_0_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
 Girl power: Calista Flockhart as Cat Grant and Melissa Benoist as Kara Danvers 
in Supergirl. Photograph: Warner 
And then there is Jessica Jones. Where Agent Carter is playful and 
tongue-in-cheek and Supergirl is warm and bright, Jess is a markedly modern 
superhero. Currently in early retirement, she wears a constant scowl, has a 
taste for cheap bourbon and enjoys sex unashamedly – a superhero for the Girls 
generation. Her storyline is anything but frothy, too: she has post-traumatic 
stress disorder after being psychologically tortured and manipulated by super 
villain Kilgrave (David Tennant), but she won’t abide therapy (“Like I’d waste 
time circle jerking with a bunch of whiners,” she sniffs).

Audiences have a double standard for female characters; they’re not allowed to 
be flawed, human, complex
Melissa Rosenberg 
“She’s kind of an arsehole,” Krysten Ritter, AKA Jessica Jones, says 
affectionately. “But that’s the beauty of Netflix; it is like a 13-hour movie 
and you spend it all in her company. [By the end] you can’t help liking her. 
She definitely is the best character that has been made available to me. It 
felt so much bigger than just being a cool part; this was a groundbreaking 
step.”

A few years earlier and a fully formed role like Jones probably wouldn’t have 
existed. “It’s a Madonna-whore thing,” explains Rosenberg. “Audiences have a 
double standard for female characters; they’re not allowed to be flawed, human, 
complex.” But since her time working in TV, spanning the best of 90s (Party Of 
Five, Ally McBeal) to 00s (The OC, Dexter), she’s seen characters such as Tony 
Soprano, Walter White – and, to a lesser extent, Nurse Jackie and The Good 
Wife, go by, all lauded for their knotty layers. Rosenberg knew that the world 
of superwomen needed their own version, too. The most important thing Marvel 
did for Jessica Jones, she says, is that “they allowed her to be ugly”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447929822515%2Fb3d818ea-e84f-480a-8c60-e424c76563b8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447929822515%2Fb3d818ea-e84f-480a-8c60-e424c76563b8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hayley Atwell as Peggy in Agent Carter. Photograph: Allstar 
Meanwhile, film is following the path being blazed on television. The first 
Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) film with a woman in a title role, Ant-Man And 
The Wasp, is due out in 2018 (it’s a lady Wasp); and the rumoured Jennifer 
Lawrence-starring Captain Marvel, in 2019, will be about Ms Marvel and not her 
male incarnation from the comics. DC’s Wonder Woman is finally making her debut 
on the big screen, 42 years after she first appeared on US TV, with Gal Gadot 
playing her first in 2016’sBatman v Superman: Dawn Of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2> and then in her own film the 
next year. Finally, the ensemble Suicide Squad film, due in 2016, includes four 
main females cast as supervillains.

Supergirl, superpowers and why they're not that super for women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/nov/09/supergirl-why-women-super-heroes-struggle>
Following the lead from the Thor comic, Marvel has even taken to reversing 
characters’ genders: the Ancient One, a Fu-Manchu-ish male in the Doctor 
Strange comics,will be played by Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/28/tilda-swinton-eyes-gender-swapped-mentor-role-in-marvels-doctor-strange>
 in the 2016 Doctor Strange film. Jessica Jones’s heavy-set, philandering male 
lawyer from the comic books is being played in the series by Carrie-Anne Moss: 
renamed Jeri, much less heavy, but just as adulterous with her female secretary.

The superhero sea change may also be to do with the increasing number of women 
behind the camera.A 2012 study by the Geena Davis Institute On Gender In Media 
<http://seejane.org/wp-content/uploads/full-study-gender-disparity-in-family-films-v2.pdf>
 found that having just one female writer on a script increased screen time for 
female characters by an average of 10%, and this is being reflected by the new 
wave.Wonder Woman <http://www.themarysue.com/wonder-woman-women/> and the 
all-female Ghostbusters reboot have made moves to hire as many women on their 
crews as possible, with the former being helmed by DC’s first female director, 
Patty Jenkins. The same has been done on Jessica Jones. “It was an aggressive 
effort,” Rosenberg says. “We brought female directors on, we made sure the 
writing room was diverse and that the cast was very equal.” (Three out of its 
six directors are female.)
Melissa McCarthy (@melissamccarthy) 
3 cheers to Ellen from all the remarkable women of #Ghostbusters 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Ghostbusters?src=hash>.When we stand together we 
are unstoppable!#GirlPower <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GirlPower?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/fEq7PpD78G <http://t.co/fEq7PpD78G>
 <https://twitter.com/melissamccarthy/status/636159256413212672> August 25, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/melissamccarthy/status/636159256413212672> 
Currently, men outnumber women five to one production roles; in 2014 women 
made up just 13% of directors and writers 
<http://womenintvfilm.sdsu.edu/research.html>. But the problem isn’t just men 
writing fewer female superheroes, Rosenberg says, it’s that they write them 
badly. “A white man is never defined by his whiteness and maleness,” continues 
Rosenberg, “whereas being female is treated as a defining facet.” Writers and 
producers treating women like “The Other”, she says, results in the same 
stereotypes again and again: femme fatales, coy virgins, stern battleaxes. 
“There are a great deal of things I am proud of in my career,” she continues, 
“and so many are things that did not end up on screen, things I stopped from 
happening. I can watch things I worked on and know, because I was in the room, 
a certain character did not say this or wear that.”

You don’t know what this means for women, we have been fighting for this
Krysten Ritter 
In fact, a dictionary-worth of terms exists to describe how unfairly women are 
treated in the superhero genre. There’sWomen in Refrigerators Syndrome 
<http://lby3.com/wir/index.html>, where female characters are killed off in a 
gruesome way – say, stuffed in a fridge – as a plot device to motivate male 
characters. There’sthe Smurfette Principle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1991/04/07/magazine/hers-the-smurfette-principle.html>: 
that there will always be only one woman on a team of men. And there’s the 
wonderfully namedSexy Lamp Test 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2013/06/20/kelly-sue-deconnick-talks-captain-marvel-pretty-deadly-and-the-sexy-lamp-test>
. Coined by comic book writer Kelly Sue DeConnick, it states that “If you can 
replace your female character with a sexy lamp and the story still basically 
works, maybe you need another draft.”

With the varied, more dimensional women that we’re starting to see, though, it 
finally feels as if the genre is recognising and reacting to these disparities. 
In 20 years, when we’re watching the 11th Avengers sequel, will we look back 
and laugh at how we once wrote films where cape-wearing journalists spun the 
world backwards to reverse time, but we couldn’t write a female character who 
wasn’t someone’s wife or mother?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447930145424%2F2ca3df10-6486-4f5f-8cc6-bbfe1a164d7e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20how%20the%20female%20superhero%20is%20finally%20taking%20flight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjessica-jones-agent-carter-supergirl-female-superhero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F19%2F1447930145424%2F2ca3df10-6486-4f5f-8cc6-bbfe1a164d7e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A bit of training: Jessica Jones. Photograph: Myles Aronowitz 
Even after being involved in the superhero business firsthand, Rosenberg is 
sceptical that her show is more than a one-off. She recalls being on a panel 
with Geena Davis, where they spoke about the excitement after Thelma & Louise 
came out in 1991. “This discussion was happening then, that Thelma & Louise was 
the start of more interesting roles for women. And then there wasn’t. It seems 
like every couple of years a film or TV show with complex female roles comes 
out and everyone is like: ‘Oh my god! This is successful!’ Then a bad one will 
come out and everyone says: ‘Well, itis a female role.’ Even with Jessica, 
Peggy and Supergirl on at the same time, all it takes is for one of us to bomb 
and it’ll be said: ‘You can’t have a female lead superhero’. Come back and ask 
me in 10 years and we’ll see where the dial is then.”

Agent Carter declassified: the key facts about Marvel’s 1940s spy caper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/10/agent-carter-declassified-the-key-facts-about-marvels-1940s-spy-caper>
Ritter, however, remains optimistic. She talks about how female comic-book 
fans have already begun donning Krysten-Ritter-as-Jessica-Jones costumes at 
conventions, perhaps the ultimate marker of a breakthrough superhero role. “I 
literally sentone fan’s picture 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/8d9W3co3jB/?taken-by=therealkrystenritter> to the 
heads of Marvel, saying: ‘Look! It’s real! My dream is happening!’” she 
enthuses. She has faith that Jessica Jones is the hero that young comic fans 
deserve.

“My acting teacher is in her late 60s and she was blown away by Jessica,” she 
continues. “She kept saying: ‘You don’t know what this means for women, we have 
been fighting for this and look, it’s here!’ I don’t know if it is a turning 
point, but I hope so. I don’t know what the response will be, but I know I felt 
a really responsibility to kill it.” She smacks her fist into her other hand 
with every word, and it makes you hope that those studios take notice.

Marvel’s Jessica Jones is on Netflix now; Supergirl airs Thursdays, 8pm, Sky1; 
Agent Carter returns on 24 January 2016, 9pm, Fox
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnWHUjuJ8zxE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnWHUjuJ8zxE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnWHUjuJ8zxE&media=> 