Who plays Freddy Krueger, the Elm Street franchise's deathless child-killing 
bogeyman?  Robert Englund  Robert Scotlund  Robert Irelund  Robert Wules And 
who wrote and directed the first Nightmare on Elm Street?  Sam Raimi  Sean S. 
Cunningham  John Carpenter  Wes Craven What colour is Freddy Krueger's famous 
striped jumper?  Red and black  Red and green  Orange and black  Orange and 
purple What kind of hat does he wear?  Trilby  Porkpie  Fedora  Tyrolean Where 
is Elm Street?  Shermer, Illinois  Haddonfield, Illinois  Sherwood, Ohio  
Springwood, Ohio What's the subtitle of A Nightmare on Elm Street 3?  Freddy's 
Revenge  The Dream Master  The Dream Child  Dream Warriors Who of these hasn't 
appeared in a Freddy Kreuger film?  Kelly Rowland  Mike Myers  Johnny Depp  
Roseanne Barr What was Amanda Kreuger's job? (That's Freddy's mum)  Nurse  Nanny
 Nun  Newsagent Who sang the theme to Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare?  Lou 
Reed  Iggy Pop  David Bowie  Lydia Lunch In Freddy vs Jason, who wins?  Freddy  
Jason  It's a draw  You gotâ€¦  Terrific score! You're reward: the closing titles 
to Freddy's Dead, with Iggy Pop on vocals: <iframe width="350" height="197" 
src="//www.youtube.com/embed/pFhd4MnWiZc" frameborder="0" 
allowfullscreen></iframe>  Pretty good score. Your reward is this clip of 
Robert Englund explaining the origins of Freddy's voice (try a better score for 
a better clip): <iframe width="350" height="197" 
src="//www.youtube.com/embed/QbUg-HH3RpI" frameborder="0" 
allowfullscreen></iframe>  Not a great score. That only earns you this 
inexplicable clip of Freddy Krueger singing Paramore (try a better score for a 
better clip): <iframe width="350" height="263" 
src="//www.youtube.com/embed/7pV3yB6Q7lk" frameborder="0" 
allowfullscreen></iframe>  Challenge your friends Submit answers  