
“Are you rushing or are you dragging?” barks the hard-boiled conductor during 
a tense early scene from the upcoming US dramaWhiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/dec/09/the-10-best-films-of-2014-no-4-whiplash>
. Good timing is crucial for this taskmaster, and woe betide the drummer who 
dares to dawdle or to forge ahead. Falling behind just a hair holds everyone 
up, but jumping the gun in your eagerness to turn the page and find out what 
comes next inevitably causes problems of its own.

Whiplash, it turns out, is one of a number of Oscar contenders tangentially 
concerned with the management of time. Elsewhere on the starting grid we 
discover Alejandro González Iñárritu’sBirdman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/birdman> (which affects to hold its breath 
during a single, uninterrupted take), Richard Linklater’sBoyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/21/sundance-boyhood-review-richard-linklater>
 (which unwinds at leisure over a 12-year period) andThe Theory of Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/07/theory-of-everything-review-hawking-eddie-redmayne>
 (in that Eddie Redmayne plays the author of A Brief History of Time). But it 
is the piledriving Whiplash that makes the issue feel most urgent. Miles 
Teller’s desperate, rushing drummer sets the tempo for the film year to come.

Is January the best time to preview 2015, or should we mail this article back 
to 2012, when it might have been more relevant? When it comes to the movies, 
we’ve all been guilty of rushing, of getting ahead of ourselves, of gorging 
ourselves on the starters before the main course has been cooked. The future is 
now. Possibly it has already been partially consumed in the form of teaser 
trailers, exclusive stills and excitable nuggets of casting news and set 
reports. Over the past few months, for instance, I’ve seen so much content 
about the next Star Wars outing that it is almost a surprise to note that 
principal photography only finished in November. To all intents and purposes, 
the film does not exist. And yet already it feels like a foregone conclusion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffilms-of-2015-trailers-teasers-worth-the-wait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353895975%2F5649b9d3-3f74-413f-aaff-a7b1f3ecc02f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Films%20of%202015%3A%20they%E2%80%99re%20worth%20the%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffilms-of-2015-trailers-teasers-worth-the-wait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Films%20of%202015%3A%20they%E2%80%99re%20worth%20the%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffilms-of-2015-trailers-teasers-worth-the-wait%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353895975%2F5649b9d3-3f74-413f-aaff-a7b1f3ecc02f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Press shots have been released for Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens, 
but the film doesn’t hit cinemas until the end of 2015. Photograph: 
Allstar/Disney/Lucasfilm 
Thank heavens, therefore, that the opening months of 2015 provide us with some 
tangible pleasures. January alone sees the UK release of a brace of potent US 
crime dramas in Bennett Miller’s Foxcatcher and JC Chandor’s A Most Violent 
Year. Best of all, we have Paul Thomas Anderson’s freewheelingInherent Vice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/05/inherent-vice-review-joaquin-phoenix-paul-thomas-anderson>
, a film that makes a jubilant virtue out of chaos and confusion.

Jump forward slightly further and we alight on further bounty. Kornél 
Mundruczó’sWhite God 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/19/cannes-2014-review-white-god-dog-horror>
 is an antic parable about a canine revolution in modern Budapest. Peter 
Strickland’s The Duke of Burgundy swans in to provide delirious art-house 
erotica, while Roy Andersson’sA Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/02/a-pigeon-sat-on-a-branch-reflecting-on-existence-review-roy-andersson-venice-film-festival>
 rustles up a deadpan metaphysical burlesque featuring two travelling salesmen 
who just “want to help people have fun”. I would unstintingly recommend that 
you see every one of these films, and you may already have done so, since they 
all played at festivals during 2014. These movies, in other words, have been 
screened and reviewed and chewed over at length. They are what Donald Rumsfeld 
might refer to as the “known knowns”.

Rushing further through the year, we eventually reach the “unknown knowns”; 
those films that we know are there but have yet to spot. These include Thomas 
Vinterberg’s version ofFar from the Madding Crowd 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/watch-far-from-the-madding-crowd-trailer-carey-mulligan-1201363196/>
, Ben Wheatley’s High-Rise, Sacha Baron Cohen’s hooligan comedy Grimsby and Sam 
Taylor-Wood’s adaptation ofFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey>. The august lions of US 
cinema are represented by Martin Scorsese’s missionary drama Silence, Ron 
Howard’s disaster epic In the Heart of the Sea and the espionage thriller St 
James Place, directed by Steven Spielberg from a Coen brothers script. 
Elsewhere, the multiplexes are poised to throw open their doors to receive the 
likes of Jurassic World, Ant-Man and Avengers: Age of Ultron. Extensive details 
on these unseen delicacies can be found on thousands of fan sites.

If we are guilty of rushing, who is setting the pace? Undeniably, journalists 
must shoulder some of the blame – hurrying to steal a march on their rivals and 
thereby spoiling the fun for everyone else. But let’s not rush to judgment: the 
hacks are at least aided by the diehard fans constantly clamouring for an 
inside track, and by the studio marketing departments that spew all manner of 
preview content in a surreal, pre-emptive attempt to fashion a word-of-mouth 
hit out of an unfinished film. All these tribes are racing one another, at high 
speed, towards the point where the anticipation of a film becomes more 
important than the simple thrill of discovery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffilms-of-2015-trailers-teasers-worth-the-wait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419354171647%2F5f3d439f-bad2-4f1a-abe8-34fcb2d9bea6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Films%20of%202015%3A%20they%E2%80%99re%20worth%20the%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffilms-of-2015-trailers-teasers-worth-the-wait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Films%20of%202015%3A%20they%E2%80%99re%20worth%20the%20wait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F01%2Ffilms-of-2015-trailers-teasers-worth-the-wait%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419354171647%2F5f3d439f-bad2-4f1a-abe8-34fcb2d9bea6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Theory of Everything, a biopic about Stephen Hawking starring Felicity 
Jones (left) and Eddie Redmayne, is released on 1 January. Photograph: 
Allstar/Working Title Films/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Is there room in the dock for a fresh set of culprits? In launching their 
cyber-attack on Sony Pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/20/north-korea-proposes-joint-inquiry-us-sony-pictures-hack>
, the self-styled Guardians of Peace provided a backstage melodrama that could 
put Birdman to shame. Like Iñárritu, they pulled back the curtain on an 
exploded set of backbiting and gossip and works in progress that should really 
not have been seen. Yet, at the risk of blaming the victim, the Sony Pictures 
hacking scandal was merely making hay from a condition that existed already. 
Put bluntly, if there were not such a desperate desire to see (the 
then-unreleased) Annie or the Oscar-tipped Still Alice, or to peruse the first 
pass at a script for the next James Bond movie, then the cyber-attack would 
have risked falling flat.

Project yourself still further into the future. Alarmingly, one finds that the 
schedules are filled. Nowadays, the studios talk in terms of “mega-franchises” 
and “movie universes”, and their development slates extend for years. If you 
like planning ahead, here are some dates for the diary: X-Men: Apocalypse is 
booked for US release on 27 May 2016, The Justice League Part One for 17 
November 2017; we must wait until May 2018 to see Avengers: Infinity War – Part 
1, and a further two months to witness The Amazing Spider-Man 3. Just typing 
those titles, I swear I felt my anticipation levels peak, plateau and start 
sliding south.

All of which makes the existence of Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/boyhood> seem more extraordinary still. Like 
the big studios with their mega-franchises, director Richard Linklater mapped 
out his project years and years in advance. Unlike them, he was largely content 
to keep his creation under wraps. There were no leaks, no drip-fed images, no 
updates from the set. Instead, he was able to work on in quiet, in stages, 
banking on the assumption that nobody would die and that the world would still 
turn – and that, all said and done, it is the journey that matters.

“How do we plan for our own futures?” Linklater wondered idly last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/26/boyhood-movie-richard-linklater-ageing-time>
. “You do your best, but you live in the present. All you can do is keep 
marching towards it and adjust yourself as the reality shifts.” On the cusp of 
the new year, I’m taking those words to heart. There is no point in rushing, or 
setting your clock by the previews. The films of 2015 sit just over the 
horizon. Some of them will be great and some of them will be bad; all of them 
will be here in their own, sweet time.
 