
Salaries in the financial sector are rising faster than any other industry, 
figures have revealed.

In just 12 months, average gross weekly earnings of full-time employees rose 
by more than 11% in the finance, insurance and real estate industry. The 
figures, released by theOffice of National Statistics (ONS) 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/publications/re-reference-tables.html?newquery=*&newoffset=0&pageSize=25&edition=tcm%3A77-254386>
 last week, show staff were taking home an average of £783 every week.

Although there has been a rise in women's wages in the sector over the past 
year, men working in finance are still being paid more than 30% more, the 
figures suggest. Average female earnings in the sector increased by 17%, to 
£622 a week. But men's wages climbed to £902 – up 10% on last year.

The news comes despite unprecedented criticism of the City's bonus culture and 
it's role in the economic crisis. The banking industry came under fire again 
this month after the chairman of the Royal Bank of Scotlanddescribed its chief 
executive's £1.1m salary as "modest" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/feb/11/rbs-chief-executive-salary-bonuses>
. Stephen Hester is set to receive £780,000 next month, which is part of a 
deferred bonus.

Meanwhile, in several sectors, workers saw their weekly earnings fall. Female 
construction workers and male agricultural workers were among the worst 
affected, with their average earnings dropping by 11% and 9% respectively.

Luke Hildyard of the High Pay Centre <http://highpaycentre.org/> said: 
"Soaring pay in the financial sector has been one of the biggest causes of the 
growth in inequality over the past decade. With the economy stagnating, 
arguments of a 'trickle down effect' have little credibility – only a tiny 
super-rich elite have benefitted from the explosion of bankers' pay, while 
everyone else has to put up with wage freezes and rising prices. It isn't good 
for the country.

"If the people benefitting from these unjustifiable differences in earnings 
are unrepresentative of the UK as a whole – with women, for example, hugely 
under-represented in the financial services sector – that only increases the 
need for action."

In November, the ONS's annual salary survey – a comprehensive study of hours 
and earnings – found that the gender pay gap had fallen below 10% for the first 
time in 15 years. But in apoll of 1,000 working women last year 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/role-models-gender-barrier>, two-thirds said 
that they had or expected to face multiple barriers during their career 
lifecycle.

Efforts to make boardrooms more equal have seen some success. The Davies 
report in 2011recommended that FTSE 350 companies increase the percentage of 
women in top jobs to 25% by 2015 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/12560121>. Since 
the report, the percentage of female FTSE 100 directors hasrisen from 12.5% to 
17.7% <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jan/06/overlooked-underpaid>.

November's salary survey revealed that average full-time earnings for men was 
£546, compared to £449 for women. It also found that Blackpool was the 
worst-paid area in the UK, with a median salary of just £19,245. Westminster 
was the highest, with a median annual gross salary of £42,924.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 