
It may be an extreme way to kiss goodbye to a dream home – but a growing 
number of Americans are torching their properties when they find themselves 
overwhelmed by sub-prime mortgages.

Insurance investigators around the country have flagged scores of cases of 
houses going up in flames just days before bailiffs are due to cross the 
threshold.

Take, for example, the case of Sheryl Christman – a 38-year-old truck driver's 
wife from Gaines Township, Michigan. She was sentenced to five year's probation 
and 1,000 hours of community service for setting her $150,000 house ablaze just 
three days before it was due to be repossessed.
The Coalition Against Insurance Fraud, <http://www.insurancefraud.org/> a 
group speaking for insurers, regulators and consumers, says there are worrying 
signs of a trend.

"There are warning signals of a potential spike in arson by desperate 
homeowners who are looking for an insurance payout to bail them out of 
foreclosure," says spokesman James Quiggle. "A small but growing number of 
arrests are popping up around the US."

Some cases are deeply nasty. A Houston man, Sam White, was accused by 
prosecutors of spray-painting racial slurs and swastikas on the walls of his 
own homes to make it look as if a fire was racially motivated.

In Indiana, meanwhile, 31-year-old Christina Snyder asked a neighbour to slap 
her around, bind her hands and write "whore" on her clothing to give the 
impression that a house fire was set by a rapist – when, in fact, she was 
plotting to set it herself to avoid foreclosure.

The worst hit state in the sub-prime mortgage crisis is California and 
officials there say that home arson isn't the only problem - car fires are also 
on the increase as cash-strapped consumers struggle with auto loans.

JC Weydert, assistant district attorney in the state's central San Joaquin 
Valley, toldthe Los Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/news/local/la-fi-arson21apr21,0,2577744.story> that 
local auto arson had doubled in three years: "The honest fact is that there are 
more cases than resources to handle them."

In some cases, car owners are dumping their vehicles in the desert. The LA 
Times reported that one couple from the Sacramento area were arrested for 
driving their Nissan pickup truck into a river and setting fire to their Jeep 
to avoid a $600 monthly payment.

"As the economy turns south and times get a bit rash, otherwise reasonable 
people will do unreasonable things to try to get out of repayments," says Tully 
Lehman, a spokesman for the Insurance Information Network of California.

In general, arson isn't a very clever plan. Investigators are likely to look 
hard at heavily indebted owners whose property suddenly bursts into flames. And 
in the case of houses, The Coalition Against Insurance Fraud points out that 
many mortgages cover land, rather than just a house, so the loss of a structure 
doesn't mean that repayments automatically cease.

 "You're still in debt. Where are you going to live? How much are you going to 
sell a charred hole for?" Quiggle asks. "You're also pitted against 
investigators who are going to delve into every aspect of your finances and 
your life."

The IMF's managing director, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, this week suggested that 
the worst of the global financial crisis could be behind us. But that doesn't 
square with the impact in middle America – RealtyTrac reported that home 
foreclosure filings were up 65% during April compared with last year. Roughly 
one in 50 households are facing repossession and the figure might be higher 
were it not for a backlog of paperwork as courthouse clerks struggle to cope 
with an avalanche of applications.

All manner of oddities have emerged from the sub-prime crisis. Californians 
are worried 
<http://www.visaliatimesdelta.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080514/NEWS01/805140316>
 that stagnant swimming pools in the backyards of abandoned homes are breeding 
grounds for mosquitoes which spread West Nile virus.

In Florida, empty bank-owned properties are proving to be fertile nesting 
grounds for record numbers of honeybees 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/20/us/20bees.html?partner=rssnyt&emc=rss> – 
including newly arrived Africanised "killer bees".

As for arson, even those who ought to know better are accused of being 
tempted. A grand jury last monthindicted the wife of Texas supreme court 
justice David Medina for arson and criminal mischief 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/01/us/01brfs-WIFEOFJUSTIC_BRF.html?ref=us>, 
alleging that she burned down the couple's home and caused $200,000 of damage 
to neighbours' property. Medina denies the charges. Reports suggest that the 
couple had refinanced the property three times and had been served with a 
foreclosure notice.
 