
The Quattro's been fired up, Keeley Hawes's Alex Drake has gone heavy on the 
blue eyeliner and Philip Glenister's Gene Hunt is still very, very angry 
indeed. Yep,BBC1's 1980s set detective series Ashes to Ashes 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/ashestoashes/> is back for a second series. But what did 
you - and the critics - make of its return?

Brian Viner in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/reviews/last-nights-television--ashes-to-ashes-bbc1-the-omid-djalili-show-bbc1-stewart-lees-comedy-vehicle-bbc2-1671592.html>
 says the drama never hit the heights of its time-travelling predecessor, Life 
on Mars.

What
 "Watching Ashes to Ashes is rather like watching a drama about a New Jersey 
Mafia family called the Altos; it never quite hits the same sublime notes as 
the original." 
Viner said the opening episode's plotline about a Soho murder was "intriguing 
enough". But as for the strange voices that Drake kept hearing - offering clues 
to the fact that she is two decades away from where she really should be - 
Viner reckons he'd "seen episodes of Scooby Doo that spooked me more, and 
indeed episodes of Scooby Doo that were less silly".
 "The time travelling element has become an annoying distraction. All that 
said, there are some delightful touches - I love the raincoat belts perennially 
trapped in the car doors - and Glenister never lets a good line go to waste." 
Andrew Billen in the Times 
<http://entertainment.timesonline.co.uk/tol/arts_and_entertainment/tv_and_radio/article6135004.ece>
 was even less impressed. He thought the plotline was "dull and sordid", with 
Hawes "a naturally funny actor [who] still looks uncomfortable".

The mystery with the first series of Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashes-to-ashes>, he said, was why it 
was so weak.
 "In their rush, the writers, it seemed, forgot that to make the outrageous 
time travel plot worth caring about you had to make the action within it as 
credible as possible while allowing the dialogue to be as fantastically 
elevated as they liked." 
He said there was "evidence of corrective action" in last night's second 
series opener, but he remains far from convinced. Like Viner, he liked the 
period detail, though, including a parody of 1980s cop show Dempsey & 
Makepeace, Russell Harty's chatshow and Thatcher talking about the Falklands. 
Oh, and those raincoat belts again. They made quite an impression.

Matt Baylis in the Daily Express has had enough as well.
 "Once - or even twice - with John Simm and the Seventies, this was quite a 
hoot. A further Eighties update, with the bird from Spooks, and a by-now very 
well-thumbed yarn about bent policemen in Soho, is just about the final Amen.
"Except that it probably won't be - because still we'll have the early 
Nineties, and then the Noughties. So it's more fantasy nostalgia about the 
not-really-very-distant past, and its hilarious haircuts. Lord, spare me."

Keith Watson in freesheet Metro 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/metrolife/article.html?Ashes_To_Ashes_has_still_got_the_magic&in_article_id=627106&in_page_id=9&in_a_source=>
 begged to differ. After a disappointing first series which "turned out to be 
as insubstantial as a smoke-ring", the second run began with "some of the Life 
on Mars magic".
 "Gone is the laboured attempt at sexual chemistry between Hunt and Drake 
which turned their every scene into a Carry On parody. Back comes the gripping 
combination of time-trippy thrills and pop-tuned nostalgia that got us hooked 
in the first place. Soundtracking a storyline about a policeman's death by 
suspected prostitute-assisted auto-erotic asphyxiation with the jaunty chords 
of Haircut 100's Love Plus One couldn't help but put a bounce in your jukebox.
"But if it's to have true staying power, Ashes To Ashes has to be more than a 
mere TV spin on Now That's What I Call The '80s. Woven in-between the knowing 
pop culture references ('as the great Charlie Rich once said,' observes Hunt, 
'no one knows what goes on behind closed doors') there were hints of a darker 
subtext. Could Hunt be bent (as in corrupt, what were you thinking?) and about 
to throw Drake to the misogynist wolves?"

Sian Brewis in the Leicester Mercury 
<http://www.thisisleicestershire.co.uk/entertainment/TV-review-Ashes-Ashes/article-919060-detail/article.html>
 got a bit fed up with the constant 1980s references and time-travelling plot.
 "This time, thank God, there's no evil clown lurking about. Now it's all 
police corruption and a scary stalker from the future who is out to get Alex 
... Keeley Hawes [as Alex] got a pasting for the first series, but thankfully 
she's stopped all that moody moping about.
"It can be kind of obsessive, this sci-fi stuff. Once you begin trying to spot 
references, they are all over the place. It made my head hurt, so I just 
stopped trying to keep up and enjoyed Gene Hunt's interview technique."

The Guardian's Lucy Mangan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/apr/21/ashes-to-ashes-tv-review>
, in an online review, was also not impressed, either by the script that 
"frequently clunks like an overworked Audi Quattro as it strains at every turn 
to remind us ... that we are in the eighties", or the "tissue-paper thin" plot.
 "It's – um – it's not very good, is it? I confess, this is my first time with 
Ashes to Ashes – I missed the first series, and almost the whole of Life on 
Mars before that – but as I understand it, this should mean that I am better 
disposed to like it as it stands. It does not suffer by comparison with the 
John Simm-Philip Glenister masterwork ... It does, however, suffer simply on 
its own terms."  