
It shouldn’t be a surprise that a third series of The Trip has been 
commissioned, mainly because it looks as if it’s the best job in the entire 
world. You go somewhere nice. You eat amazing food. You spend two thirds of 
your time talking like Michael Caine and the final third forlornly inspecting 
your reflection for traces of your lost soul, and that’s about it.

The Trip leaves BBC2 and heads to Spain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/15/the-trip-heads-to-spain-steve-coogan-rob-brydon>
It’s just a shame that barely anyone will watch the new series, because it’s 
not going to be on the BBC any more. Instead, Sky Atlantic has nabbed the 
rights as part of its continued Steve Coogan land grab. It’s already lockedAlan 
Partridge <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge> behind its 
paywall, and now it’s got The Trip, too.

With the government refusing to stop nipping at the BBC’s heels, this is 
something that viewers should probably start getting used to. The corporation 
is frantically ditching shows and sporting events –even entire channels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2016/feb/14/bbc3-the-tv-channel-thats-now-an-online-first-destination>
 – to prove that the licence fee is still value for money. A series like The 
Trip, which does, at times, come off like a publicly funded jolly for a bunch 
of millionaires, was never going to make the cut in this climate.

And this is disappointing, obviously, because Coogan is in the middle of a 
breathtaking resurgence. He’s an Oscar-nominated filmmaker now, he has made his 
peace with Alan Partridge, and – as long as he’s given enough control over his 
projects – he rarely puts a foot wrong. Mid-Morning Matters might even be the 
best vehicle that Alan Partridge has ever appeared in. But it’s being snuck out 
onSky Atlantic <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic>, so it’s 
destined to be seen only by a minuscule band of relatively wealthy die-hards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fthe-trip-sky-atlantic-steve-coogan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b8bbb4b238c4694ee21819b7abcf4980e93f46d%2F0_2055_6732_4040%2F6732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Alan%20Partridge%2C%20now%20The%20Trip%20%E2%80%93%20Sky's%20Steve%20Coogan%20land%20grab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fthe-trip-sky-atlantic-steve-coogan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Alan%20Partridge%2C%20now%20The%20Trip%20%E2%80%93%20Sky%27s%20Steve%20Coogan%20land%20grab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fthe-trip-sky-atlantic-steve-coogan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b8bbb4b238c4694ee21819b7abcf4980e93f46d%2F0_2055_6732_4040%2F6732.jpg>
 Coogan as Alan Partridge for Mid-Morning Matters. Photograph: Colin Hutton/Sky 
TV 
If Coogan can’t get people to watch Sky Atlantic with a beloved cultural icon 
like Partridge, The Trip will be an even harder sell. A gloomy, deliberately 
slow exploration of middle-age that is primarily told through endless Roger 
Moore impersonations, and stars the bloke out of those awful cruise ship ads, 
doesn’t exactly scream mass appeal. There’s a sense that The Trip was a 
discovered show, that people stumbled across it because it was given a plum 
spot on a terrestrial channel. Out on the fringes of Sky Atlantic, where people 
wouldn’t even watch Mad Men, it’s likely to only be seen by people who already 
enjoy it. If a quiet little show like this wants to build its audience, it’s 
going to have its work cut out.

Best TV of 2014: No 5 – The Trip to Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/17/best-tv-of-2014-no-5-the-trip-to-italy>
Hopefully, whatever plan Sky has for The Trip will pay off because, at its 
best, there’s really nothing else like it. The first series in particular was 
as close to perfect as anything I’ve seen for years. It came at a time when 
Coogan was struggling with a disappointing Hollywood career, the overbearing 
legacy of Alan Partridge and his co-star Rob Brydon’s rapid ascent to fame. All 
this came out in the wash, which gave the series a genuine air of melancholy. 
Nobody can ever say how autobiographical it really was (in fact, picking apart 
fiction from real life was part of the fun) but it still managed to resonate in 
an incredibly authentic way.

Admittedly, the second series was a bit of a directionless mess, thanks in 
part to the decision to let Brydon do most of the emotional legwork. The Trip 
is still a show worth getting excited about, though – but only if you’re one of 
the lucky few with the means to watch it.
 