
Alexandra Harris's Romantic Moderns is unashamedly academic and it deals with 
the difficult subject of Englishness. It would seem, one judge remarked, to be 
a counterintuitivewinner of the Guardian first book award 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/dec/01/guardian-first-book-award-romantic-moderns>
. But the first print run sold out within a month of publication and it got the 
second highest overall score from the Waterstone's reading groups involved in 
the judging. Something interesting is clearly happening, but what?

When I first spotted Romantic Moderns 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/sep/25/romantic-moderns-alexandra-harris> 
in a dowdy proof way before publication I was reminded of the moment in The 
Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, when the thaw sets in and the entire 
landscape begins to change in ways that are only discernible from the sound of 
dripping water. It's the job of prizes to reflect the drip of change and I 
think this year's prizes have shown that the literary landcape is shifting in 
profound ways.

You only have to look at the novels on this year's first book longlist 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/guardianfirstbookaward> – as on the Booker 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booker-prize> – to see that literary fiction 
has a new spring in its step. But change, and the hunger for it, is strongest 
in non-fiction. The judges of the Costa biography prize more or less turned 
their backs on conventional biography. At the Samuel Johnson prize cermony in 
the summer, I was buttonholed by a couple of trustees who were worried that the 
leading award for non-fiction was being hijacked by a pursuit of populism that 
didn't necessarily privilege the best literature.

For a variety of reasons – reduced publishing advances, more cautious 
commissioning, the stranglehold of an increasingly centralised marketplace on 
what is seen as sellable – non-fiction publishing has been getting safer. And 
in becoming safer, it's become both more conservative and more superficial.

It was in this context that three debuts caught my eye – Romantic Moderns, 
Kathryn Schulz's Being Wrong 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/aug/28/being-wrong-kathryn-schulz-review> 
andBomber County by Daniel Swift 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/aug/21/bomber-county-daniel-swift>. All 
three were some time off publication, and reading the pictureless proof of 
Romantic Moderns, in particular, was a bit like trying to extrapolate from a 
toothless toddler to the beautiful adult she would one day become.

But all three had the excitement of writers who had dared – and had been 
licensed to – follow their own curiosity wherever it led. Bomber County 
movingly places the death of Swift's own grandfather in the context of the 
poetry of the second world war. Schulz's meditation on error orchestrates 
anecdote, scholarship and research into fascinating new harmonies, andRomantic 
Moderns <https://www.theguardian.com/books/romantic-moderns> connects painters, 
writers, cooks and even florists into a wholly original reading of the English 
response to modernism.

It's surely no coincidence that two of the writers – Harris and Swift – are 
academics, whose books come out of their research. It's also significant that 
two of them – Romantic Moderns and Being Wrong – are published by independent 
presses.

In the end, Bomber County didn't make the shortlist, though one judge did put 
it top, and it's had a strong showing in our FBA twitter chat group. And I'm 
not saying that Romantic Moderns was a shoe-in - it's a mark of a buzzy prize 
when all the shortlisted books have their champions. But, as chair, I didn't 
need to use my casting vote.

The important story of this year's prize is that difficult, unclassifiable 
books can win both prizes and readers provided they are good enough. It's not 
only patronising, but culturally impoverishing to underestimate the 
intelligence, curiosity and discrimination of readers who are given the 
opportunity to engage with them. And they may even sell well too.

• Romantic Moderns by Alexandra Harris is available for £14.95 (RRP £19.95) 
with free UK p&p from the Guardian Bookshop. Call 0330 333 6846 or visit
guardianbookshop.co.uk <http://guardianbookshop.co.uk>.
 