
The US congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords> has released the first 
photographs of herself since being shot in the head in Tucson in January.

Giffords posted two images showing her smiling and with her hair cropped short 
on herFacebook page on Sunday 
<http://www.facebook.com/GabrielleGiffords#!/media/set/?set=a.10150211167452194.310758.96491952193&comments=1>
.

She was seriously injured in the Arizona shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona-shooting>, in which six people 
were killed and 13 others injured on 8 January.

Since then, the only images the public has seen of her came in grainy footage 
taken as she boarded a plane to Florida to watch her astronaut husband, Mark 
Kelly, launch into space on the shuttle Endeavour on 27 April.
 The second image of Gabrielle Giffords posted on her Facebook page. 
Photograph: P K Weis/AP 
The Facebook pictures, which reveal no obvious scarring and only slight skin 
colouration on the side of her head, inspired more than 800 of her Facebook 
friends to post supportive messages in just two hours.

"Wow! I saw her at the very end of March, and even then, Gabby was all there, 
her smile, her personality. And she looks even better now," wrote Linda Lopez, 
anArizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> state senator.

"I think people are going to be very happy to see how great she looks. For 
someone who's undergone what she's endured, it's really something. I feel 
relieved. She looks beautiful."

Giffords has been in a Houston rehabilitation facility since two weeks after 
the shooting. The images were taken by the photojournalist PK Weis, on 17 May, 
the day before Giffords had cranioplasty, during which doctors repaired her 
skull, finally freeing her from a protective helmet.

Weis, who has known Giffords for more than a decade, said: "It was very 
inspiring to see how much she had recovered in four and a half months. I was 
excited to see her, and to see her smile."

In an interview with the Arizona Republic 
<http://www.azcentral.com/news/articles/2011/06/09/20110609gabrielle-giffords-health-issues-revealed.html>
, published on Thursday, Giffords' chief of staff, Pia Carusone, said the 
congresswoman's limited ability to speak means she communicates mainly through 
facial expressions and hand gestures.

"She is borrowing upon other ways of communicating. Her words are back more 
and more now, but she's still using facial expressions as a way to express â€“ 
pointing, gesturing," Carusone said.

"Add it all together and she's able to express the basics of what she wants or 
needs. But, when it comes to a bigger and more complex thought that requires 
words, that's where she's had the trouble."

Jared Lee Loughner, 22, has pleaded not guilty to charges stemming from the 
shooting andhas been declared incompetent to stand trial 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/may/26/jared-lee-loughner-gabrielle-giffords>
.

He will return to court on 21 September, when a judge will review again 
whether he understands the 49 charges against him.

Prosecutors said they hoped the trial would resume, but legal experts say it 
is possible that Loughner, a schizophrenic, will never be found competent and 
could remain in a psychiatric facility indefinitely.
 