
US singer Ariana Grande <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariana-grande> has 
made British chart history by becoming the first artist to have a No 1 single 
based on both sales and streaming.

It is the first time songs played on streaming services such as Spotify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify>, Deezer, Napster, O2 Tracks, 
Xbox Music and Sony's Music Unlimited have counted towards the chart rankings 
alongside physical and digital sales, the Official Charts Company said.

The 21-year-old singer's hit Problem featuring Iggy Azalea tops the charts 
with a combined "chart sales" figure of 113,000. With 100 streams counting as a 
single purchase, the number of plays from streaming sites made up 6% of her 
success in topping the charts, with 712,000 audio streams, the Official Charts 
Company said. Grande also pulled in 106,000 sales. On average, the streaming 
contribution to this week's top 40 singles was just over 20%.

Grande said: "I'm so happy. Yay."

Martin Talbot, chief executive of the Official Charts Company, said: "This is 
a big week for the official singles chart â€“ and we are delighted that it is 
such a big week for them too."

Former X Factor star Ella Henderson is at number two with her debut track 
Ghost. The single has been streamed over a million times in the last seven days.

Following his performance at last weekend's Glastonbury festival, newcomer 
George Ezra climbs two places to number three with Budapest.

Ed Sheeran is at number four with Sing. This was the most streamed track of 
the week having notched up 1.32 million plays.

All 12 tracks from the standard version of his chart-topping album X appear in 
today's top 100 official chart thanks to streaming.

He has also managed to hold on to the number one spot on the official album 
chart, overhauling 5 Seconds Of Summer who were out in front a few days ago. 
Ezra's album Wanted On Voyage is at number three.

It is now the UK's fastest selling album of 2014, selling 182,000 copies 
during its opening week. It sold an additional 93,000 in the last seven days, 
bringing its tally to 275,000.

Only Coldplay's album Ghost Stories, followed by Paolo Nutini's Caustic Love 
and Ellie Goulding's Halcyon, have sold more.

Sheeran told OfficialCharts.com: "Just heard the news that my album is at 
number one again this week. And to hear that every track from it is doing so 
well on streaming is great too. Thank you to everyone that's been enjoying it, 
however you're doing so."
 