
Cynics might suggest that you can’t tell much about a movie from its trailer. 
Yet last year’s promo for Marvel’s Guardians of the Galaxy, with its 
irresistible Blue Swede soundtrack and smart riff on the famous The Usual 
Suspects lineup sequence, proved a masterful example of the form and completely 
transformed expectations for the barmy cosmic superhero tale. James Gunn’s 
nutty little confection went on to make more money than Superman reboot Man of 
Steel at the global box office, a spectacular feat for a film about a bunch of 
little-known multi-coloured space weirdos.

Now comes the debut trailer for Marvel’s Ant-Man and, if Guardians of the 
Galaxy needed help to turn around public perceptions, this one surely requires 
one of the finest trailers ever seen in the history of Hollywood.Firing the 
fabulous Edgar Wright as director after more than half a decade of development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/16/ant-man-kevin-feige-rejects-marvel-criticism-over-edgar-wright-exit>
, only to replace him with Yes Man’s Peyton Reed, has created spectacular 
negative buzz. And given that context, I’m afraid our first look at Paul Rudd 
as the diminutive superhero simply fails to stand tall.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxInh3VhAWs8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxInh3VhAWs8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxInh3VhAWs8&media=>
 The Ant-Man trailer 
We see Michael Douglas as Dr Hank Pym, the original Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man> in the comics, explaining to Rudd’s 
petty criminal Scott Lang that he’s about to get a second chance as the titular 
hero. It’s pitched as a stirring speech set up perfectly for Lang to harpoon 
all that portentous tension by asking if the name is set in stone. But the 
Guardians trailer already pulled a similar self-referential trick when Chris 
Pratt’s Star Lord discovered nobody had ever heard of him - and produced far 
more laughs.

The rest of the rather low-key, low-energy trailer largely sees Rudd 
rollicking around the screen as Ant-Man, complete with trusty insect steed and 
shockingly unimpressive costume, which to me looks likes something from Doctor 
Who. It is utterly lacking in the full-blooded, warm-hearted razzamatazz of its 
predecessor.

Screenwriter Adam McKay (Anchorman) has admitted he rewrote the original 
screenplay by Wright and Joe Cornish in just six to eight weeks with the help 
of Rudd. “We just shaped the whole thing, we just tried to streamline it, make 
it cleaner, make it a little bigger, a little more aggressive, make it funnier 
in places – we just basically did a rewrite,”he told Collider last year 
<http://collider.com/ant-man-script-changes-adam-mckay-paul-rudd/#wUelBXHiUsmGShES.99>
, adding: “Edgar had a really good script. But we just had a blast, and Rudd 
was just so much fun to write with.”

If Wright and Cornish’s screenplay was so great in the first place, why did it 
need rewriting? The British pair have been reduced to a story credit on the 
final movie, and you have to worry that the Ant-Man that finally hits the big 
screen is going to be a dramatically diminished version of what it might once 
have been. Let’s hope this is one occasion when the trailer really doesn’t tell 
the full story.
 