
If Andy Murray is looking for chinks in the armour of the world's greatest 
player going into today'sAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final then he could do 
worse than take a look back at something Roger Federer said in the aftermath of 
his five-set defeat by Juan Martín Del Potro in the final of last year's US 
Open. As he was by Rafael Nadal here at the beginning of 2009, Federer was 
beaten in five sets in a grand slam final, strangely fading away in the final 
set as the Argentinian claimed his first slam title. "He hung in there and did 
well. In the end, he was just too tough. Just the way it is," Federer said.

On the face of it, that seems fair enough. Del Potro played a great match and 
deserved his first major triumph. But it was the way the match slipped away 
from Federer in the final set that was intriguing. The Swiss is justly proud of 
how he has kept himself in great shape throughout his career, something that 
has, without doubt, been a massive factor in his sustained success. You cannot 
win a grand slam title these days without being a top athlete. But as he was 
against Nadal in Australia, he seemed spent in the final set.

With the temperature due to be well past 30C (86F) when the match begins, 
fitness and condition may well become an even bigger issue. Federer makes a lot 
out of the fact that he does his off-season work in the intense heat of Dubai, 
while ­Murray's programme in Miami is well-documented and, having transformed 
himself into a top-class athlete, the Scot is arguably the fittest player on 
the tour. Should the final go to five sets, he may feel he has the edge. In the 
heat, the ball flies a little faster, which could make it even more interesting 
because Murray loves it when the courts quicken up, as shown by the fact that 
eight of his 14 tour titles have come indoors.

All that could be irrelevant if Federer comes out and destroys Murray, as he 
did in the 2008 US Open final. That, though, was Murray's first grand slam 
final and a combination of understandable nerves and fatigue after playing his 
semi-final over the previous two days because of rain – while Federer had the 
day off – were strong contributing factors.

Even then, Murray still had a chance – he would have gone ahead by a break in 
the second set but for an atrocious line-call – and though he never claimed 
that he would have won the match had that gone his way, Federer was beginning 
to look tight. You just never know.

The Swiss deservedly goes into the match as favourite, not least because his 
records are incredible. This is his 18th grand slam final in the past 19 events 
and his 22nd overall. Tomorrow's match will be his fifth Australian Open final 
in seven years and this tournament marked the 23rd consecutive time he has 
reached the last four of a slam.

They are records that would strike fear into any opponent, but 16 months on 
and Murray is an altogether different animal and he is not frightened of 
Federer.

That is in no small part because he has won six of their 10 meetings. Federer 
has won the past two but there is no question that Murray gets inside the head 
of the Swiss, something that was further in evidence when he began the 
psychological warfare after his semi-final win over Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. The 
pressure is on Murray, Federer claimed, while also suggesting that having 
failed to win his first slam final, it might be more difficult for him to win 
one at the second attempt.

This is nothing new from Federer. Throughout his career, he has continually 
come out with statements that from the mouths of any other player – 
particularly an American – would have been dismissed as arrogant and 
disrespectful. As one ­television commentator here said: "He's the most elegant 
trash-talker in sports." Murray is far too polite to say as much but his words 
will not have gone unnoticed and anything that might give him an extra 
incentive could prove to be crucial.

Murray's success against Federer has been built on his solidity, variety and 
his ability to make his opponents play in a style with which they are not 
comfortable. Federer has often said that when he plays Murray he feels the 
match is on his racket; if he plays well, he'll win; if he plays badly, he'll 
lose. But as he claimed after beating Tsonga: "When was the last time I played 
a bad match? I don't know. A long time ago, I think."

He is not exactly running scared but Federer is clearly concerned. Why else 
would he claim that Murray has not really improved from when they played in the 
final in New York? In the 16 months since that match, Murray has won eight of 
his 14 ATP Tour titles and become one of the most ­consistent players in the 
world.

In their past two matches, Federer has come out firing, trying to overpower 
and bully the Scot into submission. But Murray usually plays well against the 
Swiss, partly because he loves taking on the world's best. His natural 
game-style works well: his short slices bring Federer to the net even when he 
does not want to come in and his passing shots are second to none. If the match 
becomes a war of attrition, conducted largely from the baseline, it will play 
into ­Murray's hands and it would be no surprise to see him pepper the Federer 
backhand.

"Without taking anything away from him, a few times he played me I wasn't at 
my very, very best," Federer said, immediately taking some of the credit away 
from Murray. "In Dubai [in March 2008] the first time we played, I had just 
come back from resting after my mono [glandular fever]. I know some don't like 
to hear it. Some still don't believe me for some reason. We had some close 
matches on many occasions where I thought I was in control and I ended up 
giving the match away by making errors of my own. That was definitely because 
of his play and the way he plays. So I think the head-to-head could be quite 
different. But that's why I don't really care too much about that. Best of five 
sets is very different."

Best of five sets is very different, as Del Potro and Nadal showed last year. 
While Federer suggests Murray will need to win the first set to settle his 
nerves, Murray has the advantage of knowing that fitness should not be an 
issue. Mentally that could make all the difference.
 