
It’s no surprise that Vienna tops the Mercer Quality of Life index worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/vienna-named-worlds-top-city-for-quality-of-life>
. Glorious history, access to mountains (take the cog railway up the 
Schneeberg, 90 minutes away), decent cafes and Franz Ferdinand’s bullet-riddled 
car: what more do you want? I first met Vienna on a five-hour train layover en 
route to Budapest and was immediately impressed. Here are five recommendations 
for anyone visiting the city.

Narrenturm tower

Vienna’s facade portrays a conservative, bourgeois city where public belching 
is illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/vienna-police-fine-man-70-for-loud-belch>
. But in the Narrenturm,an 18th-century tower filled with wax casts of deformed 
disease victims from previous centuries 
<http://www.atlasobscura.com/places/narrenturm>, I had an epiphany: Vienna 
clutches at tradition and conformity because chaos is bubbling away underneath. 
This weird musuem of human suffering captures the very essence of the place: 
orderly, systematic and utterly eccentric.

The Third Man tour

The film got it exactly right in the scene with Orson Welles in the sewer – 
it’s possibly the best performance Vienna has given (it should have won the 
Oscar). I recommend theThird Man museum <http://www.3mpc.net/englsamml.htm> – 
totally lovable and a bit potty – and the sewer tour with local expert Gerhard 
Strassgschwandtner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Ffive-things-vienna-most-liveable-city-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cb308254049b818ff840daf05f7118aa7d26edd%2F0_0_5000_3668%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20to%20do%20in%20Vienna%2C%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20liveable%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Ffive-things-vienna-most-liveable-city-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20to%20do%20in%20Vienna%2C%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20most%20liveable%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Ffive-things-vienna-most-liveable-city-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cb308254049b818ff840daf05f7118aa7d26edd%2F0_0_5000_3668%2F5000.jpg>
 The Tower of Babel by Pieter Bruegel the Elder, one of the famous works on 
display at the Kunsthistorisches Museum. Photograph: Imagno/Getty Images 
Food

Vienna is not a place to visit if you want to lose weight. I am rarely 
defeated by platefuls of grub, but one fiaker goulash with wiener sausages 
almost killed me. Government offices have cafeterias where they will pop your 
waistcoat buttons with all kinds of goodies. Try thejustice ministry cafe 
<http://212.186.126.116/Default.aspx> for the fabulous view over the palaces, 
but there are loads more. Some of the tourist-orientated cafes are too 
tight-laced, but Café Hawelka is a favourite.

State Opera

Cheap seats are issued every day 80 minutes before performances – queue at the 
side office in Operngasse. For popular shows, allow a few hours. It’s worth it.

Kunsthistorisches Museum

A world-class collection <http://www.khm.at/en> that features Rembrandt, 
Brueghel and so on. It is Arcimboldo’s wacky yet formal portraits that really 
embody the spirit of the city.
 