
In 2005, as part of our focus on Africa during the Make Poverty History 
campaign, the Guardian featured 10 newborn babies in countries across the 
continent, telling the stories of their births, their families and the lives 
they have been born into.

We pledged to track the lives of these babies up to 2015 - the date the world 
had set for achieving the millennium development goals - as a way to tell the 
story of the millions of people across the developing world as they struggled 
to provide the best chance for their children.

One baby, Sijjin Kuang, in southern Sudan, died before the original story was 
published. We have traced the nine remaining children and returned to talk to 
them and their parents, presenting a unique and extraordinary picture of a 
continent undergoing dramatic social change, and the struggle to raise a new 
generation.

These children's stories are a reminder to the world's leaders meeting at the 
UN summit <http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/un-mdg-summit-2010> in 
New York today of their commitment to the eight agreed goals to cut global 
poverty - the greatest promise the world has every made.

Democratic Republic of Congo: David Lewis Dieumerci 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africas-children-david-lewis-congo>
 David Lewis Dieumerci Photograph: Katrina Manson for the Guardian 
David was born Jean Mkoto Dieumerci on 22 April 2005 to Ngosia Nzinga, 28, and 
Jean Mtoko, 30, at the rundown Mama Yeyo hospital in Kinshasa. He spent the 
first five weeks of his life there – not because he was ill but because his 
parents could not afford to pay a £255 bill for the caesarean delivery.Katrina 
Manson reports on his life since then 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africas-children-david-lewis-congo>
.

Tanzania: Zainab Salehe Abu 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-tanzania-zainab-abu>

Zainab was born on 12 February 2005 to Raheme Richard Abu and her husband 
Salehe, both 25, at Muhimbili national hospital in Dar es Salaam. She was born 
into a sprawling family with little to her name but parents who were determined 
to see their children educated.David Smith talked to them 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-tanzania-zainab-abu>
.

Sudan: Sijjin Kuang 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/african-children-sijjin-kuang-sudan>
 Sijjin Kuang Photograph: Sven Torfinn for the Guardian 
Sijjin Kuang was born amid gunfire on 16 February 2005 to Akol Mading. His 
father Kuang Nguangning had already been killed. He died on 23 May, a casualty 
of the region's almost total lack of healthcare.Xan Rice tells his story 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/african-children-sijjin-kuang-sudan>
.

Kenya: Debrah Matei Mwololo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/african-children-debrah-mwololo-kenya>

Debrah's parents left rural Kenya for the opportunities of the city but she 
was born on 12 May 2005 into poverty – home was a single room in a huge Kibera 
slum, where a third of children have stunted growth due to poor nutrition.Xan 
Rice spoke to the family 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/african-children-debrah-mwololo-kenya>
.

Malawi: Innocent Smoke 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-malawi-innocent-smoke>
 Innocent Smoke Photograph: John Vidal for the Guardian 
Innocent Smoke was born on 24 February 2005 in his grandmother's home in 
Nsalu, a village near the Malawi capital, Lilongwe, to Lenita and Boy Smoke, 
both 34. In his village farmers work communally, but failed harvests meant his 
father was forced to seek work as a day labourer in the city. Innocent endured 
a tough start in life – he contracted malaria and his family could not afford 
medication. John Vidal reports on his story 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-malawi-innocent-smoke>
.

Nigeria: Confidant Martins 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-confidant-nigeria>

Confidant was born by caesarean on 12 May 2005 to Deborah Martins in Lagos 
University teaching hospital, to prevent her inheriting HIV from her mother. 
Deborah named her daughter in a moment of certainty about the future, despite 
the poverty and illness in her family. But, as Shyamantha Asokan reports, her 
fatherhas since died from an HIV-related illness and life is tough 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-confidant-nigeria>.

Ghana: Hannah Adzo Klutsey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-hannah-klutsey-ghana>
 Hannah Adzo Klutsey. Photograph: Richard Sky for the Guardian 
Hannah was born on 25 April 2005 in Kpobiman, Greater Accra, to Mary Ogborvi, 
25, and Benjamin Klutsey. Hannah's parents are both illiterate but were 
determined that she and her three brothers should attend school. Five years 
later on, Richard Sky finds that the family isstruggling to find enough money 
for both food and education 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-hannah-klutsey-ghana>
.

Uganda: Wyclif Kukiriza 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africas-children-wyclif-kukiriza-uganda>

Born 12 May 2005 to Deborah and Robert Sebulidde Kukiriza, at Mulago hospital, 
Kampala, it seemed that Wyclif was destined to be another orphan of the Aids 
epidemic. But five years on, the spread ofcheaper anti-retroviral drugs is 
keeping his parents alive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africas-children-wyclif-kukiriza-uganda>
, reportsSarah Boseley.

Zambia: Prosper Mumba 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-child-zambia-prosper-mumba>

Born 18 May 2005 to Bertha and Joseph Mumba, both 26, at Chilanje clinic, 
Lusaka, Prosper is the son of a preacher in Lusaka township. His parentsworried 
about being able to educate and provide for their children 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-child-zambia-prosper-mumba> 
when their only income was from the congregation, writesJohn Vidal.

South Africa: Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-angel-swartbooi-south-africa>
 Angel Siyavuya Swartbooi Photograph: Ellen Elmendorp for the Guardian 
Siya, as his family call him, was born on 2 June 2005 in Khayelitsha, South 
Africa to an unmarried mother with an uncertain future. But while life in the 
township is hard, Siya's parents, Nonzuzo Swartbooi and Benson Ntsimango, are 
still together andhave lost none of their ambition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/sep/19/africa-children-angel-swartbooi-south-africa>
.David Smith reports.
 