
’Tis the season for mass mindless consumption – or is it? If you’re on the 
lookout for truly original and independent fashion ideas, bypass the 
traditional Boxing Day sales and check out the work of these up-and-coming 
Melbourne designers who will put you right on the edge in the fashion stakes. 
They prove there is more toMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> fashion than wearing 
black.

1. Damien Yip Studios

Damien Yip grew up in Brisbane and says much of his initial fashion 
inspiration came from his mother’s sewing. This fascination grew into a 
proclivity for making clothes for himself as a teenager, and eventually being 
offered the chance to work on a small clothing collection with Authority 
Clothing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F30%2F1419903302648%2Ff5d27bb6-fa36-404d-b923-f9d0e633dc6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best%20Melbourne%20independent%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best%20Melbourne%20independent%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F30%2F1419903302648%2Ff5d27bb6-fa36-404d-b923-f9d0e633dc6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Damien Yip – Fred Hates Fashion. 
In the past year, Yip’s fashion work <http://www.damienyip.com> has blossomed 
into completing an entire collection and making ashort film 
<http://vimeo.com/104903583> as part of Fred Hates Fashion at Melbourne spring 
fashion week 2014.

“My fashion influences come from construction/tectonics and how I can achieve 
an outcome that is both functional and expressive,” Yip says. “I am also an 
avid collector of Junya Watanabe’s work – so his precedence offers me many 
lessons.”

Now permanently based in Melbourne, Yip says the city offers a dynamic fashion 
scene but he is attempting to appeal to more “universal objectives” in his 
design challenges.

“My biggest influences are music and craftsmanship, and a faithful optimism in 
the future,” he says.

2. Penny Drop

Penny Hale (of the label Penny Drop <http://thepennydrop.tumblr.com/>) says 
she was drawn into fashion from a young age when she used to make clothes for 
her Kelly Doll with remnants from her mum’s sewing machine. “Mum was a pretty 
badass sewer, making me intricate smocked dresses, which I refused to wear 
after about my fourth birthday. I was keen to develop my own aesthetic from a 
young age.”

She ended up studying fashion at RMIT and landed costuming roles for theatre 
and film productions.

She says that being on a student budget means that “whatever I can get my 
hands on tends to inspire creativity”, citing a recent example of using bags of 
hair clippings from a hairdresser friend, dying them and using them for 
makeshift felting to create a “screaming voodoo/witchcraft vibe”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F30%2F1419903099416%2F221917dd-7901-41d3-b298-3aaddbc294a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best%20Melbourne%20independent%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best%20Melbourne%20independent%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F30%2F1419903099416%2F221917dd-7901-41d3-b298-3aaddbc294a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The designs of Penny Drop. Photograph: Tanika Mackay 
Penny says it’s still early days for her fashion career but she is constantly 
searching for “that sweet spot” between form and function, pitching her work 
directly at the Melbourne underground.

“I think the colourful nature of my designs appeals to the club, bar, doof, 
festival kids of Melbourne, suggesting there is a dire need for them to be 
washable, durable, affordable, comfortable and a bit of a visual playground. I 
keep my fingers crossed that people will embrace the colour.”

3. Sprinkle Magic

Something of a Melbourne institution, Sprinkle Magic 
<http://www.sprinkle.com.au> operates out of her small store on Lygon Street in 
Carlton, creating stylish clothes that she says aim to “silhouette womanly 
curves, not hide them”.

Although having never studied fashion, Sprinkle has been involved in the 
Melbourne fashion industry for more than 20 years and regularly pulls together 
cabaret and fashion shows. She previously ran a Melbourne club that had a 
dress-up theme every month.
 Sprinkle Magic. 
Her clothes have been bought and worn by Cyndi Lauper, as well as many 
Australian performers including Yana Alana, Tism and the Town Bikes.

Many of Sprinkle’s clothes have a vintage feel with a modern twist, but she 
says she is “heavily influenced by fabrics, people, places and my imagination”.

“Strong, intelligent, sexy women inspire me and influence the way I design 
clothes. Women that aren’t afraid to stand out from the crowd and show their 
strength of character.”

4. Chris Avery


Starting his career as an architect, Chris Avery <http:// 
http://www.christopheravery.com.au> says he found himself overwhelmed by the 
rules and regulations of an industry that stifled his creativity.

He left architecture after six months and went travelling through Asia and 
Europe and found inspiration from traditional religious and cultural dress – 
from Indian Kutas to Russian monks and Thai traditional dancers.

“There was this aura around them – where every one who wore them wore these 
clothes with such pride no matter how good or bad their social economic status 
was. This is what led me to fashion. Being able to take that feeling and 
translate it into menswear, by pushing the boundaries and allowing men to dress 
outside of social conforms.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F30%2F1419904054099%2Ff30b9969-e436-403b-a91d-db0101e957b1-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best%20Melbourne%20independent%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best%20Melbourne%20independent%20designers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffive-of-the-best-melbourne-independent-designers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F30%2F1419904054099%2Ff30b9969-e436-403b-a91d-db0101e957b1-1020x612.jpeg>
 Chris Avery finds inspiration in traditional cultural dress. Photograph: Jakeb 
Andrew 
The past two years have brought considerable success and exposure to Avery’s 
work, which has been featured at Melbourne spring fashion week, the American 
Beauty Show in Chicago, and featured as part of a fashion conference at a 
women’s university in Saudi Arabia.

He says: “If I can make someone feel true about who they are through the dress 
that I make, then my job as a designer is complete.”

5. Edgeley

Alice Edgeley started out working on costumes as a child, but moved from 
costume to fashion and now tries to keep a foot in each camp. As a self-made 
clothing designer, she learned her craft on the job, now operating a small 
boutique inGertrude Street, Fitzroy <http://www.edgeley.com.au>, where she 
spends her days cutting up and sewing garments between serving customers.

“Last September, during Melbourne spring fashion week, I had my first fashion 
show for Edgeley. It was a group show called Fred Hates Fashion and mine was in 
collaboration with Tusler (a leather accessories designer). We also made a 
fashion film calledI Woke Up Like This. <http://vimeo.com/105011008> It was 
heaps of fun, hard work and really scary and stressful but well worth it.”

Drawing her influence from classic films such as Irma la Douce and Gentlemen 
Prefer Blondes, Edgeley says she designs clothes that she would want to wear in 
Melbourne, but she also has dream locations in mind. “So I’ll imagine a catsuit 
to wear to a bar or club or a ruffly top to wear on holiday sitting on the deck 
having an aperitif,” she says.

 