
A shortlist of five candidates for the job of Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> chief executive will be 
interviewed in the new year – but MediaGuardian.co.uk understands that ITV's 
Peter Fincham has not been included.

It is thought the shortlist includes BBC chief operating officer Caroline 
Thomson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/15/channel-4-chief-executive>, who 
worked at Channel 4 from the mid-1980s and eventually become head of corporate 
affairs under then chief executive Michael Grade in 1990; Channel 4's director 
of television and content Kevin Lygo; and Talkback Thames chief executive and 
former BBC1 controller Lorraine Heggessey.

Fincham, ITV director of television, channels and online and former BBC1 
controller was also discussed but has not been put on the shortlist so far, it 
is understood.

One friend said: "Peter has not been approached."

Fincham declined to comment.

Other names that were put forward by Egon Zehnder included former BBC2 
controller Jane Root, and Martha Lane Fox – the government's digital inclusion 
champion – but sources could not confirm if they made the shortlist.

The newly appointed Channel 4 chairman, Lord Burns, is understood to be keen 
to appoint a chief executive with strong public-service broadcasting 
credentials.

Burns is taking charge of a recruitment process that began after Channel 4 
announced that Andy Duncan was stepping down in September and issaid to be keen 
for a "public service filter" to be applied to potential candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/20/lord-burns-channel-4>.

Outgoing chairman Luke Johnson, who leaves Channel 4 on 27 January, is 
understood to have taken a lead role in compiling the shortlist that will now 
be scrutinised by Burns.

It is thought that non-executive directors of Channel 4 have been keen to see 
a candidate known as a "creative leader" appointed to balance 65-year-old 
Burns's business and policy credentials.

There have also been suggestions that headhunters Egon Zehnder were tasked 
with looking particularly for female candidates to replace Duncan, who left in 
November.

Channel 4 declined to comment.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 