
Men’s 100m

It was on this track last year that Adam Gemili broke the 10sec barrier for 
the first time andin doing so snapped his hamstring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/adam-gemili-diamond-league-dina-asher-smith>
. The 2014 Commonwealth Games silver medallist only returned to competition 
last week after a year out and knows it will be tough in a field that includes 
the world 100m bronze medallist Trayvon Bromell, who also runs in the 200m 
later in the day, and the 40-year-old Kim Collins, who staggeringly wentunder 
10 seconds last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/20/greg-rutherford-manchester-win-kim-collins-greatcity-games>
. Britain’s CJ Ujah and Richard Kilty are also in the field – the latter ran a 
wind-assisted 9.92sec last week and will be hoping to legally break 10sec for 
the first time in his career1.41pm

Women’s 100m

Britain’s Dina Asher-Smith has made a late start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/21/dina-asher-smith-olympic-games-sprinter-rio-2016>
 to her outdoor season after suffering a hamstring injury at the world indoor 
championships in Portland in March, so it will be intriguing to see how she 
compares with a high-class field, which includes six athletes who have broken 
the 11sec barrier. The big favourite will be the Dutch athleteDafne Schippers, 
who took world 100m silver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/18/dafne-schippers-rio-olympics-100m-manchester-greatcity-games-sprinter>
 last year, but it would be wrong to completely discount the chances of the 
USA’s English Gardner, who has run 10.79sec in the past. A strong British 
contingent also includes Desiree Henry and Asha PhilipHeats 2.13pm, final 3.53pm

Greg Rutherford: ‘It’s great I’m the favourite for Rio. I love the pressure’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/01/greg-rutherford-favourite-rio-2016-rome-long-jumper>
Men’s long jump

Britain’s Greg Rutherford is unbeaten since the Anniversary Games last July 
and travels to Birmingham full of confidence after jumping a season’s best 
8.31m todefeat a strong field in Rome on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/02/greg-rutherford-long-jump-rome-diamond-league>
. The London 2012 champion faces another tough test against many of his rivals 
in Rio, including the 2016 world leader Marquise Goodwin, who has taken a 
sabbatical from playing for the Buffalo Bills in the NFL to pursue his Olympic 
ambitions, and has jumped 8.45m this season. the world indoor champion Marquis 
Dendy is also in Birmingham, along with the world silver medallist Fabrice 
Lapierre of Australia2.57pm

Women’s 100m hurdles

The hottest race of the day, three of the four fastest hurdlers this year 
going head to head. All eyes will be on the American Kendra Harrison, who in 
Eugene last week ran 12.24sec, the second fastest time in history and just 0.03 
slower than the world record set by Bulgarian Yordanka Donkova in 1988. But 
Harrison faces competition from Brianna Rollins, who has the second fastest 
time of the year, and the Australian 2012 Olympic championSally Pearson, who 
makes a comeback almost a year to the day sincebreaking her wrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/15/sally-pearson-hurdles-amputation-rome>
. Two British athletes, Tiffany Porter and Lucy Hatton, will also be competing
3.08pm

Men’s 3,000m

The meeting concludes with Mo Farah, who pulled out of Birmingham last year 
because he felt “emotionally and physically drained” after a series of
allegations were made about his coach Alberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/06/mo-farah-nothing-to-hide-alberto-salazar-controversy>
, running in the 3,000m. Farah looked hugely impressive in defeating a stacked 
10,000m field in Portland last week but this is a much easier affair, with none 
of the most dangerous Kenyan or Ethiopian middle distance athletes competing. 
Bethwell Birgen, who is a 3min 30sec 1500m runner, may prove to be Farah’s 
toughest test4.15pm
 