
Law students sometimes embark on their chosen course without knowing what 
exactly they’ve let themselves in for. High on enthusiasm, they arrive at uni 
harbouring fantasies about becoming the nextAtticus Finch 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atticus_Finch> – but the truth is unlikely to be 
so grand. So let’s sort some of the facts from the fiction.

You need to study law as your first degree if you want to be a lawyer

A law degree is often the initial step on the path to a legal career, 
introducing students to the core subjects. But it isn’t really essential for 
aspiring lawyers. Indeed the Supreme Court justice Lord Sumption advocates that 
law should be offered only as a second degree, as it is in the US. In arecent 
speech <https://www.supremecourt.uk/docs/speech-161006.pdf>, he said studying 
law was “not a particularly good training for the handling of evidence, or for 
acute social observation, or for the exercise of analytical judgments about 
facts”.

For those set upon a legal career, he suggested, “the study of a different 
subject at a formative time of one’s life is personally enriching”.

Victims of revenge porn turn to students for legal advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/25/victims-of-revenge-porn-turn-to-students-for-legal-advice>
So you may prefer to study a different subject, to add another string to your 
bow. If you take this route, however, you must also undertake the one-year 
graduate diploma in law (GDL).

Patrick Hulley, 21, a final year law student at Newcastle University, warns 
that the GDL is “more intense and stressful” than a law degree. And at a cost 
of £7,000 to £10,000, it will add to the already huge expense of legal 
training. Though there is one pay-off: the core subjects may be fresher in your 
mind when starting one of the professional courses (the BPTC or LPC).

You’ll spend your life in the library

Before starting his degree course, 38-year-old mature student Marc Tyler, now 
in his final year at Liverpool John Moores University, had assumed that 
studying law would require developing an encyclopaedic knowledge of English 
law, and memorising thousands of pieces of legislation and cases.

“I thought it would mean spending endless hours in the library searching for 
that one ‘killer’ case that would turn the world on its head, or at least get 
me top marks,” he says.

The reality, that 75% of his work is done away from the lecture hall or law 
library, was a “pleasant shock” for Tyler. “My romantic notion of nights spent 
looking through dusty tomes in the library were a little far-fetched, given 
that everything is online.”

Jade Foley, 19, a second-year law student at Brunel University and president 
of the university law society, agrees that this was the “biggest misconception”.

“We have eight hours of lectures and four hours of seminars a week. On top of 
that, I do up to four hours of study a day, which leaves plenty of time to 
socialise and get involved in extracurricular activities like mooting and 
debating,” she says.

The key, says Rhys Payne, a 25-year-old third-year student at the University of
Law <https://www.theguardian.com/education/law>, who finds time for a job and a 
social life in addition to his studies, is to be organised and ensure you have 
balance.

It’s all boys, boys, boys

The fact that most law firm partners and heads of chambers are men, and so are 
most of those holding senior judicial posts, gives a misleading impression of 
people seeking to enter the profession.

Patrick Hulley says he finds himself “in the minority” of law students at 
Newcastle University – and when on work experience most other students he meets 
are women.

Figures from the Law Society show that more than three-quarters 
<http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/law-careers/becoming-a-solicitor/entry-trends/> 
of students accepted on university law degrees in 2014 were female.

You can’t do a law degree if you have children

Before he embarked on his studies, as a father of two (and later, three), 
Tyler was warned not to waste his money. He would not be able to do it with 
kids in tow.

He acknowledges that combining parenthood and legal study is no stroll in the 
park. “It involves long hours and juggling many balls,” he says, but it is made 
much easier by the fact that course materials are available electronically and 
much of the learning is “self-led”.

Do you have what it takes to switch to law?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/19/do-you-have-what-it-takes-to-switch-to-law>
You’ll bag a job at the end of it, no sweat

For students looking to become barristers or solicitors, the challenge of 
bagging a pupillage or training contract is increasingly tough. So perhaps it’s 
best to broaden your scope: law is an interesting and well-respected degree 
that could certainly help you get a job in another sector.

Students with law degrees are highly attractive to non-legal employers. A poll 
of 500 UK businesses by Marketing Minds 
<http://www.legalcheek.com/2016/01/non-law-graduate-employers-favour-llbs-over-all-other-degrees/>
 showed that businesses value law graduates for their “transferable skills”, 
“aptitude for learning” and “strong leadership and communication abilities”.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 