
1 A slow start on serve

Andy Murray knew that he needed to get a high percentage of first serves into 
court early on. For an hour, his first serve deserted him. His second serve, 
which has improved vastly in the past few months, held up pretty well but he 
was never able to get enough free points from his first serve to allow him to 
relax and play relatively carefree tennis. WithRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> barely missing a return, that 
put him on the back foot and though he began to play much better as the match 
wore on, beating Federer from two sets down was always going to be an uphill 
task. No one has managed it in a grand slam and only Lleyton Hewitt, in a Davis 
Cup tie, has ever done it anywhere.

 2 Reluctance to move forward

This has to be taken in context because if you are going to approach the net 
against someone as good as Federer, the approach has to be right. But Murray 
was perhaps guilty of a little hesitancy, particularly when he did find a good 
serve, and he might have been better off taking some of Federer's floated 
returns out of the air rather than letting them land deep. He hit several 
excellent returns, especially on the backhand side to the Federer ­backhand, 
which he could have followed in to the net. Murray had done it superbly en 
route to the final, but for whatever reason he didn't feel able to do it in the 
final.

• Kevin Mitchell's match report from Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/31/andy-murray-roger-federer-australian-open>
• In pictures: The best images from the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2010/jan/31/australian-open-andy-murray-roger-federer>
• Read Scott Murray's game-by-game report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jan/31/andy-murray-roger-federer>
• Simon Cambers: Murray ran into a genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2010/jan/31/roger-federer-andy-murray-australian-open>

3 Federer changed tactics

In their most recent two matches, which Federer won, the Swiss came out of the 
blocks quickly, attacking the Murray second serve and even chipping and 
charging at times in an effort to take control at the net, effectively bullying 
the Scot into making more mistakes than he normally would. Here he did the 
opposite, cutting down the risk in his game and reducing his unforced errors as 
a result. It was controlled, considered tennis and even if it did not throw 
Murray, it was something different. That is never a bad thing.

4 When the chances came, Murray missed them

Again, this has to tempered by what is coming from the other side of the net 
but Murray regretted not taking a break point that would have put him up 3-2 in 
the first set, an opportunity he probably should have taken by being more 
aggressive on his forehand. In the third set, in which he held five set points 
in the tiebreak, at 6-5 he made a mental error by trying to take a forehand 
down the line, rather than playing it back to the Federer backhand. His other 
real chance came when he put a backhand volley just wide, but the rest were 
saved legitimately by Federer's good play.

5 Federer played superbly. Again

Sometimes you just have to admit that the other man played better on the day. 
Federer served superbly when it ­mattered, as he so often does, and never 
allowed Murray to settle. His serve has to be the most underrated shot in men's 
tennis and when Murray managed to force an opening, it was invariably closed by 
a big first serve from the Swiss. For two sets he was near-perfect and though 
his level dipped ever so slightly at the start of the third, his overall 
consistency was so high that Murray had to press too hard at times. Had the 
match gone to a fourth set, who knows what would have happened. But on the day, 
Federer was the better player.
 