
Across the country, we have seen our neighbours' homes and farms devastated by 
the floods. We understand their anger and frustration.

We also understand their demands for swift action, but what they have been 
given is political gamesmanship: blame-shifting from party to party and from 
minister to minister, late responses, dramatic reversals of opinion. This 
reached its well-publicised nadir at the weekend withEric Pickles's appearance 
on the Andrew Marr show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/09/eric-pickles-apologises-floods-environment-agency-somerset>
: "I apologise unreservedly and I'm really sorry that we took the advice; we 
thought we were dealing with experts." Throwing your own government experts to 
the wolves is not an apology.

This political vitriol, at least with respect to the Somerset Levels, appears 
to come down to a relatively simple question – should we have been dredging? It 
is an incredibly complex question, in the Somerset Levels and elsewhere, and 
this simplistic discussion does the people of those communities a great 
disservice.

More fundamentally, this is not the time to be deciding long-term flood 
mitigation strategy. In times of disaster, you do disaster management. Later, 
you learn the lessons from that disaster. And finally, informed by evidence and 
motivated by what has happened, you set policy. That is the most frustrating 
aspect of the current political debate, because in an effort to outmanoeuvre 
one another, our leaders are making promises to enact a policy for which the 
benefits are dubious.

First, the reason the rivers are flooding is primarily the exceptional 
rainfall. January was the wettest winter month in almost 250 years, and this 
rain fell when the soil moisture content was already high. However, these 
issues are exacerbated by how we have changed our floodplains, with both 
agricultural and urban development reducing water storage capacity.

Second, while much of our nation is flood-prone, flooding comes in a variety 
of forms and has a range of underlying causes. Some floods have been due to 
coastal storm surges, some due to flash flooding caused by rapid flow from 
poorly managed lands, and some due to sustained rain and soil saturation. We 
have a wet and volatile climate, 11,073 miles of coastline and little 
geographical room to manoeuvre on our small island. Our solutions have to take 
all of these issues into account, and they must recognise that any change in a 
river catchment will affect our neighbours downstream.

Third, returning to the specific challenge of the Somerset Levels, it is 
unclear what benefit dredging will have. The Somerset Levels sit near sea 
level, such that the river-to-sea gradient is very shallow. This means that 
even if they are dredged, rivers will only drain during low tide. And widening 
the channels will actually allow more of the high tide to enter. Some have 
argued that in the past dredging was more common and flooding apparently less 
so. But this winter has seen far more rain and our land is being used in very 
different ways, so the memories of three decades ago are not entirely relevant.

Fourth, where dredging is done, it is being made more costly and challenging 
by farming practices elsewhere in the catchment area. The rivers are filling 
with sediment that has eroded from intensively farmed land in the headwaters of 
the catchments and from the Levels themselves. Practices that have greatly 
accelerated erosion include: heavy machinery operations in wet fields; 
placement of gates at the bottom of slopes so that sediment eroded from the 
field is very efficiently transported to impermeable road surfaces, and thence 
to streams downslope; cultivation of arable crops on overly steep slopes 
(increasing the efficiency of sediment transport from land to stream); 
overwintering of livestock on steep slopes; and excessive stocking densities on 
land vulnerable to erosion.

Nutrient enrichment from livestock waste and artificial fertilisers (when used 
in excess of crop requirements) also contributes to the dredging problem. The 
nutrient loading often exceeds the system's recycling capacity, such that 
nutrients flow into ditches and waterways, stimulating the growth of aquatic 
plants that can clog up minor ditches and waterways. With less space to 
dissipate water within the network, it is forced into the main channel.

In other words, some of these floods are the consequence of subsidised 
agriculture – and by extension the low prices we demand for our UK-produced 
food.

Finally, if we are going to consider long-term planning we must consider 
climate change impacts.Flooding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/flooding> will become worse due to the 
rise in sea level, which has already risen by about 12cm in the past 100 years, 
with a further 11-16cm rise projected by 2030. It is less clear how climate 
change will affect the intensity and frequency of the most extreme rainfall 
events. Although almost all projections indicate that dry areas will become 
drier and wet areas will become wetter, predictions for specific geographical 
regions are highly uncertain. And our historical records do not go back far 
enough to unravel long-term trends in the frequency of uncommon but high-impact 
weather events.

This should not be reassuring – it is another major element of uncertainty in 
an already complex problem.

As challenging as these issues are, they are not intractable. The solutions 
will involve stronger planning control and scientifically informed planning 
decisions, a reconsideration of some intensive farming practices, some dredging 
in key areas, some controlled flooding in others, and a better disaster 
management strategy for when the inevitable flooding does occur. But now is not 
the time to resolve such a complicated knot of issues. It is certainly not the 
time to offer false promises or miracle cures.

Now is the time to help our neighbours in distress, listen to their stories, 
and remember them when the floodwaters recede. Then we should let the experts 
get on with their jobs.

• Paul Bates is professor of hydrology at the The Cabot Institute 
<http://www.bris.ac.uk/cabot/>, University of Bristol
 