
Everything old is remixed until it’s new again. This seems to be the defining 
trait of our current culture: our cinemas and books are full of reboots, 
relaunches, and reinventions. Audiences gobble up endless superhero franchises, 
devotees recreate Harry Potter and Doctor Who in fan fiction. In such a 
cultural landscape, it’s not surprising that so many writers are turning to one 
of the oldest forms of literature for reinvention: the fairytale.

While we all know fairytales from our childhoods, they follow us into our 
adult reading: Italo Calvino compiledItalian Folktales 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/114763/ursula-k-le-guin-italo-calvino> in the 
50s while writing his own fabulist novels; 60s postmodernists like Donald 
Barthelme played with the form in novels like Snow White; and 70s feminist 
writers such asAnne Sexton with Transformations 
<http://www.themillions.com/2015/10/a-poisonous-antidote-on-anne-sextons-transformations.html>
 andAngela Carter with The Bloody Chamber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jun/24/classics.angelacarter> created 
subversive works from classic tales. But in recent years, the use of the 
genre’s techniques and forms in American and British literature has rocketed.

Topography of short stories: Upright Beasts by Lincoln Michel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/topography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine/2015/dec/07/topography-of-short-stories-upright-beasts-by-lincoln-michel>
In the past two years alone, Helen Oyeyemi’s Boy, Snow, Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/22/boy-snow-bird-review-helen-oyeyemi>
 used Snow White to tell a contemporary tale of racial identity in 50s New 
England while Porochista Khakpour’sThe Last Illusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/27/the-last-illusion-porochista-khakpour-review-zal-world-trade-center>
 spun a Persian folktale into an outsider coming-of-age story in 9/11-era New 
York. Patrick deWitt wrote the playfully self-aware folktaleUndermajordomo Minor
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/05/undermajordomo-minor-patrick-dewitt-review>
, while Michael Cunningham reworked a variety of fairytales inA Wild Swan 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23848124-a-wild-swan>. Other 
fabulist-infused collections included Neil Gaiman’sTrigger Warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/08/neil-gaiman-trigger-warning-short-stories-review-sublime-ridiculous>
 and Kelly Link’s Pulitzer finalistGet in Trouble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/25/get-in-trouble-kelly-link-review-short-story-collection>
. We’re only a few months into 2016, but already have the horror fables of 
Brain Evenson’sA Collapse of Horses 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25330189-a-collapse-of-horses>, the 
domestic fabulism 
<http://electricliterature.com/new-genres-domestic-fabulism-or-kansas-with-a-difference/>
 of Amber Sparks’sThe Unfinished World 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25622828-the-unfinished-world>, as well as 
Helen Oyeyemi’s wonder-filledWhat Is Not Yours Is Not Yours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/27/what-is-not-yours-is-not-yours-helen-oyeyemi-review-short-stories>
.

Why are so many literary writers drawn to fairytales? By their very nature, 
fairytales are meant to be retold and reinterpreted. But I think there is 
something more than that. As a writer, I’m interested in tweaking and twisting 
established forms into unfamiliar shapes. I tried this with a variety of genres 
and styles in my first book,Upright Beasts 
<http://coffeehousepress.org/shop/upright-beasts/>, and have noticed that the 
fairytales in my book always get the best response, even when – or perhaps 
especially when – they get a little bizarre. Readers who might be turned off by 
surrealism or dream logic in a traditional story accept it in these stories. 
Because the form is so universal, it’s an ideal vessel to sail readers to 
strange, dark lands (the dark and strange arethe traditional territory of 
fairytales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/12/grimm-brothers-fairytales-horror-new-translation>
, despite their Disneyfication for children.)


Helen Simpson on Angela Carter's Bloody Chamber
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jun/24/classics.angelacarter> 
In most fiction, there’s an emphasis on rounding out the fictional world. But 
there is also a power in flatness. The deceptively simple language and 
structure of fairytales actually allows for other elements – from the sexual to 
the philosophical – to stand out. In children’s tales, this flatness lends 
itself to delivering moral messages, but literary authors can use the contrast 
for other purposes: not worrying about whether the evil stepmother is 
“likeable” or her wicked punishments “realistic” means the story can concern 
itself fully with a Freudian family struggle, say, or use the characters as 
metaphors to examine class, race, or gender. As contemporary fabulist and Fairy 
Tale Review founder Kate Bernheimerputs it 
<http://www.thevolta.org/ewc30-kbernheimer-p1.html>: “A one-dimensional, 
abstracted space allows the artist and reader room to experience – to invent – 
new ways of sensing primal and inexplicable wonder.”

I also find that fairytales, with their flatness of language and simplicity of 
structure, can give writers access to storytelling modes often ignored by 
mainstream literature. In the English-speaking world at least, the literary 
landscape is largely divided into literary realism and “world-building” genre 
fiction. In the former, even slight deviation from our culture’s narrow 
conception of reality is frowned upon. In the latter, all sorts of impossible 
things can happen, but only if there’re clear and consistent rules. Fairytales 
and fables offer a third way: a mysterious overgrown path into the unknown 
forest where stories can operate outside of real or invented rules. We don’t 
worry about the realistic motivations of the evil dwarf’s curse nor the 
backstory of the talking fox. It happened once upon a time, and that’s enough 
to know. With the wave of a wand, the reader is in a space where the surreal, 
the gothic and the weird can all thrive – and maybe will there be a trail of 
breadcrumbs to lead you out again.

 * Lincoln Michel <https://lincolnmichel.com/> is the editor-in-chief of 
Electric Literature. His fiction has appeared in Granta, Oxford American and 
Tin House. He’s the author ofUpright Beasts 
<http://coffeehousepress.org/shop/upright-beasts/> and he tweets @thelincoln 
<http://twitter.com/thelincoln>
 