
There’s one thing to add to the tidal wave of tributes last week after AA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> died. They saluted a journalist, a 
constant scribbler, an acidulous wordsmith who specialised in counterintuitive 
destruction. Yet, it turned out, even his victims seemed to love him: for his 
turn of phrase and twist of mind.

“Journalism is success, writing books is achievement,” he once told the 
Observer (after his two novels had crashed and burned in the same critical fire 
he stoked week by week). Wrong again. Adrian Gill was a success because his 
presence, his personality, his pen, arrived Sunday after Sunday. Who cares 
about a couple of entries in the Amazon back catalogue? He did what he did; 
and, in the great English tradition of skewering pretension, his quotes will 
live on.

• The Trump effect may have buoyed US print newspaper sales but barely rippled 
them on this side of the Atlantic as the most momentous election of the 21st 
century came and went last month. Every national morning daily from theStar to 
theTelegraph fell back on October’s ABC results. Populism doesn’t help the pop 
press. Only at the top end – theTimes and the Guardian – was there a move 
forwards not back. And just one paper grew print sales year-on-year without 
need for free bulk copies to polish its performance. Let’s here it again for the
Observer.

A riveting read for would-be writers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Faa-gill-farewell-journalist-critic-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72d5582e456a2361d91a38dffbeb0f44f4242d20%2F0_209_1823_1093%2F1823.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fond%20farewell%20to%20the%20acidulous%20Mr%20Gill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Faa-gill-farewell-journalist-critic-success%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fond%20farewell%20to%20the%20acidulous%20Mr%20Gill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Faa-gill-farewell-journalist-critic-success%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72d5582e456a2361d91a38dffbeb0f44f4242d20%2F0_209_1823_1093%2F1823.jpg>
 Kirk Douglas in 1951 film Ace in the Hole. Photograph: Allstar 
This Christmas’ best last-minute gift for a journalist (or journalism student) 
who wants to expand the horizons of their trade? Sarah Lonsdale’sThe Journalist 
in British Fiction and Film (Bloomsbury, £17.99 in paperback). Put George 
Orwell, Martin Amis, Evelyn Waugh and Graham Greene together and you’ve got a 
cynical but frail reporter on the edge of society, a tradesman hanging onto a 
shrivelling existence. But spread the net much wider – as Lonsdale does – and 
individual heroes of revelation and change emerge.

This is a moving image of moral certitude and shabby depravity. It’s a 
fascinating bit of academic research that makes you stop and examine your own 
preconceptions – as well as a great tour through over a century of bookshelves 
and movie-studio cutting rooms.
 