
She made him the kind of jollof rice he liked, flecked with bits of red and 
green peppers, and as he ate, fork moving from the plate to his mouth, saying, 
“This is pretty good,” as he always had in the past, she felt her tears and her 
questions gathering.

Americanah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/11/americanah-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-review>
, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie

---

Last month, I spent Valentine’s Day weekend on a bus to and from Liverpool 
(with a long day in a kitchen in between). I quite like long journeys – 
especially those ontrains 
<http://thelittlelibrarycafe.com/blog/2015/8/13/marzipan-the-miniaturist> – but 
eight hours on a National Express bus on a gloriously sunny day feels like some 
kind of horrible punishment. Thankfully, I had Americanah with me. The trip up 
the M6 flew by, as I found myself completely invested (even on my second read) 
in Ifemelu and Obinze’s story. I’m not sure I saw much of the English 
countryside at all – I was too busy travelling with them through Nigeria, the 
States, and England in the years either side of the turn of the millennium. 
It’s a truly brilliant book, with characters who feel so rich and fully 
realised that I’ve spoken to friends about them as if they’re people I know.

 There are references to food dotted throughout the book, but I kept coming 
back to the description of this homely, comforting dish. Having not made jollof 
rice before, I needed some help. Every recipe I read seemed completely 
different, so I sought out the advice of a friend. Before I could get a list of 
ingredients out of her, she noted the following: her family would put different 
things in it depending on what was in the cupboard, her mum used to chop 
vegetables into tiny dice and add them to the sauce (to sneak them past her 
younger siblings), she couldn’t possibly offer specific measurements, and the 
stock cube should be Maggi if at all possible.

 This recipe isn’t from my family. Rice in our kitchen was in risotto, fried 
with egg and soya sauce or sitting alongside curries. But my friend’s stories 
are ones I can identify with – I remember my mum hiding vegetables from my 
fussy sister in pasta sauces, her confident ability to open our pantry and 
adapt our favourite dishes to suit what she found, and the comforting 
regularity with which we’d recreate the same meals, over and over again. After 
a week eating different variations of the recipe below, this is one that’s 
going to be added to my regular repertoire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Ffood-in-books-jollof-rice-from-americanah-by-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09e611a6b3432b9972eccbaf3dc2d1e6a9039f2d%2F0_0_2036_2036%2F2036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Jollof%20Rice%20from%20Americanah%20by%20Chimamanda%20Ngozi%20Adichie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Ffood-in-books-jollof-rice-from-americanah-by-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Food%20in%20books%3A%20Jollof%20Rice%20from%20Americanah%20by%20Chimamanda%20Ngozi%20Adichie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Flittle-library-cafe%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Ffood-in-books-jollof-rice-from-americanah-by-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09e611a6b3432b9972eccbaf3dc2d1e6a9039f2d%2F0_0_2036_2036%2F2036.jpg>
 ‘Every recipe I read seemed completely different, so I sought out the advice 
of a friend.’ Photograph: Kate Young 
Jollof Rice: the recipe

 Serves 4 as a meal, or more as a side

Ingredients 
 5 small tomatoes (or one tin chopped tomatoes if you can’t find ones that 
smell like tomatoes)
 2 small red peppers
 2 scotch bonnet chillies (this is very much to taste - add more or less as 
you fancy)
 1 red onion 
 Large pinch flaked sea salt 
 3tbsp rapeseed oil
 250g basmati rice 
 4tbsp tomato paste 
 2tsp curry powder 
 1 stock cube (Maggi is traditional)
 Pinch nutmeg 
 1 small red pepper (chopped into small dice)
 1 small green pepper (chopped into small dice)

Equipment 
 Knife
 Chopping board
 Food processor/stick blender/mortar and pestle
 Large frying pan
 Medium saucepan
 Wooden spoon 
 Fork

1 Remove the seeds from the peppers and chillies and chop into large chunks. 
Slice the tomatoes into quarters and remove their seeds. Top and tail and peel 
the onion, and slice into large chunks. Place these, along with the salt, into 
the processor/mortar and blitz or pound to a paste. This can be messy. I refer 
you to Obinze:


He had already told Nigel many times that Nigerian cooking was not cosmetic, 
with all that pounding. It was sweaty and spicy and Nigerians preferred to 
present the final product, not the process.

 NB. I have had more than one scotch bonnet/eyes incident. I can’t stress 
enough – wash your hands well once you’ve finished chopping the chilli.

 2 Warm the oil in the frying pan, and tip in the paste. Lower the heat and 
reduce it until thick, which should take around ten minutes, stirring regularly 
to prevent it sticking.

 3 Meanwhile, you should cook the rice. Rinse it three times in cold water, 
and then add enough fresh water to cover the rice by 2cm. Put it on to boil, 
reducing to a simmer once the water is bubbling. Allow to cook (with the lid 
on) until the water has evaporated to the level of the rice. Turn the heat off 
and leave the rice to steam in the pot while you finish the sauce.

4 Add the tomato paste, crumbled stock cube, spices and chopped peppers to the 
paste mixture. Continue to cook for the next five minutes on a low heat, until 
the pepper has softened to your taste. Remove from the heat, stir the cooked 
rice through and serve immediately with meat, fish, or on its own.
 