
“Why can’t theatre be more like football?” said a man to me on Sunday 
afternoon. It was a good question to be asking atLeicester’s Curve theatre 
<http://www.curveonline.co.uk/> in an informal afternoon of conversation, tea, 
cake and party games hosted by the Curve and theBrick Box 
<http://thebrickbox.co.uk/> as part of the Guardian and Battersea Arts Centre’s 
A Nation’s Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/a-nations-theatre> 
conversations and Curve’sInside Out festival 
<http://www.curveonline.co.uk/get-involved/inside-out-festival/>, promoting the 
work of local artists and companies. The festival ended with a performance of 
All Out, created by the excellentCommon Wealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/sep/25/bac-theatres-get-out-more>
, with local people of all ages, which was put together in just five days and 
performed in the multi-storey car park next to the theatre, providing a fragile 
and touching snapshot of the hopes and dreams of a city.

Herding sheep: why London theatre critics really need to get out more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/mar/31/nations-theatre-keswick-shepherds-life-london-critics-regional-theatre>
It was a particularly pertinent question to be asking in a city where you can 
feel the euphoria on the streets and where today, almost the entire city will 
turn out forLeicester City’s Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/15/claudio-ranieri-an-apology-leicester-city>
 victory parade. Football has brought the city together and made it proud of 
itself. Could theatre ever do the same? Can the passion that the city feels for 
its team ever be translated into a similar passion for its local theatre?

Over the last 12 months, around the country, the A Nation’s Theatre 
discussions have touched on many issues, such as whatdevolution means for 
theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/may/17/home-manchester-bac-nationhood>
, how best tosupport artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/28/theatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company>
, how the Edinburgh festival can be a morelevel playing field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/28/is-the-edinburgh-festival-really-a-level-playing-field>
,access and diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/feb/16/disability-theatre-diversity-arena-wolverhampton>
 and ways to promote high quality touring productions.

Many of the conversations have been terrific, passionate and engaged, but 
while in most of them the voices of artists and those who work in theatre have 
been heard loud and clear, what has often been missing is the voices of the 
audience. Just as we need to widen and diversify the stories we tell on stage 
and who is telling them, so we need to do the same about conversations around 
theatre. Otherwise we are only ever talking to ourselves. Why do some people go 
to the theatre and why do so many people never go, thinking that it’s some kind 
ofexclusive club 
<http://www.jakeorr.co.uk/blog/2015/01/theatre-is-not-a-club-so-why-do-we-make-it-feel-that-way/>
 that’s not for them?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Ffootball-theatre-the-curve-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5fe0be5f006feec5da259554e135e3dd5967765%2F0_180_4094_2456%2F4094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20unites%20cities%3A%20can%20theatre%20ever%20do%20the%20same%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Ffootball-theatre-the-curve-leicester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20unites%20cities%3A%20can%20theatre%20ever%20do%20the%20same%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Ffootball-theatre-the-curve-leicester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5fe0be5f006feec5da259554e135e3dd5967765%2F0_180_4094_2456%2F4094.jpg>
 The Curve theatre, Leicester … a space that invites the public in, rather than 
existing like a monastery. Photograph: Gary Calton for the Observer 
There were no answers on Sunday, because the informality of the event meant 
that conversations were fractured and drifting. Moving from table to table, I 
spoke to two women who talked eloquently about their children’s routes into 
theatre; a husband and wife working in education inLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leicester> said how important it was to keep 
those routes open to all and spoke of the importance of links between schools, 
colleges and the professional world; a disco-dancing child (yes, there was more 
disco dancing than debate) who told me that performing was “tingly”; an older 
woman who said that seeing theatre made her want to have a go at making it 
herself.

Today, the route for the Foxes’ victory parade will pass the Curve theatre, 
where there will be family-friendly viewing platforms and family activities. 
That’s exactly as it should be: a publicly funded space – and one that in its 
early days was a highly contested one – inviting the public in, not because it 
hopes to flog them a few tickets, but because it knows it has to be more of a 
town square andless of a monastery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/oct/19/a-nations-theatre-shopfront-belgrade-no-boundaries>
.

Sarah Kane: Why can’t theatre be as gripping as footie?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/sarah-kane-theatre-football-blasted>
On Sunday afternoon, there were signs of that in action. The theatre’s 
artistic director,Nikolai Foster 
<http://www.curveonline.co.uk/about-us/press-office/curve-appoints-nikolai-foster-as-new-artistic-director/>
, was available to chat to anyone. I’ve never seen the Curve foyer look quite 
so muddled and full of life, and yet, somehow, it felt as if those of us there 
owned the space, and if we wanted to disco-dance in it, we would. That’s as 
important as debate, and there are lessons to be learned from it. At the Curve 
it feels as if those lessons are starting to be taken on board, as the theatre 
looks to extend its producing and touring remit as well as its participatory 
activities. Theatres must value those who want to volunteer as much as those 
who buy a ticket to watch, because thebenefits of the back and forth between 
the two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/aug/30/major-theatre-institutions-die>
 are obvious.

Later on Sunday afternoon, on top of the car park as Inside Out reached its 
conclusion, bunches of multicoloured balloons were released and bobbed away 
over the city as if kept afloat by euphoria. Afterwards the Curve’s associate 
director,Suba Das 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/jul/23/suba-das-curve-theatre-leicester>
, said quietly: “It’s taken four years for this theatre to get to this point, 
so forgive me if I cry.” With work, perhaps in four years’ time the people of 
Leicester will feel as proud and passionate about their theatre as they do 
about their football team.

 * Highlights of the Inside Out festival will be at Battersea Arts Centre in 
London 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/39416/whats_on/whats_on/shows/a_nations_theatre_festival>
 later this month, as part of A Nation’s Theatre festival. 
 * This event was hosted by Lyn Gardner – to find out what other Guardian Live 
events <https://membership.theguardian.com/events> are coming up, sign up to 
become aGuardian member <https://membership.theguardian.com/>.  