
We took a series of blood samples before and six weeks into the diet. The 
blood plasma was obtained by centrifuging the samples and the blood plasma 
profiles were then generated using a NMR spectrometer. This allowed us to study 
the levels of a very broad range of molecules present in the blood and compare 
the changes before and after Atkins diet .

The results are a mixed bag. Worryingly, in this case, the LDL cholesterol 
(the bad type) increased in relation to the HDL (the good type). Atkins claims 
in his book that followers of his routine will see the opposite effect. LDL 
cholesterol has been shown to increase the risk of heart disease. Everyone's 
advice (including Atkins') is to try to reduce it.

Atkins' other predictions were mostly correct. The level of ketone bodies - 
produced as a byproduct when the body is using fat as its main source of fuel - 
shot up. Three in particular were noted: beta-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate and 
acetone (better known as nail varnish remover and a natural byproduct of the 
ketiotic process). The levels of a key amino acid called alanine fell, 
indicating that it is being used up to manufacture glucose inside cells.

Other amino acids such as valine, leucine and isoleucine were increased - 
similar to what is found in type 2 diabetes.

Taken together, these are the classic signs that the body is in a "ketotic" 
state. It is also the state of the body when it is in starvation mode.

In addition, the level of citrate nearly tripled. To our knowledge, this 
hasn't been observed before in the scientific literature and is noteworthy 
because blood citrate levels normally stay remarkably constant. Even if you 
manage to eat a dozen oranges (which are filled with citric acid) your citrate 
levels will stay very steady. The fact that they increased in this experiment 
implies that a more fundamental (but as yet unrecognised) change in metabolism 
might be responsible. Given that citrate is important in calcium balance, there 
could be unforeseen effects on bone metabolism with long-term elevation of this 
chemical. But we stress that one cannot draw general conclusions from short, 
single-patient studies.

Finally, the levels of glucose in the blood stayed almost constant. That was 
something of a surprise because fat-burning during ketosis kicks in usually 
only when glucose levels drop. But again, there is not enough information to 
draw strong conclusions - just new questions about the long-term effects of the 
diet.

Basically for Alok as an individual, the Atkins diet appeared to induce a 
metabolic state that was more like diabetes than simple starvation (which is 
the other cause of ketosis). This is not a good thing, and indeed the whole 
Atkins diet picture looks like a recipe for insulin resistance and consequent 
type 2 diabetes - exactly the opposite of what we should be aiming for in terms 
of weight loss.

Â· Yulan Wang is a researcher in metabanomics and Jeremy Nicholson is a 
professor of biological chemistry at Imperial College London.
 