
Ford, the struggling US motor industry group, is considering plans to sell off 
Swedish car maker Volvo in a deal that would fetch it some $8bn (£4bn) and 
enable chief executiveAlan Mulally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-mulally> to focus on building the 
company's American brands.

The group, which lost a record $12.7bn last year, is understood to be weighing 
up the option of offloading Volvo in the wake of the £497m disposal of Aston 
Martin earlier this year and the planned sale of Jaguar and Land Rover later 
this year.

The mooted sale of Volvo - bought for $7bn in 1999 - would complete the 
dismantlement of Ford's premium car division (PAG) under Mr Mulally, who has 
closed 13 North American plants and axed 35,000 jobs. But the Swedish carmaker 
is said to be highly profitable, contributing the bulk of the $420m earnings 
the PAG made in the first quarter.

A PAG spokesman said: "Ford Motor Company is not in any discussions with any 
companies relating to selling Volvo. But since last year we have been assessing 
our operations around the globe and looking at strategic options which any 
responsible business would do."

Sources dismissed reports that a decision to sell Volvo had been taken, 
pointing out that this would require filings to stock market regulators such as 
the SEC.

They also indicated that Mr Mulally will be under pressure to give details of 
the Jaguar/Land Rover sales process and any planned Volvo move when he delivers 
second quarter results on July 26. Indicative bids for the two UK-based 
companies are due a week earlier but no decision is likely before the end of 
the year, with unions last week demanding a say in the outcome.

These moves come amid signs that Ford could be having second thoughts about 
its disposals policy. Land Rover, whose US sales went up 8% in the second 
quarter, is expected to make $1bn profits this year while Jaguar is said to be 
improving.
 