
The US carmaker Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> offered a 
chink of light in the gloom engulfing Detroit by delivering a quarterly profit 
of $2.26bn (Â£1.37bn), though the gain was entirely down to a one-off financial 
boost from a debt restructuring which offset losses on the sale of vehicles.

Ford's market share of crucial US vehicle sales rose by two percentage points 
to 16.4% as its rivals,General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors> and Chrysler, struggled 
their way through bankruptcy. But the company still lost just over $1bn on its 
core business of selling cars and trucks.

The firm, the second-largest American carmaker after GM, is the only one of 
Detroit's "Big Three" to have refused any state aid. Chief executiveAlan Mulally
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-mulally>, conceded that conditions 
remain tough. "While the business environment remained extremely challenging 
around the world, we made significant progress on our transformation plan," he 
said.

Through a series of transactions to reduce debt by swapping loans for shares, 
Ford made an exceptional gain of $2.7bn. The company burnt through $1bn of cash 
in the second quarter, but still has $21bn in the bank and reiterated its goal 
of breaking even in 2011. Anecdotal evidence has suggested that someUS 
motorists turned to Ford to avoid cash-strapped companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/dec/01/us-car-manufacturing-detroit>
because of concern that warranties could be compromised at Chrysler and GM.

In Europe, Ford's profits fell from $582m to $138m despite the popularity of a 
new version of the Fiesta, which has racked up sales of 300,000 since its 
introduction in the autumn making it Europe's second-best-selling car. The 
Fiesta and the Focus are soon to be introduced to the US as Ford tries to 
satisfy demand among American motorists for smaller, more fuel-efficient 
vehicles.

Analysts believe Ford has sufficient firepower to maintain its standalone 
stance. In a recent research note, Eric Selle, a debt analyst at JP Morgan, 
said: "We believe Ford has the liquidity to make it to 2010, when its cash burn 
should improve."
 