
Ford Motor Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/nov/14/ford-automotive-history> has 
reported its best performance in a decade, making a profit of $6.6bn (£4.15bn) 
in 2010 despite a slowdown in the last three months.

The figures mark a dramatic turnaround for the company, which a few years ago 
appeared to bethe most vulnerable of Detroit's "Big Three" carmakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/29/ford-loss>. Last year was 
Ford's second consecutive year in the black after three years of losses.

But the company's recovery stalled in the fourth quarter, when debt-related 
costs dragged down its profit.

Ford's US vehicle sales rose 19.5% in 2010. Sales of its highly profitable 
F-series pick-up trucks increased 27.7%. The company's 40,600 hourly-paid 
workers will receive profit-sharing bonuses averaging $5,000 – the biggestFord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> has handed out since 2001. Last 
year's bonuses averaged $450.

Alan Mulally <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-mulally>, Ford's 
president and chief executive, said: "Our 2010 results exceeded our 
expectations, accelerating our transition from fixing the business fundamentals 
to delivering profitable growth for all.

"We are investing in an unprecedented amount of products, technology and 
growth in all regions of the world."

Ford's full-year 2010 pre-tax operating profit was $8.3bn, its best figure 
since 2000. On the down side, the fourth-quarter figures fell short of most 
Wall Street estimates, held back by weaker than expected European sales and 
high promotional costs for new models. Fourth-quarter pre-tax operating profit 
was $741m, compared with $914m a year ago. This helped to push its shares down 
sharply in early trading on Wall Street.

Ford's debts continue to worry analysts. Its rival carmakers, Chrysler and 
General Motors, went into bankruptcy, enabling them to wipe out debts worth 
tens of billions of dollars. Ford avoided bankruptcy but now owes more than its 
rivals.

Ford cut debt by $14.5bn to $19.1bn in 2010, which will save it more than $1bn 
a year in interest costs. Lewis Booth, Ford executive vice-president and chief 
financial officer, said reducing debt would remain a "key focus" in 2011.

Jessica Caldwell, analyst at Edmunds.com, said: "They have come a long way in 
the last three or four years and have set themselves up for the near term. They 
are making cars that both the media and the public like."

She conceded that the debt was a worry. "It is money they can't spend on 
research and development. But not taking bankruptcy bought them a lot of 
goodwill. GM is still trying to shake off the 'Government Motors' moniker."
 