
Amid Detroit's recession-shattered wasteland of empty offices and foreclosed 
homes, one man is doing rather well for himself - Ford's chief executive, Alan 
Mulally,got a pay package of $17.9m 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSN2218789320100322?type=marketsNews> for 
2009.

The payout, a 6% increase on 2008, almost certainly makes Mulally the best 
paid man in America's motor manufacturing industry.

His earnings could hardly be a starker contrast with the economic environment 
in Ford's home region, where houses are changing hands for as little as $1 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/mar/02/detroit-homes-mortgage-foreclosures-80>
 and unemployment, by some measures,is as high as 50% 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/12/16/detroits-unemployment-rat_n_394559.html>
. And a multi-million dollar package may well stick in the craw of some of the 
50,000 people who have lost their jobs at Ford over the last five years.

Mulally's money was largely in long-term share awards. He got a $1.4m salary 
and he didn't receive a cash bonus, although he did enjoy $127,699 worth of 
travel on executive jets. Although it's a huge sum by any sensible standard, 
there are grounds for arguing that he deserved it - Mulally is the man who saved
Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> from disaster.

While General Motors and Chrysler both went bankrupt last year and sucked up 
billions of dollars of government aid to stay afloat, Ford didn't take any 
public money andactually produced a profit for 2009 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/jan/28/ford-announces-profits-2009>, 
generating $2.7bn of net income (boosted, though, by hefty one-off accounting 
gains). In February, the company with the blue oval logo manufactured more cars 
than GM for the first time in half a century, becoming America's biggest 
vehicle maker by volume.

A youthful 64-year-old from a small Kansas town, Mulally took the top job at 
Ford in September 2006, an automotive novice after a 37-year career at the 
aerospace company Boeing. Since his arrival, Ford's shares have risen in value 
by 74%, up from around $8 to Monday's close of $13.99. That's a pretty 
staggering achievement, given the predicament of the company's two main rivals.

It would be foolish to put too much credit at the feet of one man. Ford had 
tactical advantages over its rivals as it entered the crisis, including much 
greater expertise in smaller, more fuel efficient cars that have suddenly 
become popular in the US at the expense of hulking sports utility vehicles. 
Ford has been able to move faster than GM and Chrysler by bringing European 
models, such as the Fiesta and Focus, to the US market. And its rivals problems 
have doubtless aided Ford's bottom line as the stigma of bankruptcy made 
carbuyers leery of purchasing GM or Chrysler vehicles.

But Mulally was behind one shrewd move that kept the company above water. 
Recognising tough times on the horizon, he raised $23bn in late 2006 by 
mortgaging almost everything Ford owned - from factories to stocks and even the 
firm's logo. That has given Ford crucial firepower, as he discussedin an 
interview with The Guardian last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/may/11/ford-alan-mulally-interview-car-industry>
.

In a statement, Ford defended Mulally's pay, pointing out that its stock was 
the fourth best performer in the S&P 500 index last year: "Given the 
challenging economic environment, we believe this performance to be 
outstanding, and we are gratified that stakeholders have shown renewed 
confidence in our future."

Mulally's boss, chairman Bill Ford, would have got $16.8m last year if he 
hadn't agreed to delay remuneration until Ford's automotive operations achieve 
full-year profitability without any one-off items.

Ford has had to shut more than 17 factories in recent years to cope with a 
slump in demand for new cars in the US. But Mulally has succeeded in doing so 
without significant industrial strife.

Here's a man who's done a remarkable job in keeping a huge industrial employer 
in business. He's far more deserving of rich rewards than the money-grabbing 
bankers who fiddle around with collateralised debt obligations on Wall Street.
 