
Ford's $2m-a-year chief executive, Alan Mulally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-mulally>, yesterday vowed to work 
for an annual salary of one dollar if the struggling carmaker has to take 
government money as part of a $25bn (Â£16.7bn) bail-out of the US car industry. 
In a further move to woo congressional support, Mulally pledged to sell Ford's 
fleet of corporate jets, cancel all next year's bonuses, close more plants, 
trim its dealer network and step up work on developing electric vehicles.

In its business plan, submitted to Congress yesterday, Ford said it was 
seeking bridging finance of $9bn, but argued that if Congress gave its approval 
it would not have to draw down the money. "ForFord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford>, government loans would serve as a 
critical backstop or safeguard against worsening conditions, as we drive 
transformational change in our company," Mulally said.

America's big three auto firms - Ford, General Motors and Chrysler - were all 
due to submit business plans to Congress as they seek financial support to 
weather the economic downturn.

The carmakers' pleas for aid were underlined by the latest grim sales figures 
yesterday. Ford reported a near 31% drop in sales for November, and said it 
expected the industry-wide slump to be about 35%. "The economy continues to 
weaken and auto sales reflect this reality," Ford sales and marketing chief Jim 
Farley said.

GM's recovery plan is expected to include cuts to its network of eight brands, 
centring on the sale or shutdown of the Saab, Saturn, or Pontiac marques. Its 
notoriously gas-guzzling Hummer is already up for sale. GM asked the government 
to extend $12bn in loans and another $6bn in credit. The car company said it 
needs Congress to extend $4bn in financing this month and provide the rest of 
the $12bn by March. The remaining $6bn would be available if a year-long 
recession in US auto sales drops beyond GM's now-lowered expectations. Without 
the immediate $4bn cash infusion, the top US automaker faces the risk of 
failure, a senior executive said. "The first $4bn is crucial," GM chief 
operating officer Fritz Henderson said. "There is no Plan B."

The road to restoration for privately-owned Chrysler could focus on an 
eventual merger with a foreign vehicle maker, given that its talks on uniting 
with larger rival General Motors have stalled.

Some congressional leaders have made it clear they are determined to ensure 
the carmakers will only get their support if they come up with credible 
restructuring plans. Hearings on the promises made by Detroit's motor groups 
will begin on Thursday.

Despite the carmakers' deferential return, tensions remain high as their 
defenders in Congress chafe at Wall Street's easy claim to a 
multibillion-dollar bail-out while Detroit struggles for its loans. The $25bn 
auto rescue could win approval next week.

Ford said yesterday it expected the company overall and the north American 
operations to be either profitable or breaking even in 2011. The forecast is 
based on optimistic prospects for a US market recovery which would see sales of 
12.5m units next year, with a rise to 14.5m in 2010 and 15.5m in 2011.

Ford has sold Aston Martin, Jaguar and Land Rover in the past two years and 
yesterday said it was looking at the future of Volvo.

In Germany Volkswagen reported that sales had fallen 17.6% in November 
compared with a year ago, while tomorrow the Society of Motor Manufacturers and 
Traders will disclose the performance of the UK new car market in November.
 