
Ahmed*, a Somali journalist, fled to Uganda in 2009 after he was threatened by 
al-Shabaab militants. He later moved to Kenya, and only returned toSomalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> in 2012 after al-Shabaab had 
withdrawn most of its forces from the capital, Mogadishu. But danger is ever 
present.

“Al-Shabaab tracks you and then out of the blue they message you, ‘We know you 
are at your office right now,’” he says. “You can try to protect yourself, but 
in the end you just pray that nothing will happen.” Since 1992,59 journalists 
have been killed <https://cpj.org/killed/africa/somalia/> in Somalia.

The Islamist extremist militia still casts a shadow over Mogadishu, despite 
the presence of thousands of African peacekeepers, European troops and soldiers 
from the ill-equipped and underfunded Somali army.

Somalia's limited polls overshadowed by clan rivalries and al-Shabaab
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/22/somalia-limited-polls-overshadowed-clans-al-shabaab-michael-keating-head-un-mission>
Ahmed, who was a friend of a 25-year-old businessman killed in a suicide 
attack on Mogadishu’s Naasa Hablood hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/25/al-shabaab-launch-attack-on-mogadishu-hotel>
 last month, says: “It was a very painful death as he was deported back from 
Jeddah [in Saudi Arabia] in 2014 and newly married. He was running his own 
business and expecting his first child soon.”

After years of chaos – starting with the fall of the dictator Mohamed Siad 
Barre <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/28/somalia-timeline> in 1991 
and the ensuing conflict between powerful warlords – Somalia has started to 
make some progress:elections were held in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/10/somalia-chooses-new-president-elections>
 and political institutions are slowly being rebuilt. The government last month
unveiled its first national development plan 
<http://www.mopic.gov.so/somalia-launches-first-national-development-plan-in-30-years/>
 in three decades, andlimited polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/22/somalia-limited-polls-overshadowed-clans-al-shabaab-michael-keating-head-un-mission>
 are due to be held in August.

But the security situation remains perilous, even though most of al-Shabaab’s 
fighterswithdrew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/07/somali-troops-mogadishu-rebels-out>
 from the capital in 2011. The militants have resorted to hit-and-run 
shootings, assassinations and bombings that sow fear in this city on the Indian 
Ocean.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fforeign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b77ce7e63d8c8d3df276045481938577d1776bf%2F0_0_3500_2383%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foreign%20troops%20in%20Somalia%20struggle%20to%20keep%20al-Shabaab%20at%20bay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fforeign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foreign%20troops%20in%20Somalia%20struggle%20to%20keep%20al-Shabaab%20at%20bay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fforeign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b77ce7e63d8c8d3df276045481938577d1776bf%2F0_0_3500_2383%2F3500.jpg>
 Locals look at the wreckage of a minibus destroyed in a roadside bomb in 
Lafoole village near Mogadishu, 30 June. Photograph: Feisal Omar/Reuters 
Last month, there were two assaults on prominent hotels, plus mortar attacks, 
shootings and assassinations. European soldiers are here to help the army 
defend the capital: theEU Training Mission (EUTM) 
<http://www.eeas.europa.eu/csdp/missions-and-operations/eutm-somalia/> has 160 
men and women from across Europe deployed in Somalia.

For security reasons, they live in the heavily protected international camp on 
the outskirts of the city, next to the airport, which sits at the heart of a 
fortified zone.

Max*, a German army captain, shares Ahmed’s sense of insecurity. “When you 
drive out of the camp, you have that very strange feeling,” he says. “There is 
always the threat that something could happen, even though there has not been 
an attack on us so far.”

Every morning, before the Europeans leave the camp, they are briefed on the 
agenda and security. Then they put on body armour, take their weapons and 
travel in armoured vehicles with an escort to the General Dhagabadan training 
centre.

Getting to work safely is a concern for most people living in Mogadishu. Some 
Somalis rely on changing their routes regularly while others pay for armed 
guards.

However, a senior EU official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, says the 
security situation has improved over the past couple of years, especially since 
the EUTM’s arrival in the region – to train soldiers in Uganda in 2010 and 
Mogadishu in 2014.

Somalia's Lido beach: the heart of Mogadishu and the place my friends died | 
Abdi Latif Dahir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/01/somalia-lido-beach-heart-mogadishu-place-my-friends-died>
It is hard to measure what effect the EUTM has had on the Somali soldiers – 
who will one day have to keep the peace alone. The trainees donot have the 
knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/apr/19/somalia-army-uphill-battle-credibility>
 the EU military trainers had expected.

They are poorly equipped – some wear uniforms from Uganda, others have 
American uniforms, and some show up in civilian clothes and flip-flops. 
Sometimes, soldiers will be absent for days because they have to be on duty in 
their regular units or because they haven’t been paid.

For now, the government depends on the African Union (AU) peacekeeping force, 
Amisom <http://amisom-au.org/>, which has been deployed here since 2007. 

Although there are 22,000 troops on the ground, they struggle to seize 
territory from the militants, and often face devastating losses. In January, 
al-Shabaab attacked Kenyan soldiers at their Amisombase in El Adde 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-somalia-kenya-idUSKCN0VY1VL>. Somalia’s 
president, Hassan Sheikh Mohamoud, said more than 200 soldiers were killed, 
although Kenya has not disclosed casualty numbers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fforeign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35bc4e0320cb2a5cd116817c9423058166a8877c%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foreign%20troops%20in%20Somalia%20struggle%20to%20keep%20al-Shabaab%20at%20bay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fforeign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foreign%20troops%20in%20Somalia%20struggle%20to%20keep%20al-Shabaab%20at%20bay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fforeign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35bc4e0320cb2a5cd116817c9423058166a8877c%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Ethiopian soldiers serving in Amisom pictured in Halgan village in Somalia’s 
Hiran region. Photograph: Ilyas Ahmed/Amisom 
The EU, which along with the UN is the main donor 
<http://amisom-au.org/frequently-asked-questions/> to Amisom, said this year 
that it would reduce its contribution by 20% 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/development-policy/news/african-union-s-somalia-mission-hit-by-eu-funding-cut/>
, meaning a salary cut for AU soldiers. Now, Uganda, which contributes more 
than 6,000 troops to the AU force, has said it willwithdraw its troops by the 
end of next year <http://af.reuters.com/article/topNews/idAFKCN0Z92QK>. 

Lt Col Joe Kibet, Amisom’s spokesman, said the Somali army is, “in terms of 
training, tactics and weaponry, now as good as any national army” and would 
take over “more and more responsibilities”.



Despite the security situation, Max says the European trainers are making 
progress. “I can understand that it is difficult for the single soldier to see 
the big picture when you only stay here for some months,” he says. “But we try 
to build up this country together with our Somali and international partners, 
and this takes time.”

*Some names have been changed to protect identities
 