
You’ve had Black Friday. Now get ready for… Super Tuesday! No, it’s not a 
pre-Christmas bargain bonanza – it’s far more exciting than last week’s retail 
spree. Well, for bank enthusiasts it is.

Super Tuesday, as some City analysts have decided to call it, brings together 
the Bank of England’s annual MOT of banks’ financial strength with its 
twice-yearly assessment of risks to the financial system. It’s not to be 
confused withSuper Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/06/super-thursday-interest-rates-bank-of-england>
 – the Bank’s quarterly bombardment of economists with information on inflation 
and interest rates.

Central banking used to be rather a dull business, but the dry data releases 
and policy pronouncements are now treated almost like the announcement of 
Adele’s next tour.Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>
, the Bank’s governor, is supposedly either a rock star or a George Clooney 
lookalike, depending on who you talk to.

The so-called stress tests cover the high street banks – HSBC, Royal Bank of 
Scotland, Barclays and Lloyds – plus Santander UK, Standard Chartered and 
Nationwide building society.

Analysts don’t think any of the lenders will fail the main test. The real 
action could be a clampdown on consumer lending after the Bank’s chief 
economist, Andy Haldane,said the Bank was keeping an eye on rising household 
debt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/consumer-spending-troubling-bank-of-england>
. Maybe Tuesday won’t be all that super for the banks.

Fed fever

Central bank fever will shift to the US and eurozone on Thursday when the 
chiefs of the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank face questions on 
monetary policy.

Fed chair Janet Yellen will appear at the joint economic committee of Congress 
for her annual session on the economic outlook. Interest will be much higher 
than normal because Yellen will be speaking less than two weeks before the 
Fed’s final monetary policy meeting of the year. Economists expect it to 
announce the first interest rate rise for almost seven years, and will inspect 
every syllable of Yellen’s testimony for clues about policymakers’ thinking.

Yellen, ranked the world’s second most powerful woman 
<http://www.forbes.com/powerful-people/#tab:overall> by Forbes, said earlier 
this month that a rate rise in Decemberwas a “live possibility” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/04/janet-yellen-december-rate-hike-still-on-table>
. Economists had expected rates to rise from near zero in September but the Fed 
held fire amid market turmoil from China’s slowdown.

Earlier on Thursday, that other star of the central banking firmament, “super” 
Mario Draghi, is expected to announce further monetary easing in the eurozone 
to drive inflation back towards the 2% target.

Aberdeen flounders

What links Janet Yellen, Aberdeen and China? Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement>, that’s what. 
The Scottish investment group rose to prominence as it placed bets on 
fast-growing emerging markets over the past decade. That strategy appeared to 
pay off: China and other Asian economies were unstoppable while the dull old US 
and UK struggled in the financial crisis.

But Aberdeen, under chief executive Martin Gilbert, has come a cropper this 
year as markets have been gripped by concern about China’s slowdown. The 
company’s shares have fallen by a third since hitting a peak of 507p in April, 
and investorshave withdrawn billions of pounds of funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/23/aberdeen-asset-management-shares-emerging-markets-us-interest-rates>
.

The flight of capital from emerging markets caused by China’s woes has been 
exacerbated by mounting expectations of a rate rise in the US, which is where 
Yellen comes in. In July, Gilbert vowed to maintain Aberdeen’s investment 
approach, saying: “It’s painful watching those outflows. Our style of investing 
is out of fashion. Hopefully people will love emerging markets again at some 
stage.”

But rumour had it last month that Gilbert was looking for a buyer for the 
company he set up in 1983. Analysts will get the chance to ask Gilbert about 
all this and more when Aberdeen reports results on Monday.
 