
Something weird happened last week at the Royal Festival Hall. At the end of 
Claudio Abbado's performance 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b015n9fl/Radio_3_Live_in_Concert_Abbado_and_the_Lucerne_Festival_Orchestra_at_the_Royal_Festival_Hall/>
 of Bruckner's Fifth Symphony with the Lucerne Festival Orchestra, what 
I experienced – along withthousands of others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2011/oct/12/classicalmusicandopera-claudio-abbado>
 in the hall, and thousands more listening on Radio 3 – felt like a vision of 
infinity, a collapsing of time and space into a single point of brilliance and 
intensity. Abbado and his musicians seem to achieve more through the medium of 
the concert than Cern'sLarge Hadron Collider 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Large%20Hadron%20Collider%20site:theguardian.com#q=Large+Hadron+Collider+site%3Atheguardian.com&hl=en&prmd=ivnsu&source=univ&tbm=nws&tbo=u&sa=X&ei=qPqXTq3UEoa78gPB1szoBQ&ved=0CCsQqAI&bav=on.2,or.r_gc.r_pw.,cf.osb&fp=4b9b52932c1a77ee&biw=1037&bih=831>
 has managed in years of experiments.

If there's a creative precedent for this Brucknerian infinity, it's probably 
theTotal Perspective Vortex <http://fscked.org/writings/TotalPerspectiveVortex/>
 in Douglas Adams's novelThe Restaurant at the End of the Universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2011/may/25/douglas-adams-towel-day>
, a device that shows how unimaginably tiny you are in the context of all 
things in the universe. Well, that's how it seemed to me. And I think I know 
how Bruckner andAbbado <https://www.theguardian.com/music/claudio-abbado> and 
his musicians did it. But before I tell you, a short scientific digression.

Mere musical descriptions can't really deal with notions of infinity. But I 
think there's some big science to back up such an interpretation of this 
Bruckner performance. Well, maybe, if I've understood it right. In his recent 
bookCycles of Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/16/cycles-time-roger-penrose-review>
, mathematician Roger Penrose takes issue with the generally accepted idea that 
the universe will eventually (in, say, a few trillion years) become an 
infinitely lifeless, cold soup of pointlessly drifting photons. Penrose thinks 
we could have a sort of big crunch instead, a universal collapse that would 
prefigure a new big bang. So the cycle of the universe would begin again: time 
goes round and round, rather than travelling in a straight line towards an end.

And that's what I reckon was going on at the Royal Festival Hall. Or at least, 
it's the closest explanation I can find. Abbado gave us a cycle of time, making 
a piece of music perfectly loop back on itself. At the end of the piece, 
Bruckner reveals the connections between the tunes you've been hearing for the 
last 75 minutes. He piles them one on top of the other, inone of the most 
thrilling musical fusions <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QW8UCqR1l3c> ever 
composed. If the performance hasn't done justice to the piece up to this point, 
the effect of this contrapuntal coming-together is simply noisy. But in 
Abbado's performance, it was transformative.

The ending, in his hands, gave us the whole journey of the symphony in 
ultra-compressed form. It was like a black hole of music. Those last five 
miraculous minutes made sense of everything that had happened up to that point: 
the discontinuities and disruptions of the first movement, its cubist 
collection of diverse musical objects, the emotional ambiguity of the slow 
movement – all of that was resolved, unified and drawn together in this 
time-travelling coda. You could say the end of the Fifth does in music what 
Penrose predicts for the universe. It distills the vastness of the symphony 
into a single passage, its very last chord being the musical equivalent of a 
big crunch.

How did Abbado do it? Simply by doing what conductors do all the time, albeit 
more brilliantly than any other musician I've ever heard tackling Bruckner: he 
controlled the flow of time. It wasn't just him, of course, as his musicians 
gave a performance that – in terms of ensemble, expression and flexibility – 
was among the most astonishing any of us are likely to experience. The Lucerne 
Festival Orchestra raises orchestral playing to anew realm of possibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2008/aug/19/theabbadomoment>. 
Through the alchemy of the musicians' relationship with Abbado, they also 
revealed Bruckner as a visionary – a quantum, time-collapsing composer.

My cultural life

By my bed: Alex Ferguson's autobiography, Managing My Life, a terrifying 
reproach to living your life with anything less than iron-like discipline.

On my iPod: Delius's late string concertos, in a brilliant new BBCSO recording.

On my TV: The Rugby World Cup and the great clash of the hemispheres.

In my diary: Wagner's The Flying Dutchman at the Royal Opera House.

• This article was amended on 27 March 2012. The original sub-heading referred 
to the Lucerne Festival Chorus, and the text referred to the Lucerne Symphony 
Orchestra. These have both been corrected.
 