
As I wait to meet my guide at the corner of one of Vienna’s market squares, I 
feel confident that I have already spotted what will be the first stop on our 
tour of the city’s ugliest buildings. The purple flowery facade of 
Leopoldsgasse 39 stands out from its beige neighbours, a beacon of 
individualism that I’m about to find is a common theme on this tour.

“It supposedly represents the artist’s love life,” my guide, Eugene Quinn, 
explains as we peer at lilac murals of crying women. “From the look of it, I 
don’t think it was very successful.”

Vienna is generally thought of as a handsome city: all imperial palaces and 
pretty squares. But a new tour launching – on 2 May, as part ofVienna’s Year of 
Walking Campaign 
<http://www.wien.info/en/vienna-for/sports/vienna-goes-on-foot-2015>, which 
will feature dozens of events to get people out on foot and a global conference,
Walk 21 <http://walk21vienna.com/>, in October – aims to show an alternative to 
the fairytale cliches.

“The tour is meant to show a more gritty, urban, contemporary and humorous 
Vienna to outsiders – and perhaps also locals,” says Eugene, who runs the Ugly 
Walking Tour with co-guide Nina Hochrainer and a culture group called Space and 
Place. As we set off for a sneak preview, I find I enjoy many buildings for the 
same reasons others hate them. Dark histories, 1980s aesthetics, and modernism 
forced on top (literally) of 19th-century architecture, all tell interesting 
stories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F02%2Fvienna-austria-ugly-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430424044680%2Fa5755eaa-1880-4300-8402-d9a8da384f63-2060x1364.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20grand%20architecture%20%E2%80%93%20Vienna%20embraces%20its%20ugly%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F02%2Fvienna-austria-ugly-walking-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20grand%20architecture%20%E2%80%93%20Vienna%20embraces%20its%20ugly%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F02%2Fvienna-austria-ugly-walking-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430424044680%2Fa5755eaa-1880-4300-8402-d9a8da384f63-2060x1364.jpeg>
 The gigantic Nazi anti-aircraft towers that loom over areas of the city escape 
the attention of many visitors. Photograph: Maddy French 
One example, visible in nearly every neighbourhood, is the modern glass 
penthouse on top of an ornate, century-old apartment block. A product of 
Vienna’s increasing wealth, they’re a deliberate affront to the city’s 
traditional Altbau style.

“Their construction can cause years of disruption to neighbourhoods,” says 
Eugene. “It’s an example of how something can look OK by itself but clash 
horribly with its surroundings.”

Taste aside, these structures are interesting because they reflect a broader 
tension in Vienna between past and present. This is even more apparent in the 
historic centre, a Unesco-listed district that impresses visitors but is 
avoided by locals. Critics says that although Unesco status brings value, it 
restricts development. “So many decisions about the area are made in Paris. 
People end up self-regulating, and don’t bother building things,” says Eugene.

This district still has its fair share of ugly, including a Black Death 
memorial 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Black+Death+memorial+statue+vienna&biw=1637&bih=1041&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=mbpAVZXgD4vgaIDrgbAG&ved=0CCcQsAQ>
, background to countless tourist selfies, that is both gaudy and disturbing. 
And the six gigantic Nazi anti-aircraft towers that loom over areas of the 
city, though a fascinating insight into Vienna’s darker history, escape the 
attention of many visitors and are ignored by most tours.

Deciding whether you agree or disagree with Eugene and Nina’s choices – 
apparently, there were many to choose from – is part of the fun, and 
participants are invited to an ugly pub to continue the discussion afterwards. 
As Eugene says: “We want to start a debate with these tours, not finish it.”

• The tours start 2 May and cost €5pp, spaceandplace.at 
<http://spaceandplace.at/2015/vienna-ugly-tour>
 