
Writing a good sex scene is remarkably tricky. Generally, it either descends 
into grunting porn, or implodes in a wild burst of adjectives. One minute 
there’s a hand on a thigh, the next they’re swooping through pellucid galaxies 
of shuddering colour. The latest author to be crushed under the grinding wheels 
of his own sex scene isMorrissey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/24/list-of-the-lost-morrissey-review-novel>
, whose attempt in his debut novel,List of the Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/sep/24/morrissey-what-we-learned-about-him-from-list-of-the-lost>
, has been roundly mockedon Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=morrissey&src=typd> and beyond, for a mortifying, 
breathless gush featuring “bulbous salutation” and barrel-rolling breasts. It’s 
a shoo-in for the next Bad Sex Awards. But not everyone has struggled to 
capture the act of love as Mozza has. So here are a few of the best, which 
would almost certainly be shortlisted for the Good Sex Award, if one existed.

Morrissey: what we learned about him from List of the Lost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/sep/24/morrissey-what-we-learned-about-him-from-list-of-the-lost>
Chaucer: Troilus and Criseyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/21/my-hero-geoffrey-chaucer-lavinia-greenlaw>

Her slender arms, her soft and supple back, / Her tapered sides – all fleshy 
smooth and white – / He stroked, and asked for favours at her neck, / Her 
snowish throat, her breasts so round and light; / Thus in this heaven he took 
his delight, / And smothered her with kisses upon kisses / Till gradually he 
came to learn where bliss is.

Arundhati Roy: The God of Small Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2012/mar/20/review-god-small-things-arundhati-roy>

Ammu, naked now, crouched over Velutha, her mouth on his. He drew her hair 
around them like a tent. Like her children did when they wanted to exclude the 
outside world. She slid further down, introducing herself to the rest of him. 
His neck. His nipples. His chocolate brown stomach. She sipped the last of the 
river from the hollow of his navel. She pressed the heat of his erection 
against her eyelids. She tasted him, salty, in her mouth. He sat up and drew 
her back to him. She felt his belly tighten under her, hard as a board. She 
felt her wetness slipping on his skin. He took her nipple in his mouth and 
cradled her other breast in his calloused palm. Velvet gloved in sandpaper.

Velvet gloved in sandpaper

Sebastian Faulks: Birdsong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/06/birdsong-sebastian-faulks-bookclub>


He had lifted her skirts as she stood with her back to the wall and now had 
his fingers between her legs. “Come to me,” she whispered, her breath hot in 
his ear. “Into me now.” He removed her fumbling fingers from his trousers and 
freed himself …

Gustave Flaubert: Madame Bovary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jul/27/classics.asbyatt> 


The cloth of her habit caught against the velvet of his coat. She threw back 
her white neck, swelling with a sigh, and faltering, in tears, with a long 
shudder and hiding her face, she gave herself up to him.

Henry Miller: Tropic of Cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/03/100-best-novels-tropic-of-cancer-henry-miller>


There was something about her eloquence at that moment and the way she thrust 
that rosebush under my nose which remains unforgettable … Her words imbued it 
with a peculiar fragrance; it was no longer just her private organ, but a 
treasure, a magic, potent treasure, a Godgiven thing and none the less so 
because she traded it day in and day out for a few pieces of silver.

John Cleland: Fanny Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/13/the-life-and-times-of-fanny-hill-caroline-quentin-bristol-review>


I had it now, I felt it now, and, beginning to drive, he soon gave nature such 
a powerful summons down to her favourite quarters, that she could no longer 
refuse repairing thither; all my animal spirits then rush’d mechanically to 
that centre of attraction, and presently, inly warmed, and stirr’d as I was 
beyond bearing, I lost all restraint.

List of the Lost by Morrissey review – 'verbose, tangential, unfocused'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/24/list-of-the-lost-morrissey-review-novel>
Michael Ondaatje: The English Patient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/mar/04/booker-club-english-patient-ondaatje>


There was that small indentation at her throat we called the Bosphorus. I 
would dive from her shoulder into the Bosphorus. Rest my eye there. I would 
kneel while she looked down on my quizzical as if I were a planetary stranger. 
She of the quizzical look. Her cool hand suddenly against my neck on a Cairo 
bus. Taking a closed taxi and our quickhand love between the Khedive Ismail 
Bridge and the Tipperary Club. Or the sun through her fingernails on the 
third-floor lobby at the museum when her hand covered my face.

Milan Kundera: The Unbearable Lightness of Being 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/may/01/fiction.johnbanville> 


Yes. When they looked at each other in the mirror that time, all she saw for 
the first few seconds was a comic situation. But suddenly the comic became 
veiled by excitement: the bowler hat no longer signified a joke; it signified 
violence; violence against Sabina, against her dignity as a woman. She saw her 
bare legs and thin panties with her pubic triangle showing through. The 
lingerie enhanced the charm of her femininity, while the hard masculine hat 
denied it, violated and ridiculed it. The fact that Tomas stood beside her 
fully dressed meant that the essence of what they both saw was far from good 
clean fun (if it had been fun he was after, he, too, would have had to strip 
and don a bowler hat); it was humiliation. But instead of spurning it, she 
proudly, provocatively played it for all it was worth, as if submitting of her 
own will to public rape; and suddenly, unable to wait any longer, she pulled 
Tomas down to the floor.

I would dive from her shoulder into the Bosphorus

E Annie Proulx: Brokeback Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/mar/11/awardsandprizes.oscars2006> 


A hot jolt scalded Ennis and he was out on the landing pulling the door closed 
behind him. Jack took the stairs two and two. They seized each other by the 
shoulders, hugged mightily, squeezing the breath out of each other, saying, son 
of a bitch, son of a bitch, then, and easily as the right key turns the lock 
tumblers, their mouths came together, and hard, Jack’s big teeth bringing 
blood, his hat falling to the floor, stubble rasping, wet saliva welling, and 
the door opening and Alma looking out for a few seconds at Ennis’s straining 
shoulders and shutting the door again and still they clinched, pressing chest 
and groin and thigh and leg together, treading on each other’s toes until they 
pulled apart to breathe and Ennis, not big on endearments, said what he said to 
his horses and his daughters, little darlin.

Anaïs Nin: Delta of Venus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/07/anais-nin-author-social-media> 


When she saw that he was dissolved with pleasure, she stopped, divining that 
perhaps if she deprived him now he might make a gesture towards fulfilment. At 
first he made no motion. His sex was quivering, and he was tormented with 
desire … Marianne grew desperate. She pushed his hand away, took his sex into 
her mouth again, and with her two hands she encircled his sexual parts, 
caressed him and absorbed him until he came. He leaned over with gratitude, 
tenderness, and murmured, “You are the first woman, the first woman, the first 
woman …”
 