
People think it’s cool to hate Christmas – it’s like hating Taylor Swift or 
fake meat. Hating Christmas means you are pure and above it all, that cliched 
lowbrow enthusiasm. Hating Christmas is therockism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rockism> of winter.

The griping starts every fall, whenever the merchandise begins to appear in 
stores. It’s so superior, so predictable and so boring. “I can’t believe it’s 
the holidays again!” “Ugh,Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>.” I refuse to participate 
in this overhyped, bourgeois manifestation of all that is wrong with society.

For bonus cool points, especially on Twitter, you can add a cynical flourish 
by also mocking the war on Christmas. (I’m OK with that, actually. I don’t 
believe inthe war on Christmas 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/martha-burk/enough-with-the-war-on-ch_b_8849200.html>
 – that’s just a load of political and religious crap.)

And joy? Joy is not part of a properly detached aesthetic. 

But joy is why I do believe in Christmas. I believe in decorations, and 
sparkles, and cookies, and snowmen, and department store window displays, and 
tinsel, and presents, and caroling, and gingerbread houses, and fruitcake, and 
crying when I see British pop stars sing “Do They Know It’s Christmas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjQzJAKxTrE>” even though I know it’s 
problematic.

I believe in David Bowie showing up to Bing Crosby’s house 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ADbJLo4x-tk> to sing. I believe in It’s a 
Charlie Brown Christmas 
<http://abc.go.com/shows/movies-and-specials/listings/a-charlie-brown-christmas>
, I believe in Miracle on 34th Street and of course I dream of aWhite Christmas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7S-IidmcSN8>. I believe in the Nutcracker 
<http://www.nycballet.com/Ballets/N/George-Balanchines-The-Nutcracker.aspx>, 
which is an entire ballet about candy, my friends. I believe inthe spirits 
coming to visit Scrooge 
<http://literature.org/authors/dickens-charles/christmas-carol/> and his 
transformation. I believe in theRadio City Christmas Spectacular 
<http://www.radiocitychristmas.com/explore-the-show.html> and its live camel.

I believe in it all, except eggnog. Eggnog is gross. Oh and Santacon: no one 
can defend Santacon. I’ll give you Santacon, Christmas-haters.

I throw epic Christmas parties at my house for my friends of all 
denominations. At the last one, I had three Christmas trees, four themed 
windows, several nutcrackers and every foil streamer I could find on eBay. 
There was a punch bowl with a block of ice in the shape of a wreath. There was 
a giant fake fireplace, a smaller fake fire and a television playing a fire on 
a loop. There was fake snow on the windows. There wasstollen 
<http://gothamist.com/2014/12/23/grandmas_stollen_was_the_best.php>, and 
gingerbread, and presents, and snowflakes and 36 hours of Christmas music on 
the stereo. I had on a dress made of paper that matched my paper tablecloth.

There is no room for cynicism at my house.


Christmas is also the time of special episodes on my favorite shows. On the 
second season of Girlfriends, they dida twist on the O Henry story 
<http://www.tv.com/shows/girlfriends/you-better-watch-out-108540/>, The Gift of 
the Magi <https://www.auburn.edu/~vestmon/Gift_of_the_Magi.html> that got 
across the perils of deceit as deftly as the classic did. On Popular they 
retold A Christmas Carol withNicole, the show’s villain, as Scrooge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pb4n-u-nLw0>. The Six Million Dollar Man also 
went with A Christmas Carol; the guy who represented Scrooge was called 
“Budge”, which is hilarious, truly. On Supernatural, Sam and Dean had to defeat 
a bloodthirsty Mr and Mrs Santa butthey still gave each other presents in the 
end <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SzriBZC1uus> – an episode that is 
obviously loosely based onSanta Claus Is Coming to Town 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santa_Claus_Is_Comin%27_to_Town_%28film%29>. 

You guys, scholars make a big deal about how myths are retold over and over in 
different cultures, and it happens right here every year, right before our very 
eyes.

I’ve even borne witness to a Christmas miracle. One year, my friends Josh and 
Jens and I had just returned to Brooklyn after a movie. We wanted a drink, but 
there we stood, alone in the snow, thirstily looking up and down the main drag 
of our neighborhood. Everything was closed. Not a creature was stirring, not 
even a mouse.

But what to our wondering eyes should appear? Suddenly Rosemary’s Greenpoint 
Tavern lit up with Christmas cheer! We were the first customers in, and it felt 
like family. Family with beer.

One of my favorite things about the season is this joke: 

 What did one snowman say to the other?

 “Do you smell carrots?”

If you can grasp the joyful absurdity (Damon Lindelhof could 
<http://lostpedia.wikia.com/wiki/Snowman_joke>) of that, then surely you can 
find a little fun in Christmas. I’m not asking you to believe in Christ. But 
believe in the spirit of the season, if nothing else. Be merry.
 