
Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby>, the former 
boss of failed bank HBOS, will secure a senior role in the gambling business 
formed from the merger of Ladbrokes and Gala Coral, putting pressure on City 
regulators to publish a long-awaited report on his role in the mortgage 
lender’s implosion.

Hornby is to be appointed chief operating officer of the whole group and will 
pick up a large bonus following the merger, which is expected to be announced 
on Friday after more than a month of talks.

The deal will be structured as a takeover of publicly traded Ladbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> by Coral, which is owned by 
private equity firms. The combined company is expected to apply to list its 
shares on the London Stock Exchange.

Shares in Ladbrokes have risen by almost a third since May, though have 
declined from147p in June, when news of the talks first emerged, to 128p on 
Thursday.

The merged company will control nearly 4,000 betting shops while its main 
competitor on the high street, William Hill, has about 2,300. But the effective 
duopoly, with both firms controlling about 70% of the UK’s 9,000 total, is not 
expected to trigger a competition review.

A similar merger proposal was filed by the firms in 1998 only to be ruled out 
by former business secretary Peter Mandelson, who said a tie-up was not in the 
interests of customers. But that ruling was made long before internet gambling 
exploded, allowing many other entrants to take a slice of a much bigger market.

Ladbrokes was until recently accused of failing to embrace the internet with 
the same enthusiasm as its rivals, allowing William Hill and younger firms such 
as Paddy Power and bet365 to win market share.

Last month, Jim Mullen, who was appointed four months ago as chief executive 
to shake up Ladbrokes, said his focus“has been on a more aggressive plan to 
build digital scale and grow our recreational customer base across all channels”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/ladbrokes-and-coral-in-talks-to-create-biggest-bookmaker>
.

He added that a merger with Gala Coral “could create a combined business with 
significant scale and has the potential to generate substantial cost synergies, 
creating value for both companies’ shareholders.”

As chief executive of HBOS, Hornby was in charge in 2008 when the lender was 
taken over by Lloyds bank in a shotgun merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/18/marketturmoil.hbosbusiness> 
designed to save it from going bust. The deal, which was waived through by the 
Treasury, was cited as one of the main reasons that Lloyds was later partly 
nationalised.

A report on the conduct of the HBOS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>
 board directors, including Hornby, has suffered a series of delays, which have 
been blamed on the time taken for those named in the report to make their own 
comments.

Hornby is under the spotlight alongside fellow directors, Lord Stevenson and 
James Crosby, following accusations that they failed to act promptly to save 
the institution, which owned Halifax and the Bank of Scotland, from near 
collapse.

It is known that shareholders have told senior directors at Ladbrokes and Gala 
Coral that Hornby should be kept off the board until the report is published.

Hornby has already been fiercely criticised in a report from Britain’s 
influential Banking Commission last week 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/hbos-failure-bar-lord-stevenson-sir-james-crosby-andy-hornby>
 which called for all three men to be barred from the City for their role in 
HBOS’s collapse.

If found negligent by the investigation, Hornby could also be barred by the 
business secretary Sajid Javid as a company director.

The companies refused to comment on the deal.
 