
A former Socceroo died in hospital because his urinary catheter was wrongly 
connected to an oxygen supply, leading to a burst bladder and collapsed lungs, 
a coroner has heard.

An inquest is being held into the death of Steve Herczeg at Adelaide’s Queen 
Elizabeth Hospital on 19 September.

“The coroner will hear that Mr Herczeg’s oxygen supply was incorrectly 
connected, resulting in his bladder inflating with oxygen, then bursting and 
his lungs collapsing from the pressure of the oxygen,” counsel assisting Naomi 
Kereru told the South Australian coroner’s court on Monday.

The court heard Herczeg, 72, played for Australia in the country’s first 
attempt to qualify for theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>, was admitted to 
hospital because he had had a fall and was having hallucinations.

He was also suffering from a urinary tract infection, for which a catheter had 
already been inserted, but was considered clinically stable when admitted to 
the respiratory ward and placed on oxygen therapy, Kereru said.

Soon after his admission, a nurse heard screams of pain coming from Herczeg’s 
room and a code blue was called. An emergency team attempted to resuscitate him 
but was unsuccessful.

The doctor who performed the autopsy found Herczeg’s bladder had ruptured and 
his lungs had collapsed, causing his death by “respiratory failure”.

The forgotten story of ... the Socceroos in Vietnam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/jun/06/australia-friendship-tournament-vietnam-1967>
“I understand his oxygen supply somehow became connected to his catheter,” 
forensic pathologist Stephen Wills told the court.

“The bladder ruptured, allowing the gas into the rest of his body.”

Wills said it was highly unusual for the tubes to be mixed up the way they 
were.

“I’ve never come across it before,” he said.

He said it would have been “quite painful” when Herczeg’s bladder burst and 
while the former footballer was suffering from respiratory disease, the 
injuries would probably have killed any healthy person.

Hungarian-born Herczeg was part of the 20-man squad for Australia’s first 
World Cup qualifying matches 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/sport/football/steve-herczeg-south-australias-forgotten-socceroo/news-story/5eae28f420921613116314e65d564d69>
, against North Korea in 1965. The two teams met in Cambodia, with the Koreans 
winning 9-2 on aggregate over two matches to clinch the last spot in the 1966 
finals in England.

Herczeg played in the second game 
<http://www.ozfootball.net/ark/Socceroo/1965A.html>, which Australia lost 3-1, 
in front of 55,000 fans in Phnom Penh.
 