
What goes around comes around – in the art world as in the law.

In 2012, Australian criminal barrister Charles Waterstreet, the co-creator and 
inspiration behind the the hit ABC legal series Rake, represented Nigel Milsom 
during an armed robbery case that saw the Newcastle-based artist sentenced to 
six years in jail.

Jailed portrait prize winner is an artist's artist, and one of prodigious 
talent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/24/jailed-portrait-prize-winner-is-an-artists-artist-and-one-of-prodigious-talent>
Now Milsom has won the the $100,000 Archibald prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/archibald-prize-2015> – Australia’s 
highest profile visual art award – for his arresting black and white portrait 
of Waterstreet in his barrister’s robes.

It’s the latest chapter in an ongoing relationship. “I’ve known Charlie 
indirectly and directly since birth,” said Milsom, whose father used to sell 
the Waterstreet parents fish in Albury, New South Wales. And for the Archibald, 
it’s a dramatic backstory for an exhibition prize that is sometimes accused of 
being less than the sum of its parts.

The award was announced at the Art Gallery of New South Wales in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> by Guido Belgiorno-Nettis, 
president of the gallery’s board, to the heaving media throng who routinely 
report for duty on the biggest day in the Australian art calendar.

Archibald prize 2015 review –
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/17/archibald-prize-2015-exhibition-review>
Milsom’s story is the stuff of TV drama itself. He was considered one of 
Australian art’s most promising talents before depression, drug addiction and 
the death of several close friends derailed his career soon after he won the 
Sulman prize, sister award to the Archibald, in 2012.

High on heroin, ice and prescription drugs, Milsom was involved in the hold-up 
of a 7/11 store in the Sydney suburb of Glebe with his drug dealer James Simon. 
At trial, the artist pleaded guilty to aggravated armed robbery, and was 
sentenced to six years, with a minimum jail period of two years and six months. 
Simon was given six years too.

He put his head on the chopping block and restored my faith in the legal system
Nigel Milsom 
While inside, Milsom picked up Australia’s other big portrait prize, the 
Moran, though not in person – his girlfriend and art dealer spoke on his 
behalf. The artist’s sentence was later reduced by the NSW court of criminal 
appeal, in no small part due to Waterhouse’s defence.

“He basically put his hand up and said that he’d help me, that he’d help sort 
out the mess that I found myself in and that’s what he did,”said Milsom,  
<http://www.businessinsider.com.au/how-nigel-milsom-who-just-won-the-100000-archibald-prize-wound-up-in-prison-for-robbery-2015-7>
who was released from Cessnock correctional centre after 12 months and showed 
his first exhibition after prison at Juniper Hall in Paddington in April.

“He put his head on the chopping block and restored my faith in the legal 
system.”


In Milsom’s portrait, which took just a week to paint but three years to 
conceive, Waterstreet is rendered in Goya-esque shades of black, white and 
blue. In life, the lawyer is a colourful character whose quick thinking and 
faster living have given actor Richard Roxburgh, as his fictional alter ego 
Cleaver Greene, plenty to play with.

Archibald prize finalists 2015: from popstars to politicians – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jul/09/archibald-prize-finalists-2015-from-popstars-to-politicians-in-pictures>
“Charlie is a very complex person,” wrote Milsom in his supporting statement 
for his painting. “He isn’t just a law man. He’s a writer, a social 
environmentalist and he is involved in film, photography and theatre, too. 
Despite personal struggles with his own demons over the years, he has managed 
to dedicate most of his time to the welfare of others.


“My portrait is an attempt to depict him a giant, part-man, part-mythical 
creature with hands that appear otherworldly, as though the anatomy of his 
hands has been designed to grasp unnatural disasters naturally.”

Also announced on Friday were the $50,000 Wynne landscape prize and $40,000 
Sulman prize for genre painting. The former went to Natasha Bieniek for her 
work Biophilia, an intricate painting of St Kilda botanical gardens, inspired 
by iPhone photos and at just a few inches square, not much bigger than one.

The Sulman went to Chinese-Australian artist Jason Phu for his piece, I Was At 
Yum Cha When In Rolled The Three Severed Heads of Buddha: Fear, Malice and 
Death.

The Young Archies, for child and teenage artists, will be announced on 22 July.

 * The Archibald, Wynne and Sulman prize exhibition 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/archibald-wynne-sulman-prizes-2015/>
 runs at the Art Gallery of New South Wales from 18 Jul to 27 Sep. The 
Archibald prize finalists will then tour regionally until July 2016  