
Andy Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andyduncan>, the former chief 
executive of Channel 4, has been appointed to the same role at luxury car 
dealer HR Owen.

Duncan, who left Channel 4 after five years as chief executive in November 2009
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/23/andy-duncan-pay-channel-4> and 
received almost £1.5m for his final 11 months as part of a departure deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/23/andy-duncan-pay-channel-4>, will 
join the company on 4 October. He will have a seat on the HR Owen board and 
takes over fromNick Lancaster, who left the company in May 
<http://www.motortrader.com/industry-news/car-dealer-news/30082-hr-owen-boss-nick-lancaster-quits.html>
.

"It is a real coup for the company to attract an individual of Andy's 
calibre," said Jon Walden, the chairman of HR Owen. "His outstanding track 
record in general management, marketing and sales, together with his extensive 
experience of the fast-changing new technology of the internet, will be highly 
beneficial as we build our business for the future, and we are looking forward 
to working with him."

Before joining Channel 4, Duncan was head of marketing at the BBC, where he 
was one of the architects of Freeview, and prior to that had a 17-year career 
in marketing at Unilever. Duncan has been responsible forbrands including I 
Can't Believe It's Not Butter, PG Tips and Bachelor Supernoodles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/16/andy-duncan-channel-4>.

HR Owen reported a pre-tax profit of £726,000 in the six months to the end of 
June, down from almost £6.5m in the same period last year. However, the £6.5m 
figure included an exceptional one-off gain of £7.5m meaning that HR Owen 
actuallymoved back into trading profitability in the first half of this year 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/Article.aspx?id=20100826113800P5692>.

According to motortrader.com, which cites an advertisement for the role that 
appeared in the Sunday Times 
<http://www.motortrader.com/industry-news/car-dealer-news/30141-hr-owen-offering-p250k-salary-for-new-chief-executive.html>
, Duncan is being paid around £250,000 as a basic salary as well as unspecified 
benefits, a bonus scheme and a long term incentive plan.

Duncan's basic salary at Channel 4 was £670,000 a year, until he took a 
voluntary pay cut bringing it down to under £500,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/mar/09/andy-duncan-channel-4-pay-cut>.

According to the Sunday Times ad the successful chief executive applicant 
needed to be "an inspirational leader with strong strategic skills, consumer 
orientation and a track record of building successful businesses in sectors 
where high levels of quality and service are demanded and delivered".

Following the departure of Lancaster, three other HR Owen board members 
resigned: Nick Mason, the former drummer of Pink Floyd, a well-known car 
enthusiast; Tony Smith, who has managed bands including Genesis, and the hotel 
operator Ramon Pajares.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 