
The former boss of Royal Bank of Scotland's investment banking arm, Johnny 
Cameron, today said he is taking his "share of responsibility" for the collapse 
of RBS and has pledged that he will never run a bank again.

Cameron has agreed to be banished from the City following an investigation by 
the Financial Services Authority into his management of the troubled division. 
TheCity regulator has also agreed 
<http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pages/Library/Communication/PR/2010/081.shtml> not to 
pursue any disciplinary action against him. Cameron, who was a close colleague 
of former RBS chief executive Sir Fred Goodwin, has agreed not to perform any 
"significant influence function" at a City firm or "undertake any further 
full-time employment in the financial services industry". But he will be able 
to take on "part-time consultancy work in the financial services industry 
provided that the work does not involve performing activities which would 
require approval for a significant influence function," the FSA said.

RBS was bailed out by the taxpayer in October 2008 and the government 
eventually spent Â£45bn buying shares in the Edinburgh-based bank which is 
continuing to make losses.

Cameron said: "Given the losses sustained by RBS in 2008, as a director of the 
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> Group, I 
recognise that it is appropriate that I take my share of responsibility, and I 
will not be seeking another managerial role in the financial services industry. 
I am pleased that the FSA has concluded its year-long investigation."

The FSA, which has been investigating the systems and controls in place in 
RBS's so-called global banking and markets arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/16/rbs-boss-city-jobs-ban> 
grants an authorisation to any individual wanting to take a role in the City 
and is able to withdraw the licences to operate as well.

The FSA said it would have attempted to put a formal ban on Cameron had he not 
voluntarily agreed not to take on a senior role again.

"Were it not for this undertaking, it was the FSA's intention to take steps to 
seek to prohibit Cameron from performing any 'significant influence' function 
or any function held in full-time employment in relation to any regulated 
activity carried on by any authorised person, exempt person or exempt 
professional firm," the FSA said.

"On the basis of the information available to it, the FSA believes that 
Cameron would not meet its current standards for approval for a significant 
influence function," the regulator added.

The FSA will not take any disciplinary action and stressed that it had "not 
made any findings of regulatory breach against Cameron and he has not made any 
admissions".

Cameron has already made two attempts to return to work since leaving RBS in 
January 2009. The FSA blocked his efforts to take up a role at City advisory 
firm Greenhill while its investigation into RBS continued. His appointmentat 
headhunter Odgers Berndtson lasted just days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/sep/28/rbs-chief-quits> after UK 
Financial Investments, which looks after the taxpayer stake in RBS, withdrew a 
crucial contract from the firm.

Cameron's decision not to seek another role highlights the contrasting fates 
of executives since the banking crisis. Andy Hornby, chief executive of HBOS 
when it had to be rescued by Lloyds, is nowchief executive of privately owned 
pharmacy business Alliance Boots and will tonight deliver a high-profile 
lecture on retailing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/may/17/alliance-boots-profits-andy-hornby-hbos>
.
 