
Dr Louis Leakey 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/03/22/LouisLeakey_2_October_1972.jpg>, the 
British anthropologist, announced in Washington the discovery of fossil 
remains, estimated to be 14,000,000 years old, which “fill one of the major 
gaps in man’s evolution.”


He said he had unearthed the remains last July on an orange farm in Kenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>. They consisted of two halves of the 
upper palate and a lower tooth of what he described as a creature unique in 
anthropological discovery.


The new find, at Fort Ternan <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fort_Ternan>, was 
equal in importance to Zinjanthropus (found in Tanganyika). The new creature’s 
teeth disclosed that it stood between the primitive ape type - pro-consul - and 
Zinjanthropus in the evolution of man. “It was not a man, but it was a creature 
heading very strongly in the direction of man and away from the proconsul 
apes,” he said.


A significant feature about the new creature was the very small canine tooth, 
which, as in man, did not project more than a fraction below the level of its 
other teeth. Its lower molar was low-crowned, and thus structurally more like 
the molars of man than of apes; and it also had a depression on the cheek bone 
below the eye - “the kind of hollow found in man but never in apes.” Its age 
had been estimated by tests at the University of California.


He added he had no doubt that it was in Central Africa that man was born. 
“CentralAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> was the place which 
we sometimes call the Garden of Eden.”


In February last year Dr Leakey announced that he had discovered in the 
Olduvai Gorge, in Tanganyika, what he called the earliest man known to science, 
estimated to be about 600,000 years old.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ffossils-kenya-louis-leakey-1962%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2d0df0920e9538d76f2b03ecea7e0ac729a9fae%2F0_0_5076_3044%2F5076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fossils%20discovered%20in%20Kenya%20are%20neither%20ape%20nor%20man%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%201962&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ffossils-kenya-louis-leakey-1962%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fossils%20discovered%20in%20Kenya%20are%20neither%20ape%20nor%20man%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%201962&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ffossils-kenya-louis-leakey-1962%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2d0df0920e9538d76f2b03ecea7e0ac729a9fae%2F0_0_5076_3044%2F5076.jpg>
 Louis Leakey and his family inspect the campsite of an early hominid, Olduvai 
Gorge, Tanzania, 1961. Photograph: Robert F. Sisson/National Geographic/Getty 
Images  