
The oil giant BP has announced that they will no longer fund the American 
Legislative Exchange Council (Alec) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/23/alec-bp-british-petroleum-companies-conservative-lobbyist>
, a lobbying group that routinely misrepresents climate science to US state 
legislators. It is the latest sign that some of the world’s largest fossil fuel 
companies appear to be warming to the overwhelming evidence that the unabated 
use of their products poses severe risks of disrupting the climate.


Last month, BP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> and Royal Dutch Shell 
announced their support for shareholder resolutions calling on them to commit 
to reduce heat-trapping emissions, invest in renewable energy, and show how 
their current business model would hold up against the strict limits on future 
emissions needed to limit the risk of major climate disruption.

Shell chief executive Ben van Buerden recently stated 
<http://ecowatch.com/2014/10/24/shell-chevron-exxon-dump-alec/> that “climate 
change is real and a threat we want to act upon. We are not aligning with 
sceptics.”

Even ExxonMobil, which spent $16m (£11m) between 1998 and 2005 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/solutions/fight-misinformation/exxonmobil-report-smoke.html#.VQI7Xo7F-WU>
 to fund groups that spread disinformation about climate science, now 
prominently acknowledges on their website that “rising greenhouse gas emissions 
pose significant risks to society and ecosystems.”

But appearances can be deceiving.

For one, BP still channels funds through its political action committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/22/climate-sceptic-us-politician-jim-inhofe-bp-political-action-committee>
 to climate science-denying US policymakers such as senator James Inhofe, chair 
of the senate’s environment and public works committee. While such direct 
contributions to politicians are a matter of public record, companies continue 
to sow climate doubt and influence climate policy in ways that are far more 
opaque.

For instance, recently released documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/21/climate-change-denier-willie-soon-funded-energy-industry>
 show that ExxonMobil gave more than $75,000 between 2008 and 2010 to secretly 
support the work of Willie Soon, a contrarian climate researcher at the 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, well after the company announced 
it would halt such funding. Soon’s research has sought to downplay the human 
influence on global warming.
Campaign sign up 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/03/climate-embeds/campaign-form/update/promos/campaign-embed-form.html>
This follows revelations that Southern Company, one of the largest utilities 
in the US, spent $400,000 between 2006 and 2015 to fund Soon, supporting his 
research, Congressional testimony, and other “deliverables” while specifying 
that its funding be disclosed only with express company permission.

Robert Gehri, the Southern Company employee who authorised this funding was 
one of a dozen industry representatives who, on behalf of the American 
Petroleum Institute, createda $6m campaign in 1998 that misled the public about 
climate science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/27/what-happened-to-lobbyists-who-tried-reshape-us-view-climate-change>
. Among other strategies, he oversaw the covert funding of “independent” 
scientists.

Some of the largest fossil fuel companies now publicly accepting mainstream 
climate science, continue to support climate denial through influential 
lobbying groups and trade associations. Shell, Chevron, and ExxonMobil still 
fund Alec, which misleadingly describes climate change as “a historical 
phenomenon for which debate will continue over the significance of natural and 
[human-caused] contributions.”

With their support, Alec promotes “model legislation” to repeal state 
renewable energy standards and roll back other climate and energy policies.

Shell, BP, Chevron, and ExxonMobil are also members and funders of the API and 
the Western States Petroleum Association (WSPA). Late last year, aleaked 
presentation from WSPA 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2014-11-25/revealed-the-oil-lobbys-playbook-against-californias-climate-law>
 revealed a stealth campaign to block climate policies in California by backing 
a constellation of astroturf groups with names such as the “California Drivers 
Alliance” and “Californians Against Higher Taxes”.

Exactly how much fossil fuel companies have spent to support disinformation 
remains shrouded in secrecy, in part because they are not required to report 
their political and public relations spending. Robert Brulle, a social 
scientist at Drexel University, estimates thathundreds of millions of dollars 
<http://drexel.edu/now/archive/2013/December/Climate-Change/> have flowed from 
corporations, ideological foundations, and groups that oppose climate policy 
and often sow doubt about mainstream climate science.

Such spending is big money in politics, but it pales in comparison to the 
staggering costs of climate change. New York City alone estimates it will cost 
nearly $20bn over a decade to protect its citizens against rising seas and more 
extreme weather. The bipartisanRisky Business Project 
<http://riskybusiness.org/> estimates that over the next 15 years, sea-level 
rise and storm surge are expected to increase damage from East and Gulf Coast 
storms by $2bn to $3.5bn. They also conclude that more extreme heat could cause 
corn, wheat, soy and cotton yields to decline 10% or more in some southern and 
midwestern counties.

Who will pay these and other costs of preparing for now inevitable changes? 
Right now, by default, this responsibility falls largely to taxpayers.

But shouldn’t fossil fuel companies bear some responsibility to pay for the 
harms resulting from their products?

Tobacco companies were found liable for damage from cigarettes. Those 
companies also deceived the public about the realities of scientific research 
on smoking. In fact, they funded some of the same scientists and groups fossil 
fuel companies have relied on to spread misinformation. The tobacco companies 
were held accountable, in part, because they colluded to deceive the public and 
policymakers about the risks their products caused.

Similarly, after scientific evidence on the cancer-causing risks of asbestos 
was established, producers of asbestos and manufacturers of products containing 
it were also held liable for damages.

The magnitude of the fossil energy industry’s contribution to the climate 
problem is enormous. Researchers have found thatjust 90 entities 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/global_warming/science_and_impacts/science/largest-producers-industrial-carbon-emissions.html#.VQHVM44c6gY>
 – including the world’s largest investor-owned fossil fuel companies such as 
Chevron, ExxonMobil, BP, and Shell – are responsible for extracting the coal, 
oil, and gas that have produced about two-thirds of all industrial carbon 
pollution. For decades, these same companies have sought to obscure the risks 
of using their products, and sought to deny and delay regulation – increasing 
the risks society faces from a changing climate.

It is not too late for fossil fuel companies to take responsible action. Shell 
and BP’s support for shareholder resolutions calling on them to invest in 
low-carbon energy is a first step. But investors – and society at large – 
should expect far more.

We should expect fossil fuel companies to stop supporting climate 
disinformation and distance themselves publicly from trade associations and 
lobbying groups that do. We should expect them to make their political spending 
transparent. And we should expect them to pay a fair share of the costs of 
limiting the damages from climate change, which a more expedited transition to 
low carbon economy could have – and should have – avoided.

Peter C Frumhoff is the director of science and policy at the Union of 
Concerned Scientists and a former Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
lead author. Naomi Oreskes is a professor of the history of science at Harvard 
University and the author with Erik M Conway of Merchants of Doubt, which is 
the subject of a new documentary, and The Collapse of Western Civilisation.
Ticker <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/kiln/fuelticker/>  