
Sometimes when you switch off, you turn on. After making my 15-hour The Story 
of Film: An Odyssey, I wanted to switch off. It had taken six years to make and 
I'd travelled the world. I wanted to go nowhere and to think about anything but 
film-making, so I walked a lot, drew a bit and filmed stuff. Filming to escape 
filming is weird, I know, but, like people watching or climbing hills, it's 
absorbing and relaxing for me. So I filmed cities, clouds, the sea and my niece 
and nephew, Laura and Ben, playing. I had fun watching them have fun.

Orson Welles once said that to write a poem you need a pen, to paint a picture 
you need a brush and to make a film you need an army. I was army-less, and as 
far away from film-making as you could get – or so I thought.
 Magical … Henry Thomas as Elliott in Spielberg's ET. Photograph: AP 
A month after I switched off, on an idle evening in a hotel room, I looked at 
the footage of Laura and Ben playing – a single shot that lasted just 11 
minutes. As they know me well and my camera was unobtrusively tiny, they were 
unselfconscious. As I wasn't making a film, I was unselfconscious, too. This 
double distraction made the footage fresh. I watched the two kids trying to 
bite each other, then fart, then smash up the marble run they played with, and 
I felt a film coming on, the way hunger comes on.

Inspiration is a ball kicked in from nowhere, said Seamus Heaney. In came that 
ball. The kids in my shot reminded me of kids in other movies – Elliot in ET, 
Billy inKen Loach's Kes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/02/my-favourite-film-kes>, 
children in silent Japanese films, the stroppy adventurers in great Iranian 
movies like Jafar Panahi's The White Balloon. Looking at my footage felt like 
looking into a rock pool.

Spy a metaphor in something and a thought-train starts rolling. That train 
took me to Renko, a determined Japanese girl in Shinji Sōmai's film Moving. Her 
parents are splitting up; her reaction is as operatic as a Sergio Leone film. I 
thought of Palle, a little Danish boy who wakes up to find that all the people 
in the world have disappeared. The train took me to Margaret O'Brien singing 
out of tune and beheading snowmen in Vincente Minnelli's Hollywood classic Meet 
Me in St Louis. My non-film was starting to become a film.

And my thought-film started to be about more than children. I began to realise 
that most of the movie kids I was remembering were, like Elliot in ET, 
escapologists plotting to obviate adults' rules, slip the leash and jump the 
hedge. In the era of 12 Years a Slave, I realised that films about kids are 
almost always about freedom too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FANkKOs6zMOc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FANkKOs6zMOc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FANkKOs6zMOc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view A Story of Children and Film trailer 
<http://vimeo.com/67417724#at=0>

The film began to gather steam, and I began to edit my footage of Laura and 
Ben together with clips of kids from great movies around the world. The 
connections seemed to work, and a picture of childhood in cinema began to grow. 
The editing brought further insights, further balls kicked in from nowhere. I 
started to realise that cinema is very good at depicting childhood; that this 
young art form and childhood seemed to be made for each other, in that both are 
very present tense. Kids seem always to be in the moment, and so does Gene 
Kelly. Everywhere I looked, there were articles about mindfulness, the here and 
now we took for granted until Twitter and Skype made them elusive. My 
army-less, switched-off non-film suddenly had a bigger theme: the here and now.

The project grew. I called it A Story of Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and Film. A daydream became a 
hunch, which became a cut sequence on a small screen in an editing suite, which 
became a portrait of childhood and a new take on movie history and then, one 
day, an entire film on massive movie screens.

A Story of Children and Film is finished now, "locked" as they say, subtitled 
and dubbed. Laura and Ben are a year older now, and so are the movies, but 
their 11 minutes of play, and the thought-train that they led to are now a time 
capsule, an ongoing moment.

• A Story of Children and Film 
<http://dogwoof.com/a-story-of-children-and-film> is to be released in the UK 
on Friday.Cinema of Childhood 
<http://www.filmhousecinema.com/news/view/413/welcome-to-the-cinema-of-childhood/>
, a season of 17 films curated by Mark Cousins, will tour UK cities from 11 
April.
• Children in cinema: never mind Nemo, what about finding some funding? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/03/children-in-films-finding-nemo>
 