
A marathon four-day Russian public reading of Leo Tolstoy’s vast classic novel 
War and Peace <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-and-peace-13.html> kicked 
off on Tuesday morning, with more than 1,300 people in more than 30 cities 
preparing to make their contributions to the record-breaking project.

Coordinated by Tolstoy’s great-great-granddaughter Fekla Tolstaya, and 
featuring a number of cultural luminaries including the Polish film director
Andrzej Wajda <http://www.wajda.pl/>, the readings are being streamed by 
Russian state television channelKultura <http://tvkultura.ru/>. One volume of 
Tolstoy’s fictionalised history of Russia during the Napoleonic campaign will 
be read each day.

The novel opens in 1805, as Anna Pavlovna Scherer, “maid of honour and 
favourite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna”, is throwing a party with Napoleon 
being talked of as the man – and possible military adversary – of the hour. The 
mission to complete the reading of the novel’s more than half a million words 
is due to conclude by the end of Friday.

“We’re starting at 10am, and we will go through to midnight or two or three 
am, depending,” Tolstaya told the Guardian. “They’re extremely long.”

As well as the Oscar winner Wajda, the readers were drawn from across Russia, 
including schoolchildren, politicians, professors and actors – as well as one 
cosmonaut. More than 6,000 people applied to be part of the project, said 
Tolstaya, with the successful candidates each given a two-to-three minute 
excerpt from the novel, to be read in carefully chosen museums, libraries and 
institutions acrossRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. French 
readers are also being drafted in to read the many sections of the novel 
written in French.

It is not only problems, and war and difficult things, happening in Russia
Fekla Tolstaya 
“This is the biggest reading of War and Peace in the world – a four-day 
marathon, uniting the whole country and people all over the world. [And] it is 
very democratic: we can have a minister of culture reading next to a student 
from Vladivostok, a great actor then an old lady reading from a library in 
Siberia,” Tolstaya said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffour-day-marathon-public-reading-of-war-and-peace-begins-in-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5687ee8a69663c2f43ecbc6924da5eea90028ca5%2F0_89_2016_1423%2F2016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four-day%20marathon%20public%20reading%20of%20War%20and%20Peace%20begins%20in%20Russia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffour-day-marathon-public-reading-of-war-and-peace-begins-in-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four-day%20marathon%20public%20reading%20of%20War%20and%20Peace%20begins%20in%20Russia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffour-day-marathon-public-reading-of-war-and-peace-begins-in-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5687ee8a69663c2f43ecbc6924da5eea90028ca5%2F0_89_2016_1423%2F2016.jpg>
 Fekla Tolstoya, pictured monitoring the live stream. Photograph: Fekla Tolstoya
“For me it shows how we are all equal when we speak about literature, when we 
speak about books – everyone can find something for themselves in this book. 
Bearing in mind that my name is Tolstoy, I think you would allow me to say that 
War and Peace is the number one Russian book. And I say that not only because I 
am a Tolstoy, but because it is something special for every Russian. For me it 
is about love, about how the young grow up; and the older I become, the more 
philosophical I find this text.”

The reading marks the culmination Russia’s “year of literature”, and Tolstoys 
from around the world are also participating, Tolstaya said. “My family is very 
big – there are descendants of Tolstoy all over the world, so there will be 
Tolstoys reading from the US, Britain, Brazil and France.”

The Russian branch of the family will read from the Tolstoy family estate, 
Yasnaya Polyana 
<http://bookhaven.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/Tolstoy_family_circle_at_Yasnaya_Polyana.jpg>
, where he wrote War and Peace.

“For me it is extremely important to show the world that it is not only 
problems, and war and difficult things, happening in Russia, but that we can do 
something like this too,” Tolstaya said. “People argue with each other when 
they speak about politics, [but] culture, our cultural heritage, great Russian 
literature – this is the place where we all unite.”

As well as Wajda, other celebrities taking part include Andrei Konchalovsky, 
another director; Vladimir Urin, the Bolshoi ballet’s director, and Valentina 
Matvienko, speaker of the upper house of the Russian parliament.
 &lt;figcaption&gt;The livestream of the War and Peace 
reading.&lt;/figcaption&gt; &lt;/figure&gt;  