
Many journalists who have already departed this earth would be amazed to know 
that Frank Thorne managed to reach the age of 65.

The award-winning reporter, who has announced his retirement, was acknowledged 
as an heroic drinker even by the bibulous standards of old Fleet Street.

His phenomenal alcoholic intake didn't stop him from being one of popular 
journalism's most productive, and best-liked, story-getters. He was dogged, 
determined and dependable (although editors had to accommodate his waywardness).

When I arrived at the Daily Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> in February 1990 I was handed 
the poisoned chalice of a half-written, ill-researched and controversial 
"investigation" into Arthur Scargill's handling of miners' strike funds.

The paper's industrial editor, Terry Pattinson, had found two sources, and 
they had already been promised many thousands of pounds to tell what they knew 
or, at least, what they purported to know.

One source, who lived in France and refused to come to Britain, was proving 
very difficult to handle and there were deep suspicions about his motives.

Meanwhile, time was against us. Several rival journalists were aware that the 
Mirror was working on a story involving Scargill and to add to the problem, 
TV's The Cook Report was sniffing around the same story.

I had known Thorne for years, respected his reporting skills, and called on 
him and his equally hard-drinking friend and colleague, the late Ted Oliver, to 
work with Pattinson. From the start, this was not a harmonious relationship, 
with a truculent Pattinson claiming the pair were always worse for drink.

In order to placate Pattinson, I warned Thorne and Oliver that I wouldn't 
countenance them being drunk on the job, threatening them with dismissal if it 
happened.

They set about the task diligently enough but within a week they called my 
bluff by appearing very late at night in my office, so full of drink they had 
to lean against each other to stand up.

Inevitably, one stepped forward as the other stepped back and they both fell 
over, laughing and cursing. A beaming Thorne, looking up from the floor, said: 
"Are you going to fire us now?"

I delivered a routine bollocking to them the following day. They apologised. 
They stayed sober. And they succeeded in finding two more sources, both of whom 
proved crucial in my decision to publish the story on Scargill that has given 
me - but not them - nightmares ever since.

The story won the trio the 1990 London Press Club scoop-of-the-year award and, 
also jointly, the British Press Awards reporter-of-the-year title. Some 12 
years later,after I had apologised to Scargill for the story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/may/27/mondaymediasection.politicsandthemedia>
, all three reporters were given space in the Guardian to answer me back,saying 
I had been wrong to apologise. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/jun/03/mondaymediasection.mirror>

It did not affect my friendships with Oliver, who visited me in Ireland before 
his death in 2007, nor with the irrepressible Thorne.

Now 65, he started his Fleet Street career in his mid-20s at the Daily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, working to a news editor, 
Brian Hitchen, who spotted his potential.

After a year, Thorne moved to The People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/thepeople> where he benefited from the 
tutorship of the great investigations editor, Laurie Manifold. He once told me 
about his fear during his first under-cover assignment, posing as a drug buyer.

He flourished at The People (aka Sunday People) rising to become its senior 
investigative reporter during his 12 years with a paper that was very different 
in tone and content from the modern version.

After spending three months on Today he joined the Daily Mirror in the 
mid-1980s, leaving some seven years later.He told Press Gazette 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/content/former-reporter-year-frank-thorne-retires-australia-weve-had-best-timesonline-killing>
: "Soon after Robert Maxwell went overboard with our pensions, I 'jumped ship' 
and took redundancy once David Montgomery and his motley crew took over the 
Mirror, as I was determined to move to Australia."

In the 18-month wait for his Australian residential visa he worked as a senior 
researcher for Roger Cook on The Cook Report.

He moved to Australia in October 1994 and set up shop as a freelance, 
servicing British newspapers and magazines plus titles in the USA and 
Australia. For years he prospered but, as all freelances know, it has become a 
far from lucrative trade in recent times.

As he explained to Press Gazette: "After a career spanning the best part of 40 
years in Fleet Street, I got sick of being paid as little as Â£20 recently for 
nibs making the Sun online, being underpaid for commissioned work done or not 
being paid at all by some newspapers.

"We've had the best of times," says Thorne. "Now online is killing the 
business of journalism we so loved and enjoyed."
 