
The Ajax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> coach Frank de Boer is to 
leave the Dutch side after five and a half years in charge, the club announced 
on Thursday.

Sunderland safe after Lamine Koné double sinks crumbling Everton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/sunderland-everton-premier-league-match-report>
De Boer has been mentioned as a potential replacement at Everton for Roberto 
Martínez, whose hold on his job looks increasingly flimsy after a3-0 defeat at 
Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/11/sunderland-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday. Everton have won only one of their past 10 matches.

De Boer’s agent, Guido Albers, claimed last weekend that the former Holland 
international “would love to join a club like Everton”. De Boer said on 
confirming his departure from Ajax that he did not know what his next move 
would be.

The 45-year-old’s contract at Ajax runs out next year but after their 
final-day implosion in the Dutch title race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/08/psv-eindhoven-clinch-eredivisie-title-ajax-fail-to-win>
 the club announced they had agreed to part ways after their tour of China is 
completed. That begins on Friday and ends next Thursday.

Ajax went into Sunday’s final round of matches level on points with the 
defending champions PSV Eindhoven but with a superior goal difference.

With their opponents, De Graafschap, sitting second from bottom, Ajax were 
favourites to deliver a fifth title under De Boer but could manage no better 
than a 1-1 draw, allowing PSV to finish two points clear at the top of the 
table.

“I began to realise it was time for something else,” De Boer said on Thursday. 
“That is better for me and I think also for Ajax. What I will do, I do not know 
yet. A year without a club is also an option. I’ll see what comes my way.”

His agent recently told the Dutch broadcaster NOS: “He would love to join a 
club likeEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> or Valencia. 
It’s all about the right philosophy and how they play football. That is what 
Frank is looking for. I have told Ajax there is no other club and I have not 
held discussions with anyone.”
 