
The owner of Frederik the Great, hailed as “the most handsome horse in the 
world”, has praised the stallion as a “showman” who will not let fame change 
him.


Frederik, a 15-year-old Friesian stallion based in Arkansas, entered the 
public consciousness this week afterpeople began sharing pictures 
<http://www.deccanchronicle.com/lifestyle/viral-and-trending/260516/meet-the-world-s-most-handsome-horse-fredrick-the-great.html>
 of him online.

Blessed with a flowing black mane, strong torso and noble bearing, the horse 
was an instant hit. His supporters have described him as “handsome”, 
“magnificent” and “sexy”, and he has been offered film roles.

“The first time I laid eyes on him,” said Stacy Nazario, owner of Pinnacle 
Friesians <http://pinnaclefriesians.com/index.html>, the farm Frederik calls 
home, “I knew he was an exceptional stallion.”

Nazario acquired Frederik when he was six years old. She imported him from the 
Netherlands, where he had been co-habitating with his mother, and brought him 
to live with her on her farm in the Ozark mountains.

“His personality went right along with his looks. He’s just phenomenal. His 
temperament is sweet. I could put a baby right next to him and he would just be 
gentle with it. He’s a gentle giant.”

While Frederik only rose to widespread fame this week, Nazario said he has had 
a cult following for some time.

“He’s always been popular with his fanbase,” she said. “Before this his videos 
and his photographs have been all over. He’s got fans from all over the world.”

Images from Frederik’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/frederikthegreatfriesianstallion> have been shared 
thousands of times, in which he demonstrates a wide range of poses. He is shown 
galloping through a field with his head up and chest out, proud and true, but 
is also seen in more reflective repose, gazing out over a wooden fence.

This combination of power and sensitivity goes someway toward explaining his 
appeal.

“There will NEVER be a more majestic, handsome, sexy horse on the face of the 
earth. Never, ever. I wish I could just touch and “smell” him just once,”wrote 
Facebook user Sharon Younts 
<https://www.facebook.com/frederikthegreatfriesianstallion/photos/a.1075733399134508.1073741870.209679649073225/1075733419134506/?type=3>
 under a picture of Frederik running wild and free.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ffrederik-the-great-viral-horse-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e7efeb66306ef650ec49ce01cf23058190333a8%2F0_0_1027_688%2F1027.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frederik%20the%20Great%3A%20the%20'handsome'%20horse%20that's%20going%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ffrederik-the-great-viral-horse-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frederik%20the%20Great%3A%20the%20%27handsome%27%20horse%20that%27s%20going%20viral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F28%2Ffrederik-the-great-viral-horse-facebook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e7efeb66306ef650ec49ce01cf23058190333a8%2F0_0_1027_688%2F1027.jpg>
 Frederik the Great. Photograph: Facebook 
“He is so stately & proud!! Magnificent!!!” commented 
<https://www.facebook.com/frederikthegreatfriesianstallion/photos/a.1075733399134508.1073741870.209679649073225/1075733419134506/?type=3&theater>
 Donald Ledford, responding to a photo of Frederik rearing up on his hind legs.

Nazario said Frederik, who enjoys taking part in dressage competitions, is 
“absolutely” aware of his good looks.

“He lights up when he’s in the arena or when there’s photography going on. 
It’s almost like watching a celebrity, you know, the difference between when 
they’re at home and under the lights,” Nazario said. But, she said, Frederik 
would not be seduced by the fickle mistress of fame.

“He’s that gentle and sweet of a horse, which is ingrained in his personality, 
that will not change.”

One of Frederik’s most distinctive features is his long mane, which flows down 
almost to his fetlocks. The striking body of hair has attracted admiration from 
expert horse fanciers as well as casual enthusiasts.

“He’s very noble to look at, he has a lot of presence,” said Melody Hames, a 
horse hairdresser who runsJMC Equestrian Custom Clippings 
<https://www.facebook.com/JMCequestrian/> in Lancashire, UK. “You see power but 
at the same time elegance.”

Hames praised Frederik’s smooth, shiny coat, and sleek mane, a look she said 
could be achieved by using special horse hair conditioner, which she 
recommended leaving in the hair until dry.

Elizabeth Moyer, editor of Horse Illustrated 
<http://www.horsechannel.com/horse-magazines/horse-illustrated/> magazine, said 
Frederik the Great had all the characteristics of a handsome horse.

“From the standpoint of beauty, what makes an attractive horse: a shiny coat 
and a fabulous mane and hale definitely contribute to a handsome horse.

“Athletic talent and beautiful movement also add to a horse’s appeal. But 
clearly I can see a great presence and attitude [in Frederik] that has captured 
the attention of the general public as well as horse lovers everywhere.”

A busy few months lie in wait for Frederik. He has media commitments, 
including photo and video shoots, and Nazario is considering a couple of movie 
offers. The horse is also standing at stud – “Frederik ships only fresh cooled 
semen,” according to his website – and has dressage competitions coming up.

On Friday afternoon, though, Frederik was content to be away from the 
spotlight, just a horse being a horse.

“He’s just eating grass, walking around, he’ll look out at the deer,” Nazario 
said. “He loves to just relax.”
 