
A Russian rocket carrying a French satellite to test a German theory is 
scheduled for launch on Friday. At 21:02 GMT, the Soyuz rocket will blast off 
from Kourou, Europe’s spaceport in French Guiana, carrying the experiment.

Microscope, which stands for Micro-Satellite à traînée Compensée pour 
l’Observation du Principe d’Equivalence 
<https://microscope.cnes.fr/en/MICROSCOPE/index.htm>, is designed to test the 
very heart of Einstein’s 1915 theory of general relativity, which gives us our 
best description yet of gravity.

Known as the principle of equivalence, it is derived from Galileo’s 17th 
century experiment to drop different masses from a tower to show that both hit 
the ground at the same time. Why they should do this is a mystery, and many 
physicists feel it may only be approximately true.

Dawn comes a second time to Venus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/10/dawn-second-time-venus> 
So Microscope will measure the principle of equivalence 100 times more 
accurately than before.If it discovers a deviation 
<https://microscope.cnes.fr/en/MICROSCOPE/index.htm> it would be an event that 
would shake the foundations of physics. It would prove that relativity is not 
quite right, and that would open a path to a more precise theory of gravity.

The Soyuz rocket carrying Microscope will also place ESA’s Sentinel-1B 
satellite and three tiny student CubeSats in orbit. Sentinel-1B is part of the 
EU’sCopernicus Earth observation programme <http://www.copernicus.eu>. It 
carries a radar capable of making images and joins a sister satellite, which is 
already in space.

The CubeSats are 10cm cubes designed and built by students. Each tests a new 
satellite sub-system such as communications or attitude control. ESA’s 
Education and Knowledge Management Office sponsors the students to give them 
experience of working on real space missions while still at university.
 