
Channel 4's incoming chairman and chief executive may have to weigh the need 
for further cuts next year after Andy Duncan, the outgoing chief executive, 
admitted today that there would be no deal withBBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide> in the foreseeable future.

Ofcom will announce a replacement for Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> chairman Luke Johnson this week, 
potentially as soon as tomorrow, following a narrowing of the shortlist to two 
candidates last week. Appointing a replacement for Duncan will be one of the 
new chairman's first priorities.

Duncan said, in today's Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/6487826/Channel-4s-Andy-Duncan-frustrated-by-unfinished-business-with-BBC-tie-up.html>
, that there will be no major partnership with BBC Worldwide, the corporation's 
commercial arm, and that even the chance of "some smaller deals" have now been 
put back to some point next year.

Channel 4's plan to find further cost savings and give it extra muscle in the 
UK TV advertising market by doing a deal with BSkyB to merge the two 
broadcasters' airtime sales operations has also effectively been scuppered. 
When the Competition Commission ruled that itwould not relax the contract 
rights renewal regime put in place to stop ITV1 from abusing its dominant 
position <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/15/itv-shares-down-crr>, 
its decision suggested such a merger of sales houses would be blocked.

Without these deals, and with no public subsidy forthcoming from the 
government's Digital Britain media policy initiative, Channel 4's new senior 
management are likely to find their room for financial manoeuvre more limited 
and could have some tough choices to make, including further cuts.

"My understanding is there is going to be an announcement made this week [on 
the Channel 4 chairman]," said a source with some knowledge of the process. 
"However there have been questions over whether [the new chairman] will be 
given a free hand in terms of changing Channel 4's structure, headcount and 
wage bill."

It is thought that the former ITV chief executive Richard Eyre was one of the 
contendersat final shortlist stage for the Channel 4 chairmanship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/27/greg-dyke-richard-eyre-channel4>
. Other names in the frame have included Greg Dyke, the former BBC director 
general, and the chairman of Chorion, Waheed Alli.

The BBC trustee Patricia Hodgson, a former chief executive of the ITC, has 
emerged as a good fit, although it is not known if she has been involved in the 
recruitment process.

Dianne Thompson, Camelot chief executive, is also believed to have been 
approached during the early stages of the process but is not thought to be a 
contender for the job.

The talks between Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide are not at a dead end. 
Negotiations are understood to have been renewed over Virgin Media's 50% stake 
in the pay-TV operator UKTV, which it jointly owns with BBC Worldwide, which 
could be spun into a venture with Channel 4.

It is understood that Virgin Media, which has stalled the sell off of its 
wholly-owned TV channels, including Living, has not previously engaged in open 
conversations about offloading its stake in UKTV, which runs services including 
Gold and Dave.

When the talks with BBC Worldwide were taking place earlier this year, the 
idea was to create a joint venture encompassing assets including UKTV's 
channels, Channel 4's own digital services such as E4, and possibly 2Entertain, 
the DVD distributor in which the corporation's commercial arm owns 60%.

John Smith, the BBC Worldwide chief executive, told the Lords communications 
committee in May that the proposed joint venture with Channel 4would have an 
annual turnover of £800m and generate £200m profit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/13/bbc-worldwide-channel-4>. This 
profit would be ploughed back into subsidising BBC and Channel 4 public service 
content.

"UKTV is in play, it has not been pushed before [by Virgin Media]. They are 
talking now," said one source familiar with the situation.

The major stumbling block with buying Virgin Media's UKTV stake is understood 
to be that BBC Worldwide would need government permission to raise its 
borrowing levels to make a transaction possible.

Duncan and Johnson have been saying since Channel 4's annual report was 
published in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/06/channel-4-andy-duncan-survive-die>
 that Channel 4 could survive perfectly well without public subsidy or other 
new sources of funding, despite having earlier talked about a potential £150m a 
year funding gap opening up by 2012.

However, they have warned that Channel 4 may have to cut its investment in 
public service programming and content. "We are not forced to do anything, we 
are not in a position of weakness, we can cut our cloth to fit our means … what 
will suffer substantially is programming and content spend, which will in turn 
diminish [our] public impact and plurality to the BBC," Duncan told journalists 
at the 2008 annual report presentation on 6 May.

Channel 4 remains profitable, making £1.8m in 2008. The broadcaster has been 
cutting costs over the past 12 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/06/channel-4-results-andy-duncan-budget-cut>
, shedding 200 staff and reducing its programming budget of about £600m by at 
least 10%.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 