
There are plenty of great Australian songs. It’s rare, however, that any 
manage to infiltrate the national consciousness the way the Easybeats’sFriday 
on my Mind <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NSowZcvoqr4> has.


In 2001, it was voted the best Australian song ever in a poll celebrating 75 
years of the Australasian Performing Rights Association. You can argue over 
numbers two and three – AC/DC perhaps; the Saints’ incendiary(I’m) Stranded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/13/australian-anthems-the-saints-im-stranded>
 or Midnight Oil’sBeds Are Burning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/midnight-oil-beds-are-burning-australian-anthems>
; something byKylie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/jul/29/kylie-minogue-cant-get-you-out-of-my-head-australian-anthem>
 orthe Seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/18/seekers-the-carnival-is-over-australian-anthems>
 – but it’s hard to naysay the song that bust open doors for Australian pop the 
world over, George Young and Harry Vanda’s legendary 1966 mod anthem.

From its opening line of “Monday morning feels so bad/Everybody seems to nag 
me”, the single bristles with pent-up frustration and anger, seeking release 
from the word go. Everything is tightly wound, barely kept on a leash. The band 
race through the verse, singer Stevie Wright nearly tumbling over his words in 
his urgency to reach the chorus.

I’m gonna have fun in my city
 [I’ll] be with my girl, she’s so pretty
 She looks fine tonight
 She is out of sight to me

He starts ... and he’s not screaming, but it feels like he’s screaming, such 
is the release and his desperation to find meaning in the everyday tedium of 
the 9 to 5. In this, he echoes the tropes of that other super-fine 60s mod band,
Small Faces <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HUuuHLaSLR0>. 

The lyrics – clear and direct, brutally so – are Orwellian in their simple 
evocation of the working person’s lot. The guitar builds and twists, the drums 
thud out anticipation, the melody becomes more and more urgent, before the song 
spirals to a momentary halt – a realisation that the whole routine is due to 
start all over again.

Tonight, I’ll spend my bread
 Tonight, I’ll lose my head
 Tonight, I’ve got to get tonight
 Monday, I have Friday on my mind

It’s aspirational. It’s explosive. Pop sophistication meets rough and ready R 
and B. In its lines “No one, nothing else that bugs me/More than workin’ for 
the rich man” it echoes Australia’s self-image of not kowtowing to any colonial 
overlords, of everyone being given a fair go. No wonder we still love it so 
much here.

The Friday in the song isn’t just a day of the week. It’s a state of mind that 
most of us aspire to – a state of being relaxed, able to enjoy oneself free 
from the hassle of work. It’s a reminder that a country isn’t about its rulers, 
but its people.

And it evokes all these feelings while being supremely hummable and totally 
danceable. Try not dancing along with Stevie Wright in this clip from a German 
television program.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrBJLoYd8xak&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrBJLoYd8xak>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrBJLoYd8xak&media=>
Friday on my Mind is political in its sentiments. It’s a call to arms, a Fight 
For Your Right (To Party), <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eBShN8qT4lk> but 
plainer and harder as befit the times. As Simon Reynolds wrote in his 1998 book 
Generation Ecstasy: “When I listen to […] Friday on my Mind, I am stunned by 
the way the lyrics – a thrilling anatomy of the working-class weekender 
lifecycle of drudgery, anticipation and explosive release – still resonate. 
Thirty years on, we’re no nearer to overhauling the work/leisure structures of 
industrial society.”

Guitarist George Young mainly agrees: “It’s understandable why it can be seen 
as an ode to the working class given the weekly grind of the average punter. 
But it has more to do with [our] outlook on the world than any class statement.”

In many ways, the success of Friday on my Mind and the Easybeats encapsulates 
that which the Easybeats came from – immigrant culture. The five founding 
members were all from recently migrated families: Wright and drummer Snowy 
Fleet (England), rhythm guitarist Young (Scotland) and lead guitarist Vanda and 
bassist Dick Diamonde (Holland). They met at Villawood Migrant Hostel in 
Sydney, in 1964 – an experience that Young later revealed directly fed into the 
lyrics of Friday on my Mind.

The song wasn’t recorded in Australia either, but at Abbey Road in London, 
after the band moved there in 1966. Paul McCartney famously heard the song on 
his car stereo and immediately pulled over to phone up the BBC and request the 
radio station play it again. They did.

If Friday on my Mind had just existed in isolation, then the Easybeats’ place 
in popular Australian culture would be assured, but of course it doesn’t.

The Easybeats had an incredible run of hits (She’s so Fine, Sorry, For my 
Woman) in Australia before the song hit worldwide in 1967 – five number ones in 
Brisbane alone – and fervent fandom gave rise to “Easyfever”, a homeland 
version of Beatlemania. Hotel rooms, airports and TV stations were trashed. 
Fans were hospitalised. By all accounts, Easyfever was bigger in Australia than 
even the Fab Four.

George was not only one-half of the Easybeats’s songwriting team but also 
elder brother to AC/DC’s Angus and Malcolm Young. (As Young and Vanda, George 
also produced the first six AC/DC albums, alongside hard rock bands such as the 
Angels and Rose Tattoo).

Angus recently recalled tasting rock’n’roll fame, secondhand, in 1965 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
: “I knew my brother was in bands, but I’d never seen him play. I remember 
coming home from school and seeing all these people outside the house, and I 
couldn’t get in the house. There was all these police, all these schoolgirls … 
I’m this little kid saying to the policeman: ‘I live in this house!’ ‘Yeah kid, 
sure.’ I went right round the block then asked the people behind: ‘Can I go 
over your fence so I can get in my house?’ That’s how I found out my brother 
had a hit.”

The Easybeats split up after just five years. Stevie Wright was still only 21.
 