
Courteney Cox, the former Friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/friends> star, has said she is 
reconciled to looking older and regrets some procedures she had in the past to 
keep the wrinkles at bay.

 Cox, 52, spoke out during an expedition with outdoor adventurer Bear Grylls 
in the Irish highlands, in which the pair abseiled down cliffs and shared 
maggots found in a rotting sheep.

 “Getting older has not been ... I don’t think it’s the easiest thing. But I 
have learned lessons,” Cox said in the Running Wild with Bear Grylls episode 
that aired on NBC television in the US on Monday.

At what point are women allowed to look their age?|Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/at-what-point-are-women-allowed-to-look-their-age>
 Cox, who spoke some years ago about using Botox and laser treatments to 
prolong her youthful looks, said she was now more relaxed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPp_ugueckjg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPp_ugueckjg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPp_ugueckjg&media=>
 Courteney Cox on surviving fame 
 “Sometimes you find yourself trying and then you look at a picture of 
yourself and go, ‘Oh, God.’ Like, you look horrible. I have done things that I 
regret, and luckily they’re things that dissolve and go away. So, um, that’s 
good, because it’s not always been my best look. So, now I just have a new 
motto: ‘Just let it be,’” she said.

 Cox, who played Monica Geller for 10 years in the comedy series Friends, is 
the latest star to speak out about the pressure women feel in Hollywood to 
maintain their looks.

Her co-star from the successful, long-running sitcom, Jennifer Aniston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-aniston>, 47, last month wrote that 
she was sick of the “sport-like scrutiny and body shaming that occurs daily” in 
celebrity and other media. And Renee Zellweger, star of the Bridget Jones 
films, who is also 47, rejected persistent speculation that she had undergone 
plastic surgery on her face or eyes.

 “Too skinny, too fat, showing age, better as a brunette, cellulite thighs, 
facelift scandal, going bald, fat belly or bump? Ugly shoes, ugly feet, ugly 
smile, ugly hands, ugly dress, ugly laugh; headline material which emphasizes 
the implied variables meant to determine a person’s worth,” Zellweger wrote in 
a blog on 5 August for the Huffington Post.
 