
The National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>’s 
new production ofWaste <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/waste> comes at 
a time of unusual drama in British politics, withDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> surprised to be running a 
majority government andJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> even more astonished to be 
leading the opposition. This isn’t the first time thatHarley Granville Barker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/granvillebarker>’s Westminster drama has 
felt well timed: its premiere in 1936 (after long blocking by the theatrical 
censor) coincided with the abdication crisis, while the most recent major 
revivals – at the Old Vic in 1997 and the Almeida in 2008 – more or less 
bookendedthe administration of Tony Blair.

Theatre: the nation’s debating chamber
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/06/political-theatre-nations-debating-chamber>
These frequent stagings, though, are not due to exact parallels with the 
narrative, in which independent MP Henry Trebell attempts to disestablish the 
Church of England but is destroyed by sexual scandal. What givesWaste its 
lasting fascination is its consideration of time-less aspects of democracy: 
ambition, weakness, rivalry and, above all, compromise.

This is, for me, the prime play about the government of Britain, but who might 
sit alongside Barker in a cabinet of political dramatists? Because Shakespeare 
wrote at least a dozen great dramas about leadership – even the neglectedKing 
John should be studied by anyone contemplating public office – and Henrik Ibsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ibsen> and George Bernard Shaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/bernardshaw> contributed several each, I 
have chosen from plays written after 1945. And with the exception of one 
international office, only British candidates were admitted.

Political historians will note the pleasing coincidence of a Churchill as 
chancellor, although, as in all cabinet selections, there will be controversies 
over omissions, perhaps especially from backers of the dramatist Peter Morgan. 
But, while creating good theatre,Frost/Nixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/aug/22/theatre> (2006) and The Audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/05/the-audience-review-helen-mirren>
 (2013) claim what seems to me unacceptable dramatic licence in the 
presentation of recent and living figures. As any old Westminster hand will 
tell you, there is always the hope of reshuffles. But, withWaste at the head of 
the table, these are my preferments.

Treasury: Caryl Churchill – Serious Money (1987) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743046521%2Fcfcf1abb-9abe-4015-a188-cd6d39c08a39-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743046521%2Fcfcf1abb-9abe-4015-a188-cd6d39c08a39-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Lex Shrapnel and Sara Stewart in Serious Money at Birmingham Repertory Theatre 
Six months after the Royal Court premiere of Churchill’s savage verse comedy 
about City traders, theglobal stock-market crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/07/credit-crunch-boom-bust-timeline>
 known as Black Monday confirmed its suggestion that fresh forms of technology 
and greed had exposed a new dark side of market economics. Successive financial 
scandals and recessions triggered by profit-hunting have enhanced the drama’s 
prophetic reputation. But while it drew some blood from the City,– British 
Telecom refused to provide free telephones as props after reading the script – 
the presence at the West End transfer of large parties of tanked-up bankers, 
whoopingly enjoying the attack on their own excesses, demonstrated the risk of 
satire being appropriated by its targets.

Foreign Office:Gore Vidal – The Best Man (1960) 

Set at the summer convention where the party will nominate its presidential 
candidate, this serious comedy by a writer better known as an essayist and 
novelist features political types – the intellectual idealist, the bigoted 
populist, the slippery ex-leader – who remain current, encouraging regular 
revivals during White House races. It’s a pity that Vidal never rewrote it as
The Best Woman to reflect the rise of his friend and occasional house guest in 
Italy, Hillary Clinton.

Defence: David Greig – The Letter of Last Resort (2012) 


Given extra resonance by Corbyn’s declaration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/30/corbyn-i-would-never-use-nuclear-weapons-if-i-was-pm>
 that he would never make use of the UK’s nuclear weapons, Greig’s short 
two-hander dramatises the duty of an incoming prime minister to write to the 
commanders of the four Trident nuclear submarines instructing them whether, in 
the event of the UK having been destroyed in nuclear war, to retaliate, 
surrender or seek friendly territory. A fictional female PM and a military aide 
debate deterrence and ethics in a brilliant script that should be placed on the 
blotter for each new occupant of No 10.

Home: David Edgar – Destiny (1976) 

Edgar’s unmatchable qualifications for this brief also include Maydays, his 
1983 epic about leftwing defectors to Thatcherism. However, this earlier 
large-scale play about the rise of a fictional neofascist National Forward 
Party achieved the hardest journey in political drama – from topicality to 
prophecy – by depicting the weakness for xenophobic, protectionist rhetoric 
that has periodically gripped mainstream politicians and voters on subjects 
including Europe and immigration.

Education: Molly Davies – God Bless the Child (2014) 


This position was fiercely contested by younger dramatists with education in 
their portfolios, including Steve Waters withLittle Platoons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/25/little-platoons-review> (2011), 
which deals with the “free school” movement, and Tamsin Oglesby’s classroom 
class war dramaFuture Conditional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/10/future-conditional-review-rob-brydon-tamsin-oglesby-education>
 at the Old Vic this summer. However, Davies takes the brief with this 
ingenious and provocative comedy in which a new educational and discipline 
scheme called Badger Do Best is being tested in a school, with possible 
financial advantages for the headteacher. It adds to the play’s power that the 
depiction of top-down imposition of zealously applied new practice has 
applications to many other institutions, including the NHS.

Health: Peter Nichols – The National Health (1969) 

As the play’s title indicates, the state of the post-1945 promise of free 
medicine was regarded even 50 years ago as a thermometer of general political 
wellbeing. In this politicised spin onCarry On Doctor, events on a ward are 
contrasted with the romanticised version of the NHS in a TV soap opera. Changes 
in society and medicine, plus the modern epidemic of medical dramas on 
television, have left the play unrevivable except as a period novelty, but its 
sobering message for politicians and patients is that the NHS had funding and 
structural problems even then.

Culture, Media and Sport: Howard Brenton and David Hare – Pravda: A Fleet 
Street Comedy (1985)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446744067522%2F796ca8c8-1787-4e57-8c90-e4602369c6f4-2060x1270.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446744067522%2F796ca8c8-1787-4e57-8c90-e4602369c6f4-2060x1270.jpeg>
 From left, Anthony Hopkins, Christopher Baines, Peter Blythe and Bill Nighy in 
Pravda: A Fleet Street Comedy at the Olivier theatre. Photograph: Alastair 
Muir/Rex Features 
In political theatre, as in political journalism, two dominating tones are 
editorialising and cartoon; the former risks taking the issues too solemnly, 
the latter too lightly.Pravda, a collaboration between two leading political 
dramatists as the hybrid writer they jokingly call Howard Hare, was cartoonish, 
but also brutally acute in its analysis of the possible conflict between 
accuracy and profitability in journalism. As deranged South African tycoon 
Lambert Le Roux – first played at the National by Anthony Hopkins, in a 
terrifying but seductive performance that stands as a theatrical landmark – 
takes over and tabloidises the establishment paper of record,The Victory, the 
monopolies commission and Westminster submit to him much as they did toRupert 
Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>.

Leader of the Commons: James Graham – This House (2012)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743561989%2F1899bf3f-16c7-443a-ad6f-dd9196e32afa-2060x1524.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743561989%2F1899bf3f-16c7-443a-ad6f-dd9196e32afa-2060x1524.jpeg>
 From left, Reece Dinsdale and Charles Edwards in This House at the National’s 
Olivier theatre. Photograph: Tristram Kenton/Guardian 



Most dramas about parliamentarians, including Barker’s Waste, stay away from 
the House given the number of actors needed for a convincing debate. Graham’s 
docudrama about the hung parliament of 1974-79 cleverly avoids this problem by 
focusing mainly on small groups of MPs plotting and scheming in corridors, 
whips’ offices, clock towers and committee rooms. At its premiere, the play was 
both historical – showing the events that led to the Thatcher government – and 
contemporary, as the Cameron-Clegg coalition had just begun. It also achieved a 
timeless, Shakespearean sweep in its account of political power games, which 
makes it the closest British equivalent to the great presidential television TV 
seriesThe West Wing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>. 
Having also writtenBoyz (about the Tory party) and The Vote (a real-time 
theatre-TV piece for 2015 election night), Graham seems certain to follow Hare, 
Edgar and Brenton as a leader of British political playwriting.

Europe: Michael Frayn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-frayn> – 
Democracy (2003)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446744369052%2F3cd0f883-fed7-4a33-a817-1b581008ceb1-2060x1279.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446744369052%2F3cd0f883-fed7-4a33-a817-1b581008ceb1-2060x1279.jpeg>
 William Hoyland in Democracy at the Old Vic in 2012. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton/Guardian 
Frayn combines deep research with penetrating psychology to stage the strange 
story of how Willy Brandt, a healing chancellor of Germany from 1969-74, was 
shadowed in office by a member of staff who was an agent of the East German 
secret police. As well as bringing to wider attention a particular and peculiar 
piece of European history, Frayn offers more general insights into how 
electoral and rhetorical skills work, and the relationship between a leader and 
his people.

Women: Abi Morgan – Splendour (2000) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743373484%2F0c9ee356-9a21-41c0-915c-0bae7a1e6b35-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743373484%2F0c9ee356-9a21-41c0-915c-0bae7a1e6b35-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Genevieve O’Reilly in Splendour by Abi Morgan at the Donmar Warehouse. 
Photograph: Johan Persson/PR 
In this area, Thatcher bio-dramas inevitably make their case, with Moira 
Buffini’sHandbagged (2013) – which explored the first British female PM’s 
relationship with the Queen – far ahead, for me, of the Thatcher scene in Peter 
Morgan’sThe Audience. However, as a consideration of political women, Morgan’s 
Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/09/splendour-donmar-abi-morgan-review>
, smartly revived at the Donmar Warehouse this summer, has the distinction of a 
rare all-female cast and an unusual perspective on power, as four women who 
have different connections with the dictator of an unnamed unstable nation – 
wife, photographer, translator, friend – wait for his return against a 
background of ominous gunfire.

Scotland: John McGrath – The Cheviot, the Stag, and the Black Black Oil (1973)

This classic of campaigning drama, designed to tour communities, recreated two 
centuries of Scottish history from Culloden through the highland clearances to 
the North Sea oil boom of the early 70s, with the explicit suggestion of a 
momentum towards independence, making it a theatrical anthem for Scottish 
secessionists. One sadness of McGrath’s early death in 2002 is the 
impossibility of an update taking the cheviot and stag into the lands of the 
Salmond and the Sturgeon.

Northern Ireland: Ron Hutchinson – Rat in the Skull (1984) 


DI Nelson from the Royal Ulster Constabulary interrogates a suspected 
terrorist, Roche. In dialogue that fizzes with terrifying metaphor and 
subversive arguments, the game of rat and rat between Nelson and Roche – 
challenging whatever prejudices the audience may have – encapsulates the 
opposed histories and clashing languages and cultures that resulted in the 
Troubles.

Wales: Philip Ralph – Deepcut (2008)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446746301227%2Fa8c3a00b-bd53-4cda-b812-bcfd95f60a51-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446746301227%2Fa8c3a00b-bd53-4cda-b812-bcfd95f60a51-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Deep Cut at the Traverse theatre in Edinburgh during the festival. Photograph: 
Toby Farrow/Sherman Cymru Theatr/PA 
Although it concerns events in Surrey, this unforgettable production was 
created by Sherman Cymru in Cardiff and is the tragedy of a Welsh family: 
Private Cheryl James, who died from a gunshot wound at Deepcut army barracks in 
1995, and her parents, Des and Doreen, who fought to prove that she and other 
young recruits died due to a culture of sexual and violent intimidation. For 
two decades, the families of the dead have faced military and political 
obfuscation. I have seen no other play that left me more angrily persuaded of 
its case. The opening of anew inquest  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/10/soldier-who-died-in-deepcut-barracks-exhumed-and-reburied>
into Pte James’s death this year suggests that Ralph’s devastatingly presented 
evidence may yet become one of the few pieces of theatre to achieve political 
or legal change.

Transport: David Hare – The Permanent Way (2003) 

The recently popular form of verbatim drama – staging speeches based on 
interviews with witnesses and participants – was pioneered by director Nicolas 
Kent and journalistRichard Norton-Taylor, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richardnortontaylor> who turned the Scott 
arms-to-Iraq tribunal intoHalf the Picture (1994) and staged the Hutton inquiry 
asJustifying War (2003). However, partly because it was based on less obviously 
compelling subject matter, the unexpected gem of this genre is Hare’s 
inquisition into the consequences of railway privatisation, counterpointing the 
voices of politicians, railway executives and the relatives of crash victims.

Justice: Sir John Mortimer – The Dock Brief (1957) 

An early work by a lawyer-writer who went on to epitomise for many the 
Blairite champagne socialist, this one-act play – in which a hack barrister 
attempts to defend a man accused of murdering his wife – was something of a 
run-up for his later Rumpole stories. Continuing revivals, though, attest to 
the durability of its elegant debate about the mechanics of trial by jury.

Energy and Climate Change: Richard Bean – The Heretic (2011)

Unusual among British political playwrights in regularly challenging liberal 
beliefs – hisOn the Side of the Angels (2009) is a comedy about international 
aid workers – Bean took a typically contrary stance on global warming. The 
protagonist ofThe Heretic is a scientist whose research on sea levels 
contradicts the pessimistic consensus and so provokes opposition from both 
apocalyptic academics and Green protesters. Among British political dramatists, 
Bean is, on most subjects, the leader of the opposition.

Party Chairman: Trevor Griffiths – The Party (1973)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743793904%2Ffd45836b-8491-4855-b9ea-8737ab21d832-2060x1653.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20West%20End%20to%20Westminster%3A%20which%20playwrights%20should%20run%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fwest-end-westminster-which-playwrights-run-britain-waste%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446743793904%2Ffd45836b-8491-4855-b9ea-8737ab21d832-2060x1653.jpeg>
 Laurence Olivier and Rachel Davies in the National Theatre production of The 
Party at the Old Vic. Photograph: John Haynes 
Both drama and politics tend towards dialectical debate, but the two forms of 
public discourse have never been brought together more totally than in this 
script by the leftwing dramatist who celebrates his 80th birthday this year. 
Against the background of the student protests in Paris in 1968, a formal 
debate is staged between a Marxist and Trotskyist about the best future route 
for socialists in Britain. Five-page speeches are exchanged, including, in the 
premiere production, by an improbably cast Sir Laurence Olivier as a Glaswegian 
revolutionary. Subsequent productions directed by Hare and Edgar (with Howard 
Davies) might have been considered likely to be the last revivals of a play now 
hard to stage even as a historical curiosity. But its arguments may have become 
current again under a Corbyn-ledLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party.

• Waste opens on 10 November at the National Theatre, London SE1. 
nationaltheatre.org.uk <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>.
 