
Judging by the spectacular advance sales and largely warm reviews for Harry 
Potter and the Cursed Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/harry-potter-and-the-cursed-child>, JK 
Rowling (who oversaw the sequel and takes a storyline credit) has cracked the 
theatre on her first go. She’s not the first great British storyteller to be 
drawn to the stage, but the theatrical experiences of the creators of 
Frankenstein, Oliver Twist and Miss Havisham, Dracula, Sherlock Holmes and 
Hercule Poirot were very different – mostly involving more aggravation than 
applause.

When Mary Shelley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/maryshelley> returned to 
London from Italy in 1823, five years after Frankenstein had been published 
anonymously, she imagined that drama was her destiny. This ambition was 
brutally crushed by her father, William Godwin. Writing plays was sheer 
“laziness” on her part, he scolded “my dear Mary” (then aged 26) after reading 
her debut effort, and her characters were mere “abstractions”. It was never 
performed, and she subsequently turned to other genres instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3de53a6d9c3b5547bc38884993e8fe763cba5f64%2F16_0_1962_2450%2F1962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20page%20to%20stage%3A%20Harry%20Potter's%20success%20is%20a%20rare%20trick%20for%20novelists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20page%20to%20stage%3A%20Harry%20Potter%27s%20success%20is%20a%20rare%20trick%20for%20novelists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3de53a6d9c3b5547bc38884993e8fe763cba5f64%2F16_0_1962_2450%2F1962.jpg>
 ‘I found myself famous!’ Mary Shelley, author of Frankenstein. Photograph: 
Alamy 
As for adapting her own novel, she was too late to even do that first because 
several stage versions of Frankenstein had by then already appeared on the 
London stage. Not one writer had asked permission or paid any royalties because 
pirate playwrights could rip book authors off with impunity. However, having 
her work plundered did have one positive aspect, as she herself noted after 
seeingPresumption: or, the fate of Frankenstein 
<http://www.rc.umd.edu/editions/peake/> at the Lyceum: a new edition of the 
novel capitalised on the stage versions by naming her as its author for the 
first time, and “lo & behold! I found myself famous!” she wrote, a poet’s widow 
and single mother thrilled to be associated with fiction’s scariest monster for 
the first time.

For Charles Dickens <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens>, in the 
following decade, the commercial theatre was a similar source of frustration. 
Although he was an energetic organiser of am-dram and eventually toured a 
one-man-show of readings from his novels, his work was also appropriated and 
wrecked by hacks – and with no upside as he was famous already. Serial 
publication added an extra turn of the screw to this exploitation, since it 
enabled plagiarised plays to be rushed out before the eventual book - so, 
gallingly, the first complete appearance of a given novel was on stage, not in 
print. Dickens even reacted to a mid-serialisation stage production of Nicholas 
Nickleby (which of course could only have a wild, wrong stab at the novel’s 
ending) by adding a chapter in which Nicholas meets and, as author’s proxy, 
denounces a “literary gentleman” who claims to have made novelists famous by 
transforming 242 novels into instant plays.

Half a century later, Arthur Conan Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle> was just as besotted with 
the theatre as Dickens. Seeing an audience respond warmly to a play, Conan 
Doyle wrote, “gives a thrill of satisfaction such as the most successful 
novelist can never feel”. He took this love affair further, as writer and 
impresario, by staging professional productions intended to enjoy long runs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71ee3baf0a3a50edac1064a7987269ec64ed1416%2F0_154_2185_2731%2F2185.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20page%20to%20stage%3A%20Harry%20Potter's%20success%20is%20a%20rare%20trick%20for%20novelists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20page%20to%20stage%3A%20Harry%20Potter%27s%20success%20is%20a%20rare%20trick%20for%20novelists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71ee3baf0a3a50edac1064a7987269ec64ed1416%2F0_154_2185_2731%2F2185.jpg>
 Actor William Gillette, who played the lead in Conan Doyle’s production of 
‘Sherlock Holmes’ at the Lyceum Theatre in 1901. Photograph: Hulton 
Archive/Getty Images 
 There were more duds than hits, though – Shaw called one Doyle collaboration 
with JM Barrie “the most unblushing piece of tomfoolery that two respectable 
citizens could conceivably indulge in public”. Perversely, he largely eschewed 
the easy option of putting Sherlock Holmes (whom he viewed scornfully, and 
tried to kill off) on stage, although when he grumpily agreed to this audiences 
lapped it up. Later, he would say yes to early cinema versions, apparently 
feeling the limited medium (dealing, he said, in “mere plot and action”) and 
the limited character were ideally suited to one another.

 Like both Dickens and Doyle, Bram Stoker had a significant involvement in the 
theatre world. On the face of it, working for the great actor Henry Irving 
equipped the author of Dracula perfectly for adapting it himself. However, 
Irving (the model for aspects of the vampire count 
<http://www.cincinnati.com/story/news/history/2015/10/21/bram-stoker-and-actor-henry-irving-inspiration-dracula-visited-1884/74305880/>
) declined to perform in Stoker’s adaptation of his 1897 novel, which received 
just a single performance at the Lyceum theatre, where the Irishman was 
Irving’s business manager.

 Dracula only became a money-spinner long after Stoker’s death in 1912; once 
his widow had fought draining copyright battles (eventually winning a Pyrrhic 
victory) against the 20s German stage and screen adaptation Nosferatu, she 
authorised the Broadway version that became Tod Browning’s 1931 film Dracula, 
with Bela Lugosi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31242473877eb1e60db554a724bb89543c9152c9%2F0_820_2434_1460%2F2434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20page%20to%20stage%3A%20Harry%20Potter's%20success%20is%20a%20rare%20trick%20for%20novelists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20page%20to%20stage%3A%20Harry%20Potter%27s%20success%20is%20a%20rare%20trick%20for%20novelists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fharry-potter-stage-success-jk-rowling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31242473877eb1e60db554a724bb89543c9152c9%2F0_820_2434_1460%2F2434.jpg>
 Agatha Christie, pictured at her home, Winter-Brook House. Photograph: 
Popperfoto/Getty Images 
 The following decade saw the emergence, in diametric contrast to Stoker’s 
stymied play and Doyle’s diffidence about Holmes spin-offs, of Agatha Christie 
as a giant of the stage, and the radio, and the cinema. When “Agatha became the 
phenomenon ‘Agatha Christie’”, writes her biographer Laura Thompson, it was not 
the books but “the adaptations that did the trick” in enabling that “leap into 
fame”, beginning with her 1943 dramatisation of And Then There Were None, which 
became a West End and Broadway hit and eventually,also a film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/28/agatha-christie-and-then-there-were-none-film-adaptation>
.

The Mousetrap opens in London - review: archive, 27 November 1952
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/27/the-mousetrap-agatha-christie-opens-london-1952>
 Christie remained box office gold throughout the 40s and 50s, adapting her 
own books as well as producing made-for-theatre thrillers such as The 
Mousetrap. While her whodunnits went out of fashion as new productions 
following the rise of kitchen-sink drama, revivals continued to sustain 
regional theatres and her Poirot and Marple mysteries were given a second lease 
of life by television. Before Rowling (for whom, in contrast, films came before 
plays), Christie was the only one of these supreme storytellers to benefit 
financially from and exercise control over dramatic treatments of her work.
 