
Brrrrr … winter is here and summer holidays seem very far away. But now is a 
great time to go on holiday in Australia. Not only are the prices cheaper and 
the crowds smaller, but a winter break will cut into the gloom that can descend 
at this time of year. So here are some tried-and-tested ideas.
 Port Douglas, an hour’s (beautiful) drive from Cairns. Photograph: AAP 



Port Douglas, Queensland

Get a cheap flight to Cairns, and Port Douglas is only an hour’s drive north – 
and what a stunning journey, along the Captain Cook highway, with 
rainforest-cloaked mountains swooping down to white sand and brilliant 
turquoise sea.

Port Douglas is a little jewel of a town with easy access from the town wharf 
to both the inner and outer Great Barrier Reef. There are lots of rooms 
available in town, a gorgeous four-mile beach (although bewarestingers and 
crocs outside the white net <http:// 
http://worldtravelfamily.com/stinger-season-port-douglas/>), and if you get 
bored of the wonders of the ocean you can head over to Daintree national park 
for a swim in the cold but pristine river pools.

There’s also the river system next to the town to explore: with little to no 
drama you can hire a small river boat from the wharf and set out with a picnic 
and some binoculars to spot crocs or birds in the mangrove swamps.

The correct place to eat is On the Inlet. The food when we visited was so-so, 
for the price, but the view … you can eat out on the deck with a view of the 
sun setting behind emerald mountains and the ocean: wow.EW

Darwin, Northern Territory

Winter? What winter? Up in the Top End there is only the glorious dry season 
at this time of year, when temperatures rarely stray from a range of pleasant 
to balmy.

Step off the plane, put on your thongs, explore the Darwin coastline, take in 
the sparkling water views and historic sites of past destruction. East Point 
reserve is perfect for an afternoon barbie, and the Ski Club can’t be beaten 
for a beer. The open air Deckchair Cinema, nestled in a rainforest-like 
setting, is one of Australia’s best places to see a movie.

Mindil Beach hosts the biggest of Darwin’s many excellent markets (Thursday and
Sunday). Just make sure you’ve grabbed your food and drink and are sitting on 
the beach for the spectacular sunset.

For a taste of the Territory outdoors, hire a boat and go crab-potting and 
barramundi fishing, or head to Berry Springs (40 minutes) or Litchfield 
national park (90 minutes) for stunning waterholes you can safely swim in. If 
you have more time, a few days in Kakadu (three hours) will make this the trip 
of a lifetime.

Darwin comes alive in the dry season. Sure, there are a couple of things that 
can kill you, but stay away from waterways that aren’t designated for swimming 
and you’re unlikely to end up on the front page of the NT News.HD

Port Fairy, Victoria

The seaside town of Port Fairy can get pretty windswept in winter – but if you 
get some dry days there are some fantastic walks, opportunities for bird 
sightings and empty beaches.

Almost four hours west of Melbourne, past the end of the Great Ocean Road, 
this patch of coastline before the south Australian border is wild, beautiful 
and at times desolate.

It’s great for dramatic walks. But let’s say the weather is terrible – and you 
have to stay inside. Port Fairy has a range of historic accommodation with 
features such as open fireplaces, great restaurants and cosy cafes.

I’ve spent many winter weekends in Port Fairy – in fact I even spent a very 
cold winter living in a National Trust bluestone bank building in the centre of 
town – and the town is suited to the cold.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432622463524%2F16653271170_78b75d7542_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20cosy%20log%20fires%20to%20outback%20adventure%2C%20seven%20of%20the%20best%20winter%20getaways%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20cosy%20log%20fires%20to%20outback%20adventure%2C%20seven%20of%20the%20best%20winter%20getaways%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432622463524%2F16653271170_78b75d7542_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Surfers brave the chilly Southern ocean in Port Fairy.Photograph: Ed 
Dunens/Flickr <https://www.flickr.com/photos/blachswan/16653271170/> 
After all, this historic town was built by Irish immigrants (it used to be 
called Belfast) who knew how to create pubs, inns, taverns and cottages that 
could withstand the cold.

Swimming in the Southern ocean is only for those with the hardiest 
constitutions but for the rest of us, there’s a farmer’s market, cheerful pubs, 
shopping and walks.


My favourite new(ish) restaurant in Port Fairy is the very cool Coffin Sally. 
They have an open fire place in the bar, jugs of cocktails and they make the 
best pizzas this side of Melbourne. In a town of 3,000 people, it’s telling 
that on weekends the restaurant does two sittings for dinner.

For more formal dining, celebrated chef Ryan Sessions has just taken over 
running The Stag. Using native ingredients, try the degustation menu and retire 
to your bluestone cottage for a cosy doze in front of the fire.BD

Daylesford, Victoria

An hour from Ballarat, it gets cold in Daylesford in winter – and once again, 
many holiday cottages come with a roaring open fire, or at least heaters in 
every room.

On my visit last winter, a friend and I were able to secure a two-bedroom 
cottage on a Friday afternoon for the following two nights at $175 per night. 
Just look on Stayz or AirBnb for some good last minute options.

Although there are plenty of upmarket eating options such as the award-winning 
Lake House restaurant, our favourite was a place where you don’t need to book. 
The Farmers Arms pub is a must-visit for dinner with huge helpings of hearty 
food like schnitzel, and a meat raffle on Friday nights. You order your food at 
the bar, and grab a seat where you can. It’s popular with locals and tourists 
alike.

For the rest of the very cold July weekend, we went for walks, had massages 
(instead of going to the expensive Hepburn Bathhouse and Spa, I found a cheaper 
but very good shiatsu guy online), dinner and the farmers’ market. But mostly, 
if it’s cold and you’re renting a lovely cottage, it’s great to sit in front of 
the fire with a good book and read.

The nearby town of Hepburn Springs is also gorgeous, with a spa centre and a 
good cafe for brunch, the Red Star Cafe 
<http://www.urbanspoon.com/r/346/761596/restaurant/Victoria/Red-Star-Hepburn-Springs>
, which has a selection of books and board games.BD
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432622780786%2F14002199845_fc3390b0c1_o-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20cosy%20log%20fires%20to%20outback%20adventure%2C%20seven%20of%20the%20best%20winter%20getaways%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20cosy%20log%20fires%20to%20outback%20adventure%2C%20seven%20of%20the%20best%20winter%20getaways%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432622780786%2F14002199845_fc3390b0c1_o-1020x612.jpeg>
 Daylesford lake – perfect for a weekend stroll.Photograph: Cheryl Howard/Flickr
 <https://www.flickr.com/photos/96730140@N04/14002199845/> 
The Blue Mountains, New South Wales

Just like Daylesford, Katoomba and its neighbouring villages of Leura and 
Blackheath have great weekend rentals with roaring open fireplaces as well as 
plenty of good local walks and restaurants.

You can comfortably get to the Blue Mountains, starting around 50km west of 
Sydney, after work on Friday and have lit the fire and opened a bottle of red 
by 8pm.

If the weather is grim, stick to smaller walks such as the well-trodden path 
from Katoomba to the Three Sisters and spend your time in the town’s 
bookstores, particularly the second-hand ones. The antique and homeware stores 
of Leura are also worth visiting.

I also recommend the National Trust-listed Everglades Gardens 
<http://www.visitnsw.com/destinations/blue-mountains/katoomba-area/leura/attractions/everglades-gardens>
 in Leura. A beautifully preserved house and garden from the 1930s, it’s an 
intriguing mix of Australian bush and English garden design with flowering 
terraces, winding paths, glades, pools, and fountains. Stop by the house and 
check out its well maintained tea rooms and cafe.

Cafe Bon Ton, Leura garage and Silk’s Restaurant are top spots to eat in Leura 
while I still cherish the memory of a pie I bought five years ago from 
Blackheath. The buttery crust is still imprinted on my mind, and the pie shop 
is still there: Blackheath Bakery Patisserie at 6 Govetts Leap Road, Blackheath.
BD
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432623195473%2F16958135000_6e6ccd4f8f_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20cosy%20log%20fires%20to%20outback%20adventure%2C%20seven%20of%20the%20best%20winter%20getaways%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20cosy%20log%20fires%20to%20outback%20adventure%2C%20seven%20of%20the%20best%20winter%20getaways%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Ffrom-cosy-log-fires-to-outback-adventure-seven-of-the-best-winter-getaways-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432623195473%2F16958135000_6e6ccd4f8f_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Leura Cascades in the Blue Mountains.Photograph: Tyler Nienhouse/Flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/flakepardigm/16958135000/> 
Alice Springs and Uluru roadtrip, Northern Territory

The red centre in dead winter is stunning, with unexpectedly lush vegetation, 
fresh air and flies at an absolute minimum.

If you’re prepared to hire a 4WD, then there’s a great round trip by road to 
try. If you’re starting in Alice, head out westwards, tracking the magnificent 
West MacDonnell range, to Glen Helen homestead lodge; you can swim along the 
way at Ellery Creek Big Hole.

From Glen Helen (where you will need to buy a permit for a few bucks to 
continue) you can take the dirt-road (but perfectly fine) Mereenie loop round 
to Kings Canyon. On the way take a small detour to the astounding meteor crater 
at Gosses Bluff (the local name is Tnorala). You will probably be the only 
people there, but anywhere else on Earth it would be a major tourist attraction.

After a night at Kings Canyon, you can carry on by tarmac to the glory that is 
Uluru, and then when you’ve had your fill there, head back to Alice by the main 
road.EW
 Ghost gums near Alice Springs. Photograph: Northern Territory 
Government/AFP/Getty Images 



Margaret River, Western Australia

Head west, to where the winters in Margaret River are mild, the wine plentiful 
and the beaches wild.

Margaret River is paradise for surfers, but also has a lot to offer foodies, 
wine lovers and walkers.

It’s physically stunning with pink-hued gums, a dramatic coastline, and rows 
and rows of vines along Cave Road.

The region produces many of Australia’s top wines, and there are around 220 
wineries and 100 cellar doors within spittooning distance.


You’ll need to set aside a full day to cover the best of them. 
 Margaret River, a laid back corner of Australia. Photograph: PR 
Make sure you go to Vasse Felix – one of the first wineries to operate in the 
region in 1967, and try the cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay. Cape Mentelle, 
Cullen and Howard Park are also excellent wineries well worth stopping at.

On my last visit I picked up a haul from Xanadu, which had some good specials 
on and will ship back east for you, and Leeuwin Estate was a very picturesque 
place to stop for lunch. Check their website for concerts, as they often have 
entertainment among the vines.

In the township of Margaret River itself there are a number of good 
restaurants. My old favourite - Wino’s - has moved on, but in its place is
Swings Taphouse & Kitchen 
<http://www.swings.com.au/taphouse-kitchen/swings-taphouse-kitchen.html>, known 
for its fried harissa chicken wings (AUD$16).

Margaret River is 277km south of Perth, and the best way to get there is by 
hire car – although there are regular bus services. Around 10km west of the 
township, Prevelly is situated at the mouth of the Margaret river, as is the 
nearby beachside area of Gnarabup. Both have good accommodation options.BD
 