
Jez Butterworth playwright


I went to a comprehensive school in St Albans and, as any of my old teachers 
would tell you, I was impossible to teach from 13 onwards. I was bored out of 
my mind in every single lesson except creative writing and drama. We had one 
drama class a week. I longed to be in these classes where someone was 
broadcasting on a frequency I understood and which inspired me. Writing my own 
stories. Acting in stuff we'd made up ourselves. It was wonderful. But there 
was pitifully little of it. Everything else was just endless clock-watching, 
sitting at the back, getting into trouble, creating some drama for as long as 
you could, till you got thrown out.

April De Angelis playwright


At primary school in the 1970s our drama teacher was the legendary Ivor Cutler 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2006/mar/07/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>. 
We sang along to nonsense tunes and improvised being monkeys picking salt out 
of each other's skin. Once he gave us each a plastic grape for excellence. 
Collectively we revelled in the power of unstinted imagination. A year on at a 
new school I got lucky landing the part of Toad inToad of Toad Hall. I loved my 
drama teacher, Mrs Heaton. Drama at school was the key that unlocked me with 
its premium on curiosity and inventiveness; the joy of working in groups yet 
feeling your individual input was integral. Being inside the complex world of a 
play with its debates, strategies, motivations and allegiances was brilliant 
for confidence and developing a love of language. I wasn't a kid who was taken 
to the theatre, so school was the place. In the school mag at the time I said 
the cast felt like family. Drama creates engaged, articulate beings who are 
attuned to their connection with others – which is why it's been suppressed – 
it's a political act.

Michael Craig-Martin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2011/may/04/michael-craig-martin> artist

Like most people, I consider it disgraceful that there are students leaving 
school without being able to read or write or do simple arithmetic, and this 
situation should be addressed with urgency. However because the three Rs form 
the basis of most well-educated people's experience of education, many make the 
mistake of assuming that they constitute the basis of all education – of 
education itself.

The reason why the teaching of the arts is not automatically being included in 
the proposed new required curriculum is that the minister and those advising 
him do not believe that teaching the arts is of genuine and equal educational 
value. They see such teaching as peripheral, a luxury rather than a necessity. 
They do not understand (perhaps because they never experienced it themselves) 
that the arts teach students important things academic education does not.

Learning by doing, by flexibility of imagination, by personal choice, learning 
the pleasure of hard work when what you are doing is itself a pleasure, 
learning by the satisfaction of personal accomplishment – these are the things 
that art practice teaches best, and these are the very attributes we all know 
young people are going to need to lead a prosperous and fulfilling life in the 
modern world no matter what they do.

In my experience the people who are most vociferous in their condemnation of 
new art, art they do not "get", are those who see themselves as well-educated. 
For many this is the first time in their lives that they have come up against 
something that does not find a comfortable place in their picture of things, 
something that resists their understanding. It is a very unnerving feeling, and 
they often dismiss the work as rubbish or the artist as fraudulent. Could it be 
the consequence of a failure in their education?

Es Devlin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/jun/29/designer-gaga-olympics-ceremony-es-devlin>
designer

When I was about 15 the land artist Chris Drury <http://chrisdrury.co.uk/> 
took our art class into the forest. We built a giant dome out of branches. 
There were about 12 of us and we could all fit inside it. We told stories in 
the dark. We emerged from the forest the next day as new people. I wonder 
whether I would be telling stories for a living now if it weren't for this 
singular experience.

We rehearsed the school play in the evenings and the school became a new 
place, with new rules, new possibilities. I remember running anarchically down 
the dark corridors – running in corridors was strictly forbidden during the 
school day. Parents helped teachers make costumes – the terms of pupils' 
engagement with teachers were revised, the school became a community. I wasn't 
conscious of this at the time, but the sense of freedom we gained from being in 
the school at night time under the revised laws of the rehearsals has been 
something I've pursued ever since.

Britain excels in fashion, music and drama. How can we expect to perpetuate 
excellence if we do not cultivate the roots of these practices in children at 
school?
 Antony Gormley's monumental Angel of the North. Photograph: Andrew 
Yates/AFP/Getty Images 
Antony Gormley <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gormley> artist

Had there not been an art room at the heart of my school I would not have 
become an artist or a whole person. The art room was always open, I could go 
there any time. It was a well-lit room where anything could be made, drawn, 
painted. I would go there several times a day to keep whatever I was doing 
going. "What are you trying to say?" would be the question asked by the 
monk/painter/art teacher: a good question. Here I was encouraged to originate 
things that did not exist before, that came from my own experience, thoughts, 
feelings and my ability to give them form. It made me examine my perceptions 
and value what they told me. It made me search for means and competence. This 
was subject matter that did not come from books, was not already known, and 
although from a source without authority, was my own. The fact that this was 
given attention, value, critical consideration gave me confidence, and when the 
outcome was shown in the main assembly hall it gave me an identity in the 
school. The other question the art master asked was: "Is it finished?" It had 
to be complete, and what was complete? When what I had to say was made: made 
into a thing that was whole, undeniable, a thing in the world. This was not an 
opinion or a recovered piece of general knowledge but a fact, something in and 
of the world that changed the world.

Imagination is a vital, precious, fundamental resource that exists in every 
one of us: the imagination and the power to make what has been imagined has to 
be valued within our schools or there will be no future. Please Mr Gove, 
realise that to be human is not just a matter of performing to standards but to 
be given the power and the confidence to make what we dream.

David Hare playwright

In November the Guardian website posted an unforgettable film made by Ken 
Russell <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/ken-russell> for the BBC arts programme 
Monitor about the young author of A Taste of Honey, Shelagh Delaney 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney>. Anyone who 
watches that film about Delaney's life in 1950s Salford, and her love of the 
people who live there, will hear a particular tone of democratic idealism that 
has now disappeared almost entirely from British public life, and which, like 
pure music, chokes me up whenever I hear it. I hear the same tone when old film 
is run of the 1960s Atlanta civil rights leaders, and of Martin Luther King in 
particular.

What do schoolchildren need? Access to hope. And, most of all, access to 
convincing voices of hope. Gove's central curriculum is designed to batten down 
and to proscribe. It's profoundly anti-libertarian both in its programme and in 
its execution. The challenge for the rest of us is to make those voices 
accessible again, wherever they now are.

Nicholas Hytner director of the National Theatre

Every child should get the chance to make art, and to see it at the highest 
standard. Growing up in Manchester, I was taken by my school and my parents to 
amazing stuff, and I was blessed with an array of inspirational teachers who 
made theatre and music central to my life. I sang Mahler and Monteverdi, I saw 
Shakespeare andJoe Orton <http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/orton>, I played 
Chekhov and the Christmas Fairy. Children from homes like mine will always do 
OK; it's profoundly depressing that so much is being done to discourage schools 
from introducing every child to all that's on offer.

Julian Lloyd Webber 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/sep/23/michael-gove-ebacc-destroy-creative-education>
musician

As a nation the UK continually punches way above its weight when it comes to 
culture. Time after time we deliver the goods (as inDanny Boyle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/danny-boyle>'s wonderfully inventive Olympic 
opening ceremony) – but this always seems to be against the odds. Just imagine 
what might be achieved if we backed the arts wholeheartedly. The arts should 
not be the preserve of some privileged elite – all our children should be 
enabled to experience them. But the way the EBacc is currently framed will not 
allow this to happen and it needs to be changed, otherwise huge numbers of 
children will never be given the opportunity to realise their talents.

Antonio Pappano director of music, Royal Opera House

At St Vincent's primary school in Westminster I was fortunate enough to have 
had a teacher named Mrs Walsh who played the piano beautifully, and I and my 
fellow students sang in a choir she led. That experience stays with me to this 
day as it all seemed so natural andright. Music was and should be a part of 
everyday school life. The brain needs music and the visual arts as well as 
reading/writing, maths and history to complete itself. The emotional 
intelligence that is engendered is a gift for life. The problems of the future 
will be solved by creative people, people whose brains are open. Music is not a 
privilege, it is an everyday necessity.

David Pickard <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2001/mar/14/artsfeatures2> 
general director, Glyndebourne

Through our education work at Glyndebourne we come into contact with thousands 
of children of all ages, abilities and backgrounds. We see again and again how 
the arts enrich and sometimes change their lives, often when their families are 
unable to provide them with these opportunities themselves. The arts teach 
children so much more than simply drawing, playing an instrument, singing, 
dancing or acting. They teach them to think creatively; to interact 
effectively; to express themselves persuasively; and to believe in themselves. 
These skills are just as important in the world of work as the fact-based 
learning proposed byMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>.

My own musical education has been less important for the specialised knowledge 
it has given me than for the creative and communication skills essential for 
running an organisation. My ambition to work in the arts grew out of the thrill 
of seeing live performance from an early age. When I was a teenager I sat on 
the floor of the Royal Opera House listening to Pavarotti. I was transported by
Felicity Lott 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2005/jun/08/classicalmusicandopera1> in 
Capriccio on the Glyndebourne Tour in Oxford. And now nothing gives me greater 
pleasure than seeing the reaction of schools audiences at Glyndebourne and the 
knowledge that another generation is being inspired in the way I was.
 Elizabeth Price's video installation The Woolworths Choir of 1979 is shown at 
the Tate. Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
Elizabeth Price Turner prize-winner 2012

My earliest memory of school is of making an abstract drawing: a kind of 
geometric maze. I made it using wax crayons, enjoying their luminous colours, 
and I was delighted with it.

I remember many different pieces of art I made during school: a poster of 
Jesus (wearing flares) admonishing children to put litter in bins; a 
powder-colour painting of a Coca-Cola bottle; a gold-foil collage of 
Tutankhamun. Looking back, my whole school history is charted by the pieces of 
art I made there. It was obviously my way of growing up, and of joining in.

I went to a secondary school where anyone could learn an instrument, anyone 
could join the hockey team, appear in the school play and go along to the art 
club. Although this extraordinarily rich educational opportunity is sneeringly 
referred to as a prizes-for-all culture that generates mediocrity, that wasn't 
my experience. I participated in all of these things, and while I was not so 
good at some (hockey) I found I was good at others (art and music) and I was 
helped to excel in them.

This was made possible through the encouragement and dedication of some 
charismatic and highly dedicated teachers. Also, because these subjects had 
equal standing with other subjects in the curriculum, I never felt that being 
good at art was a lesser achievement. My way of joining in was OK.

The marginalisation of art in state schools as a result of the EBacc is a 
truly depressing prospect, not only because so many children will have less 
opportunity to discover their capabilities, of finding their own way of 
participating in the world, but also because, as a result, art itself will be 
profoundly diminished. If only the privileged have access to an inspiring art 
education (and we all know limited resources will be directed to subjects 
within the EBacc, at the expense of those outside) then art will become 
expressive of a narrow range of social experience.

Nicholas Serota director, Tate

I had the good fortune to be in London as a teenager in the early 60s when it 
was possible to see an early Rolling Stones concert as the supporting act at 
the Hammersmith Odeon, an explosive survey of international art in the decade 
54-64 at the Tate,Matisse's Snail  
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Matisse+Snail&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&prmd=imvns&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=rV-_UMTgMbCb1AWr1oGICg&ved=0CCQQsAQ&biw=1712&bih=1025>
andHockney's The First Marriage 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hockney-the-first-marriage-a-marriage-of-styles-i-t00596>
 also at the Tate,Truffaut's classic Jules et Jim 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2000/may/11/francoistruffaut.worldcinema> and, 
slightly later,Peter Brook's magical A Midsummer Night's Dream 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSC_production_of_A_Midsummer_Night's_Dream_(1970)>
 at the RSC. These were all touchstones that shaped my view of the world just 
as much as political events such as the death of Kennedy and the war in 
Vietnam. Culture is not an optional extra, it is just as much a part of life 
and education as maths, English, the sciences, history and a language.
 Art Makes Children Powerful (2012) by Bob and Roberta Smith. 
Bob and Roberta Smith artist

I went to a huge comprehensive school in Wandsworth. I imagine it's just the 
kind of institution Mr Gove hates. I had an amazing art education between the 
ages of 11 and 18. One of my teachers was Noel Hawks, who ran a record shop in 
Clapham High Street called Dub Vendor. Around that time I remember a large 
group of us trekking to east London to take part in theAnti-Nazi Carnival at 
Victoria Park <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/apr/20/popandrock.race>. We 
saw the Clash and X-Ray Spex. The study ofPoly Styrene 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/poly-styrene> should be in the art curriculum. 
I came away with two experiences that I talked to Mr Hawks about: one was 
seeing dub innovators Aswad and the other was the surrealist and activist 
collage work ofJohn Heartfield 
<http://www.wsws.org/articles/2012/aug2012/hear-a07.shtml>. Heartfield-inspired 
graphics filled Victoria Park and later Brockwell Park. All kids at school need 
to realise that art is free speech and rebellion.

My other art teacher was Kathy Dalwood <http://www.kathydalwood.com/>. She is 
the painter Dexter Dalwood's cousin and Hubert Dalwood's daughter. She took us 
on all sorts of school trips, mainly to what is now Tate Britain and the 
Hayward Gallery. I researched her dad and became interested in British 
sculpture. I loved, still love, Henry Moore from looking at his shelter 
drawings when I was at school. May be that's why I am so incensed aboutTower 
Hamlets selling the Moore sculpture "Old Flo 
<http://www.artfund.org/news/2012/12/04/sale-of-old-flo-on-hold>".

The most instructional experience was a school trip to the Whitechapel art 
gallery <http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/whitechapel-gallery> to see the 
Max Beckmann show that Nicholas Serota had put together. Jenni Lomax was the 
art education person then, and she told us, through looking at the paintings, 
about the Weimar republic and allegory. Later she presented us with huge sheets 
of paper and said forget about the paintings downstairs, just make something 
huge. That day was the day I thought: THIS IS FOR ME.

Alistair Spalding <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/alistair-spalding> 
artistic director and chief executive, Sadler's Wells

I'm afraid I'm not a good example of someone being inspired to go into the 
arts by my education, as we really didn't get much of a chance to develop our 
creative skills at the secondary school I went to. I ended up educating myself 
in the arts, and luckily it turned out well for me. I do not want my children's 
chances of enjoying or participating in artistic pursuits to be such a lottery, 
however. They should have a chance to at least find out whether they have 
musical, dramatic, choreographic or visual arts talent and, more importantly, 
whether they find pleasure in those pursuits. The benefits of having dance as 
part of a creative education are particularly obvious, as it is a performing 
art that enables you to express emotions and ideas but at the same time it 
improves your physical coordination and wellbeing.

Mark Wallinger artist

Looking back, I realise how blessed I was to go to Manford Way junior school 
in Hainault, Essex. Staffed by an array of talented and eccentric teachers, 
many of whom had come late to the vocation, it allowed our imaginations to 
flourish. I owe an awful lot to Mr Holland, a polymath who could hold a 
classroom transfixed by reading classic children's books or get us to work out 
the height of the school clocktower using trigonometry, and who also took art 
seriously, promoting the better of us from desk to easel. He encouraged me to 
further what abilities I had to draw and paint – to look closely, observe and 
reflect, make judgments, assess and reassess. To draw from life is to become 
absorbed in a profound engagement with the world.

Art comes not at the expense of an academic education, nor is it about grace 
notes in the margins; itis education. But in Goveworld this might be a problem 
because it is impossible to measure and becomes its own reward.
 