
Brett Graham

Head chef, the Ledbury, London. Grows in the garden of his home in East Sheen

I grew up in a very rural setting – outside Newcastle in Australia, next to a 
massive woodland, on a five-acre “farm” which wasn’t a working farm. That’s 
where my love of gardening started, but I was inspired by my grandfather who 
grew beans and beautifully smelling but over-watered Grosse Lisse tomatoes. I 
cultivated carnivorous plants like venus fly traps, and a few shrubs. The 
conditions were so dry and dusty I moved them into a greenhouse, which I got 
Dad to help me build when I was 12. Then I started on vegetables and lettuces. 
My interest was in nature and in learning – how to control and encourage growth.

Then my parents got divorced and my mother moved to an apartment in the centre 
of Newcastle and I moved in with her, so couldn’t continue with my greenhouse, 
or chickens. There was a long gap before I returned to my first passion.

I’d moved from Australia to London in 2000 and during my third year of working 
at the Ledbury I was living in a flat in Maida Vale. It had a flat roof, so I 
decided to cover it in herbs planted in wine boxes and champagne buckets. I 
loved being up there at night. Then I moved into a house in East Sheen with my 
wife five years ago and in a couple of months turned a barren garden into a 
place to grow strawberries, jerusalem artichokes, potatoes, beans, fennel and 
types of radishes – cherry bell, scarlet, little white icicle ones. I soon 
realised how important positioning is in England, compared to Australia. Here 
you’ve got to work so much harder. But that’s fine, mate. There’s even more 
satisfaction, thinking: “I grew this, I looked after this, it’s got no chemical 
in it and it’s beautiful.”

I started taking produce to work and did dishes with my own vegetables and 
herbs on taster menus. I don’t tell customers I grow these things – unless they 
specifically ask – but get great satisfaction from it. I consider my gardening 
as down-time and a way to relax. I can switch off in the garden at night – I 
become calm just by spending 15 minutes watering or picking herbs after getting 
home at 1.30 or 2.00am.

My only frustration is when I don’t have enough time and feel like I’m letting 
down my celeriac
Brett Graham 
Any half a day it’s possible to have off work, I’m in the garden. We don’t 
have children and my wife’s only into flowers really, so I’m on my own, in 
silence. I put boxes on the shed roof because she didn’t want me taking up any 
more space. I try to put things together that have a similar growing feel, like 
my wasabi and succulent wah suruna , which need damp, shade and warmth. My only 
frustration is when I don’t have enough time and feel like I’m letting down my 
celeriac or whatever. So I’m usually up and in the garden at 6am, before 
heading to work for an 8am start, taking in sorrel fresh each morning, which is 
a huge benefit in the Ledbury kitchen. And things like my Japanese spinach work 
really well for us, because suppliers charge £15 or £16 a kilo and I’m 
providing 200 grams a day. But I could never produce enough food here for the 
Ledbury. I can do months of work growing some new potatoes – picking them, 
looking after them, sieving through all the dirt, potting and re-potting, and 
then 25 portions are sold on a lunch menu and they’re all gone in two hours. 
It’s more about the spirit, the belief in freshness – it’s a revolution. It’s 
about teaching the other chefs to source locally and think and feel a certain 
way, and about the huge rush you get from serving meals with one or two 
ingredients which you’ve cared for all the way from seed to table.

Bruno Loubet


Head chef, Grain Store in King’s Cross, and Grain Store Unleashed. Recently 
moved to Bedfordshire to build an edible country garden
 Bruno grows purple carrots, amaranth and spaghetti squash. Photograph: Emli 
Bendixen for Observer Food Monthly 
Given we only moved here less than a year ago and I started this garden from 
scratch, what I’ve achieved is not that bad. I hired a machine to take out the 
grass and dig everything over, used a lot of farm manure, turned it many times 
in the winter, built the chicken and rabbit pens and then in spring started 
seeding things in boxes, so everything you see growing here’s from seeds. I’ve 
worked really hard to make it happen, in between commuting by train to work 
14-hour days in London.

It all goes back to growing up in rural France where ‒ as a perk of being a 
railway station worker ‒ Dad had an allotment a few minutes’ walk away, which 
fed our family of 11. Having seven children, maybe it allowed him peace too, 
although I’d often turn up there. For me, gardening allows the mind to reset, 
makes me feel sane and human and gives me a connection to food and life.

Back in Dad’s allotment we’d grow everything, including many fruits. I 
remember mates pestering me to go and play football or ride bicycles, saying, 
“Why do you want to be gardening, what’s wrong with you?” and I’d reply, “Get 
off, it’s what I do.” I foraged all the time too ‒ it’s the way my family 
lived. Almost everything we ate was linked to its season and proximity.

I remember in 1968 how my mother, expecting a revolution in France, got us to 
store food under the floorboards
Bruno Loubet 
Food had been scarce in the 40s, so my parents remained frugal and adaptable. 
Mum’s eccentric father, who’d lost his leg after falling from a cherry tree 
while picking, ripped up the floorboards and planted pumpkins and butternut 
squash in the house, so no one could steal his food. And I remember in 1968 how 
my mother, expecting a revolution in France, got us to store food under the 
floorboards. At eight, Dad taught me how to kill a rabbit, gut, prepare and 
then cook it. At 11, I used to pick small leeks, no bigger than my finger now, 
and tie them in bundles then, on the way to school, sell them for two francs a 
bunch to a guy at the market who’d sell them on.

Dad always insisted Mum put a big bowl of mixed leaves on the table. I think 
if she didn’t he would have divorced her. This is my first place in England 
where I can step from my kitchen and pick a whole range of food I’m growing 
myself. The only sounds are the birds, the chickens and the wind through the 
veg. Once my wife let the dog in and he rolled in my strawberries and flattened 
a bunch of courgettes. He knew what he’d done because when I got home he hid 
very quickly.

I’m already thinking about winter. Dad’s dead but if he could see this now 
he’d probably say, “It’s good, Bruno”, then add: “I’m sure it will be better 
next year.” My neighbour over the back fence has been growing for 20 years and 
can’t believe what I’ve got already. Herbs, garlic, spring onions, shallots, 
[Basque] tear peas, baby leeks, fennel, purple heritage carrots, cabbages, 
runner beans, a range of beetroots, amaranth, Russian kale, American spaghetti 
squash, courgettes, artichokes, Japanese radishes. One of those leeks will make 
a winter soup and I’ve got 30 growing. Not much is ending up at [my restaurant] 
Grain Store, but, because there’s enough for the family, I’ll take in things 
for the chefs to test and courgettes for the Italian guys to barbecue for their 
girlfriends. When I have somethingreally special ‒ like my little radishes, so 
fresh and crunchy, the perfect radishes really ‒ I’ll give them to customers 
free, as a nibble bowl, and say: “That’s from my back garden.”

Thomasina Miers


Founder of Wahaca and food writer. Gardens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> at home in Kensal Rise
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439987210868%2Fc0d01676-0c8e-41c0-b2d4-213b1dba55b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20fork%20to%20fork%3A%20five%20cooks%20and%20their%20kitchen%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20fork%20to%20fork%3A%20five%20cooks%20and%20their%20kitchen%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439987210868%2Fc0d01676-0c8e-41c0-b2d4-213b1dba55b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Thomasina grows chillies, garlic and sorrel. Photograph: Emli Bendixen for 
Observer Food Monthly 
The kids take part. To a child, digging up potatoes is like mining jewels from 
black earth. They’ve got their own little gardening kits and boxes – forks, 
watering can, garden bags to carry, the lot. They want to copy, so they’re 
great at watering, digging, weeding and putting earth over after I seed. 
They’ll take out bowls for raspberry and strawberry picking and, of course, 
they’re brilliant at eating them.

I’d grown up eating vegetables from gardens – not at home but with 
grandparents. One set lived in Gloucestershire and that grandpa would endlessly 
get us to eat his beans, stewed gooseberries and rhubarb – he kind of forced it 
down our throats a bit. There were also grandparents in Wales that us kids got 
sent to whenever Mum and Dad went off on holiday alone. I did a lot of picking 
in Gran’s small kitchen garden, which had loads of runner beans and globe 
artichokes. She’d also take us to pick-your-own farms and awarded tiny amounts 
of pocket money, on a points system, for gardening.

I’d never had a garden of my own until getting this house with my husband. We 
had a bit of tangle though. He said, “What if I have a son who wants to play 
football?” I’d wanted vegetables everywhere but ended up with raised beds on 
either side. And we kept some roses for the bees and jasmine and lavender for 
the smells. The garden’s been going three years now and provides me with loads 
of ingredients. Shiso, mustard leaf, rocket, chillies, beans, sorrel... loads 
and loads of herbs. And, my God, the garlic. I’ve still got a large jar of 
garlic puree I boiled down from some wild garlic we dug up in June.

The most totally inspiring garden I ever saw was Diana Kennedy’s. She lives in 
an eco ranch in the middle of a kind of jungle and met me at her gate with a 
glass of mescal.

The book I want to write next is about how I use my own garden, larder, fridge 
and freezer to feed my family, healthily but in no time. Old-fashioned garden 
and kitchen management for the modern age.

Dan Cox

Head chef, Fera, London. Gardens in the walkway of his house in Camden

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439990001016%2F5a23dc2b-f984-4a2a-8f32-2b53c02e6f83-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20fork%20to%20fork%3A%20five%20cooks%20and%20their%20kitchen%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20fork%20to%20fork%3A%20five%20cooks%20and%20their%20kitchen%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439990001016%2F5a23dc2b-f984-4a2a-8f32-2b53c02e6f83-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Dan grows leeks, Mexican marigolds and runner beans. Photograph: Emli Bendixen 
for Observer Food Monthly 
I remember a grandfather in Chichester who grew vegetables but he died when I 
was six or seven. I lived with my family in a house in Highbury. Mum was a 
high-flying solicitor and Dad did computer-auditing and they had no interest in 
the garden. Meals involved a lot of tinned and frozen stuff ‒ it was very much 
a cupboard of convenience. But, fascinated by my grandmother’s love of home 
cooking in Barry, I started cooking for my parents. At nine or 10 years old I 
was making a starter and main course each evening for when they got home. I’d 
serve them, then go to bed, to let them enjoy it. They didn’t appreciate it to 
the extent they could have done, frankly. Mine wasn’t the warmest upbringing. 
But after they got divorced I took on the renovation of the house and then 
built a conservatory on the back and filled it with a complete range of unusual 
and rare herbs.

When I began working with Simon Rogan at L’Enclume there was a local farm 
supplying it with produce who we pushed for more volume but [who] weren’t very 
interested. So we started our own farm from scratch in six acres of empty 
field, in a beautiful landscape, down the road from the restaurant. We still 
call it ‘Our Farm’ and it supplies all Simon’s restaurants by refrigerated van.

I worked incredibly hard on the farm, starting early 2011, and in spring I was 
going back and forth to L’Enclume and standing at the bar and watching people 
serve food I’d seeded, grown, prepared in the kitchen and plated. Having 
control of your restaurant produce, that’s the main thing. And growing 
varieties you can’t necessarily get elsewhere.Returning to London to work at 
Fera was odd, in that there’d been far less bullshit in the countryside, more 
headspace, more of a natural life. I spent a lot of time finding this house, 
one of a price I could afford, near enough to work and with the right feeling. 
Because the tiny back garden gets little light I decided to make the front 
steps and what is technically the pavement into my growing area. After working 
closely with our suppliers during the day, I get to come home to a place beside 
the canal where I’m helping things grow throughout their cycles. It’s difficult 
to water tomatoes when I’m doing 18-hour days, but it’s got to be done and it’s 
good to do it. The pavement lamp comes on as soon as it gets dark, and that 
helps me and the growth. I call it my concrete garden. It’s my escape and it 
feeds me. There’s incredible flavours here: dittander, meadowsweet, 
marigolds... The Mexican marigold, for instance, I bought in the seeds from 
south America, sowed, they grew a treat and we’ve used it in every restaurant 
since. Today’s my day off and I’ve picked leeks and runner beans to cook 
tonight for me and my brother, and great cress. I do take a fair bit into Fera, 
but it’s also about gathering specimens for when I have somewhere bigger to put 
them.

I’m aiming to have my own restaurant right in the middle of a farm ‒ 
Devon/Cornwall, but certainly a place of outstanding natural beauty. So many 
restaurants have gardens but they’re often dead and barren. What I want is a 
place working totally harmoniously. Restaurant, brewery, dairy and bakery, all 
in one, with me living there, working with incredible like-minded people and 
with a growing operation going on all round. The things closest to the building 
would be interesting herbs, flowers and things needing special care and 
attention; then in surrounding fields the large scale vegetables and orchards. 
I haven’t got a name for it yet, but the vision’s there and growing nicely.




Wai Ting Chung

Co-owner, Bao, London. Her roof terrace in Fitzrovia doubles as her garden
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439990108205%2Ff54eae73-63bb-4ed8-862a-1c1e8523b07a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20fork%20to%20fork%3A%20five%20cooks%20and%20their%20kitchen%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20fork%20to%20fork%3A%20five%20cooks%20and%20their%20kitchen%20gardens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fcooks-and-their-kitchen-gardens-bruno-loubet-thomasina-miers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439990108205%2Ff54eae73-63bb-4ed8-862a-1c1e8523b07a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Wai Ting grows basil, kale and tomatoes. Photograph: Emli Bendixen for 
Observer Food Monthly 
I was born in Nottinghamshire, where my family had moved from Hong Kong. They 
hadn’t had a garden in Hong Kong because there’s just no space there. For two 
years I lived above our takeaway restaurant The Golden Crown in Beeston. We 
also had The Oriental Pearl in West Bridgford and Opium, in a listed building 
with a grand staircase, in the centre of Nottingham. It was very traditional 
Cantonese food. So I grew up, from 14 at least, helping or working in 
restaurants.

My interest in gardening began, ironically, after moving to London, where 
there seemed so little space to do it
Wai Ting Chung 
The first garden we had, lawned and hedged, was behind our new-build house in 
Wilford, where my family dug out a patch and began growing Chinese vegetables 
like spinach and gai lan [broccoli]. For them it was never about aesthetics and 
they weren’t particularly green-fingered. It was their way of supplementing 
produce for the restaurants. Personally I had no interest in it ‒ I was into 
algebra and art, then fashion. My interest in gardening began, ironically, 
after moving to London, where there seemed so little space to do it.

An ex-boyfriend bought me a grow-bag ‒ that was the start. I had a little back 
yard in Stoke Newington and was growing vegetables to cook.

Four months ago we opened Bao in Soho and it coincided with me getting this 
flat above The Newman Arms in Fitzrovia. The roof terrace gets sunlight all 
day. I share the flat and terrace with Matt, who part-owns the pub. We’re 
growing quite a few things and have this wooden structure to allow drainage. 
This isn’t about supplying Bao with ingredients, but about growing things for 
my own kitchen and The Newman Arms’ restaurant.

I love it up here. It’s relaxation, and to be surrounded by plants is very 
appealing, my sanctuary. After pub closing time, it’s surprisingly quiet – 
apart from someone who sings on her balcony ‒ and I sit up here at night, after 
work, on the AstroTurf, watering the kale, sorrel, basil, pea-shoots and tomato 
plants.

I’m not necessarily very good at gardening and it’s hard work, but I really 
enjoy it. I’m encouraged by salad-grower Sean O’Neil of The Cornwall Project 
[which supplies Cornish produce to restaurants], who I’ve been down to see at 
Keveral Farm in St Martin by Looe. He’s started producing Szechuan peppercorns, 
which are very difficult to grow in this country. Just the taste of the leaves 
is incredible and I’d love to get to grips with growing those next.
 