
Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese was famous for its steak and kidney puddings 
<http://www.theoldfoodie.com/2014/08/cheshire-cheese-pudding.html>, served from 
the first week in October throughout the winter months.

London, Monday.
Lord Birkenhead presided to-night at the opening of the pudding season at the 
Cheshire Cheese in Fleet Street 
<http://charlesdickenspage.com/pennell-cheshire_cheese.html>, and he had the 
support of Lady Birkenhead, Mr. Augustine Birrell, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, and 
several other well-known people. Among the old diners there was a little 
grey-whiskered man nearing his ninetieth year who had frequented the Cheese for 
sixty years. The one notable absentee was the famous parrot, who isstill 
confined by pneumonia 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/10/1/1443693857864/15-August-1926-Polly-the--001.jpg>
 to an upper room.

The old, low-ceilinged room with its small-paned windows and ancient pews lit 
by candle-light was a scene which but for the costumes of the diners might have 
been seen in any year of its post-Fire history. But no, there was a change even 
from last year, for the ladies as well as the men were smokingchurchwarden pipes
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Churchwarden_pipe>.

Lord Birkenhead made a very appropriate speech, although he profoundly 
disbelieves that Dr. Johnson had ever sat on the seat on which he was sitting. 
For a considerable time Johnson was poor and could not frequent taverns, and in 
the later period of his life he drank nothing but tea.

Lord Birkenhead thought that Johnson’s decision to give up alcohol was a 
lamentable one, and his excessive use of tea must have accelerated his death 
from dropsy. It was a warning. As an amateur hygienist the speaker had come to 
the conclusion that a man who took a reasonable amount of alcohol was more 
likely to reach a ripe old age than one who risked dropsy by the excessive use 
of tea. On the whole, however, as Johnson even in his tea age preferred to hear 
himself speak in a tavern rather than have to listen to others speaking to him 
at home he was ready to accept the connection between Dr. Johnson and the 
Cheshire Cheese.

What Mr. Birrell Disputed.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurconandoyle> 
and Mr. Augustine Birrell withstood one another about Dr. Johnson’s writing. 
Sir Arthur thought Johnson a great man but a poor writer. His English was fit 
for tombstones, not for books. And no one read his books. He knew that Mr. 
Birrell would dispute this, and Mr. Birrell did.

Mr. Birrell said that some of Johnson’s poems were great poetry. Scott, when 
he was near his death, recited twenty lines from “The Vanity of Human Wishes,” 
and Tennyson greatly admired it. He did not like to differ from anyone who knew 
so much not only about the present world but the world to come as did Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle, but he was wrong about Johnson’s writing. He joined with 
Sir Arthur in his admiration of Johnson as a man.

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle in his speech drew a contrast between the times when 
the tavern was built and the life of to-day in its idea of a family evening. In 
Pepys’s day people would converse at a party on all reasonable things. They 
would have music, and the kitchen-maids would come in and take their part in 
the singing, and in choosing a maid Pepys used to test her voice. To-day, when 
people gathered together for a social evening, the host switched on the 
gramophone or tuned in the wireless and the loud-speaker began, and so to bed.

To-night, however, the party at the Cheshire Cheese had wit and instruction 
blended, and a group of glee singers sang old English songs, and the very old 
man with the grey whiskers beat time on the old table. And time seemed to stand 
still.
 