
When pitching freelance articles, choose a unique angle

When pitching for freelance work there is no set of rules, says Dany Louise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dany-louise>, who writes about the visual 
arts and cultural policy. “If the story is of interest it will usually be 
commissioned, but pitching the right story is the real skill.”

“If you haven’t got the right angle, then no amount of pitching will result in 
an article being picked up,” says Katy Cowan, managing director ofBoomerang 
<http://www.boomerangpr.com/>. “So, write a story that no one else could write. 
Find a unique angle and go for it.”

You also need to do your research. “The best way to get your pitch read and 
considered is to really have a feel for the publication,” addsClare Whitmell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/clare-whitmell>, Guardian writer and 
qualified career coach.

In photography, knock on doors with your portfolio

There are many ways to get people to see your work, says David Locke, an 
independent photographer <http://www.david-locke.com/> and co-owner of Headshot 
London <http://www.headshotlondon.co.uk/>. “But the best way is to have a good 
online presence with an up-to-date portfolio and then start knocking on doors.”

Likewise, it’s important to choose a different photo selection for each 
client. “You should identify who you want to approach, and then tailor your 
portfolio to that specific person or company,” adds Cowan.

Only accept unpaid work if it has a direct benefit to your career

Unpaid work at the beginning of your career can be prolific in the arts. “Make 
sure if you are doing something for free it’s a win-win for you both,” says 
arts expert Mar Dixon. “If not, also provide a fee when they offer you free 
work.”

Similarly, arts journalist Eleanor Turney admits she did some writing for free 
when starting out. “But in general I’m very much of the opinion that you should 
hold out for pay.”

Though writing for free may be worth it if it helps buff up your portfolio. 
“It’s useful to have a portfolio to show an editor, so at first it might be 
worth choosing a couple of pieces to write for free.”

Don’t rely on freelancing websites to pick up work

“Freelancing websites are often a race to the bottom in terms of fees,” says 
Pete O’Hara, director of Creativity Culture and Education and accountant.

There are rules to follow when using these sites, adds museums and libraries 
consultant,Laura Crossley <http://www.lauracrossley.com/>. “First, your fee has 
to cover everything – insurance, pension etc. Second, remember it’s more 
worthwhile to build the career you want and that satisfies you rather than 
taking odd jobs.”

Susan Jones, a writer and consultant on contemporary visual art, says 
freelancing websites can provide a good “ticking over” income in less busy 
periods. “But explore other avenues – don’t put all your eggs in one basket,” 
she adds.

Collaborate with other professions to build your reputation as an artist

Exhibitions are valuable for budding artists says Laura Palmer, freelance 
photographer and filmmaker. “There are so many opportunities, so get entering 
them. I was dubious at first, but after entering Fresh Faced + Wild Eyed hosted 
by The Photographers Gallery, I picked up work from a variety of brands 
straight out of university.”

However, it can take a long time to build a reputation, says artist Rob Turner 
<http://robturners.blogspot.co.uk/>. “It must be something you truly believe in 
as there will be knock backs. Make as many opportunities to work for you as you 
can – tie in with other peoples skills in collaborative teams across 
disciplines.”

“For artists its all about reaching people,” agrees Rachel Nelken, founder of 
ArtsTrain <http://www.artstrain.org>. First, create an online presence so that 
people can find your work. Then get out to events – meet people and direct them 
to where they can find it. “It’s about grabbing any opportunity you can and 
finding contexts to build that audience and interest in your work – then the 
offers will come.”


Learn to manage your own finances

In a portfolio career, managing your finances can be a difficult but crucial 
part of the job. “The first thing you will need to do is to ascertain if you 
should be self employed or maybe even a limited company. An accountant will 
also help you set you up with HMRC,” says Alex Dyer, managing partner of
Theataccounts <http://www.theataccounts.co.uk/>.

It’s also important to be organised. “Keep receipts for freelance expenses, 
record travel (including mileage) to clients or to pitch for work is also 
crucial,” adds O’Hara.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 