
In the same way that every World Cup offers Fifa an opportunity to make some 
money 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jun/23/brazil-world-cup-deepen-problems-fifa>
, each passing tournament also gives England a chance to end their "years of 
hurt".Frank Skinner and David Baddiel coined the phrase back in 1996 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RJqimlFcJsM&feature=player_detailpage> to 
commemorate the 30 years of disappointment England suffered after winning the 
World Cup in 1966. When the comedians returned to milk theirThree Lions single 
before France 98 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oyoy2_7FegI>, the words 
changed to "no more years of hurt". Presumably the songwriters couldn't bear 
the thought of doing the maths; or maybe the number 32 didn't fit so well with 
their poetic metre.

Either way, England will have gone 48 years without winning a major 
international trophy by the time theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> kicks off in Sao 
Paulo next summer. As things stand, just qualifying for the tournament will be 
an achievement for Roy Hodgson's team. No one seriously believes they can win 
it, so, to save the embarrassment of looking back on nearly half a century of 
broken hopes, England fans should savour what blessings they can find.

Now that the Confederations Cup is classified as a tournament worth winning 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/jun/14/confederations-cup-brazil-japan>
, England supporters should revisit their past and make more of their minor 
triumphs on the international stage. They are proud holders of the Rous Cup, 
which was won most recently in 1989 thanks to a fine 2-0 victory over Scotland 
and a goalless draw against Chile. Only 15,628 people turned up to watch 
England play Chile at Wembley, but a trophy is a trophy, even if few supporters 
watch it being lifted.

Memories of the Rous Cup are unlikely to pacify England fans, but they should 
make more of their triumph in Le Tournoi de France, a competition that served 
as a warm-up to the 1998 World Cup. England beat France and Italy on their way 
to winning it, with Ian Wright, Paul Scholes andAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> scoring their goals.

It was a happy time for the England football team, who looked capable of 
putting together a challenge at the forthcoming World Cup. Paul Wilson watched 
England play in Nantes, Montpellier and Paris and was keen to praise theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager: "The first year of 
Glenn Hoddle's reign has been characterised by better results and fortune than 
experienced by any of his predecessors dating back to Alf Ramsey. How you get 
to be so lucky is of course the essence of management. You don't do it by just 
keeping your fingers crossed. Hoddle is lucky in the sense that he has Shearer, 
one of the most coveted strikers in world football, at his disposal, but much 
of the rest is down to man-management, at which he appears adept."

Hoddle would show tactical intelligence later in the year when England 
traveled to Italy to secure their place in the World Cup 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O57dE8lChOI>, but he was fortunate to possess a 
bunch of players that would make Hodgson jealous. Shearer was his captain and 
obvious star, but he was well supported by Wright, Teddy Sheringham and Andy 
Cole in attack. Paul Scholes, Paul Gasgoigne and David Beckham provided 
creativity from midfield, with Paul Ince shielding a defence that contained Sol 
Campbell, Gareth Southgate and the Neville brothers. With David Seaman in goal 
and strong support cast that included Stuart Pearce, Graeme Le Saux, Martin 
Keown and Nigel Martyn, Hoddle possessed a squad capable of beating the best 
teams in the world (in friendlies).

England 2-0 Italy
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-vkkOpLbOGU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-vkkOpLbOGU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-vkkOpLbOGU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
For France, the Tournoi was a warm-up event for the World Cup; for England, it 
provided practice for a World Cup qualifier. To make it toFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> 98, England would have to go to 
Rome in October 1997 and secure at least a draw against Italy. From that 
perspective, Le Tournoi provided England with a vital lift, as David Lacey 
reported from Nantes:

England 2-0 Italy: a positive step on the road to Rome By David Lacey

L'Equipe summed up England's exhilarating but unexpected 2-0 victory over Italy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/italy> in the Tournoi de France in 
Nantes on Wednesday night thus: "Chics, ces Anglais!" Which only goes to show 
how limitless football 's capacity for surprises continues to be.

For among the many words that might have been employed to describe the 
performance of an England team containing such luminaries as Martin Keown, 
Stuart Pearce and Teddy Sheringham, "chic" would not readily have sprung to 
mind. Call Paul Ince "chic" and he would probably give you a funny look.

Yet yesterday's L'Equipe got it right to the extent that England 's first win 
over Italy for 20 years was achieved by playing football which was certainly 
radical chic. Glenn Hoddle's highly experimental side blended a caucus of 
Manchester United youth with some Premiership wrinklies to produce one of the 
most stylish performances seen from an England team since Ron Greenwood's side 
went to Barcelona shortly before the 1980 European Championship and defeated 
Spain by a similar score.

The principal difference is that whereas Greenwood fielded most of his first 
choices at Nou Camp – Ray Wilkins, Kevin Keegan, Steve Coppell, Trevor Francis 
and Tony Woodcock – Hoddle used the match against Italy to try out a system 
previously seen only in training and did so, moreover, with an untried team.

He was rewarded with several excellent individual performances. Pearce, 
himself outstanding, reckoned yesterday that he had never seen a better full 
international debut than that of the 22-year-old Paul Scholes, whose inspired 
long pass set up the opening goal for Ian Wright after 25 minutes. Wright 
returned the favour shortly before half-time.

By playing Phil Neville wide on the right and moving David Beckham inside, 
Hoddle gained the pace and perception of the former while widening the latter's 
scope for those raking, crossfield passes which are part of Beckham's 
stock-in-trade. Then Gary Neville came off the bench for Graeme Le Saux, moving 
to right wing-back with his brother switching flanks.

"We played with one up (Wright) and two little inside-forwards (Beckham and 
Scholes) and it worked a treat," said Hoddle. "It takes good players to do 
that. We've worked at this system in training over the last 12 months but until 
now we haven't been able to put it into a match situation. This is what this 
tournament's all about, looking at new players, new shapes and systems."

"I didn't expect to be in the squad so soon," said Scholes. "But I wasn't 
nervous. It's just something that doesn't seem to bother me."

"The way we played in the first half," said Beckham, "with our one-touch 
football , has made people sit up. Nerves? No. We play so many big games for 
United, every one a cup final, you don't get the chance to feel nervous. And 
we've all grown up together."

Beating Italy in a tournament designed as a dry run for the French World Cup 
organisers before next summer's real thing can hardly be related to what might 
happen when England go to Rome in October, but Cesare Maldini and his players 
will be feeling decidedly less sanguine than they did after Gianfranco Zola's 
goal won them the game at Wembley in February. For Maldini senior it was the 
first defeat since he took over as coach from Arrigo Sacchi.

England 1-0 France
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F26lDoOkfJ-o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F26lDoOkfJ-o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F26lDoOkfJ-o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
France became the sixth hosts to win a World Cup when Zidedine Zidane knocked 
in two headers and Emmanuel Petit strolled through the Brazil defence to give 
them a 3-0 victory in the 1998 final. Asides from their lack of an obvious 
goalscorer, that France team was almost perfect, but they were not overly 
fancied before the competition began. France had not qualified for Italia 90 and
the arguments provoked by their failure to qualify for USA 94 were far from 
resolved 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2012/nov/16/from-vault-ginola-houllier-france-feud>
. Nevertheless, when David Lacey watched England beat them in Montpellier, 
things seems to be aligning for Hoddle and his team:

Shearer paints picture of an English renaissance By David Lacey

If this is a false English dawn, then clearly somebody is a dab hand at 
forging Constable landscapes. Glenn Hoddle's team continue to rewrite history. 
England are no longer about Euro 96 and all that. Only nine days ago no England 
side had won in Poland for 31 years, Italy had not been beaten for 20 and 
France had not lost to an English side on French soil since 1949. Records may 
be there to be broken but Hoddle's players have just wrecked an entire HMV 
store.

The latest success in the Tournoi de France was achieved in the Stade de la 
Mosson in Montpellier on Saturday night. Alan Shearer punished a fumble by 
Fabien Barthez four minutes from time to give England a 1-0 win and the French 
their first home defeat since losing to Bulgaria in a World Cup qualifier in 
Paris in November 1993.

Hoddle calls Shearer his "cutting edge". Some understatement: were Shearer a 
knife, he would be banned in public places. It was Gary Lineker who observed 
that "goals come in bunches". His most prolific spell for England came during 
the 1990-91 season and the tour of Australasia that followed. Four goals 
against Malaysia brought his total to 10 in 10 appearances. Shearer has now 
topped this with 11 in 11. Not only that, he is a more complete footballer than 
Lineker, as consistent a goal-provider as he is a goal-taker more of a Geoff 
Hurst in fact.

If England do return to France for the World Cup next summer and Shearer is 
still in this sort of form, all things will be possible. "Alan has got 
everything," Hoddle said. "He's got the right temperament. With him, for all 
the praise he receives, it's just a matter of going on to the next game."

In the case of Shearer and England, the next game is against Brazil at the 
Parc des Princes tomorrow night. England have beatenBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> only three times in 18 meetings 
going back to 1956. Their last win was at Wembley in 1990. Such is the mood of 
optimism among Hoddle's players that anything is possible now.

Graeme le Saux remembered similar vibes when Blackburn Rovers won the 
championship in 1994-95. "There's something you need to be successful, 
something you can't coach. You become protective of each other as a team. It's 
like an aura."

Le Saux, like David Beckham, is suspended for the Brazil match, having 
received a second yellow card in Montpellier. He was cautioned for a foul on 
Marc Keller Beckham, absurdly, for refusing to board the stretcher for a 
five-yard journey to the touchline to receive treatment after a tackle by 
Patrick Vieira.

Past World Cups have been littered with the eccentricities of North African 
referees, and if England do qualify this time then they can afford to be 
charitable and regard the Moroccan Said Belqola as part of the learning 
process. He, presumably, would have carded Lazarus for taking up his bed and 
walking.

Bookings apart, the victory, though less spectacular than the 2-0 win against 
Italy in Nantes three nights earlier, was nearly as satisfying in a different 
way. Sol Campbell looks a better international defender with every game and 
Hoddle was pleased with the defensive discipline shown by Beckham and Paul 
Gascoigne in protecting the back three.

With Paul Ince's midfield thrust replacing David Batty's passive passing, 
Gascoigne improved after half-time. He stopped trying to put the ball through 
the legs of worldly wise opponents and concentrated more on his passing. 
Gascoigne and Beckham found the quality of pass or cross to expose the defence, 
although it was a centre from Le Saux that found Shearer rising at the far post 
10 minutes before half-time for a header which drew an excellent save from 
Barthez.

Six minutes later, after Beckham's through ball had sent Shearer clear, the 
England captain's cross left Ian Wright with just Barthez to beat but his shot 
hit the goalkeeper's body and ricocheted over. Just past the hour, after 
Beckham's searching centre, Barthez dropped smartly on another header from 
Shearer, and by then Christophe Dugarry had twice gone close enough to suggest 
France could win the game.

Yet the French attack lacked an ability to pick a pocket or two, and this was 
what decided Saturday's outcome. Shearer accepted a pass from Gascoigne and 
immediately found Teddy Sheringham, who had just come on for Wright, in space 
on the right.

As Sheringham drove the ball across low, it took a deflection off Bixente 
Lizarazu, one of the French substitutes, which possibly confused Barthez. The 
keeper allowed it to slip through his grasp, and that left Shearer to grab the 
unexpected gift.

Poland was serious, these are just war games, and England still have to meet 
Italy in Rome in the World Cup. But as Hoddle said: "With good results and good 
performances, you get respect from other teams. Sometimes people give Brazil 
too much respect. They think they've come from another planet. Maybe we have to 
start looking at ourselves rather than Brazil."

England 0-1 Brazil
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fj-E3wkVYIOM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fj-E3wkVYIOM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fj-E3wkVYIOM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Of course, this being England, reality was always going to strike at some 
point. England won the tournament with their victories over Italy and France, 
but they were well beaten by Brazil. The old uncertainties came back. England 
were overly reliant on their main striker; they struggled to keep the ball; 
and, like every other team in international football, they were susceptible to 
a toe-poke from Romário.

England revival as delicate as a glass football By David Lacey

The glass football that England bore home in the early hours of yesterday 
morning, the winners' trophy from the Tournoi de France, was tangible evidence 
of the success Glenn Hoddle has achieved in his first year as coach to the 
national team. It was also a reminder of how fragile a commodity new-found 
optimism can be.

By any yardstick Hoddle has done well since he took over the England squad 
from Terry Venables when the nation was still abuzz after Euro 96. It is to his 
credit that, 12 months on, England are looking forward in expectation rather 
than back to what might have been. Under Hoddle, England have won nine matches 
out of 11, and the victory in Poland 12 days ago has revived the team's chances 
of qualifying directly for next year's World Cup finals.

A great deal now rests on the result in Rome on October 11, when England will 
try to reverse their defeat by Italy at Wembley in February. Brazil could not 
deprive England of their pretty French bauble in Parc des Princes on Tuesday 
night, but the 1-0 win by the World Cup holders was a timely reminder to Hoddle 
and his players about the task ahead.

The principal message from the Brazil match was that, if Alan Shearer does not 
score, England's alternative match-winning options are thin indeed above a 
certain level. It was the same against Italy at Wembley, and beating the 
Italians 2-0 in Nantes last week, when Shearer was kept out of the firing line, 
did not alter the basic fact.

If England qualify, Hoddle will be heavily reliant on Shearer, Paul Ince and 
David Seaman each surviving the 1997-98 season without serious injury. Those 
three players represent the core of England's ambition, and the loss of one or 
more of them would be a body blow to the coach's plans.

Then there is Paul Gascoigne, who in the Tournoi de France demonstrated that 
he can still perform for 90 minutes at international level – although questions 
about his true value remain unanswered. Hoddle's faith in him is admirable but 
if England qualify it will be important that David Beckham, suspended for the 
Brazil game, and Paul Scholes emerge in a year's time as serious prospects for 
what is going to be a long and demanding 32-nation tournament.

England's main gains from the Tournoi de France have been in defence, where 
Sol Campbell now wears the look of a genuine international footballer and 
Southgate has become more of the player he was under Venables. In Phil Neville 
England have potentially a genuine wing-back although against Brazil he did not 
look quite the finished article.

For Hoddle an important benefit of this summer's exercise has been to work 
with his squad for three and a half weeks uncluttered by club commitments, a 
problem that is bound to arise next season when the programme will be busier 
than ever.

At least the coach appears to be happy within himself. Graham Taylor completed 
his first year in office by complaining that the England job did not command 
enough respect. "When I was Chelsea manager, looking on from the outside, it 
looked a very difficult job," said Hoddle, "and it is just that. But it's one 
I'm enjoying and taking a lot of pride in. The ups are very high and the downs 
very down but I've got a good family behind me and that is the most important 
thing, whether you're up or down."

The less Hoddle's family see of him over the next year will be a measure of 
how well things are going for England, and so much depends on what has happened 
by the time he returns home from Rome.

The aftermath

On the Sunday after England returned home from France, Amy Lawrence wrote in 
the Observer about a new closeness among the England squad: "Luton Airport may 
not have been the scene of tearful partings when England arrived home from the 
Tournoi, but the lads had forged a strong enough bond to suggest a few 
heartfelt hugs and a bientots weren't out of place.

"In going their disparate ways to be reunited with their folks, Glenn Hoddle's 
squad were leaving a second family behind. Before we know it they will be 
entering the world's sporting arenas holding hands. Brazil, the team who ended 
England's six-match winning streak, do precisely that, so perhaps it's another 
detail for Hoddle to mull over in the weeks before he organises his next 
reunion."

There was much praise for Hoddle, who was keen to share the compliments with 
his staff. When asked about England's disciplinary record, the manager was 
happy enough to crack a joke: "Just for once, it's nice to miss out on the Fair 
Play Award but win the actual tournament."

That sanguine approach to his team's disciplinary record would be gone within 
a year, when Hoddle would find himself bemoaning a costly red card given to 
David Beckham in England's defeat to Argentina at the World Cup. Beckham had 
missed England's final match in Le Tournoi due to suspension, but Hoddle did 
not seem too concerned. The player was distraught: "I was gutted. Playing 
against Brazil is every player's dream." He did not learn from his mistake 
quickly enough.

In other post-tournament news, Hoddle sent out a warning to Paul Gascoigne, 
who was playing for Rangers at the time. L'Equipe reported that the manager had 
criticised Gascoigne's lack of focus: "Paul no longer thinks of football as a 
priority in his life. Today football comes fourth in his list of interests. He 
thinks too much about money and is beset by personal problems. It's time the 
penny dropped. If not, I'll wash my hands of him."

Hoddle claimed the quotes had been mangled to misrepresent him. Perhaps he 
should have been a bit more forthright. A sterner warning may have pushed 
Gascoigne harder and saved him from the anguish he experienced the following 
summer, when Hoddle rejected him on the eve of the World Cup finals and was 
nearly clobbered for it. Gascoigne, who reacted like a "man possessed", later 
admitted: "I went to the wardrobe and kicked the door in. Then I overturned the 
table, smashing a pottery vase. I didn't try to hit Hoddle, though I'd have 
liked to."

All in all, 1997 was to prove an apex for England. They could look back on a 
successful Euro 96 with pride, look forward to the 1998 World Cup with hope, 
delight in their performance away in Rome and feel united by their success in 
France. Le Tournoi is not quite the World Cup, but at least it broke up the 
years of hurt.

Read other stories From the Vault 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/series/fromthevault> and share your memories 
below
 