
For the danger they posed, the lapses were appalling. They put lives at risk, 
that much is clear. But they were shocking, too, due to where they happened. 
The US government's high-security disease-control laboratories – which house 
samples of the most harmful germs in the world – cannot afford to screw up.

First came news of a single incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/19/anthrax-exposed-scientists-cdc-atlanta-live-bacteria>
. Staff working on deadly bioterrorism agents at the Centres for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta followed the wrong procedure to 
"inactivate" batches ofBacillus anthracis, the bacterium that causes anthrax. 
Though potentially still lethal, the bugs were sent to another CDC lab where 
staff were not equipped to handle live spores.A report into the lapse 
<http://www.cdc.gov/od/science/integrity/> published last week revealed a 
worrying pattern of staff failures, and found that dozens were potentially 
exposed. The CDC doled out antibiotics and anthrax vaccine. Affected rooms were 
sterilised. They were lucky: no one got the disease. But that is hardly the 
point.

It was not an isolated event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jul/11/two-us-government-labs-shut-down-troubling-safety-lapses>
. As CDC investigators finalised their report into June's anthrax scare they 
unearthed a more alarming incident that had gone unreported. In March, lab 
staff sent samples of a fairly harmless strain of bird flu to scientists at the 
US Department of Agriculture. To the agricultural team's alarm, every chicken 
they infected with the virus died. It was only after 21 birds had succumbed 
that they discovered why: the CDC samples had been contaminated with a strain 
of highly lethal H5N1 bird flu. Natural outbreaks of the virus have killed 
hundreds of people in Asia.

The director of the CDC, Tom Frieden, took swift action. He closed the CDC's 
anthrax and influenza labs and imposed a ban on the shipment of biological 
material in or out of the CDC's highest-security labs while safety procedures 
are revamped. At a press conference last week, Frieden said the behaviour of 
some staff had been "totally unacceptable … Frankly, I'm angry about it." On 
Wednesday,Frieden was called before a US House oversight committee 
<http://www.c-span.org/video/?320417-1/hearing-cdc-anthrax-lab-incident> to 
explain himself. The chairman,Tim Murphy, did not hold back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/16/cdc-accused-of-dangerous-pattern-of-safety-lapses>
. The incident was "troubling", "completely unacceptable", the CDC's reputation 
"tarnished". Frieden, he said, had called the anthrax scare a "wake-up call". 
But that was a "dangerous understatement", Murphy warned. "It was a potentially 
very dangerous failure," he said.

The incidents cast a long shadow over the organisation charged with protecting 
the US public. But a third incident points to a broader failure in US 
biosecurity. In early July,six vials of smallpox were discovered in a storage 
room at an unguarded FDA lab in Maryland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jul/08/smallpox-vials-found-cardboard-box-maryland-laboratory>
 that once belonged to the US National Institutes of Health. After the 
eradication of smallpox, a horrific disease that kills 30% of people it 
infects, official stocks are kept only at the CDC in Atlanta and atthe Russian 
Vector lab in Novosibirsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/feb/13/smallpox-virus-vector-health-terror>
. The samples found in the NIH lab probably date back to the 1950s, but tests 
at the CDC found that despite their age, smallpox in two of the six vials was 
still alive and dangerous. (The last fatal case of smallpox in the UK happened 
in 1978, when the virusescaped from a laboratory at the University of Birmingham
 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/local-news/birmingham-mail-feature-when-birmingham-was-gripped-155391>
.) The bad news did not end there. On Wednesday, federal investigators reported 
more dangerous material from the same room. In all,they found 12 boxes 
containing 327 vials <http://www.wired.com/2014/07/pox-four/> labelled with 
various unpleasant pathogens, from influenza and dengue fever to rickettsia and 
Q fever.
 CDC director Tom Frieden was called before a US House oversight committee to 
explain the recent lapses, which he admitted had been 'totally unacceptable'. 
Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images 
It was the NIH's turn to apologise. Its director, Francis Collins, said that 
"overlooking such a sample collection for years is clearly unacceptable". He 
ordered a full search of all fridges, freezers, cold rooms, storage shelves and 
cabinets, as well as offices linked to laboratories, in case other dangerous 
agents had gone missing. To the outside world, the most trusted keepers of 
lethal germs had shown themselves to be dangerously incompetent.

The failings will have direct consequences at the CDC and NIH, but the fallout 
from the lapses will be felt far beyond the US. There are major lessons to be 
learned about human error that even the most vigilant high-security labs in 
Europe, Asia and elsewhere must heed. But for some scientists, the incidents 
call for more drastic action. Some want the number of laboratories holding 
lethal bugs to be slashed, to minimise the risk of a catastrophic accident. 
Others want the highest-risk experiments curtailed, arguing that the fresh 
understanding they bring is not worth the real danger of an accidental outbreak.

"This is not just being seen as something across the Atlantic. There will be 
knock-on considerations, there have to be," said John McCauley, director of the
WHO influenza centre <http://www.nimr.mrc.ac.uk/who-influenza-centre/> at the 
National Institute for Medical Research in London. "These incidents remind 
us that accidents, although extremely rare, can happen, and we need to be aware 
of how they occurred so we can minimise or even eliminate that kind of accident 
happening elsewhere."

Eight labs in the UK are allowed to work with the most dangerous pathogens, 
and aside from two animal vaccine manufacturers, all are government-sponsored. 
Some, including the military labs atPorton Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/jul/10/porton-down-germ-warfare>, 
are world class, but others, such as the Institute for Animal health at 
Pirbright are reportedly more run-down. The 2007 outbreak of foot-and-mouth 
diseasealmost certainly came from the Pirbright lab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/oct/17/footandmouth-ruralaffairs>, 
according to a Commons science committee report.

At Wednesday's US hearing on the CDC anthrax scare, Richard Ebright, 
a biosafety expert at Rutgers University, called for a dramatic reduction in 
the number of labs permitted to work on the bugs, from 1,500 or so in the US to 
nearer 50, in order to minimise the risk of a serious accident. He urged the 
government to set up an independent federal agency to regulate the work, one 
with real powers to shut down labs that operated dangerously.

The US government is unlikely to embrace Ebright's plan. On Sunday evening, the
NIH sacked half of its biosafety panel by email 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/233912792/NSABB-Dismissal-June2014>. The move ousted 
11 of the government's original advisers, who in the past had raised concerns 
about experiments to create dangerous new pathogens. Critics are now waiting to 
see who will replace the fired advisers. One told the Guardian the replacements 
would be "yes men".
 Anthrax bacteria similar to those transported between US CDC labs in 
violation of safety protocol last month Photograph: EPA 
Ron Fouchier, a virologist at Erasmus medical centre in Rotterdam, said 
slashing the number of labs working with dangerous pathogens would be a huge 
mistake. "The reason so many labs are doing pathogen research is because there 
is so much to be investigated, in the interest of public and animal health," he 
said. The number of organisms that need high-security labs is rising. There are 
ongoing outbreaks of anthrax, various strains of bird flu, Ebola, andMiddle 
East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/11/worry-about-catching-mers-middle-east-respiratory-syndrome>
, which has killed hundreds in the Middle East, and a handful more in Africa, 
Asia, Britain, France and Germany. "I find it hard to believe theat Dr Frieden 
or Dr Ebright might think that some of the work is not needed and can be thus 
be reduced," Fouchier told the Guardian. He said his lab already used dangerous 
pathogens only when there was no alterative. Working in high-security labs "is 
not fun, and is very expensive".

But the breaches in the US have fuelled concerns about some of the more 
extreme studies that scientists do. When the CDC declared its anthrax incident, 
Marc Lipsitch, professor of epidemiology at the Harvard School of Public 
Health, saidwe should be glad it was only anthrax <http:>. He fears that 
scientists, Fouchier included, pose far greater risks to the public by
intentionally creating dangerous pathogens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jun/11/crazy-dangerous-creation-deadly-airborne-flu-virus>
. In 2011,Fouchier announced that he had mutated bird flu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/28/bird-flu-mutant-strains> to make 
it spread easily in animals through coughs and sneezes. Advocates for these 
experiments, known as gain-of-function studies, say they give scientists 
crucial insights into the kinds of viruses to fear in nature. To Lipsitch and 
many others, the irony is all too clear. In trying to prevent the next 
pandemic, they say Fouchier and his colleaguesmake a disastrous outbreak more 
likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/20/virus-experiments-risk-global-pandemic>
.

Earlier this week, Lipsitch convened more than a dozen researchers who shared 
his concerns. The result of their meeting was theCambridge Working Group 
consensus statement <http://www.cambridgeworkinggroup.org/> calling on the US 
government to "curtail" experiments that create potentially pandemic pathogens, 
until proper risk assessments have been done. While Fouchier and others explain 
that they have already been through numerous risk assessments, and operate 
under extremely tight security, their critics are not reassured.

One of the signatories of the Cambridge Working Group statement is Sir Richard 
Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/mar/06/gaddafi-charity-lse-donation-not-approved>
, a British scientist and Nobel prize winner, who now works at New England 
Biolabs in Massachusetts. Roberts hasn't seen the risk assessments for 
Fouchier's experiments, but notes that even the CDC labs, "which were generally 
considered to be the safest labs out there", had had problems. "How can you 
trust anybody? Humans are human. People make mistakes."

Lipsitch's group wants to convene a meeting that brings together scientists 
and other experts to debate the potential risks of making dangerous pathogens, 
and to draw up binding guidelines to ensure that future experiments are safe. 
The plan mirrors the landmarkAsilomar conference in California in 1975 
<http://libraries.mit.edu/archives/exhibits/asilomar/>, which was largely 
driven by younger scientists who had concerns over the unknown risks of 
swapping genes in and out of different organisms. The meeting set important 
ground rules – including the introduction of biosafety containment levels 
around the world – for genetic studies to this day.

Vincent Racaniello, a virologist at Columbia University in New York, said the 
Cambridge Working Group was "infuriating" because it misled people into 
believing that viruses made in laboratories were a serious threat to the 
public. But because the experiments are done in ferrets, he argues, it is 
impossible to know if the bugs would spread in people, and how dangerous they 
might be. He added that deciding which experiments went ahead on the basis of a 
risk-benefit analysis was "absurd", because it was often impossible to know the 
benefits of an experiment beforehand.

McCauley largely supports the experiments at the centre of the controversy, 
arguing that they reveal how viruses in the wild transform from harmless 
strains to more dangerous forms. "I need to be able to advise people," he said. 
"And it makes me feel a whole lot happier knowing more."

Roberts, though, is having none of it. "The risks are enormous and the 
benefits, to my mind, are non-existent," he said. "If I suggested that you try 
to make the most virulent and dangerous virus that we can imagine, something 
that could kill a quarter of the world's population if it got out, does that 
seem a sensible thing to do? That strikes me as being absolutely ridiculous."
 