
The stock market hitting an all-time high this week spells good news for 
thousands of people participating in company share schemes – and they are not 
all fat-cat chief executives and board direectors.

Saturday, 15 October, is a key date for about 139,000 postal workers who 
received free Royal Mail shares when the business was floated on the stock 
market in October 2013. Each full-time employeeinitially received 613 free 
shares 
<http://www.royalmailgroup.com/%C2%A3489-million-free-shares-royal-mail-allocated-approximately-150000-employees>
, which were automatically put into an employee share scheme.

Under the rules, Saturday is the first day that the postal workers are free to 
sell their shares if they wish, and those who do stand to make approximately 
£3,000 apiece, based on this week’sRoyal Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> share price of around 490p.

Meanwhile, supermarket giant Asda this week revealed that its share ownership 
schemes have effectively delivered more than £750m for staff since the first 
one was launched in 1982. More than 22,800 Asda employees took part in the 
company’s Save As You Earn (SAYE) scheme which matured in July this year, 
giving them the chance to buy shares in the company’s American owner Walmart 
for a knockdown £37.27 a share. That’s the equivalent of around $45 – and this 
weekWalmart <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> shares were at 
around $67. Between them, 22,855 Asda staff have benefited from a £56m payout 
from the latest scheme, equating to a profit of just short of £950 per worker, 
a spokesman said.

Royal Mail and Asda are among scores of big-name companies that operate 
employee share schemes – others include Tesco, Morrisons and drinks group 
Diageo. Malcolm Hurlston, chairman of theEmployee Share Ownership (Esop) Centre 
<http://www.esopcentre.com>, says the great thing about broad-based employee 
share ownership is that “everyone in a company – from the boardroom to the shop 
floor – is able and incentivised to acquire shares in the company for which 
they work”.

Probably the best known and most popular of these schemes is SAYE, also known 
as Sharesave 
<https://www.gov.uk/tax-employee-share-schemes/save-as-you-earn-saye>. With 
this, workers have the right (known as an option) to buy shares in their 
company at a price fixed at the outset. This price can be up to 20% less than 
the share price when the plan was set up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Froyal-mail-asda-tsb-company-share-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ebc943d29d3ee46abb88605c64796fb4dd37a70%2F91_0_5134_3080%2F5134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Royal%20Mail%20to%20Asda%20%E2%80%93%20company%20schemes%20that%20give%20workers%20a%20share&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Froyal-mail-asda-tsb-company-share-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Royal%20Mail%20to%20Asda%20%E2%80%93%20company%20schemes%20that%20give%20workers%20a%20share&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Froyal-mail-asda-tsb-company-share-schemes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ebc943d29d3ee46abb88605c64796fb4dd37a70%2F91_0_5134_3080%2F5134.jpg>
 ‘Taking part in the Sharesave scheme is a great way for me to put aside a bit 
of money each month and share in the success of TSB.’ Photograph: Carl 
Court/AFP/Getty Images 
Workers save between £5 and £500 a month over three or five years, and at the 
end of the period can use the accumulated money to buy shares at the fixed 
price. If at that point the share price is lower than the discounted price, you 
don’t have to buy them – you simply get all your savings back. That’s why this 
scheme has previously been described as “win-win”. However, you used to get a 
tax-free bonus added to your cash, but the SAYE/Sharesave bonus rate –which is 
set by HM Revenue & Customs – is currently set at zero, which means you won’t 
receive any interest on your savings. In other words, you could have got a 
better return by putting your cash into a savings account or doing something 
else with it.

Big cuts in store for Royal Mail and Post Office workers' pensions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/10/royal-mail-pension-post-office-hit-brexit-defined-benefit>
There are now almost 1.5m SAYE accounts held in the UK, according to employee 
share groupProShare <http://proshare.ifslearning.ac.uk>, and they have 
delivered bumper returns to many ordinary workers. For example, in August 2014 
almost 23,000 BT employees – most of them call centre staff and engineers –
benefited from a £1.1bn SAYE scheme payout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/01/around-23000-bt-staff-share-scheme-windfall>
. Their built-up savings could be used to buy BT shares for just 61p each, 
which is pretty good going when you consider that BT’s share price the day 
before the scheme matured was 388.5p. Based on that price, the average gain for 
those selling their shares immediately was an impressive £41,674 per employee. 
However, there have also been cases where companies have offered schemes that 
have left workers disappointed because the share price has fallen below the 
option price.

Many household-name businesses offer SAYE schemes. For example, TSB’s latest 
one, a three-year savings plan, closed to applicants on 22 August. When it 
matures, staff will be able to buy shares in TSB’s parent company, Spanish bank 
Sabadell. These are listed on the Madrid stock exchange and priced in euros, 
although the staff are saving in sterling. The option price, 77.68p, was based 
on the average closing Sabadell share price and euro/sterling exchange rate for 
the first five days of August, to which the bank applied the maximum 20% 
discount. This week, Sabadell’s share price was around €1.15, or £1.04.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Froyal-mail-asda-tsb-company-share-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20a2d876108cd1ddc83cd64734393441f5b2408a%2F0_0_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Royal%20Mail%20to%20Asda%20%E2%80%93%20company%20schemes%20that%20give%20workers%20a%20share&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Froyal-mail-asda-tsb-company-share-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Royal%20Mail%20to%20Asda%20%E2%80%93%20company%20schemes%20that%20give%20workers%20a%20share&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Froyal-mail-asda-tsb-company-share-schemes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20a2d876108cd1ddc83cd64734393441f5b2408a%2F0_0_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
 Tara Bridgeman. 
Tara Bridgeman, who works at a TSB branch in Barnet, north London, says: 
“Taking part in the Sharesave scheme is a great way for me to put aside a bit 
of money each month and to share in the success ofTSB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tsb>. It was easy to set up and is 
flexible, as I can choose how much money I save and have the option to take a 
payment holiday if I need to. It’s also helpful that it’s taken directly out of 
my salary before it hits my bank account so I’m not tempted to spend it.”

The history of the British co-operative movement - timeline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-enterprise-network/gallery/2014/jan/29/the-history-of-the-british-co-operative-movement-timeline>
Another popular type of scheme is the share incentive plan 
<https://www.gov.uk/tax-employee-share-schemes/share-incentive-plans-sips> 
(SIP), introduced in 2000, which offers several different ways of getting 
shares. There are just over 1m SIP accounts in existence, and this is what 
Royal Mail used for the free shares it gave to its workers in 2013.

With a SIP your employer can give you up to £3,600 of free shares in any tax 
year, but you have to hold them for at least three years.

At the Royal Mail, the company’s flotation in October 2013 was highly 
controversial because the government sold 60% of the business for 330p a share, 
only to see the price immediately shoot up. But whether the workers should sell 
their shares is a very different matter. Crucially, if they cash them in any 
time soon, they will have to pay income tax and national insurance 
contributions (NICs) on their value – ie, 20% tax and 12% NICs for a basic-rate 
taxpayer.

Under SIP rules they will have to wait another two years before they can sell 
these free shares completely free of income tax and NICs.

There are two other approved share schemes in use in the UK: the company share 
option plan 
<https://www.gov.uk/tax-employee-share-schemes/company-share-option-plan> 
(CSOP) andenterprise management incentives 
<https://www.gov.uk/tax-employee-share-schemes/enterprise-management-incentives-emis>
 (EMIs).

The first of these gives you the option to buy up to £30,000 of shares at a 
fixed price – but Hurlston says CSOPs are “in pretty sad decline”. In 2013-14 
there were 1,280 live CSOP schemes, down from more than 5,000 in 2000.

By contrast, EMIs are on the rise, with nearly 10,000 companies using them, 
according to the most recent official figures. EMIs are mainly used by small, 
fast-growing companies that perhaps aren’t able to pay huge salaries right now, 
but want to keep hold of their staff by promising them “jam tomorrow”.
 