
Craig Baxam was lost. He thought he was in a town in northern Kenya called 
Marareme, though really he didn’t have a clue. He then got on a bus headed to 
Garissa, towards the Somali border, but was puzzled by the way the other 
passengers referred to it as “Arara”.


Baxam was far from home, spoke no local language and knew little about the 
region he was traveling through. If he were successful in reaching southern
Somalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>, his destination, things 
would almost certainly get worse for him: the war-torn country, where he 
planned to live according to his faith, remains one of the most inhospitable 
and perilous on Earth.

Yet none of that flustered him. All he wanted was to keep on moving towards 
the border. Find it, cross it and begin a new, better, devout life.

Baxam, 24 at the time, had thrown to the winds his comfortable existence in 
Laurel, Maryland, where he worked for a TV services company. In December 2011 
he cashed in his thrift savings plan account (all $3,613.38 of it), gave $1,000 
of that to an acquaintance in need, and with the rest bought himself a ticket 
to Nairobi. He had decided to set out on a hijrah, a migration to a true 
Islamic land, as he was instructed to do in the Qu’ran.

To say that this was all new to Baxam would be an understatement. A black 
American raised Catholic who had recently discharged himself from the US army 
after four years of service, he grew up with no connection to the Muslim faith. 
But five months before his trip, he went through a dramatic and sudden 
conversion after stumbling on a religious website.

Barely half a year later, he was making his way north through Kenya into the 
vast unknown.

Somalia: one man’s terrorist is another man’s carpenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/18/somalia-terrorist-carpenter-al-shabaab>
As he travelled, Baxam kept his head down, stopping merely to eat and pray at 
mosques. He had good reason to be careful: he was heading towards one of the 
world’s most anarchic conflict zones in a country that had been in the throes 
of an extremeIslamist insurgency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/04/somalia-al-shabaab-insurgency-mogadishu-mohamed-nur>
 for several years.

Once inside Somalia, he planned to live under al-Shabaab – a group designated 
by Washington as a terrorist organisation which practices a very strict form of
Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> under the religious law of 
sharia.

The stakes were high. US and Kenyan authorities worked closely together to 
intercept 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/15/foreign-troops-in-somalia-struggle-to-keep-al-shabaab-at-bay>
 any movement across the border from al-Shabaab members, and Baxam had a taste 
of those security efforts as he sat on the bus going north. He later told the 
FBI there were posters all along the route telling people to contact police 
should they see anyone acting strangely. He must have looked suspicious 
himself, he said, given what was about to happen.


Soon after the bus pulled out, a man boarded and gently began asking Baxam 
questions. Where was he going? Did he speak the local dialect? Was there family 
nearby?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a53d4e9e91c84f261770d6e2f099caf0526a578%2F0_0_2021_2441%2F2021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a53d4e9e91c84f261770d6e2f099caf0526a578%2F0_0_2021_2441%2F2021.jpg>
 Craig Baxam with his mother Deanna in November 2015. Photograph: Courtesy of 
Deanna Baxam 
Baxam thought to himself: I’m in luck, here’s someone who wants to help me. It 
didn’t quite turn out like that. Not long after, the bus was surrounded by 
Kenyan police who swarmed onboard and took him away on suspicion of terrorism.

•••

At 7am on a Monday, 11 days after Craig Baxam was hauled off the bus, the 
phone rang at Deanna Baxam’s house in Atlanta, more than 8,000 miles away. It 
was the Baltimore field office of theFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi>. Her son, she was told, had been 
detained in Kenya and was in a Nairobi jail.

That was all they said. Nothing about how long he’d been held, where he’d 
been, or what treatment he had endured.

The following day, 4 January 2012, two FBI agents from the Atlanta division 
came knocking on Deanna Baxam’s door. They asked whether she was willing to pay 
for her son’s plane ticket home. When she inquired whether he had been charged 
with any crime, they said no, so she readily agreed, thinking Craig would soon 
be back with her.

“They said: ‘We would like to bring him home to you, but you have to pay the 
airfare.’ So I gave them my charge card and they put a $3,000 ticket on it,” 
Baxam said in the course of a three-hour interview with the Guardian in her 
home in the Atlanta suburbs.

On 6 January 2012, she began the long drive to Maryland to meet her son as he 
flew into Baltimore Washington international airport. She was apprehensive, but 
happy he was safe and coming home. But somewhere on the interstate, another 
call came in from the FBI. Craig’s plane had already landed, they told her. He 
had been re-arrested as he set foot on US soil and taken off to a federal 
institution.
membership callout 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/us-membership/power.html> 
He was charged 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3148000-Indictment-1.html> with 
attempting to provide material support to al-Shabaab, the designated terrorist 
organisation, and informed that he faced a maximum prison sentence of 15 years.

Of all the many things that have happened to Deanna Baxam since that day, 
having the FBI asking her to pay for her son’s plane ticket so he could be 
flown into the waiting claws of the US justice system perhaps hurts the most.

“I’m very angry about that. They used me as an American citizen, had me spend 
private funds to conduct law enforcement activities on behalf of the FBI. 
That’s not the worst of it. The worst of it is this: my government screwed my 
son and made me pay for it.”

She may not have realized it fully at that time, but Deanna Baxam had just 
been sucked into one of the defining conflicts of the modern age: religious 
fundamentalism versus the US national security apparatus.

On the one hand, she now had a son who professed to be a devout Muslim and who 
felt such a fierce commitment to his newly discovered faith that he was 
prepared to leave his family and radically change his life to practice it. On 
the other hand, she also had to deal with seemingly duplicitous anti-terrorist 
agents within the FBI who were bearing down on her child with the full might of 
the world’s only superpower.

As a mother, it bothers me that I lent my son to the army and they didn’t give 
him back to me
Deanna Baxam 
She was caught between two utterly bewildering worlds, and her initial 
reaction was one of disbelief. This didn’t happen to a family like hers. “I 
thought our family did everything right, everything that would keep us out of 
the government’s clutches,” she said.

Deanna was born in Nebraska, a US citizen, but she was raised in Jamaica to 
Jamaican parents. She returned to the US after completing her chemistry degree 
and went on to marry Carl Baxam, an American Trinidadian who worked for a 
defense contractor. They had two sons, the youngest of whom, Craig, was born in 
1987.

There was always something special about Craig, she said. He was creative, 
outgoing, smart. He also had an obsessional quality, as smart kids often do. 
Passions would flare up, burn brightly and then fizzle out in quick succession. 
“One day when he was about 10, he wanted to learn Hangul, so he visited our 
Korean neighbors every day – he was a real pest. That was typical: he wanted to 
learn the piano so he would go at it for days and days, and then it was done.”

Along with that intensity came what she describes as a purist streak. “There 
was no grey for him: it was either black or white, right or wrong. Nothing in 
between. When things were shoved into the in-between, he couldn’t deal with it.”

There were other difficulties. He once said to his mother he thought he had 
attention deficit disorder, though she couldn’t see it. He also took the 
divorce of his parents badly. They separated when Craig was eight years old and 
a few years after that Deanna moved away from Maryland to New Jersey, leaving 
her son largely in the care of his father.

The internal struggle reflected itself in Craig’s education. He flunked out of 
college before the end of freshman year, and then flunked out of community 
college. Deanna kept asking him what he was going to do with his life, a 
question which he answered, to her shock and dismay, by signing up for theUS 
military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military>. He enlisted in 
2007, telling Deanna that he wanted to defend America in the wake of 9/11. 
After eight months’ training in advanced cryptology and intelligence, he was 
posted to Baghdad.

Until he joined the army, Craig had been what his mother describes as “very 
clean. Didn’t drink or do drugs. Never. He had never been in trouble of any 
kind and had no criminal convictions or arrest record.” She doesn’t know what 
happened to him in Iraq – to this day he refuses to talk about it – but she 
does know that he came back a changed person.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56374f1fbe391511c34791372ea698983fcfe27e%2F0_346_1372_1945%2F1372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56374f1fbe391511c34791372ea698983fcfe27e%2F0_346_1372_1945%2F1372.jpg>
 Craig Baxam at Goodfellow air force base in San Angelo, Texas, in 2007. 
Photograph: Courtesy of Deanna Baxam 
“As a mother, it bothers me that I lent my son to the army and they didn’t 
give him back to me. I still don’t have him back. I raised nice, middle-class 
children, sent them to music lessons, Catholic school, and then he just came 
back different.”

Having never smoked, Craig now consumed cigarettes, marijuana and K2 
(synthetic marijuana, which at the time of his arrest was a legal substance). 
He began drinking heavily, another first.

Deanna Baxam is convinced her son displayed classic PTSD symptoms. In between 
flashes of anger, he was withdrawn and disconnected. She had made his bedroom 
welcoming for his homecoming, but instead of sleeping in the new bed she’d 
bought for him, he insisted on lying on the floor with his head on his service 
bag, as though he were still in the war zone.

He signed up for one more tour of duty, this time to South Korea. The night 
before he was dispatched, she recalls that Craig would not move from a chair in 
the kitchen. “I went to bed, and I left him sitting there in the chair in the 
dark all night. That wasn’t right. There was something bad going on.”

Amid all this turbulence, Craig Baxam turned to the Muslim faith that was to 
become his salvation and his undoing.

While stationed in South Korea, he began exploring religions. He would send 
his mother emails asking existential questions such as “do you believe there’s 
only one God?” or comparing Christianity with Islam. She was impressed and glad 
he was nurturing his spiritual side.

But when he got off the plane on his return in July 2011, she knew something 
major had happened. He had grown a beard and was wearing a kufi and robe. She 
was stunned, and let it show. “Oh my God, what happened to you? Why would you 
even travel looking like that?” she said.

“Mom, I’m a Muslim now,” he replied.

She ran out of the airport, sat on a bench and cried.

It wasn’t the faith that distressed her: they had raised their children to be 
believers, and Deanna Baxam herself is a Pentecostal Christian. It was the 
feeling of abandonment.

“Faith is important to me,” she said. “But we raised them in a certain 
tradition, so to have him leave Christianity was like a rejection of the 
family. I was angry about it for a long time. I told him, ‘I’m as devout as you 
are, but we are on different tracks and you are separating our family.’”

According to an affidavit 
<http://www.investigativeproject.org/documents/case_docs/1874.pdf> given by an 
FBI agent, Craig Baxman converted about a week to 10 days before he quit the 
army in South Korea. There seems to have been no grooming involved by any 
individual or organization: Baxam had been surfing the internet and had come 
across a website that talked about the Day of Judgment – it spoke to him and 
made him hungry for more. Almost instantly he was praying five times a day and 
devouring books on Islam.

Back in the US, he regularly tried to convert his own mother, too. Sometimes 
he would say to her: “Mom, I respect your right to have different faith, but 
I’m worried you are going to hell when you die.”

She tried to be as accepting as she could, hoping that his new obsession would 
fade away. It didn’t. In December 2011 she got a call from Craig’s father 
saying that her son had disappeared.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a9db3dd80a964c3d58a557fa3c369e9afc9b85f%2F0_0_4483_3225%2F4483.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a9db3dd80a964c3d58a557fa3c369e9afc9b85f%2F0_0_4483_3225%2F4483.jpg>
 A copy of the Initial Entry Training Soldier’s Handbook belonging to the 
former US soldier Craig Baxam. Photograph: Bita Honarvar for the Guardian 
Al-Shabaab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/04/somalia-al-shabaab-insurgency-mogadishu-mohamed-nur>
 is one of the world’s most feared Islamist militant groups. Since Craig 
Baxam’s attempt to live under its control, the extremists have carried out some 
of the most brutal terrorist attacks in living memory, including the 2013
Westgate mall attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/24/kenya-mall-hostage-westgate-nairobi>
 in Nairobi in which at least 67 people were killed.


The group emerged in about 2006 out of the anarchy and chaos that has gripped 
Somalia, a “failed state”. At the time that Baxam was making his way through 
Kenya, carrying only a few hundred dollars in his pocket, a prayer mat and a 
copy of the Qu’ran, al-Shabaab militants were being forced out of the Somali 
capital Mogadishu but were still in control of large swathes of the south of 
the country.

It was these al-Shabaab-controlled areas of Somalia that Craig Baxam was 
determined to reach. Using the internet, he had identified three places in the 
world where, in his view, a Muslim could conform fully to the tenets of his new 
religion under sharia law.


The trio of locations that he chose as his possible future havens are among 
the harshest environments – both physically and spiritually – on the globe. 
They were the Taliban-controlled parts of Afghanistan; the southern islands of 
the Philippines, where an extremist group was trying to gain a foothold on 
Mindanao; and the al-Shabaab parts of Somalia.

US prosecutors presented in court documents a psychological profile of Baxam 
in which they alleged that he had been aware of al-Shabaab’s terrorist 
designation and the insurgency it was actively fighting at the time within 
Somalia. Based on interrogations with him while he was held captive by Kenyan 
police with FBI agents in attendance, they claimed that he had become hostile 
towards America, which he regarded as oppressive to Muslims.

“To live as a Muslim in the US you need to compromise,” the FBI agent’s 
affidavit said, paraphrasing Craig Baxam’s alleged position. “He finds the 
constant playing of music and display of pictures disrespectful. Only Allah can 
create images.”

The affidavit went on to allege that Baxam was prepared to take up arms and 
fight against the US if it attacked al-Shabaab:

Baxam saw himself dying in Somalia. It might be from malaria or from being hit 
by a rocket. Only Allah could know. Baxam never intended to return from 
Somalia, he was ‘looking for dying with a gun in my hand’. He would be happy to 
die defending Islam; being mowed down or hit with a cruise missile. If someone 
dies defending Islam, they are guaranteed a place in Jannah [paradise].

It’s impossible to really know what was going through Craig Baxam’s head as he 
was making his fateful journey. In a recent letter to the Guardian from his 
current prison cell in Beaumont, Texas, he declined to be interviewed, writing 
that “despite the grief the US government has caused me, I am a private man and 
I also consider what happened to me to be far more insignificant than other 
cases”.

But there are clues that suggest that the US prosecutors’ account of his 
intentions was overblown. The federal judge assigned to the case, Frederick 
Motz,cast doubt 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3147999-OrderReBillofParticulars.html> 
on the state’s claim that Baxam had terrorist inclinations.

“According to what he told FBI agents,” Motz wrote in a court memo, “it 
appears to me that defendant had not formed an intention to fight for 
al-Shabaab in any offensive capacity when he travelled to Somalia. To the 
contrary, all the statements seem to reveal is that defendant wanted to live in 
a Muslim country underSharia law <https://www.theguardian.com/law/sharia-law> 
and that if the country in which he was residing was attacked, he would then 
defend that country.”

For Deanna Baxam, the account given by the state – that her son was a callous 
terrorist-sympathiser intent on betraying his own country – just didn’t ring 
true. As she sees it, it was his innate purist streak that was leading him on, 
not any political sensibility. “He believed that the Qu’ran says that if you 
live in an oppressive regime where Islam is not in control, like America, then 
you should make hijrah. So he set off for Somalia.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97833dfc1ef4021f05b05cb6517acf939ab0afba%2F0_0_1260_1666%2F1260.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20US%20army%20to%20al-Shabaab%3A%20the%20man%20who%20wanted%20to%20live%20under%20sharia%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fcraig-baxam-al-shabaab-sharia-law-fbi-army%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97833dfc1ef4021f05b05cb6517acf939ab0afba%2F0_0_1260_1666%2F1260.jpg>
 A letter from Baxam to his mother. Photograph: Deanna Baxam 
A mother is not the most dispassionate witness. But Deanna Baxam also has a 
lawyer’s eye, having retrained in law several years ago. She has identified 
aspects of the case that make her deeply uneasy about the justice served. There 
were the 11 days between her son’s arrest on the bus in northern Kenya, and his 
return to US soil – what happened in that period, how many times was he 
interrogated, and what role did the FBI play in the process? Why were none of 
the interrogations recorded on tape so that the FBI’s account of what her son 
told them could be verified?


She is alarmed by the fact that her own government deployed its considerable 
resources to track and detain her child on foreign soil. Instead of providing 
him with the care he needed as a disturbed veteran who had seen tours of duty 
in Iraq and South Korea and displayed symptoms of PTSD, they left him to his 
own devices.

“I didn’t know any of this stuff happened,” she said. “They track US nationals 
in Kenya? To say I’m outraged doesn’t seem enough of a response. When you are a 
US national overseas I thought the job of the government was to help protect 
you, not to collaborate with the Kenyan authorities in tracking you down.”

She is also dismayed by what she believes was the willful denial of her son’s 
first amendment right to practice his religion. “America has a history of 
interning the Japanese, of persecuting people because of their religious 
beliefs. How is that different here? How can we imprison somebody who has no 
demonstrated guilty intent or action – there was none of that? And yet he is 
rounded up and sent to prison.”

Craig Baxam was sentenced in January 2014 to seven years in prison, with five 
years of post-prison supervision added on. The sentence flowed from aplea 
bargain 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3147998-Plea-Agreement-Baxam-Copy.html>
 in which the US government agreed to drop the main terrorist charges against 
him in return for a guilty plea to a lesser charge: that he had knowingly 
disposed of records that could be used in a terrorism investigation. Before 
leaving for Kenya, he had destroyed his personal computer and thrown it in a 
dumpster, allegedly to foil any future FBI probe.

Today, Craig Baxam, now 29, is approaching his fifth anniversary behind bars, 
some of which time he has spent in solitary confinement.

His father, Carl Baxam, lost his job with the defense contractor after 24 
years of loyal service once news of the case broke. Carl died last year while 
Craig was still in prison.

Deanna Baxam had to change the church in which she worshipped because she felt 
stigmatized by others in the congregation. She lost a few corporate contracts 
as a lawyer, as well as some professional friendships, after people dropped out 
of sight without saying a word.

She says she still wrestles with the fallout of it all. She travels to visit 
her son whenever she can, and they exchange letters regularly. In his 
correspondence and phone calls, Craig continues to talk about Islam fervently, 
and makes clear that his long-term goal remains to live under sharia law, 
though no longer in Somalia.

He signs his letters “Esmail the American”. In them, he’ll weave in and out of 
a discussion of his faith. Allah will appear in one sentence, a joke about his 
mother’s basketball team the Chicago Bulls the next. From time to time, he’ll 
make another stab at getting Deanna to convert to Islam.

As a mother, she has had to accept that there’s a side to her son that is now 
beyond her reach. “There is a part of me that says, ‘How could this have 
happened, what would make you so driven that you would want to go and live with 
al-Shabaab?’ I can’t understand that.”

She has tried to reach out to other mothers in her position, so far without 
success. “People want to stay underground,” she said. “I mean, who wants to be 
known as the ‘mother of a terrorist’?”

If she had the chance to send a message to other mothers like her, trapped 
between religious fundamentalism and an overweaning government, what would she 
say?

“I’d say: ‘You are not alone. What has happened to you is beyond your 
imagination. But you are not alone.’”

 * This article was amended on 25 October 2016 to correct the spelling of 
Craig Baxam’s father’s surname. 
 * No billionaire owner, no shareholders. Just independent, investigative 
reporting that fights for the truth, whatever the cost. Why not support it?
Become a Guardian US member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_USCraigBaxam_footer>
 for $49 a year, ormake a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_footer_USCraigBaxam>
.
 