
Leading shares are heading higher after two days of decline, with housing 
companies building up some good rises following a positive update fromPersimmon.

Persimmon <https://www.theguardian.com/business/persimmon> said its 
reservation rate had risen by 17% since the start of July, as it shrugged off 
fears of a negative Brexit impact on the market. Its shares have added 74p to 
£18.68 while rivalBarratt Developments is up 20.7p at 484.2p, Taylor Wimpey has 
risen 6.5p to 165.2p andBerkeley Group is 99p better at £26.49.

Tesco has climbed 5.1p to 164.6p after Kantar Worldpanel said grocery sales 
received a warm weather boost in August, with Tesco’s sales down 0.4% in the 
most recent 12 weeks, better than its major rivals but still well below the 
discounters Aldi and Lidl. Jefferies analysts said:

Kantar UK food share update to 14 August confirms a healthier reading, 
supported by more favourable weather. Total market grew by +0.8% with continued 
healthy growth at the discounters (+11%) and resilience at the premium end 
(Marks +6.1%, Waitrose +1.8%). The Big 4 also saw an improvement (-1.1%) with 
pick up atTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> (+0.9%) and 
Sainsbury (+0.2%). Morrison (-3%) continues to be impacted by the non-repeat of 
summer vouchering while share loss at Asda (-4.6%) persisted.

Bruno Monteyne at Bernstein said:

Tesco saw the best performance of the big-4 with a 0.4% sales decline (70 
basis points below the market) and 20 basis points of market share losses, its 
best performance since March 2015 and a substantial improvement from the 1% 
market share Tesco was losing as recently as November. On a 4 week basis, 
Tesco’s sales were up 0.9%, just 20 basis points below the market.

National Grid has put on 1.5p to 1082.5p as regulator Ofgem said it could 
recoup £95m of the £113m it had awarded to SSE and Drax to provide emergency 
back-up power for the coming winter. But the company said it was disappointed 
it would have to bear £18m of the costs - which relate to the Drax contract - 
itself.

But Royal Dutch Shell A shares are down 10p at £18.91 amid the weakening oil 
price, while pharmaceutical shares were also unwanted. Hikma is down 8p at 
£23.04 andAstraZeneca has dipped 7p to £50.84.

Overall the FTSE 100 has added 31.02 points to 6859.56, helped by reasonable 
eurozone manufacturing and service sector data for August, showing little 
impact from the Brexit vote. But investors are still cautious ahead of a speech 
from US Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen at the Jackson Hole symposium on 
Friday.


Chris Beauchamp, senior market analyst at IG, said:

Steady gains for markets are the order of the day, although cautious heads are 
pointing towards weakness in oil, further troubles for the dollar-yen rate and 
low volumes as reasons why the bounce may not last.

Among the mid-caps annuity provider JRP - the merged Just Retirement and 
Partnership groups - jumped 14% to 100.8p after a positive update and a better 
than expected solvency ratio of 130%. Analyst Eamonn Flanagan at Shore Capital 
issued a buy note and said:

The news vacuum surrounding JRP since its first quarter 2016 interim 
management statement in mid-May has allowed the ‘bears’ to have a real pop at 
the company, especially throughout the Brexit-induced volatility in financial 
markets. In this context, we view today’s trading statement as positive in 
respect of new business and the group’s financial strength.

Meanwhile Rank - which recently abandoned its joint bid with 888 for William 
Hill - has risen 4.2p to 225.7p as it reported a 2% dip in full year operating 
profit to £82.4m but said recent trading had been positive and it had seen 
little or no direct effect from the Brexit vote. Analyst Ivor Jones at Peel 
Hunt said:

The UK gambling industry is consolidating and getting more competitive. As the 
big get bigger we believe that life is going to get tougher for the squeezed 
middle. It was sound strategy to propose taking on debt and execution risk to 
create scale.

With ambitious management, a soon-to-be debt free balance sheet and strong 
cash flow, we believe Rank is undervalued. There is still plenty of self-help 
to be getting on with to help keep the bottom line ticking over but we expect
Rank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rankgroup> to participate in 
consolidation in the medium-term.
 