
Leading shares are edging lower as investors decide to take some profits after 
the recent rally, amid another fall in commodity prices and disappointing 
results from BHP Billiton andStandard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered>.

But there are some exceptions, notably Persimmon, up 85p or 4% to £20.58 after 
the housebuilder reported a better than expected 34% rise in underlying profits 
to £634.5m. The shares have rebounded after the sector was hit on Monday by 
concerns about the outlook if Britain left the European Union. Analysts at 
Canaccord Genuity said:

The beat to our number was mainly due to a better margin performance than 
expected. While the results are very strong with consensus likely to edge up, 
the key focus will be on the capital return which has been accelerated and 
increased. The group has increased its capital return by 280p over the original 
plan of 620p set out in 2011. 110p is going to be paid in April 2016 with the 
remaining 550p to be paid to shareholders in equal instalments of 110p each 
year over the next five years.

 While the market was probably expecting some good news on the capital plan 
being accelerated, the increase in the capital return and smoothing of the 
remaining 550p is likely to be better than consensus expected. Shares should 
react well to strong results, positive outlook and news on capital return.

Another good performer is InterContinental Hotels, which also pleased 
investors with a 4% rise in full year operating profit and news of a special 
payout of $1.5bn. The company’s shares have climbed 96p to £25.50 and analyst 
Anna Barnfather at Panmure Gordon said:

Growth has slowed in America’s (which will also be impacted by refurbs and 
additional franchise investment), AMEA and Greater China mixed but Europe 
growth has accelerated. Concerns over hotel cycle will compete with M&A 
speculation which keeps us at hold.

Overall the FTSE 100 has faltered 23.03 points to 6014.70, with the pound 
under pressure again on Brexit fears.

Standard Chartered is down 17.3p at 419p after an 84% slump in pretax profits 
to $800m, whileBHP Billiton has lost 25.7p to 769.3p as it slashed its dividend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/22/bhp-billiton-reports-half-year-loss-4bn>
. BHP has dragged the whole mining sector lower, withAntofagasta off 17p at 
500.5p andAnglo American 12.45p lower at 471.30p.

Commodity shares are also under pressure on renewed concerns about a slowdown 
in China, along with talk that the country’s central bank may be reluctant to 
provide further stimulus measures.

Meanwhile the oil price has retreated from its recent highs, down 1.8% at 
$34.06 a barrel on the usual worries about oversupply and lack of demand.
 