
Leading shares are slipping lower after China’s economy saw a slowdown in the 
first quarter, albeit in line with expectations.

But the biggest fallers in the UK index were closer to home. Following 
Persimmon’s cautious trading update on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/persimmon-shares-dive-over-concerns-about-slowing-sales>
, housebuilders are leading the way down, withBerkeley Group 106p lower at 
£28.70,Taylor Wimpey down 4.2p at 172.8p and Persimmon itself falling 21p to 
£18.79.

The falls come despite UK contruction data showing housebuilding recording 
quarterly growth of 6.8%, the biggest rise since March 2014.

Also heading lower is InterContinental Hotels, down 52p to £28.76 as JP Morgan 
moved from neutral to underweight on worries about its pipeline of rooms.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 20.55 points at 6344.55, with commodity companies 
slipping back after their recent recovery.Anglo American is off 22.9p at 667.3p 
whileAntofagasta is down 9.3p at 455.7p.

Ahead of the weekend’s meeting of oil ministers, crude is on the slide again 
on concerns Iran may not take part, with Brent down just over 1% at $43.33.BP, 
which suffereda humiliating defeat at its annual meeting over chief executive 
Bob Dudley’s £14m paypacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
, is down 1.25p at 357.3p.

Among the mid-caps, hedge fund group Man is up 7.5p at 159p despite a slight 
drop in assets under management in the first quarter from $78.7bn to $78.6bn. 
But the results were in line with forecasts and analysts pointed to strong 
sales from its key AHL business. Analyst Paul McGinnis at Shore Capital said:

We think the flows figure represents a good performance in a difficult quarter 
for fund managers and indeed at the time of the final results on 24 February, 
the company had indicated the net flows for 2016 were slightly negative at that 
stage.

Based on last night’s closing price of 151.5p and before any changes to 
forecasts (which we provisionally expect to be minor),Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mangroup> trades on 10.9 times our 
December 2016 adjusted earnings per share of 19.8c (translated at $1.42/£), 
falling to 10.4 times in December 2017 (20.7c). The prospective December 2016 
dividend yield is 4.7% (10.2c). We think these multiples, an around 20% 
discount to the sector, materially undervalue a company ... and we think it 
should trade at a sector premium. Our fair value is 245p, buy.

 Liberum also issued a buy note but said:

 A bull would highlight that funds under management flat on the year end at 
$78.6bn was a good result given the market volatility. A bear would suggest 
that net inflows of just $0.5bn were dull and coupled with a cautious outlook 
statement then the risk to forecasts is probably to the downside.
 