
Leading shares suffered their biggest one day fall since the middle of October 
as energy companies fell sharply despite a mini-revival in the oil price.

Brent crude edged up more than $1 a barrel to $71.27 but the recent plunge to 
five year lows in the wake of last week’s Opec decision not to cut production 
was still doing damage.

Tullow Oil fell 25.5p to 400.5p, not helped by Citigroup moving from 935p to 
567p with a neutral rating and JP Morgan slashing its target price from 1000p 
to 495p. JP Morgan also downgraded other oil companies including cuttingAfren, 
down 6.09p to 45.66p, from overweight to underweight.

The bank said the collapse in the oil price comes at a difficult time for the 
sector, with stretched balance sheets and projects which were being developed 
on the basis of $100 a barrel.

Disappointing manufacturing data, especially from China and the eurozone, also 
dented investor sentiment.

So the FTSE 100 finished 66.25 points lower at 6636.37, with European markets 
also slipping back and Wall Street down 50 points by the time London closed.

The falls in London were more significant, given the number of resource 
companies listed in the UK. So the weak Chinese figures leftBHP Billiton 33p 
lower at £14.48 andAnglo American down 17.5p to £13.04. David Madden, market 
analyst at IG, said:

In London, the FTSE 100 is paying the price for its relatively high proportion 
of natural resource stocks. Despite the turnaround in the underlying 
commodities themselves, the mineral-exposed companies are the biggest losers 
today.

These challenging times for commodity companies will see a shakeup in the 
sector; extractions costs are high and markets prices are low, which spells 
trouble for the industry. I foresee profit warnings for the small oil 
explorers, and miners will be forced to rethink some of their more ambitious 
projects. European equities are relatively shielded from major moves in the 
commodities market but traders don’t want to be short going into the ECB’s 
meeting on Thursday, for fear of yet another QE clue being dropped from Mario 
Draghi.

Aberdeen Asset Management bucked the trend, up 7.6p at 457.5p, after better 
than expected full year profits of £490m, up 2%. It reported an improvement in 
business after recent weakness in emerging markets, and held out the prospect 
of a share buyback.

Elsewhere IMI, down 24p at £11.57, and Petrofac, 17p lower at 808p, are set to 
leave the FTSE 100 and be demoted to the mid-cap FTSE 250. The latest index 
changes will be decided on Tuesday’s closing share prices and as things stand 
the two will both be replaced by housebuilders.Barratt Developments, up 0.1p at 
460.4p, andTaylor Wimpey, off 0.2p at 134p, are currently set to be promoted to 
the leading index.

Balfour Beatty jumped 7.8p to 191.1p on hopes of an auction for its public 
private partnership assets afterJohn Laing Infrastructure Fund, down 3.2p at 
120.1p, made a £1bn offer.

But Kier closed down 18p at £13.93 after confirming speculation it had held 
preliminary talks about buying Mouchel, the infrastructure group which has been 
in the hands of its banks since a black hole was discovered in its accounts in 
2012.

Bookmakers moved higher after a report from the Responsible Gambling Trust 
suggested no immediate policy action and did not recommend slashing maximum 
stakes on gaming machines.William Hill rose 12.2p to 347.2p and Ladbrokes 1.2p 
to 112.5p.

Dixons Carphone added 5.2p to 428.5p on talk of a successful Black Friday, 
whileSports Direct International was 10.5p higher at 671p for a similar reason.

Lower down the market Wolf Minerals, which is developing a tungsten mine in 
Devon, was steady at 14.75p. Wolf has completed a six hole drilling campaign at 
the mine - the first new metal mine in the UK for more than 40 years - and the 
results indicate that an additional 4-6m tonnes of tungsten ore may be 
available, increasing reserves by 15%-23% through steepening pit walls and 
expanding the perimeter within existing planning permission.

The company says it is fully funded through to positive cashflow, and hopes to 
begin production in the third quarter of next year, with possible divend 
payments to shareholders following a year later.

 