
After Monday’s rout, markets are attempting to stage a rebound, but it is 
hardly a convincing one.

The FTSE 100, having fallen more than 2% on the first trading day of the year, 
is now up 9.58 points or just 0.16% at 6103.02 having earlier climbed to 6166. 
Worries about a slowdown in China sent global markets tumbling and despite 
intervention by the country’s central bank, those concerns remain.

There are some reasonable risers, however, with Royal Mail leading the FTSE 
100, up 10.9p at 447.9p. The increase follows a positive note from Cantor 
Fitzgerald, which raised its recommendation from hold to buy with a target 
price increased from 500p to 530p. Analyst Robin Byde said:

Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> has made good 
progress cutting costs, lifting productivity and introducing new products. We 
believe that the strengths and value of the company’s established networks and 
brands, in the fast changing delivery world, are underappreciated. We also 
think that market concerns about wage negotiations, future pension costs and 
regulation are overstated. The stock is good value, trading on a calendar 2016 
estimated PE of 10.5 times versus the wider sector on 15.1 times and other 
European postal companies on 13.1 times. Our forecast dividend has a yield of 
5%.

We think that the near-term risk of higher contributions to support the 
defined benefit [pension] scheme is limited but a broad-based settlement on 
future pension provision is needed. Ofcom, the UK regulator, is looking again 
at the regulation of Royal Mail but we do not expect a radical shift in policy 
as much of what Royal Mail does is already exposed to stiff competition. Royal 
Mail will shortly start a new round of wage negotiations. These could be tricky 
but we build-in higher costs. Regarding wages and pensions and the impact on 
future dividends, we note that employees own around 12% of the company.

Tesco is also in favour, up 2.05p to 144.30p after Deutsche Bank moved from 
hold to buy. The bank said:

We believe Tesco’s UK margin progression can outpace rivals despite lacklustre 
like for like sales and forecast a 2.2% UK EBIT margin by 2018/19.

But still with retail, Next has fallen 375p or 5% to £68.15 after a 
disappointing update which it blamed on unseasonably warm weather in the run up 
to Christmas. RivalMarks & Spencer has fallen in sympathy, down 5.7p at 429.6p 
while Primark ownerAssociated British Foods is 27p lower at £32.49.

Elsewhere Aberdeen Asset Management has fallen 14.1p to 267.9p after Barclays 
cut from equal weight to underweight. The bank’s analysts said:

The Aberdeen share strongly underperformed in 2015, down 33% versus the 
average UK Asset Manager in our coverage universe up 16%. It is tempting to 
view the share as solely a macro call on emerging market sentiment. However, we 
highlight that significant other areas remain vulnerable to outflow risk... We 
forecast a slowing of group outflows to £20bn in 2016 (from £34bn in 2015) but 
believe that risks are to the downside. With a significantly lower asset base 
in 2016 yoy, revenue declines of 13% year on year are projected. Cost 
rationalization plans appear modest in response. The share is trading at 12.6 
times calendar 2016 PE for a projected 25% decline in earnings per share year 
on year.

But miners have edged higher after Monday’s Chinese concerns, with Glencore up 
2.27p to 87.54p.
 