
A recovery in the mining sector is helping leading shares to push higher after 
three days of decline.

Recent upbeat data from China, with better than expected factory output, bank 
loan and retail sales figures, has helped lift metal prices including copper. 
So mining shares make up seven of the top ten risers in the FTSE 100 index with 
Glencore, up 8.25p at 185.3p leading the way.

Antofagasta has added 19.1p to 499.8p while Anglo American is 31.6p higher at 
815.4p. Mike van Dulken, head of research at Accendo Markets, said:

Copper proxy Glencore <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> is top 
of the FTSE 100 pile this morning thanks to the bottoming out and rebound from 
$4600 a tonne over of the last month, seeing the price of the red metal 
challenge September’s highs just shy of $4,700 and a bugbear 2-month trend of 
falling highs. The latest leg up maintains the 2016 trend of rising lows from 
the January depths of the global commodity rut, helped yesterday by supportive 
data from China and in spite of additional US dollar strength that normally 
serves to hinder.

But luxury goods group Burberry is down 25p at £12.49 after disappointing 
updates from rivals Hermes and Richemont.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 36.20 points at 6701.83, following recent 
falls on worries about a US interest rate rise next week. The UK unemployment 
rate was steady at 4.9% but wage growth slowed. Joshua Mahony, market analyst 
at IG, said:

A somewhat mixed bag for UK employment data provided a marginal boost for the 
pound this morning, as the deterioration in average earnings and a rise in 
claimants were offset by a significant revision to the claimants figure for 
July. Coming at a time when markets are highly sensitive to UK employment data, 
today’s data does little to boost or knock the chance of action from the Bank 
of England tomorrow.

Housebuilders are under pressure as mortgage lending fell 13% month on month 
in July, the month after the Brexit vote.Taylor Wimpey is down 2p at 151.3p 
whileBarratt Developments has fallen 5p to 478.3p. But Galliford Try has bucked 
the trend, up 67p at £11.98 as it reported a better than expected 18% rise in 
full year profits to £135m.

Ocado continues to slip following this week’s update warning on margin 
pressures, down another 24p to 254p. Exane BNP Paribas issued an underperform 
rating on the online grocer.
 