
After Monday’s surge in shares and sterling as the spectre of Brexit seemed to 
recede, there is a more cautious mood in the City.

Mining shares are heading lower as commodity prices ease again on concerns 
about the state of the global economy. Testimony later from US Federal Reserve 
chair Janet Yellen will see her give an update on the central bank’s view on 
the outlook, while European Central Bank president Mario Draghi is also due to 
speak.

Anglo American is leading the fallers, down 17p at 653p as its platinum 
division Amplats said half year profits would drop by at least 20% due to 
weaker commodity prices.

Other mining groups are also lower, with Antofagasta falling 8.6p to 425.3p and
 Rio Tinto down 38p at 2002.5p. In all mining shares account for seven of the 
top ten fallers in the leading index.

Housebuilders, expected to suffer in the event the UK does vote to leave the 
European Union, are also under pressure again, withBerkeley Group down 59p at 
£31.86 andPersimmon 5p lower at £20.51.

But banks, which should also be hit by a Brexit vote, have shrugged off the 
latest worries, withBarclays 1.95p better at 178.8p and Lloyds Banking Group up 
0.32p at 70.32p.

Whitbread is the biggest riser in the leading index, up 131p to £41.72 after 
its latest update showed a better than expected performance from its Costa 
coffee business.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 13.30 points at 6190.70, and Ipek Ozkardeskaya at 
London Capital Group said:

This week’s early enthusiasm in the UK markets appears to have eased this 
morning. The FTSE 100 is paring gains after having surpassed the 50, 100, 
200-day moving averages on hopes that the UK would vote to remain in the EU. 
Although the latest Brexit polls were in favour of the ‘Remain camp’, not much 
has changed fundamentally regarding the Brexit probabilities. At this stage, 
the market remains heavily hedged against the Brexit risks, while pricing in a 
‘no exit’ as the base case scenario.

 The FTSE stocks are fragile at the open as a reminder that investors may have 
gone well beyond themselves just a couple of days before the Brexit referendum.

Elsewhere Senior is down 13% at 195p as the engineering group warned of lower 
revenues at its Flexonics unit, partly due to challenging market conditions in 
the oil and gas sector. JP Morgan moved its rating from overweight to neutral.

Chemring has fallen 22% to 109p after the defence and aerospace group warned 
2016 profits were likely to be below market expectations. Investec kept its buy 
recommendation saying:

The company continues to suffer short term headwinds, while the longer term 
outlook remains brighter given a range of opportunities across the businesses. 
150p target price maintained following a peer group re-rating.

But Circassia recovered some ground following Monday’s slump in the wake of 
disappointing results from trials of its cat allergy treatment, adding 9.6p to 
100.6p. Analysts at Peel Hunt said:

We see more than 70% upside to our revised target price [down from 450p to 
160p] post the Phase 3 allergy trial failure but acknowledge the uncertainty 
overhang medium-term unless a strategic bid emerges. Downgrade to add (from 
buy).
 