
As leading shares fell back from their near nine-week high on a combination of 
concerns,BG was one company to buck the trend.

The gases group rose 14.5p to £12.66 after Goldman Sachs issued a buy note and 
raised its price target from £15 to £15.30. Last week it reported a lower than 
expected fall in first quarter profits last week, just days after chief 
executive Chris Finlayson left his position. Goldman said the company's 
comments about accelerating value creation suggested it would look for 
disposals, which it could also be a takeover target for major commodity 
companies.

As far as asset sales went, Goldman estimated the company could raise between 
$25bn and $33bn with the disposal of 50% of its stakes in Brazil and Tanzania, 
60% to 100% of its $20bn Curtis Island Liquefied Natural Gas project in 
Queensland. Goldman said:
 Brazil is becoming too large for BG in terms of risk management and Tanzania 
is a capital-intensive project, while other capital-light alternatives are 
available to BG to increase its LNG supply portfolio (e.g. Lake Charles). 
Management has not specified that the Brazil and Tanzania assets will be sold, 
however a 50% disposal of each of the stakes would be consistent with the aim 
to dispose of a quarter of BG's resource base.

As for a takeover of BG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bggroup>, 
Goldman said the company could be attractive to Western oil majors such as 
ExxonMobil, Chevron, Conoco, BP, Total or Shell; Chinese operators such as 
Petrochina, Sinopec and CNOOC; and large diversified miners with an oil 
business includingBHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, Glencore Xstrata.

It suggested buyers could afford to pay between £15 and £18 a share and still 
extract value. At the top end of that range, BG would be valued at more than 
£60bn.

Overall the FTSE 100 fell 23.86 points to 6798.56, as investors fretted about 
the situation in Ukraine and a number of companies issued disappointing updates.

Barclays dropped 13.5p to 245p after its first quarter profits fell 5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/06/barclays-profits-dragged-down-investment-bank>
, whileAberdeen Asset Management lost 10.5p to 435.4p as the investment 
management group reported a 3% decline in first half profits, with customers 
pulling money out of its emerging market and Asian equity funds.

Another big faller was AstraZeneca. It lost 130.5p to 4677.5p despite 
announcing it had won US approval for its new heart disease pill Epanova and an 
upbeat outlook statement, amid uncertainty about the success of Pfizer's 
proposed offer for the business.

Weak Chinese manufacturing data hit the mining sector, with Anglo American 
down 22.5p to 1542.5p andBHP Billiton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhpbilliton> 19p lower at £19.12.

But Persimmon added 51p to £13.78 as analysts at Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> raised their price target from 
1333.6p to £15.40. They said:
 Against an improving backdrop, the recent sell off of house builders warrants 
close attention. We see strong fundamentals: greater visibility provided by the 
extension to the Help to Buy scheme; a largely disciplined land market; and a 
more supportive planning system. Where headwinds exist, notably the threat of 
rising interest rates, they remain relatively benign in our view, and 2016 
valuations look highly attractive. 
Among the mid-caps Balfour Beatty has slumped 57.2p or 20% to 228.6p after 
another profit warning, prompting the departure of chief executive Andrew 
McNaughton. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/06/balfour-beatty-boss-resigns-profit-warning>

Lower down the market Xcite Energy surged 18.25p to 82p after signing a 
collaboration deal with Statoil and Shell. The three will share technical and 
operational information on Xcite's 100% owned Bentley oil field in the North 
Sea and the Bressay fields, 82% owned by Statoil and 18% by Shell.

Analyst Sam Wahab at Cantor Fitzgerald said:
 The market continues to focus on Xcite's strategy to develop its considerable 
resource base at its 100% interest in the Bentley field. We have long 
highlighted our belief that Xcite will bring in a partner prior to help fund 
the field through full development, with Statoil the logical choice (with its 
geologically similar Bressay field). To support this, the company has confirmed 
that negotiations are ongoing, albeit at a much slower pace than anticipated, 
with a potential partner(s).

The shares have underperformed in recent months as shareholders grow 
increasingly frustrated with the absence of an update on a farm down or 
proposed strategy, but we highlight that the underlying fundamentals of the 
company remain unchanged, and therefore the current share price represents a 
clear entry point ahead of an expected transaction. Reiterate buy 
recommendation and target price of 168p.

Finally Nostra Terra slipped nearly 2% to 0.275p. But traders expect a 
positive update on Wednesday, with a 120% rise in its debt facilities on the 
back of additional oil production.
 