
Disclosure

Comprising two young brothers who are neither particularly photogenic nor 
extroverted, Disclosure might seem an unlikely prospect for the title of 
festival party-starters. But Guy Lawrence, 22, and his younger brother Howard, 
19, will surely cause teenage uproar when they play the Sonic stage at 
Glastonbury on Friday night.

Over the past 12 months the pair have gone from making songs in a room above 
their father's auction house to becomingone of the biggest names in popular 
music 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jun/20/uk-dance-music-back-pop?INTCMP=SRCH>
 thanks to a full-blooded reinvention of vintage UK dance music. While the 
sounds that inspired them, deep house and most notably UK 2-step, are older 
than they are, the Lawrence brothers' sound has endeared itself to entirely new 
generation of revellers.

A recent UK tour was a raucous affair and their debut album, Settle, went to 
the top of the charts last month. The group are not only fixtures on Radio 1, 
however, they're beloved of the music press too (Settle receivedfour stars from 
the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/may/30/disclosure-settle-review?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and a hefty 9.1 on Pitchfork). This may be because, as well as reinvigorating 
old musical genres, the brothers have a great ear not only for the structures 
and rhythms of dance music but also for a catchy melody.

Expect their bigger songs – White Noise, Voices and When a Fire Starts to Burn 
– to go off. Never mind the fact that younger brother Howard recently told the 
Guardian: "When I was younger I just thought dance music was shit. All of it."

Disclosure play the Sonic stage, Friday 9pm

Paul MacInnes

Haim

HAIM - Forever <http://www.muzu.tv/haim/forever-music-video/1596657/> on 
MUZU.TV <http://www.muzu.tv/>. 
Another group built around siblings ("three sisters and a mister", 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/05/haim-sexy-folk-randb-trio> is how 
the band describe it), Haim hail from California's San Fernando valley. The 
sisters are vocalist/guitarist Danielle, bassist Este and keyboardist/rhythm 
guitarist Alana. The mister is drummer Dash Hutton. Together they make music 
that radiates the sunshine of their home state; energetic, occasionally 
euphoric and full of enthusiasm.

If at first it appears to channel the spirit of big west coast acts of the 
past from the Bangles to Fleetwood Mac (the band's cover of Hold Me is a staple 
of their live shows), the group blend these stylings with the vocals of 
contemporary R&B. In recent songs they have also moved into more minimal 
sounds. You can only chart the band's progress song by song because they have 
yet to release their debut LP.

Not that it has stopped them from topping the BBC's Sound of 2013 poll 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/04/haim-win-bbc-sound-of-2013>, nor 
from becoming a rare rock signing to Jay-Z's Roc Nation management group. They 
are tight in a way that makes you suspicious of some kind of familial telepathy 
and play with an undimming passion;Este's notorious "bass face" 
<http://slackershack.wordpress.com/2013/06/11/famous-bass-faces/> being worth 
the entrance money alone.

For their Glastonbury debut, the group have been afforded the privilege of 
playing on the Pyramid stage. The only problem being that their slot is at 
Friday lunchtime. Those already on site would do well to get down to the front.

Haim play the Pyramid stage, Friday 12.30pm; The Park stage, Saturday 4.15pm

Paul MacInnes

Solange

For many, the lingering memory of Glastonbury 2011 will be that of Beyoncé's 
career-defining set 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jun/27/beyonce-glastonbury-2011-review>: 
capping off Sunday night with fireworks blazing, Olympian choreography and 
hysteria-inspiring medleys, it was a show that shifted the already heralded 
singer into a league reserved only for icons. Solange Knowles, Beyoncé's little 
sister, however, is not so intent on rupturing perceptions this weekend. The 
27-year-old will provide a far more understated performance than her sibling; 
reaffirming her place as 2013's nonchalant, neo-soul superstar.

Solange's Glastonbury debut comes at a celebratory time for the singer. With a 
new album via her label, Saint Records, scheduled for later this year, she is 
in the process of forging a credible path in the music industry after a decade 
of sporadic, not-quite-right major label attempts. Since the release of 2012's 
Truth EP, acollaboration with producer and artist Devonté Hynes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/17/solange-review> (Blood Orange, 
Lightspeed Champion), she has acquired a cult-like following among discerning 
music enthusiasts, becoming the poster girl for the current musical craze known 
as indie-R&B.

While her quirky sophistication does radiate more Williamsburg than Worthy 
Farm, Solange's eclectic sound is ideal for a Glastonbury crowd: she brings 
tropical rhythms that will appease the world music enthusiasts, bubbling 
late-night beats designed for hipster hedonists and a jazzed-out swing for 
anyone with a picnic rug. Alongside her serene melodies you can also expect a 
sartorially slick backing band, armed with dance routines evocative of a late 
80s-era Whitney – bouncy hair, jaunty elbows and saccharine smiles in abundance.

The Park stage, Friday 4.30pm 

Harriet Gibsone

Half Moon Run
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FazV0Y7v6wsg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FazV0Y7v6wsg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FazV0Y7v6wsg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
If you're looking for a folk act to see at Glastonbury but you (a) can't be 
bothered to wait until Sunday at 9.45pm to catch the Mumfords headlining over 
on the Pyramid Stage, (b) can't face squeezing to the front to watch the 
Mumfords or (c) hate the Mumfords, then you could do a lot worse thanHalf Moon 
Run <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2013/jun/09/why-watching-half-moon-run>.

Less bumptious, boisterous or bombastic than Mumford & Sons, who they have 
supported in the States, they're probably more similar to Fleet Foxes, their 
three-part harmonies more haunting than hectoring. On second thoughts, given 
the tremulous vocals, moody atmospherics and quiet-getting-louder dynamics, 
this four-piece Montreal band, who got together in 2010, come across asa sort 
of folky Radiohead 
<http://guardianmusic.tumblr.com/post/41703268894/its-been-a-while-since-there-was-a-new-band-that>
, as likely to use keyboards as they are mandolins. They are not averse to the 
odd sample, nor do they recoil from the notion of the electronic-flecked 
soundscape, and 26-year-old frontman Devon Portielje's voice can recall Prince 
of Wails, Thom Yorke.

They're signed to Ben Mumford's Communion in the UK and Glassnote in the US, 
so Foxes-style crossover success isn't out of the question. Their debut single 
Full Circle was playlisted at Radio 1 and their debut album, Dark Eyes, is 
released here in July. With titles such as No More Losing the War, Give Up, 
Judgement, Drug You and Nerve, fully expect it to be an OK Computer of a 
Canadian folk-inflected angst-fest.

The Park stage, Friday 1.30pm; William's Green 
<http://www.glastonburyfestivals.co.uk/areas/williams-green/>, Saturday 3.30pm

Paul Lester

Drenge

There are quite a few highly touted teen-or-thereabouts bands at the moment – 
among themthe Orwells  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/may/24/the-orwells>
, Radkey,Drenge <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/24/new-band-drenge> 
andthe Strypes <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/15/new-band-strypes> – 
but only the latter pair are at Glastonbury, and of them the smartest money is 
on Drenge generating the most heat relative to the number of members.

Drenge – Danish for "boys" – are a homegrown Black Keys, two lads from 
Castleton in Derbyshire who make one hell of a garageland blues-rock racket 
considering they've only got one singer/guitarist (Eoin Loveless, 21) and one 
drummer (Rory, his brother, 19).

They spend a lot of time gigging and working in South Yorkshire and, as you 
can probably imagine, they're more of a Monkeys/Milburn sort of Sheffield band 
than a Human League/Heaven 17 one. They're signed to Infectious, the same label 
as Alt-J, but quaint, quirky indie-pop this ain't. Not that they're allergic to 
hifalutin ideas: they decided on their name after becoming obsessed withDogme 95
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/nov/25/how-dogme-built-denmark> and 
avant-garde Danish cinema and their riff-heavy songs such as Bloodsports and 
Dogmeat explore existential nausea and disgust at the human condition.

They have a punk-style disdain for stardom, claiming that they have zero 
aspirations to be "rock gods", adding: "Ideally, everyone would leave the gig 
inspired to get their own band." Their anti-careerist stance extends to their 
output, which they have declared will not include an album because that's too 
formal a move. Their antipathy towards the treadmill did not stop them touring 
with the Cribs and Deap Vally, but still, better a contradictory attitude than 
no attitude at all.

William's Green, Saturday 12.30pm

Paul Lester

Jupiter & Okwess International
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTxkaVmpgHcs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTxkaVmpgHcs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTxkaVmpgHcs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It is not as if Jupiter Bokondji 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jun/11/jupiter-okwess-hotel-univers-review>
 hasn't earned his shot at the big time, but a slice of luck has also been 
involved as the moment arrives. The rangy, charismatic Congolese singer has led 
a chequered existence, starting when his grandmother – a renowned healer – took 
him as a child to weddings and funerals to cure the sick through performing for 
them. There was a spell in Germany as an adolescent, when his father worked in 
the Zairean embassy in East Berlin, then serial attempts to get a group off the 
ground back in Kinshasa, before the Congolese civil war re-erupted.

In 2006, he told the French film-makers Renaud Barret and Florent de La 
Tullaye, "I've been struggling for almost 20 years to bring my music out of the 
ghetto," but now with his band Okwess International he is poised to open the 
Pyramid stage at Glastonbury on Friday, kicking off the three-day music 
festival.

The Frenchmen were living in Kinshasa when they came across Jupiter and made a 
documentary that chronicles his life as a musician in the urban chaos,Jupiter's 
Dance <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TxkaVmpgHcs>.

The film helped bring him to the attention of some of the figures involved in 
theAfrica Express project 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/10/all-aboard-africa-express>. Last 
year the band appeared at the Womad festivals and toured the UK on the Africa 
Express train. But Glastonbury, where the band will also play in a new venue, 
the Gully, late on Friday night, will mark their biggest opportunity in the UK 
yet. "When they asked me if we were OK to play twice, the same day, I almost 
fell off my chair," Jupiter says. "Glastonbury is such a mythical festival."

The opening slot on the Pyramid stage was meant to be taken by Toumani 
Diabaté, the first of a series of acts from Mali to be playing the festival 
this year in an act of solidarity with the war-torn country. But two weeks ago, 
a recurrence of the malaria from which thekora player  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/apr/25/toumani-diabate-mali-music-interview>
suffers forced his cancellation. His misfortune left an opportunity, and with 
their thunderous, uplifting, eminently danceable sound, it's one that Jupiter & 
Okwess International are perfectly equipped to seize.

"It's an honour to cover for Toumani," Jupiter says. "We will rock the place."

Pyramid stage, Friday 11am; Gully, Friday 11pm

Caspar Llewellyn Smith
 