
Mark Kelly, the husband of US congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabrielle-giffords>, revealed for the first 
time that he believed his wife was dead for 20 minutes after hearing an 
erroneous television news report as he flew to her bedside.

On a private plane flying to Tucson while Giffords was having life-saving 
surgery after being shot in the head, Kelly said he made the mistake of 
watching television coverage.

"We had the TV on and they reported that she had died. The kids started 
crying, my mother almost screamed, and I just walked into the bathroom and 
broke down,"he told ABC's Diane Sawyer 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/exclusive-gabrielle-giffords-husband-mark-kelly-talks-abcs/story?id=12632336>
 in an interview screened last night.

Kelly remains upbeat about his wife's recovery from the massive injury she 
suffered: "The progress she has made with this injury has been nothing short of 
a miracle.... I'm telling [the doctors] she is going to make a 100% recovery 
and they say that's possible."

According to Kelly, Giffords recognises him 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE70I0E520110119> and has given him a neck 
massage. But he admitted that, despite his confidence, "at other times I don't 
know."
The Nasa astronaut also revealed that his first reaction to seeing Giffords in 
hospital was anger, after the abuse she had suffered in the previous year's 
political climate:

"I was very angry for two to three days, very, very angry. The first call I 
received after I arrived at the hospital was President Obama, and I expressed 
to him how angry I was and that it was part of what we'd been dealing with for 
the past year."

But a week later, Kelly says he doesn't blame the political atmosphere, 
although he still wants to tone down America's angry political rhetoric "and 
get back to a better place".

Kelly is a Space Shuttle commander, with an identical twin brother, Scott, who 
is also an astronaut and currently orbiting the Earth on the International 
Space Station.

Kelly is scheduled to be the commander of the final Space Shuttle mission, 
STS134, on 19 April. But Kelly can't say if he will be on board the shuttle on 
the trip. "My number one priority is her. Ideally I'll have this discussion 
with her, I'll consider what she says, hopefully we can make this discussion 
jointly. But I get the final say on this one."

Asked if he wanted Giffords to remain a politician, Kelly replied: "That's a 
tough decision. Probably not. But I know that's probably not going to matter to 
her. I know she is such a devoted public servant that she's going to come out 
of this even more resolved to fix things, to make things better for people."

Last night the New York Times also reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/19/us/19giffords.html> that security video 
footage from where Giffords was holding an event to meet constituents shows the 
congresswoman being shot in the head by Jared Lee Loughner.
 