
Doctors will replace a piece of Gabrielle Giffords' skull with a plastic 
implant, another encouraging step in the Arizona congresswoman's recovery from 
a gunshot to the head more than four months ago.

The surgery on Wednesday, which comes just days after Gifford travelled to 
Florida to watch her astronaut husband launch into space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/may/16/space-shuttle-endeavour-blasts-off?INTCMP=SRCH>
, was confirmed by a person familiar with the congresswoman's care.

Doctors removed a piece of Giffords' skull to allow room for brain swelling 
shortly after a would-be assassin shot her in the head on 8 January, critically 
wounding her, killing six people and injuring 12 others at a political event in 
her hometown of Tucson, Arizona.

The three-term Democratic congresswoman has been wearing a helmet adorned with 
an Arizona state flag. Doctors said when she arrived in Houston in late January 
they hoped to do the cranial surgery in May.

Dr Richard Riggs, chair of physical medicine and rehabilitation at 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre in Los Angeles, said the surgery to place the 
plastic implant is relatively simple. Recovery is short â€“ a day or two at the 
most and is mostly from the effects of anaesthesia, he said.

"This gives her quality of life because she won't have to worry about the 
helmet and protection when moving around," said Riggs, who is not involved in 
Giffords' care.

The implant is placed under the scalp, allowing hair to grow on top so it is 
not visible. Riggs said the piece of skull that doctors removed likely was 
contaminated or shattered by the bullet that pierced the left side of Giffords' 
brain. That would make the skull unfit to be reattached, which is why doctors 
would use an implant, Riggs said.

Giffords returned to Houston and rehab late Monday from Florida, where she 
watched her astronaut husband, Mark Kelly, rocket into space. When space 
shuttle Endeavour's five Americans and one Italian got off the ground on 
Monday, Giffords watched in private from a wheelchair on the roof of the launch 
control centre and remarked, "good stuff, good stuff," according to her staff.

That Giffords would watch the shuttle launch seemed improbable a little more 
than four months ago. And some patients do not have this type of surgery until 
after they are discharged from hospital.

Her doctors have said she has made remarkable progress in what will be a long 
recovery.

The next step will be to release her from the hospital. Then she will continue 
speech, occupational and physical therapy at an outpatient clinic.
 