
Games industry veteran Tim Schafer wanted to make an old-school graphic 
adventure game,but didn't think he'd get any publisher support 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2012/feb/10/friday-question-million-dollar-developer>
. So he put the project's fate in the hands of the fans. Tim asked for $400,000 
onKickstarter 
<http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/66710809/double-fine-adventure?ref=live>, 
a website which encourages people to make donations towards the development of 
creative projects.

The response was pretty darn phenomenal. The target was nailed in a mere eight 
hours, according to the Metro 
<http://www.metro.co.uk/tech/games/889955-tim-schafer-raises-1m-in-24-hours-for-new-adventure-game>
. And it didn't stop there. More than $1m was raised in less than 24 hours and 
the cash kept rolling in.

OK, if you're a recent graduate, your ventures might not attract the same 
amount of interest and backing at the conception phase - as much as it would be 
lovely. What we're saying though is using your initiative to set out on your 
own - even without tons of financial backing - can be a good way of breaking 
into the industry.

There are so many different routes to market now for self-publishing that with 
a lot of hard work you can get out there and release your own games, according 
toBrian McNicoll from Dynamo Games 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/games-industry-careers?commentpage=all>
. Even if your games don't take off, you have something tangible to show 
employers, he says. It's a point echoed by Professor Frederic Fol Leymarie and 
Professor William Latham in a recentCareers blog 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/games-industry-jobs>. They said: 
"Whether or not your game has been successful, getting it to market is half of 
the battle and potential employers will admire your determination."

What else is going to help you be in with a chance of breaking into the 
industry? From everything from gaining experience to what needs to be on your 
demo, join a panel of industry experts for advice in a live Q&A on February 21 
between 1pm and 3pm. Advance questions are welcome in the comments section 
below now, and the experts will respond to your questions there.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for ourweekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.

Our panel (more names to be added):

Fabio Filasieno is a partner of Forge Reply <http://forgereply.it/>, a mobile, 
console, web games development company.

Grant Clarke is a lecturer in computer games development within the Institute 
of Art, Media and Computer Games at theUniversity of Abertay Dundee 
<http://www.abertay.ac.uk/>. He has a 15 year history of working in video games 
development.

Mark Hastings founded Guerilla Tea <http://www.guerillatea.com/> - a company 
which focuses primarily on mobile games and application development - with 
three other students during his master's degree at University of Abertay Dundee.

Saint John Walker is Skillset's <http://www.skillset.org/> head of 
development, overseeing the creation of industry-relevant and up-to-date 
accreditation systems, course structures, apprenticeship and short courses, 
qualifications, and ways to package the skills the creative media industries 
need to compete.

Sofronis Efstathiou is a senior practice fellow for the Computer Animation 
Academic Group atBournemouth University <http://home.bournemouth.ac.uk/>. 
Sofronis previously worked in the film and games industry on projects such as 
Happy Feet and 300.

Dr Alexandra Psarrou is head of the Computer Science and Software Engineering 
Department at theUniversity of Westminster <http://www.westminster.ac.uk/>.

Andy Tudor is currently creative director at Slightly Mad Studios 
<http://www.slightlymadstudios.com/>, overseeing a number of upcoming projects 
for both consoles and mobile devices.

Chris Kempt is MD and founder of Kempt <http://www.kempt.co.uk/>, a digital 
marketing agency and specialist in advertising games. Chris is a board member 
forBIMA <http://www.bima.co.uk/>, the British Interactive Media Association and 
also on the board ofTIGA <http://www.tiga.org/>, the trade association 
representing the UK's games industry.

Will Wright is a game designer at Proper Games <http://propergames.net/>. Will 
recently graduated with a master's in Games Development from the University of 
Abertay Dundee.

Paul Leishman is a recent master's graduate from the University of Abertay 
Dundee, who has started working as the associate producer atProper Games 
<http://propergames.net/>.
 