
Gary Kirsten has made his first public utterance on the possibility of 
succeeding Andy Flower as the England team director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/31/andy-flower-sacked-england-cricket-coach>
 – and although it fell short of a complete denial of interest the former South 
Africa opener and coach suggested that he would take some persuading, at the 
very least.

Kirsten was questioned in India, where he is to take charge of the Delhi 
Daredevils – Kevin Pietersen's former franchise – in the Indian Premier League 
this spring. He was able to take that lucrative position after resigning as 
South Africa's coach last summer and said that one of the major reasons for 
stepping away from international cricket was being able to spend more time at 
home with his family.

"As far as I'm concerned, my sentiments have not changed," he told ESPN 
Cricinfo, when asked about the England vacancy. "I suppose it is flattering 
that people are thinking about me."

Kirsten is undoubtedly the best-credentialled coach in the world game after 
his success with South Africa and, before that, India. The suggestion that he 
will not be applying for the job does not necessarily rule him out, as the 
England and WalesCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board is 
expected to appoint headhunters in addition to advertising the position.

A couple of the other overseas contenders who were immediately linked with the 
vacancy, Tom Moody and Mickey Arthur, have confirmed their interest, as has 
Nottinghamshire's Mick Newell.

Ashley Giles, the favourite, also confirmed his intention to apply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/02/ashley-giles-andy-flower-england-head-coach>
 before returning to England from Australia for Tuesday'stalks with the ECB's 
managing director Paul Downton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/02/kevin-pietersen-england-future-paul-downton>
 and the Test and one-day captain Alastair Cook over Pietersen's future in the 
national setup.
 