
In what appears to be an early application of art therapy, new research 
suggests that the Catalan architectAntoni Gaudí 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi> used the garden of a 
psychiatric hospital as a testing ground for his revolutionary designs, with 
the patients serving as his artisans.

The grounds of the hospital at Sant Boi, south of Barcelona, are littered with 
Gaudí-esque constructions, the most outstanding of which is a bench similar to 
those in Park Güell , finished with broken tiles in a style known as trencadís 
that was pioneered by Gaudí.

The relative crudeness of the work suggested until now that the works were 
copies, butresearch published in the magazine Sapiens 
<http://www.sapiens.cat/ca/galeria-imatges.php?IDG=21> by the architect David 
Agulló and the geologist Daniel Barbé shows that they pre-date Gaudí's 
signature buildings and were in fact prototypes for features in Park Güell, the 
Sagrada Familia and the nearby Colònia Güell, all of which Gaudí was working on 
at the time.

The work is poorly executed, the researchers claim, because Gaudí's workers 
were in fact patients. The bench at the hospital dates from 1912, while that at 
Park Güell was made in 1914. A further link with Gaudí is that his patron, 
Eusebi Güell, was closely associated with the management of the hospital and at 
one point provided one of his houses as an isolation ward during a cholera 
outbreak at the hospital.

The Sant Boi hospital was founded by the widely travelled doctor Antoni 
Pujadas in 1854. It was the first hospital inSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> to treat mental illness as something 
other than divine punishment or demonic possession. Pujadas was an advocate of 
ergotherapy, which treats illness through physical activity, in particular 
through manual work. He was also in contact with the French psychiatrist August 
Marie, an early advocate of art therapy, who was a regular contributor to the 
Sant Boi hospital's journal.

While Gaudí was part of the art nouveau movement – or modernisme, as it's 
known in Catalunya – he was also a revolutionary structural engineer. He made 
an upside-down model of the Sagrada Familia to test his structural theory, 
which he then tested in practice when he built Colònia Güell. "Without that 
first trial, I'd never have dared adopt the design for the temple," he said. It 
now appears that it began earlier still, as an experiment in both architecture 
and psychiatry, in the gardens of the hospital at Sant Boi.
 