
I used to hate the transition from October into November: the freezing 
drizzle, the lengthening nights, the gathering momentum of darkness as autumn 
slides towards another interminable winter. The evenings are dark enough to be 
depressing, the summer feels a distant memory, and there are weeks and weeks to 
go until Christmas. But perhaps I felt that way because I grew up in the 
northern hemisphere, only a few hundred miles short of the Arctic Circle.

I made my peace with this time of year at the other end of the planet, in 
Antarctica, where I once spent a year as the doctor on a remote research base. 
November in the south tells a different, and more inspirational story – one of 
enveloping light, returning life, when frozen seas as broad as the continent 
soften and thaw. At the southernmost limits of the Earth, where conditions are 
so harsh only penguins and humans survive year-round, this time of year is one 
of delight and celebration, corresponding to May in the north. The sun circles 
like a victory banner night and day. Theemperor penguin chicks  
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?q=emperor+penguin+chicks&num=10&hl=en&biw=1391&bih=1047&tbm=isch&tbnid=ZvEyinOnTsdoGM:&imgrefurl=http://www.gdargaud.net/Antarctica/PenguinFAQ.html&docid=dzA6BLLPQQu_8M&imgurl=http://www.gdargaud.net/Antarctica/Life/Creche.jpg&w=575&h=388&ei=oiyFUPv6HqKj0QWxp4DgBA&zoom=1&iact=rc&dur=917&sig=101825355050522240459&page=1&tbnh=127&tbnw=199&start=0&ndsp=41&ved=1t:429,r:7,s:0,i:90&tx=76&ty=83>
are half-grown, and will soon be ready to take their first dip in the sea. 
Seals haul themselves out to pup on sea ice while it is still strong enough to 
bear their weight, andadélie penguins 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?q=adelie+penguin+chicks&num=10&hl=en&biw=1391&bih=1047&tbm=isch&tbnid=N2ggmgO_cCNlbM:&imgrefurl=http://www.photovolcanica.com/PenguinSpecies/Adelie/AdeliePenguinPhotos.html&docid=brT-et_agc3P2M&imgurl=http://www.photovolcanica.com/PenguinSpecies/Adelie/ANT09_3760.jpg&w=900&h=600&ei=1CyFUMDyLuTF0QXm_oHQBA&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=975&vpy=161&dur=383&hovh=183&hovw=275&tx=123&ty=139&sig=101825355050522240459&sqi=2&page=1&tbnh=147&tbnw=229&start=0&ndsp=40&ved=1t:429,r:5,s:0,i:81>
 find rocky outcrops to squabble over stones and lay their eggs.

Antarctica is composed of the simplest of elements – air, ice and light – but 
despite that apparent simplicity there seemed no end to the varieties of beauty 
in the landscape. Spending my days flooded with so much light, I had the sense 
that I had crossed a frontier and entered a parallel, liminal world. The sense 
of living beyond a pale was real; the base was isolated from the outside world 
for 10 months of the year. Having no way of getting in or out, and only 14 
healthy base-mates to look after, I had to cast about for other things to do.

Medics in Antarctica have a long tradition of finding other roles: Scott's 
doctor,Edward Wilson, was a zoologist  <http://www.edwardawilson.com/>and 
part-time geologist;Shackleton's doctor, Eric Marshall, 
<http://website.lineone.net/~polar.publishing/polarfriction.pdf> filled in as a 
cartographer and surveyor.Roald Amundsen 
<http://www.south-pole.com/p0000101.htm>, the most successful if not the most 
popular of that era's Antarctic explorers, himself went to medical school. 
Inspired by the example of these men I asked around the base, trying to find 
out how I might be able to contribute. There wasn't a great deal I could do, I 
was told, but I did learn how to maintain diesel generators, drive a bulldozer 
and co-pilot a plane. I helped out with meteorological observations, assisted 
the atmospheric scientists, and became fascinated by the lives of the emperor 
penguins. When there was nothing else to do, I practised my cross-country 
skiing, spending hours orbiting the base. And when I had finished with all 
that, I went to the library.

The base had been running for 50 years, and had accumulated a respectable 
collection of polar books. In the evenings, as the others chatted in the bar or 
watched DVDs, I researched and wrote up a book about the European Arctic 
(surely the first person to write a book about the Arctic while living in the 
Antarctic?). When that was finished I revisited all the classics of Antarctic 
exploration:The Heart of the Antarctic 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_heart_of_the_Antarctic.html?id=VjQNAAAAIAAJ&redir_esc=y>
,The Worst Journey in the World 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Worst_Journey_in_the_World>, South 
<http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/s/shackleton/ernest/s52s/>, and Scott's Last 
Expedition <http://www.spri.cam.ac.uk/museum/diaries/scottslastexpedition/>. As 
the continent warms up in November, so do its residents, and I found that many 
of the key events of those stories took place at this time of year.

It was in November 1915 that Ernest Shackleton's ship Endurance was crushed 
and sunk by rafting floes, not too far from my base. And it was 13 years before 
that that Robert Scott, Edward Wilson and Shackleton (then a little-known 
officer in the Merchant Navy) hitched up their traces and walked south across 
theRoss Ice Barrier <http://www.eoearth.org/article/Ross_Ice_Shelf>, scouting a 
route towards the South Pole. These were very literary expeditions: at night 
Shackleton recited Browning to his tent-mates, and they read to one another 
from Darwin'sOrigin of Species. Apsley Cherry-Garrard notes that for evening 
entertainment his group held debates, taking turns to argue for the merits of 
Tennyson over Browning, or the relative values of love, art and beauty.

And it was 101 years ago, at this time of year, that Scott and Wilson, 
together with Bowers, Evans and Oates, set out on theirdoomed race against 
Amundsen for priority at the South Pole 
<http://www.rmg.co.uk/explore/sea-and-ships/in-depth/race-to-south-pole/the-race-to-the-south-pole>
. This year we've seen a series of events commemorating the centenary of their 
deaths. November might have been the deadliest month for Shackleton to be 
caught in the sea ice, but it was, and still is, the safest to consider making 
a long haul into the luminous world of the Antarctic interior.

I recently spent a year or so reliving my time at that base, writing my book 
Empire Antarctica about the experience. I wrote most of it in a hut at the 
bottom of my garden in Scotland, and through the winter months found a use 
again for much of my polar gear. Shivering in the hut, in my thermal boots and 
rabbit fur hat, I recalled the arched immensity of the Antarctic sky, revisited 
in my mind the limitless expansiveness of its plains of ice. The memories of 
that place were a valuable antidote to the misery of a Scottish winter. There 
were two images of the seasons that returned to me most vividly: watching 
lightshows of auroras against the backdrop of the polar night, and the giddy, 
sun-burst joy at the return of warmth and life in November.

I am glad to have two perspectives now on this time of year. As we in the 
north descend into winter, there is comfort that somewhere across the broad 
reach of our planet spring is unfurling. As our pavements get slippery, and we 
arrive and leave work in the darkness, it pleases me that in Antarctica the sea 
ice is melting, the penguins are nesting, and the sun spins day and night 
through the sky. Our planet is balanced, at least in that respect.

So don't get depressed this year at the darkening skies, and the sleeting 
rain. At the other end of the planet a world of light is unfolding. Not all of 
us can live a life of eternal summers, but with the help of some good travel 
books and a little imagination, I like to think we can hold that balance 
in mind.

• Gavin Francis's Empire Antarctica: Ice, Silence & Emperor Penguins is 
published by Chatto & Windus on 1 November.
 