
Ivory Coast's president, Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, has said the former 
leader Laurent Gbagbo will face charges "on a national and international level".

Gbagbo has been moved out of the Golf hotel, where he was taken after his 
capture on Monday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/11/ivory-coast-former-leader-arrested>
. Ouattara said he would be kept in a villa and his rights as a former head of 
state would be respected.

"Gbagbo is in a residence under surveillance somewhere in Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>," Ouattara said. His justice 
minister was preparing for a possible prosecution of Gbagbo, but Ouattara gave 
no further details. "There will be charges [against Gbagbo] on a national level 
and an international level," he said.

Ouattara will settle into the presidential palace in the coming days, he said, 
and a swearing-in ceremony will take place at a later date.

Gbagbo refused to cede power after losing an election in November, leading to 
a four-month standoff. More than 1 million people fled their homes amid the 
fighting, and the civilian death toll surpassed 1,500.

New footage has emerged 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CwlKzHXtLZs&feature=player_embedded> showing 
pro-Ouattara fighters storming Gbagbo's residence. Fighters are seen walking 
through the front gate carrying firearms. Many are dressed in camouflage and 
wearing helmets, and some are crouched in shooting position. After orders from 
a commander, fighters enter the residence, shoot at the lock on an orange door 
and push inside.

The footage, shot by a pro-Ouattara fighter, shows Gbagbo being given a 
camouflage flak jacket before he and his wife are escorted to a car. Gbagbo was 
then handed over to UN peacekeepers and taken to Ouattara's Abidjan 
headquarters.

The French defence minister, Gerard Longuet, said France would reduce its 
military force in the Ivory Coast from 1,700 to 980 troops as soon as possible. 
Longuet said French forces took a secondary role to Ouattara's forces and the 
UN in capturing Gbagbo.

The French will not make any decision on an eventual pullout until at least 
June, he said, because the future of the French force would depend on the UN's 
decision in June on whether to renew the mandate for its force.

"Patrols of Ivorian and French gendarmes will circulate in Abidjan to show 
that there is a state of law that is being put in place," Longuet told a 
parliamentary hearing.

He said the head of the Ivorian gendarme service, the director of police, the 
chief of staff of the armed forces and the chief of staff of the army had all 
offered their services to Ouattara.
 