
Harrison Ford and Anthony Hopkins have joined the cast of Official Secrets, 
the long-mooted film about the Observer’s reporting of theGCHQ bugging scandal 
in 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/03/katharine-gun-iraq-war-whistleblower>
, it has been announced.

In the latest film to cover the activities of whistleblowers and the 
journalists who report their revelations, Official Secrets will tell the story 
of Katharine Gun, an officer at the Cheltenham-based government eavesdropping 
agency. She leaked an email that contained a request by America’s NSA to 
illegally bug theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> offices of six key countries 
in the run-up to the UN’s vote on whether to authorise the Iraq war.

Gun’s revelations were reported in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/mar/02/usa.iraq> (the Guardian’s sister 
Sunday newspaper) by journalistsMartin Bright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinbright> and Ed Vulliamy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/edvulliamy>, and Gun was arrested and 
charged <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/nov/14/freedomofinformation.iraq> 
with breaking the Official Secrets Act. However, hercase was dropped in 2004 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/feb/25/iraq.pressandpublishing> after no 
evidence was offered by the prosecution.

According to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/harrison-ford-anthony-hopkins-star-860280>
, Hopkins will play a retired general and Ford a veteran CIA agent. The have 
been cast alongside The Hunger Games’sNatalie Dormer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/aug/16/natalie-dormer-corsets-lady-w>
, who will play Gun, andPaul Bettany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/30/paul-bettany-lars-von-trier> as 
Bright. Martin Freeman plays the Observer’s foreign affairs editor – whose 
character name, Peter Edwards, appears to be a composite of Vulliamy and 
real-life editorPeter Beaumont 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/peterbeaumont>, who is now the Guardian’s 
Jerusalem correspondent.

Official Secrets will be directed by Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/02/mandela-long-walk-freedom-review>
’s Justin Chadwick, and shooting is due to start in May.
 