
From men in wigs in the 1700s, to David Bowie and Diane Keaton’s Annie Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> in the 1970s, fashion has long 
toyed with gender boundaries. But this coming season, a new trend of 
gender-flouting suggests the next phase will be less about men in skirts, and 
more about men and women sharing skirts. Welcome to the world of gender-neutral 
fashion.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760996465%2F4f7bb1c5-cb11-469a-ba68-3c3d2ea37c9f-2060x1570.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760996465%2F4f7bb1c5-cb11-469a-ba68-3c3d2ea37c9f-2060x1570.jpeg>
 Diane Keaton and Woody Allen in Annie Hall. Photograph: Allstar/UNITED 
ARTISTS/Sportsphoto Ltd 
An as yet untitled new documentary produced by Lena Dunham’s company, A Casual 
Romance Productions, is set to chart the growth in gender-nonconforming 
fashion. Its main subject, Rachel Tutera, 29, who works for New York tailors 
Bindle & Keep and describes herself as “a clothier to the LGBTQ community”, 
began making bespoke suits for women after years of struggling to find clothes 
that suited her tomboy style. “I got used to wearing clothes that hid me,” she 
says. “Having this suit made for me basically reintroduced me to my body. I 
think people see me in a way that may actually align with how I see myself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760352452%2F4a687540-1d9c-42c0-ae9c-6667dda05f7d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760352452%2F4a687540-1d9c-42c0-ae9c-6667dda05f7d-1020x612.jpeg>
 Rachel Tutera in a custom suit by Bindle and Keep, where she works as the 
company’s LGBTQ liaison. Photograph: Twitter 
 Her success marks a growing demand for gender-neutral fashion – a style which 
almost completely disregards the gender of its wearer. “I think of what we do 
as gender-neutral,” Tutera told the Guardian. “It’s menswear for bodies 
menswear isn’t usually proportionate on.”

 And while Tutera’s work will be praised in the film, she acknowledges that 
gender is the latest bugbear in fashion’s historically tricky relationship with 
aspects of identity such as body shape and ethnicity, “[and] the constraints 
all of us have experienced around [them]”.

 But in a sign that this trend is moving beyond symbolising its wearers’ 
identity or sexuality, it’s now being accepted by the mainstream as more of a 
look both on the catwalk and the high street.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760629226%2Fe9f07d1f-a9a6-436b-8e5c-787fa8786c3c-1037x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760629226%2Fe9f07d1f-a9a6-436b-8e5c-787fa8786c3c-1037x2040.jpeg>
 Model Andreja Pejic last year. Photograph: Donald Bowers/Getty Images for 
Samsung 
 The film’s arrival coincides with the recent ascent of several high-profile 
unisex models, namely newcomer Elliott Sailors, who models for both mens- and 
womenswear, Saskia De Brauw, who modeled menswear for Saint Laurent and Andreja 
Pejić – nee Andrej Pejić.

Pejić recently underwent sex reassignment surgery and had been working as a 
womenswear model since 2010. “[Androgyny] represents a social layer of people 
who feel that they don’t want to conform to traditional forms of gender,” she 
recently told style.com.
 Craig Green’s autumn-winter 2014 collection featured tunics and skirts. 
Gender-neutrality is also a trend designer Craig Green alluded to with his 
autumn-winter 2014 show, which he describes as “romanticising” (among other 
things) “his signature for masculinity”. For the collection, Green – one of the 
biggest new names in menswear – dressed his models for his in matching ethnic 
tunics and skirts. Vivienne Westwood’s AW14 womenswear collection, meanwhile, 
was inspired by unisex pinup Tilda Swinton, and came with a predictably 
bohemian tagline from Westwood: “take beautiful pieces from your wardrobe or 
from that of your friend or partner and style together with your old 
favourites”.

Even Selfridges has plans to expand into unisexwear in 2015, says Eleanor 
Robinson, its’ menswear buying manager: “women buying into menswear is a 
growing trend”, she explains, citing labels such as Hood By Air, Trapstar, 
Bazar-14 and KTZ as popular among women looking to de-gender their style. 
“There is also a female customer interested in a more masculine aesthetic and 
seeking out a true menswear fit – so a real ‘boyfriend’ jean, shirt or 
sweater.” And it works both ways: “We have also seen an emerging male customer 
profile that is extremely fashion-literate, shopping womenswear and women’s 
accessories.”

An analysis that London designer Sara Weston agrees with, it’s also the reason 
she launched a line of gender-neutral fashion last October. Originally a 
menswear brand, Weston expanded Eastie Empire after noticing a surge in female 
clientele buying from the men’s collection. She thinks her success is down to a 
realisation that men and women can disregard gender when it comes to style: “I 
want to challenge the gender dynamic,” she says.

 Weston blames society’s “pressure to subscribe to gender norms as dictating 
identity and mainstream fashion” for the stigma attached to women wanting to 
wear menswear and vice versa. “This isn’t about sexuality – gender is something 
different.”

 It’s a theme covered in the new issue of i-D, whose split cover stars model 
of the moment Binx Walton and US rapper A$AP Rocky in almost identical poses. 
In her editor’s letter, Holly Shackleton says the issue addresses the way young 
people are “harnessing the digital space” to create awareness and acceptance of 
people from all walks of life, actively disregarding gender convention.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760912738%2F9f25278e-4248-4cd7-9eb3-08f066638076-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender-neutral%20fashion%3A%20beyond%20menswear%20and%20womenswear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Faug%2F11%2F-sp-the-rise-of-gender-neutral-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407760912738%2F9f25278e-4248-4cd7-9eb3-08f066638076-1020x680.jpeg>
 Models for Charles Worthington. 
 The trend has even progressed to beauty, with Charles Worthington showcasing 
a new collection of gender-neutral hair styles last month, including the the 
“strob” or stranded bob and the “boy bowl”, a heavy fringe and short sides. 
Though the customer base is predominantly women, the salon says men are 
experimenting with styles too.


“I wear roughly 50/50 male/female designs,” says fashion writer Alice 
Pfeiffer. “The French brand AMI, small labels Laurence Airline or Études Studio 
are good examples: a size S is cut for a petite French man or a medium-sized 
French woman.” She also suggests women are appropriating menswear in an active 
bid to “indicate that they are not defined by their sex appeal”.

 For style writer Dean Kissick, the reasons aren’t strictly aesthetic: “It’s 
hard for a man – there’s no men’s couture week, is there? I think everyone’s 
interested in what it feels like for a girl, or a boy, so it’s natural to want 
to wear each other’s clothes. Fashion’s always about trying out new looks and 
sensations, and also I think mirroring is a form of flirtation.” Either way, 
Kissick says: “Unisex fashion is no longer a taboo.”
 