
When pensions policy gets rewritten, the tail always wags the dog. This is 
another way of saying that the richest 20% dictate what happens to the rest. In 
particular, successive governments have refused to touch a pensions tax relief 
system that gives the most benefit to those with the highest incomes.

George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> claims his 
latest reforms are about the many and not the few, but it is hard to agree.

The reforms in question made the finale of his last budget a bigger blast than 
anyone expected. It was billed as the last word in pension freedom. The 
government wants to cut the chains of regulation that force pension savers to 
buy a lifetime retirement income.Do what you want with your pensions savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jul/19/george-osborne-pensions-lump-sums-elderly-care>
, he said – spend them, hoard them, give them away – the government won't make 
you buy an annuity.

In practice, the only people who can possibly benefit from pension freedom are 
those who have the largest pensions. In2012, only 46% of UK employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/jul/16/pension-schemes-fewer-members> 
were active members of a workplace pensions scheme, the lowest level since 
records began in 1997. Of these, many will qualify with tiny sums when they 
retire.

In the last couple of years the figures have stabilised and then started to 
rise after the previous government's Nest pension saving scheme began to take 
effect. But again, most of the savings in Nest will not amount to much after 
businesses were asked to contribute a minimum 3% of salary only.

The latest news is that the chancellor has refined his freedom policy to 
includeimpartial advice for all savers approaching retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jul/21/pensions-reform-customers-free-impartial-advice>
. The service will be running by April next year. Yet the poorest will be hit 
again under this change, after he announced that face-to-face advice is no 
longer the norm following a move to phone and internet communication as the 
preferred way to discuss the various options. If you have money, however, you 
can pay for face-to-face advice.

And Osborne will rely on charities to deliver the service, as is so often the 
way these days. Citizens Advice will be particularly aggrieved, having been 
chosen as one of the pensions advisers. Its service was cut to ribbons in the 
recession after Osborne reduced public subsidies. Now he is pumping it back up 
again. April may be an ambitious launch date, too. Offering only meagre 
salaries, the CAB will struggle to recruit people who can explain basic 
financial matters, let alone discuss pension options.

Anxiety among MPs can be added to the mix. The Treasury select committee 
chairman, Andrew Tyrie, is dismayed that another "delivery partner" in the 
pensions guidance plan is the Money Advice Service, saying the charity needs an 
overhaul before being let loose on the public.

The pensions industry has embraced the freedom proposals announced in the 
budget. This is not surprising when more freedom for the 20%, their pockets 
bulging with savings and buckets of tax relief, signals more complex 
arrangements and hence more profit.
 