
The most important influence upon the artistic career of Georgina Hunt was 
working in New York from 1970 until 1972. She found studio space in Manhattan 
and met the stars of the east coast art scene, most pertinentlyJules Olitski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/feb/13/guardianobituaries.usa>. Olitski 
at this stage was painting with a spray gun, covering canvases with evanescent 
veils of colour. The technique was exactly right for Hunt, who has died aged 89.

The canvases, usually 8ft square, that she painted from then on were 
expressions of cosmic depths, their subtly modulating drifts of colour composed 
of tiny grains of acrylic. The critic William Packer described them as "rich in 
the mysteries of space and light" and Guy Brett, in his introduction to the 
catalogue for Hunt's big show at Camden Arts Centre, north London, in 1982, 
referred to "their stilling of visual tensions and associational imagery in a 
luminous presence of colour".

With hindsight, she had been reaching all her painting life for the 
abstraction she then attained. Even when studying at the Slade School (1945-50) 
under the charismatic William Coldstream, one of the founders in the 1930s of 
the highly influential Euston Road school of urban realists, which cast its 
shadow forward over many 1950s art courses, Hunt's work held a different 
promise.

One of her early paintings, Crouching Figure, is clearly influenced by 
Coldstream, showing a nude art-class model sitting on a smallish table like a 
statue on a plinth, leaning forward and pulling her right foot back with her 
hand towards her bottom, her left leg doubled under, her head inclined forward 
to show the hair but not her face. It is a closed form, as neat as a netsuke, 
that perfect type of Japanese ivory carving that can be cradled in the palm of 
a hand.

Its quiet intensity was a herald, though the immediate future held different 
prospects. While still at the Slade, Hunt met and married Peter Atkins, a 
sculpture student who left to become an assistant in Henry Moore's studio in 
Perry Green, Hertfordshire. Another assistant there wasAnthony Caro 
<http://www.anthonycaro.org/>, whose friendship with Olitski no doubt provided 
an introduction for Hunt when she went to New York.

Caro and his wife, the artist Sheila Girling 
<http://www.sheilagirling.org/Site/Home.html>, became Hunt's lifelong friends. 
In 1953 Hunt left Britain to be with Atkins in Natal when he took a job at 
Ndaleni art school near Pietermaritzburg. It was the only art school for black 
South Africans, yet excluded women, so although Hunt was restricted to 
occasional stints helping out with teaching, she also campaigned for female 
students to be admitted, and succeeded.

Hunt was born in Reading, the daughter of a builder, the fourth child in a 
family of seven. Though not a Roman Catholic, she went to the local convent 
school, became tennis champion and head girl, and won a prize at the annual 
Royal Drawing Society exhibition. But art was considered an inferior 
occupation. It was only after training to become a teacher, but having to give 
the profession up because of a heart murmur, that she gained a place at the 
Slade.

Back in Britain from South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> in 1959 she turned to a 
powerful, almost violent, form of abstraction with a suggestion of plant forms 
and regeneration and birth. During this period she showed at the Drian Gallery 
in London, prompting the poet and critic Herbert Read to write of her: "I am 
full of admiration for what you achieve," which he took to be "an inner vision 
of reality". So it was. She had gone into analysis as a follower of Carl Jung's 
belief that integration of personality, the conscious with the unconscious, was 
the path to the wholly realised individual.

Hunt was divorced after her return from New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, but in 1997 she met Alistair 
Ewen, a fellow artist, when he was looking at one of her paintings in a group 
show. They became partners for the rest of her life. She is survived by the 
twin daughter and son from her marriage and by three grandchildren.

â€¢ Georgina Hunt, artist, born 15 June 1922; died 16 April 2012
 