
Attorney general George Brandis has made a hash of it every time he opened his 
mouth about the royal commission into theNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> government’s 
mistreatment of children in detention.

Last Friday on the ABC’s AM, he suggested to listeners 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2016/ThirdQuarter/29-July-2016-Interview-with-Michael-Brissenden-ABC-AM.aspx>
 that he was the person who drove the appointment of Brian Martin as royal 
commissioner. Brandis said it was not the Northern Territory government that 
nominated Martin, who had been chief justice of the territory for six years 
between 2004 and 2010. “I consulted my colleagues. We considered a number of 
options. We were looking for a retired judge.”

He then went about picking precisely the wrong retired judge. In fact, Martin 
is not retired at all as he still serves as anadditional judge of the NT 
supreme court <http://www.supremecourt.nt.gov.au/about/judges/index.htm> and to 
that extent is on the NT government’s payroll.

Timeline of events in the Northern Territory's juvenile detention system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/01/timeline-events-northern-territory-juvenile-detention-system>
The more fundamental difficulty is that in all likelihood the royal commission 
would have to hear from witnesses who had been sent to the Don Dale detention 
centre by chief justice, Brian Martin. He was head of a criminal justice system 
that incarcerated people in punitive and inhumane institutions – and it had 
been going on for years.

The reports into life at Don Dale and other hell-holes in the territory were 
fairly thick on the ground, as Darwin barrister John Lawrence SCpoints out in 
an article last October for Land Rights News 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27175391/1470100138867/Lawrence_NT_CLC.pdf?token=6vDIpBUsSHAsatI4dA42aprwWJE%3D>
, published by the Central Lands Council.

Martin, at least in a general sense, already would have known what was going 
on in jails and detention centres and the unpiqued nature of successive NT 
regimes.

To suggest, as chief minister Adam Giles has done, that politicians and 
judicial officers in the territory were surprised at Four Corners’ revelations, 
because of the“culture of cover-up” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-07-26/nt-prisons-minister-john-elferink-sacked-after-4-corners-outrage/7661086>
 in the Department of Corrections, is not credible – if for no other reason 
that some of the circumstances involving Aboriginal children in detention and 
their escape were before the courts.

Usually, when there is a perception of a conflict, there is one. Martin should 
not have been invited to be the royal commissioner, not because he is a bad 
judge or an unfair person, but because he was part of the machinery of justice, 
the end point of which, for a lot of youngsters was a brutal prison system, 
into which was fed an never-ending stream ofIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians>.

Yet, on Friday, Brandis charged ahead with a full head of steam: “Any 
suggestion that he [Martin] is not independent, any suggestion that he is not 
suitable for the task of this kind is very foolish.”

There was more: “I have no doubt at all that Justice Martin’s conduct of this 
royal commission will demonstrate the wisdom of the government’s choice of him 
as royal commissioner.”

The next day Martin was on the phone to Brandis saying he wanted out. 

It was Martin who showed wisdom, and Brandis who looked foolish. On Tuesday, 
the attorney general was still at it on Radio National Breakfast with Fran 
Kelly, insisting that Martin “could very well have proceeded” had it not been 
for his concerns about his daughter being dragged into the spotlight, as she 
had been employed as a justice adviser to the former Labor attorney general of 
the territory, Delia Laurie.

“Having spoken to him a few times over the weekend, I’m quite sure that that 
was the issue that was weighing most heavily on his mind,”Brandis said 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2016/ThirdQuarter/2-August-Radio-National-Breakfast.aspx>
.

Everyone believed that any problem posed by Martin’s daughter working for the 
previous government had beenfixed last Friday 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27171162/1469785926917/Martin_RC_NT_child_detention.pdf?token=Bao%2BGAypR343vbYfvSdzMF/qKMg%3D>
.

Martin himself said that Brandis was “satisfied that it would not compromise 
the independence or appearance of independence of the royal commission”.

What had been resolved on Friday had become a sticking point by Tuesday. 

What had not penetrated the collective thinking of Brandis and Malcolm 
Turnbull was that their wise choice would either know witnesses appearing 
before the commission or had dealt with them in court.

Brandis tried to slice the salami very thinly by saying, “This is not a royal 
commission into the Northern Territory legal system or the criminal justice 
system”, and this is despite Brandis’s very ownterms of reference 
<http://www.pm.gov.au/sites/default/files/media/letters-patent-royal-commission.pdf>
 for the commission calling for law reform, investigation into breaches of 
duty, appropriate oversight mechanisms (including presumable court-ordered 
oversight) and “any recommendations that you may consider appropriate”.

It is incredible that it never dawned on Canberra’s brains trust that the only 
way to handle this is with a retired judge or top-flight counsel from out of 
town, sitting alongside an Aboriginal leader. The thought of an Indigenous 
co-commissioner wascontemplated last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/brandis-had-considered-adding-indigenous-commissioner-for-nt-inquiry>
, apparently, but only speedily progressed after a hue and cry went up and 
Martin packed his bags.

The engagement of the NT government in a joint royal commission is no less 
alarming.Brandis told the ABC 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2016/ThirdQuarter/29-July-2016-Interview-with-Michael-Brissenden-ABC-AM.aspx>
, in one of his more audacious pieces of puffery, that “Mr Giles’s contribution 
to this process has been exemplary”.

This is the same Mr Giles whose grip on the separation of powers is as fragile 
as that of the late “Sir” Joh Bjelke-Petersen.Here is Giles  
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/24876038/1399878864547/NT_Hansard_May_78_2014.pdf?token=7ITfoXRVJtpzVSDgg9SoZeEwFsM%3D>
defending an NT magistrate who was a supporter of and donor to the Country 
Liberal party:

It is fantastic he has rights and freedoms in a democratic society, such as 
the Northern Territory, to be a member of a political party. Good on him if he 
wants to make a donation to the member for Port Darwin, who has declared it in 
his register of interests ... Thank you very much, Peter Maley, the magistrate 
who has shown an interest in the Country Liberals.

It’s the same Giles who keeps John Elferink, the recently ex-corrections 
minister, as his attorney general. Giles’ tweets show his lizard-eyed 
insouciance:
Adam Giles (@adamgiles) 
Look at this real life example from just last week. Does anyone really think 
this youth won't reoffend?https://t.co/UMjZ9ImaUH <https://t.co/UMjZ9ImaUH> 
(3/3)#NTpol <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NTpol?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/adamgiles/status/734167441660481536> May 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/adamgiles/status/734167441660481536> 
 And 
Adam Giles (@adamgiles) 
Enough is enough. 

We give rogue youth every chance, but they still cause trouble: 
https://t.co/EmpqP9psd4 <https://t.co/EmpqP9psd4> #NTpol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NTpol?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/36JaTz1yOv 
<https://t.co/36JaTz1yOv>
 <https://twitter.com/adamgiles/status/732409618060574721> May 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/adamgiles/status/732409618060574721> 
 And here he is championing his hardline “crack down” 
<http://www.chiefminister.nt.gov.au/media-releases/update-youth-and-town-camp-issues-alice-springs>
 on youth behaviour.

The only reason Giles is allowed inside the tent is because the NT’s Country 
Liberal representatives are part of the Coalition, sitting with the National 
party in the House of Representatives and the Senate.

Like that young fella shackled to a chair, it seems like we have little say in 
our fate | Louise Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/02/like-that-young-fella-shackled-to-a-chair-it-seems-like-we-have-little-say-in-our-fate>
Turnbull couldn’t be seen to be going hard against a political ally, no matter 
how putrid their odour, otherwise, surely, Giles would not be allowed within a 
bull-roar of advising about the royal commission.

However, not all estimations and predictions have been inaccurate. During the 
election campaign shadow attorney general Mark Dreyfus said that Brandis is a
“disaster” of an attorney general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/mark-dreyfus-on-george-brandis-as-attorney-general-a-disaster-for-the-rule-of-law>
.

Just after the new cabinet was announced last month, he added that Brandis was 
unfit for the job:
Mark Dreyfus (@markdreyfusQCMP) 
Gobsmacking that Turnbull thinks Brandis deserves another term as A-G. He is 
destroying community legal sector and undermining good govt.
 <https://twitter.com/markdreyfusQCMP/status/754917534726443008> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/markdreyfusQCMP/status/754917534726443008> 
 If politicians are so shocked about what goes on in the Northern Territory 
that they want “actionable answers”, what about a royal commission into thejust 
as shocking detention 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/08/02/australia-appalling-abuse-neglect-refugees-nauru>
 on Nauru and Manus Island?
 