
The speaker of Germany’s parliament has strongly condemned threats against 
German-Turkish MPs following a Bundestag vote that declared the 1915 mass 
killings of Armenians by Ottoman forces a genocide.


Norbert Lammert expressed particular outrage at comments made by Turkey’s 
president,Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, who said MPs with 
Turkish heritage who had backed the vote were traitors whose blood was impure 
and should be tested in a laboratory.

“I would not have thought it possible that a democratically elected head of 
state in the 21st century would link his criticism towards democratically 
elected members of the German Bundestag with doubt as to their Turkish 
heritage, and describe their blood as contaminated,” Lammert told parliament on 
Thursday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fgerman-parliament-condemns-threats-to-mps-armenian-vote-erdogan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de88fd88f74a041727d2c3557270f4c36ce65d5%2F940_36_989_1237%2F989.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=German%20parliament%20condemns%20threats%20to%20MPs%20after%20Armenian%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fgerman-parliament-condemns-threats-to-mps-armenian-vote-erdogan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=German%20parliament%20condemns%20threats%20to%20MPs%20after%20Armenian%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fgerman-parliament-condemns-threats-to-mps-armenian-vote-erdogan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de88fd88f74a041727d2c3557270f4c36ce65d5%2F940_36_989_1237%2F989.jpg>
 Norbert Lammert, speaker of the German parliament. Photograph: Markus 
Schreiber/AP 
Erdoğan’s comments came after the Bundestag’s resolution last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/germany-braces-for-turkish-backlash-as-it-votes-to-recognise-armenian-genocide>
, in which he called the 11 MPs of Turkish origin a “mouthpiece for the PKK”, 
the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ party that is fighting for an independent 
Kurdish state.

Lammert said he rejected the insinuation that German MPs were terrorists, 
saying he considered the remarks to be an attack on the whole parliament.

Since the resolution, the MPs have received a barrage of death threats and 
verbal abuse from Erdoğan supporters.

The row is taking place against the backdrop of intense, often fraught 
negotiations in recent months over how to jointly cope with the influx of 
refugees to Europe afterGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> 
received 1.1 million refugees last year.

Under an agreement reached between Turkey and the European Union, which was 
championed by the chancellor, Angela Merkel, migrants arriving on Greek islands 
are to be returned to Turkey in return for EU aid and visa-free travel for 
Turks inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Erdoğan has frequently questioned the validity of the deal and there have been 
repeated threats from within his party to cancel it altogether.

In turn, Merkel and the EU have been accused of kowtowing to a government with 
a highly questionable human rights record.

Leading Turkish politicians have warned that the Armenia resolution, which it 
said was rejected by “over 90% of the Turkish population”, threatened to 
destabilise not only relations between Germany andTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and to upset the estimated three to 
3.5 million people of Turkish origin living in Germany.

Most of the Turkish wrath has been directed at Cem Özdemir, the Green party’s 
co-chair, whose parents are Turkish immigrants and who was instrumental in 
bringing a revised draft of the resolution to the Bundestag. Özdemir featured 
prominently in a tweet by Turkey’s mayor, Ibrahim Melih Gökçek, which consisted 
of a collage of the 11 Turkish-German MPs along with the hashtag “The traitors 
should be denaturalised”.
 