
During the final presidential debate on Wednesday, 19 October, the Guardian 
Mobile Innovation Lab <https://medium.com/the-guardian-mobile-innovation-lab>, 
along with the Guardian US Opinion and News desks will send experimental web 
notifications with real-time reactions and live fact-checks from the Guardian 
US newsroom.

To sign up: Open this page <https://www.gdnmobilelab.com/third-debate/> in a 
Chrome browser from an Android phone (Samsung included) and tap to subscribe.

What you should know about our notifications: 

 * They’re currently only available on Chrome on Android devices. 
 * They’re meant for mobile but will also work on desktop Chrome browsers, too.

 * They supplement the news alerts sent from the Guardian’s Android and iOS 
apps. 
More about tonight’s experiment: 

 * The notifications are supposed to make it easy for you to keep listening to 
what the candidates and moderators are saying during the debate, while 
providing easy and convenient access to analysis, fact-checks and reactions 
from our experts on your phone throughout the night. 
 * We’ll send three alerts. Each will auto-update on your lockscreen with the 
following: 
 * Reactions from Guardian opinion editor David Shariatmadari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidshariatmadari> and commentator Kate 
Aronoff <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kate-aronoff>. We’ll send their 
quick takes about the candidates’ policy statements, their debating styles, and 
who’s winning and who’s losing. 
 * Fact-check alerts for each of the two candidates, by Guardian reporter Alan 
Yuhas <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alan-yuhas>. The notifications will 
be color coded to indicate the degree of accuracy of the candidates’ statements.
This project is the latest installment in ongoing experimentation with 
notifications, part of theMobile Lab’s mission 
<https://medium.com/the-guardian-mobile-innovation-lab> to learn more about 
mobile storytelling. After the experiment, we’ll send out a survey soliciting 
feedback on the experience.

Questions, suggestions or observations? Drop us a note: 
innovationlab@theguardian.com
 