
We are a doughty lot when it comes to physical contact with strangers. Routine 
city commutes can throw up various combinations of jabbed crotches, crushed 
breasts and armpits in the face. So the human tangle that participants find 
themselves placed in at the end of The Touching Contract feels a bit like the 
cramped journey to the show on the tube. Among other things, it’s a reminder of 
the social contract we enter into when living cheek by jowl with our fellow 
humans, the everyday niceties that make such proximity bearable – from clean 
hands to fresh breath and functioning deodorant.

Rolling out over four nights at London’s Toynbee Hall, The Touching Contract 
requires full-body participation from its audience as they are channelled 
through the building’s halls and theatre spaces, not to mention its corridors, 
stairs and lift. The body-to-body language developed for the work, by Jesse 
Jones and Sarah Browne, is based on local activists’ and community organisers’ 
experiences of detention, control and medical treatment, as well as the 
day-to-day shove and grind of life. At the hands of female performers dressed 
in institutionally “cheery” yellow tones comes touch variously reminiscent of 
the affection of a child, the slack weight of a sick relative, the ambivalent 
probing of a doctor, or the furtive gropes of the predatory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-touching-contract-toynbee-hall-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed8daeddf8a15207800cb0cb21f924b82c042fcb%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20your%20hands%20on%20me%3A%20the%20show%20that%20literally%20touches%20its%20audience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-touching-contract-toynbee-hall-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20your%20hands%20on%20me%3A%20the%20show%20that%20literally%20touches%20its%20audience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-touching-contract-toynbee-hall-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed8daeddf8a15207800cb0cb21f924b82c042fcb%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Affectionate or intrusive? … The Touching Contract. 
Here, however, touch also becomes a metaphor for other kinds of intrusive 
contact. For The Touching Contract is an actual contract you have to sign, its 
language derived from existing documents used to lay out the parameters of 
consent and responsibility – on the part of the state and the individual in 
relation to, say, electroconvulsive therapy or the receipt of welfare benefits. 
The tone is intrusive and dehumanising from the outset, demanding an ID number 
for processing, and consent to obtuse stipulations. While outlandish, these 
will be familiar in tone to anyone who has rubbed up against Work Capability 
Assessments or Jobseeker’s Allowance.

We are told that we “may experience touch administered as having one or more 
of the qualities indicated below: Protective/ Maternal/ Economic/ Policing/ 
Playful/ Sensual/ Charitable/ Self-/ Sonic/ Medical/ Educational/ Violent/ 
Paternal/ Sexual/ Contaminatory/ Service-Based.” But we are also warned that if 
we “appear not to be available as described, the performer will consider other 
enforcement actions in order to protect the community”. There is also a threat: 
recompense may be demanded if we receive “undeserved touch”.


The Toynbee Hall theatre piece that wakes the dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/12/toynbee-hall-theatre-geraldine-pilgrim>
As participants, we are encouraged both to fear touch – and to fear its 
removal. As an allegory for state support, this aspect feels particularly 
poignant in the setting of Toynbee Hall, home to the charity of the same name 
that has fought for social change in an area – Tower Hamlets – where child 
poverty stands at a shocking 49%.


Co-commissioned by Artangel <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel>
, The Touching Contract is part of a wider body of work by Jones and Browne 
called In the Shadow of the State, which looks at intrusive contact and control 
over women’s bodies by state institutions. An earlier performance, which took 
place at a historic maternity hospital in Dublin, focused on reproductive 
injustices including the legality of marital rape. In a house on Bogside in 
Derry, a single performer in a kitchen evoked memories of brutal military 
raids. And in The Truncheon and the Speculum in Liverpool, the Contagious 
Diseases Act of 1860, which required policemen to carry and use both of those 
instruments, was explored, extending into our own time and the humiliating 
examinations female prisoners can be subject to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-touching-contract-toynbee-hall-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467389c2359170d16d5580f37a14a52ec17bee8e%2F328_324_3078_1846%2F3078.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20your%20hands%20on%20me%3A%20the%20show%20that%20literally%20touches%20its%20audience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-touching-contract-toynbee-hall-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20your%20hands%20on%20me%3A%20the%20show%20that%20literally%20touches%20its%20audience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fthe-touching-contract-toynbee-hall-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467389c2359170d16d5580f37a14a52ec17bee8e%2F328_324_3078_1846%2F3078.jpg>
 Kind hands … an audience member is touched. 
But in this show, there’s also touch as simply touch. Finding oneself in a 
physically compliant state with strangers is a reminder that, while we 
inhabitants of megacities are increasingly inured to the intrusions of physical 
contact, we have also become desensitised to its nuances. Cut off from extended 
families, often out of direct contact with the very old or very young, we don’t 
automatically respond with nurturing intent to bodies requiring support: we 
flinch from the offer of comfort and shift away from displays of emotion. The 
Touching Contract is not only disconcerting and discomforting in its 
exploration of our relationship with the state, it is also a reminder of our 
growing isolation from one another.

 * The Touching Contract <http://www.intheshadowofthestate.org/> is at Toynbee 
Hall, London, 17-20 November. To book, call 07391924258.  