
The Guardian Mobile Innovation Lab 
<https://medium.com/the-guardian-mobile-innovation-lab> and the Guardian US 
opinion desk are sending experimental web notifications tonight during 
tonight’s presidential debate, with real-time opinions from Guardian columnists.


To sign up: Open this page <https://www.gdnmobilelab.com/debates/> in a Chrome 
browser from an Android phone (Samsung included) and tap to sign up. Web 
notifications are currently only available on Chrome on Android devices. They 
are meant for mobile but will work on Chrome browsers on desktop, too.

These experimental alerts will supplement the news alerts sent from the 
Guardian’sAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> app with 
reactions from Guardian columnistsRichard Wolffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richard-wolffe> and Lucia Graves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lucia-graves>. They will be sent at key 
moments throughout the debate, while the Guardian app news alerts will provide 
only the most important updates. (The alerts can also be received through 
desktop Chrome browsers but unfortunately not iPhones. We’re working on a way 
to release iOS versions of our notifications experiments and hope to have that 
ready next month.)


During the debate, you will hear from the columnists with their quick takes on 
the candidates’ policy statements, their debating styles, and who’s winning and 
who’s losing.

This project is the latest installment in ongoing experimentation with 
notifications, part of the Mobile Lab’s mission to learn more about mobile 
storytelling. After the experiment, we’ll send out a survey soliciting feedback 
on the experience.

Questions, suggestions or observations? Drop us a note: 
innovationlab@theguardian.com
 