
Last time I told you a bit about my experience with assessment centres 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/getting-onto-graduate-schemes-a-guide-to-assessment-centres-part-one>
. As I said before, assessment centres vary a lot in length, content and how 
they assess you. Here I'll be running over my top five tips for tackling 
assessment centres in general.

Be prepared

On the way to her first assessment centre, one of my friends had dutifully 
printed off all of the information the company had given her beforehand. She 
set aside her two hour train journey to study the instructions (which she had 
already skim read) to familiarise herself with the structure and content. All 
was going fine until the read about the pre-prepared presentation she was 
required to do. Needless to say there was some frantic cramming done on the 
train.

Be yourself and try and relax

This is obviously easier said than done. But if you've prepared well, try and 
get a good night's sleep, relax, and be yourself. I tried to remember that if 
I'd got this far in the application process, I must have done something right, 
and any act or pretence put on won't be easily maintained if once you've joined 
the company.

It's not always a competition 

Unless the company is right at the end of its recruitment campaign, it's 
unlikely you'll be directly competing with your peers at the assessment centre 
for a place in the company. More often than not, a company won't have a set 
number from your group that they're allowed to take through (50%, for example), 
they will have a strict and structured marking criteria to determine if you've 
been successful. That means that the company could potentially take the whole 
group from your assessment centre, or none of you, so trying to trip others up 
to make yourself look good is pointless.

Think about what you are being asked to do â€“ and why

Often in assessment centres you'll be asked to do something, but it may not be 
defined by strict guidelines. Try to think about what they want to see from 
you. Are they asking you to be creative? Why? Are they looking for you to take 
on a leadership position or gel as part of a team? It might be worth looking 
back to requirements on a company's website or in the job description. What 
skills does the company value? More often than not it will be the criteria that 
they'll mark you on, and it might not be what you initially think you're being 
tested on.

Use it as an opportunity to assess the company

While you don't want to appear too aggressive or challenging, use this as an 
opportunity to find out more about the company and the graduate scheme you're 
applying for. This day is to find out if you're suitable for the company, so 
you need to check that you are really keen and committed to what they're 
offering. By asking questions you'll also appear keen and enthusiastic, but try 
not to ask anything so basic they may expect you to already know.
 