
The case of former Guantánamo Bay detainee Ahmed Ghailani (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/18/guantanamo-detainee-ahmed-khalfan-ghailani>
, 18 November) should sound a warning to British authorities. Ghailani was 
convicted of only one charge and acquitted of more than 280 others after a key 
witness was banned from testifying because his evidence had been obtained by 
torture. This should not be seen as a failure, but proof that successful 
convictions can be obtained without the use of torture. The case of Ghailani 
shows exactly why interrogations must be carried out in accordance with human 
rights laws. British courts have a tradition of excluding evidence obtained by 
torture. If British intelligence personnel are not operating in an environment 
that reflects these standards, any evidence obtained via such means will fall 
at the final hurdle in the courts. The EHRC recently started judicial review 
proceedings after writing to the prime minister expressing concern that the 
government's guidance on torture for intelligence personnel working in the 
field did not meet international standards.

Professor Geraldine Van Bueren

Equality and Human Rights Commission <http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/>

• Criticism of the case of Ahmed Ghailani seems to exhibit the same distaste 
for the rule of law that gave rise to Guantánamo in the first place. Many men 
still languish there; some awaiting trial, some cleared for release, but with 
no country to go to. These men should either be afforded due process, or 
released. To assist in achieving the prison's closure, the UK should follow 
other European countries and afford shelter to those innocent men with no other 
country to go to.

Christine MacLeod

London Guantánamo Campaign 
<http://www.guantanamo.org.uk/content/blogsection/7/40/>
 