
The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/barnaby-joyce>, has welcomed an 
Australian-majority bid for the Kidman cattle empire, but insists he hasn’t 
discussed the matter with businesswoman Gina Rinehart.

If successful, Rinehart’s Hancock Prospecting would own two-thirds of S Kidman 
and Co, and Chinese-owned real estate conglomerate Shanghai CRED one-third in a 
deal worth $365m.

Previous Chinese bids for Kidman, Australia’s largest private landholder, have 
been rejected by the federal treasurer.

Rinehart said Kidman was an important part of Australia’s pioneering and 
entrepreneurial history.

Joyce, a personal friend of the mining magnate who is Australia’s richest 
woman, said he made a point of not talking to the mining magnate or her staff 
about the bid.

Australia still open for business, says Barnaby Joyce after Kidman land deal 
blocked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/30/australia-still-open-for-business-says-barnaby-joyce-after-kidman-land-deal-blocked>
“I want to make sure this is completely and utterly at arms length,” he told 
ABC radio on Monday.

The Nationals leader said he liked the idea of an Australian-majority bid for 
Kidman and other land assets, but a decision was up to the Foreign Investment 
Review Board.

“I want to drive around the countryside, drive around the suburbs saying this 
is overwhelmingly owned by Australians.”

Joyce rejected a claim by the independent senator Jacqui Lambie that the 
Chinese were using Rinehart to control Kidman. “I think she’s talking out of 
her hat,” Joyce said.

The finance minister, Mathias Cormann, said it would be great if such a 
significant asset as Kidman was kept in majority Australian hands.

“But there’s a process to go through and I’ll just let this play out,” he said.

The One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson>, celebrated the 
news on her Facebook page, saying she had faith in Rinehart’s business 
capabilities and her love for Australia and its assets.

“I believe Australians will be happy with this outcome given the vast majority 
of the company remains in the hands of Australia,” Hanson wrote.

The Labor senator Doug Cameron noted Rinehart’s generous donations to the 
Nationals party.

“You should ask her best mate Barnaby Joyce. He’ll probably know all about 
what Gina Rinehart is doing,” he told reporters in Canberra. “Gina Rinehart had 
to hire a tip-truck to tip the money off to theNational party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/national-party> during the last 
election.”

The former Labor treasurer Wayne Swan suggested there was some risk in letting 
investors with interests in other industries like mining getting involved.

“I think we need to be concerned when we get monopolies taking over large 
parts of our economy,” he told reporters.

The Nationals senator Bridget McKenzie welcomed Rinehart’s bid as a positive 
step forward. “I think it’s always positive that we back our own,” she said.

Independent senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> said he believed her 
intervention was a middle way which made sense. And he doubted suggestions 
Rinehart would be controlled by her Chinese minority partners. “I think Gina 
Rinehart is pretty much uncontrollable,” Xenophon said.

Xenophon believes reforms to foreign investment are still needed, saying 
existing rules are as clear as mud and as weak as water.

The Kidman sale will need to be pass Australia’s foreign investment regime and 
People’s Republic ofChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> government 
approvals.

It is also conditional on the divestment of Anna Creek Station and Peake by 
Kidman to other Australian grazing interests, with the monies to be retained by 
Kidman for the benefit of Australian Outback Beef.
 