
If you want to read Jack Kerouac’s novel On the Road in its original scroll 
form this summer, the place to go to is the Beat Generation exhibition at the 
Centre Pompidou in Paris. It will require more than one visit – the 36.6m 
scroll is exhibited in its entire length across the central room, like the 
Bayeux Tapestry – but while you are there you can also watch Robert Frank’s 
30-minute filmPull My Daisy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SW4Eh1-DNOs> 
(1959), with Kerouac’s voiceover, scrutinise the heavily revised typescript of
Allen Ginsberg’s poem “Howl” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/08/how-allen-ginsbergs-howl-transformed-pop>
, dance to Harry Smith’s experimental jazz films and relish the sight of 
numerous rare publications under glass, such as Gary Snyder’sSix Sections from 
Mountains and Rivers Without End and issues of the magazines Big Table and 
Kulchur.

Paris has acquired the habit of mounting major exhibitions on literary 
subjects –Jean-Paul Sartre <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeanpaulsartre> 
andBoris Vian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/31/boris-vian-paris-lecume-des-jours-mood-indigo>
 have been at the Bibliothèque Nationale in recent years,Jean Cocteau  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/oct/12/archive-jean-cocteau-dies-edith-piaf>
andRoland Barthes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/nov/12/roland-barthes-happy-100th-birthday-centenary-birth>
 at the Pompidou – but why the Beats, and why now? “The idea is to show these 
freedoms, which were fought for then, and which are in danger of disappearing”, 
says Philippe-Alain Michaud who has curated the show with assistance from the 
poet Jean-Jacques Lebel, translator of several Beat works into French, and Rani 
Singh of the Getty Research Institute. Michaud isn’t disposed to make the case 
for a revival of interest, since France never paid much attention to Beat 
writing in the first place. “We wanted to show the multimedia nature of the 
movement – not just writing but painting and film as well – and how the idea of 
travel was central to it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSW4Eh1-DNOs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSW4Eh1-DNOs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSW4Eh1-DNOs&media=>
 Pull My Daisy, directed by Robert Frank and Alfred Leslie 
There is another good reason for bringing the Beats to Paris. More than 
Tangier, which often gets the credit, the French capital was where Beat 
production reached its high point, between 1957 and 1960. With the turn of the 
decade, what had been an underground movement rose to the surface and was 
exposed to damaging commercial light. The living quarters were a cheap hotel in 
rue Gît-le-Coeur, near the Seine. Known as the Hotel Rachou, after its owner, 
it has passed into legend as the Beat Hotel. Just a short walk away, across the 
Boulevard St Michel, was the office of the Olympia Press in rue St Séverin, the 
nearest thing to a house publisher for Beat writing in Europe. It was at the 
Beat Hotel in 1959 that the dishevelled “routines” of William S Burroughs were 
shuffled into some kind of shape by Ginsberg, Sinclair Beiles and others – a 
random shape, according to Burroughs himself – before being brought to the 
proprietor of Olympia, Maurice Girodias. Four or five weeks later,Naked Lunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/20/william-burroughs-naked-lunch-review-anthony-burgess-1964>
, with a now rare dust jacket designed by the author and many misprints 
committed by non-English-reading compositors (fortunately, given the content), 
was in the few shops willing to stock it. The cut-up technique, which Burroughs 
used to produce his next two novels,The Soft Machine and The Ticket That 
Exploded – also published by Olympia – was accidentally revealed to his regular 
collaborator Brion Gysin at the Beat Hotel. Gysin’s original cut-up weapon, a 
Stanley knife, is on display, as is Burroughs’s vintage Underwood typewriter 
and an adding machine of the kind refined by his grandfather, also William S 
Burroughs, which brought the family status and wealth at the end of the 19th 
century. It was in Paris that Ginsberg began writing “Kaddish”, his greatest 
poem, and it was from here that Gregory Corso sent the poems for his collection 
Gasolineto City Lights Books in San Francisco. “He’s probably the greatest poet 
in America”, Ginsberg wrote in a preface, “and he’s starving in Europe.” 
Starving at the Beat Hotel, to be precise, where Corso lived in a room almost 
too small to stand up in, as we see from one of the many photographs by the 
English photographer Harold Chapman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02e74d85b6b627f6b0419389c50be6d03929ddb3%2F0_0_2588_2613%2F2588.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ginsberg%2C%20Kerouac%20and%20Burroughs%3A%20celebrating%20the%20Beats%20in%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ginsberg%2C%20Kerouac%20and%20Burroughs%3A%20celebrating%20the%20Beats%20in%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02e74d85b6b627f6b0419389c50be6d03929ddb3%2F0_0_2588_2613%2F2588.jpg>
 Neal Cassady by Ettore Sottsass (1962) 
Beat Generation does not claim the movement for Paris but it shows the 
importance of the city in the lives and works of several of its leading 
writers. Kerouac spent little time there, but for Ginsberg and others there was 
the excitement of gazing at the same cityscapes and dawdling in the same cafes 
asHenry Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/books/henry-miller>, a reluctant 
forbear,Jean Genet <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jeangenet> and Samuel 
Beckett <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/beckett>. The work of all three 
was as yet unavailable in the US, but all were published by the Olympia Press, 
the literary importance of which has never got through to the French reading 
public.

The Hotel Rachou has long since been converted into a four-star hotel – Singh 
says she was forbidden to take a group inside recently while leading a Beat 
walk – but visitors to the Pompidou will have their imaginations primed by an 
installation structured on contemporary pictures of Burroughs in his dismal 
room, some by Chapman, others by the Life magazine photographer Loomis Dean. 
There is a replica of the sagging brass bed with a bare light bulb above and 
reproductions of Burroughs’s pictures on the wall. All that is missing is a 
stuffed dummy of the cadaverous figure himself, staring into the abyss of 
“total need”, Burroughs’s term for heroin addiction. Mme Rachou, who enjoyed 
the company of the local gendarmerie as well as of beatniks, is no longer 
around to explain why she admitted these eccentric types – one tenant filled 
his room up with straw – while refusing entry to a more ordinary sort of 
tourist. Her genial presence is visible in some of Chapman’s photographs, while 
those of the bar at the Beat Hotel give a vivid impression of Left Bank life in 
the 50s.

Michaud faces a harder task in presenting the shadowy side of the Beat soul, 
though he is well aware of it. Freedom isn’t always fun. There was madness and 
criminality in the Beat family genes: Kerouac, Ginsberg and Burroughs had all 
seen the insides of psychiatric hospitals by the age of 30. Corso got his 
higher education in prison. Burroughs shot his common-law wife in the head 
during a game of William Tell in Mexico. At the Beat Hotel, Gysin disliked 
Ginsberg for his hold over Burroughs. The latter, oscillating between addiction 
and withdrawal, veered towards paranoia, while aching from his obsessive love 
for Ginsberg. In San Francisco, Neal Cassady’s girlfriend Natalie Jackson threw 
herself from the top of a building. Elise Cowen, one of Ginsberg’s admirers, 
killed herself while he was in Bombay in 1962. “Always felt revulsion for the 
death smell in her hair”, he wrote to Corso.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4bf75eb90c3c381b8ffbb7570507184f34307ba%2F0_0_4564_3438%2F4564.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ginsberg%2C%20Kerouac%20and%20Burroughs%3A%20celebrating%20the%20Beats%20in%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ginsberg%2C%20Kerouac%20and%20Burroughs%3A%20celebrating%20the%20Beats%20in%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4bf75eb90c3c381b8ffbb7570507184f34307ba%2F0_0_4564_3438%2F4564.jpg>
 Le Roi Jones and his Family (1964) by Bob Thompson; 1964; Oil on canvas; 36 
3/8 x 48 1/2 in. (92.4 x 123.2 cm); Gift of Joseph H. Hirshhorn, 1966 Beat 
Generation Photograph: Joseph H Hirshhorn/Lee Stalsworth 
In recent years, there has been interest in the women of the Beat generation, 
but Singh, who worked with Ginsberg and is an expert on the films of Harry 
Smith, admits that it was “mainly the guys”. The show’s richly illustrated 
catalogue contains her interview with Joanne Kyger, whoseCollected Poems was 
published in 2007 and who studied Zen Buddhism in Japan in the 1960s with her 
then-husband Gary Snyder. The catalogue also has archive interviews conducted 
by the Beat historian Barry Miles with Burroughs, Lawrence Ferlinghetti and 
Michael McClure (all translated from English into French). While the Beats 
might have done a lot to create greater acceptance of homosexuality, the 
liberalising ideals of feminism didn’t move them.Pull My Daisy is more than 
just a guys’ film; it is downright misogynistic (though not in the brutal 
manner of Burroughs at his worst). Ginsberg, Corso and others play themselves, 
while the pop artist Larry Rivers takes the Cassady role (Milo) with Delphine 
Seyrig as his long-suffering wife, based onCarolyn Cassady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/23/carolyn-cassady>. “She’ll get 
over it”, Kerouac’s voiceover assures viewers, as the weeping wife is abandoned 
to household drudgery while the guys are back where they want to be, in 
freedom’s playground. As for the influence of black style on the Ivy 
League-educated Beats – leading to the birth of the “white negro”, to use 
Norman Mailer’s expression – there are references in the show to the San 
Francisco poet Bob Kaufman and to LeRoi Jones. In the mid-60s, Jones buried his 
old Beat self in Greenwich Village, leaving behind his Jewish wife Hettie 
(herself a poet and children’s writer), and resurrected himself in Newark, New 
Jersey, asAmiri Baraka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/10/amiri-baraka>, black nationalist 
militant and antisemite (“I got the extermination blues, jewboys/ I got the 
Hitler syndrome figured”). There is a striking oil painting of “LeRoi Jones and 
his family” by Bob Thompson, and the typescript of Jones’s “Poem to be Read at 
Bob Thompson’s Funeral” (1966). The bridge spanning the divided American 
culture is supposed to be jazz, of which there is no shortage in the 
exhibition’s air.

One of the more pleasant surprises in store for visitors is the interest in 
visual arts on the part of the writers. Ginsberg was a talented photographer. 
Always conscious of the epoch-making nature of the Beat enterprise – Lawrence 
Ferlinghetti, among others, has accused him of inventing the entire thing – he 
kept a pictorial record until his death in 1997. Several of his carefully 
preserved pictures, with hand-written captions, are exhibited. There are also 
photographs by Burroughs, including some of his room at the Beat Hotel, and 
many examples of his script-and-image collage work. Paintings by Kerouac are on 
display, as well as a portrait of him by Larry Rivers and a lively drawing of 
Burroughs by Corso. One of the scoops for the curators is a 1.8m manuscript 
poem by Corso, probably made at the Beat Hotel: “There is no more SAFETY 
Protection/ There is only DANGER/ and it leans against the final/ lampost 
gobbling/ St Tropez SHOES”. There are paintings and collages by more recognised 
artists such as Wallace Berman, Julian Beck and Alfred Leslie. Among the best 
of the visual exhibits is Gysin’s imposing assemblage of hieroglyphics,
Calligraphie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F574e2ae0402bed807bd16726a024f16f1e2db3d5%2F0_0_8526_5505%2F8526.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ginsberg%2C%20Kerouac%20and%20Burroughs%3A%20celebrating%20the%20Beats%20in%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ginsberg%2C%20Kerouac%20and%20Burroughs%3A%20celebrating%20the%20Beats%20in%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fbeats-paris-pompidou-centre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F574e2ae0402bed807bd16726a024f16f1e2db3d5%2F0_0_8526_5505%2F8526.jpg>
 Calligraphie (1960) by Brion Gysin Photograph: Jonathan Greet 
The foundation myth is travel. Kerouac wrote urgently about the need to “go go 
go”, and here is a rare opportunity to see the manuscript of one of the few 
books in the western canon that imitates the means of going – theOn the Road 
scroll, the book as a road, paved in paper. It is therefore suitable that 
Michaud has arranged his exhibits according to location. Not only “New York, 
San Francisco, Paris”, the exhibition’s subtitle, but Mexico, Tangier and the 
far east. London, a city skulking under a grey cloud in the 1950s, barely 
features. Burroughs chose to live in Mayfair in the 1960s and early 70s but, as 
Jean-Jacques Lebel says, “that was because he could be anonymous there”.

Today, Paris is the city glancing nervously at threatening skies. The 
continual explorations of freedom its literary culture has given rise to, from 
Rimbaud and Apollinaire to Camus and Vian have been a source of inspiration to 
artists the world over. As I wandered through the Pompidou, I found myself 
thinking that the artistic-intellectual crisis in Paris was being talked about 
long before the present political one, and wondering how the two might be 
linked. Burroughs would have read the answer to the question between the cut-up 
lines. Meanwhile, it is heartening to know that a mad dash for freedom which 
set off from Columbia University 75 years ago is being celebrated in the dimmed 
City of Light this summer.

• James Campbell is the author of Paris Interzone and This Is the Beat 
Generation: New York, San Francisco, Paris. Beat Generation is at Centre 
Pompidou, Paris, until 3 October.centrepompidou.fr. 
<https://www.centrepompidou.fr/cpv/ressource.action?param.id=FR_R-33a9dae3-7aeb-4e3f-9084-29dcbdefaf60&param.idSource=FR_E-a21b6302-59ed-44fd-9f0f-74192ce9e335>
 