
“Death to Van Gogh’s Ear!” howled Allen Ginsberg in 1957 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jun/04/vincent-van-gogh-ear-genetically-engineered-art>
 at a time when the severed aural appendage of the painter who invented 
expressionism was becoming synonymous with soulful suffering. Today the ear is 
’ere again,with another explanation for Van Gogh’s brutal act of 
self-mutilation all over the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/31/van-gogh-cut-off-his-ear-learning-brother-theo-to-marry-new-study>
.

The year before the Ginsberg poem, Kirk Douglas had put on a brilliantly 
intense performance as the ginger artist in Vincente Minnelli’s film Lust for 
Life (1956), taking out his cut-throat razor and raising it to his ear after a 
row withPaul Gauguin, played by Anthony Quinn 
<http://emanuellevy.com/interviews/lust-for-life-anthony-quinns-paul-gauguin-5/>
. Lust for Life came out just after the death of the American painter Jackson 
Pollock in a drunken car crash. Art, it seemed, was a suicide rap. Great 
artists were visionary martyrs, doomed to anguish – even to cut off bits of 
themselves.

Van Gogh 'cut off his ear after learning brother was to marry'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/31/van-gogh-cut-off-his-ear-learning-brother-theo-to-marry-new-study>
Ginsberg’s poem Howl (1955-6) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film> 
sees creativity as an ordeal akin to madness and dereliction:“I saw the best 
minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked …” 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/49303> But in 
the title of his poemDeath to Van Gogh’s Ear! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gCa70trIj8g>, he seems to reject that cult of 
the “mad” artist, to mock Van Gogh’s ear as an icon of creative suffering.

However, more than half a century later, Van Gogh’s ear is the most famous 
body part of any artist, more celebrated than Rembrandt’s eyes, Michelangelo’s 
chisel hand or Picasso’s penis. Van Gogh’s ear has taken on a life of its own, 
independent fromVan Gogh <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh>, 
and void of the meaning that once made it a saintly relic of modern art.

Van Gogh’s ear was sacralised as a cult object in the age of Ginsberg, Pollock 
and Kirk Douglas, when art really was a pursuit of expression, truth and 
revelation. In the 1950s artists truly saw themselves as following in Van 
Gogh’s dangerous footsteps.Mark Rothko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/may/13/tate-modern-rothko-black-on-maroon-restored>
 pursued his inner demons in vibrating colours of anxiety. He would later, like 
Van Gogh, take his own life. Francis Bacon too sought out the visceral place 
where paint meets pain, and portrayed Van Gogh as his hero in hisStudy for a 
Portrait of Van Gogh IV 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/bacon-study-for-a-portrait-of-van-gogh-iv-t00226>
 (1957).

Today art is about money, not self-expression. When people talk about art it’s 
the glamour of art fairs and celebrity artists and the eye-watering prices of 
art – including the art of Van Gogh – that seem to fascinate us.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgCa70trIj8g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgCa70trIj8g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgCa70trIj8g&media=>
 Allen Ginsberg declaims his poem Death to Van Gogh’s Ear! 
What can Van Gogh’s ear mean in our age that mocks expressionism and sincerity 
in art, and celebrates artists as commercial and social successes rather than 
inward-looking martyrs to creativity?

It surely means something, for it is rarely out of the news. Earlier this year 
Van Gogh’s ear made global headlines after a researcher found proof that – 
contrary to some suggestions – hecut off his entire left ear in Arles on 23 
December 1888, not just the lobe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jul/12/vincent-van-gogh-truth-about-ear-exhibition-on-verge-of-insanity-amsterdam>
. Further headlines followed when it was claimed he gave the severed ear not to 
a prostitute (as often said) but a maid.

And now the art historian Martin Bailey is arguing 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/31/van-gogh-chopped-off-his-own-ear-after-fearing-his-newly-engaged/>
 that Van Gogh had just got the news that his brother Theo, who financially 
supported him, was to marry: in despair that he might lose Theo’s help and no 
longer be able to work, he hacked off his ear.

It is a plausible suggestion that does not really disprove any other 
interpretation – such as his worsening relationship with his friend Gauguin – 
or indeed explain why Van Gogh thought this was the right thing to do under the 
circumstances. Rather it adds to the psychological pressures that led to his 
emotional collapse and self-harm. One could even argue that he just didn’t like 
Christmas.

Van Gogh’s ear has become Warholian. What started as a symbol of artistic 
suffering is just art historical clickbait

It does not matter, for Van Gogh’s ear has become an empty talking point of 
contemporary culture. It generates endless headlines and jokes without meaning 
anything to anyone. This is not the 1950s. Artists are not existential heroes 
and poets no longer howl. Instead, Van Gogh’s ear has become Warholian. It is 
famous for being famous. We don’t feel moved when we hear another theory about 
it. We just feel briefly curious. What started as a symbol of the suffering of 
the artist is now just a bit of art historical clickbait.

Throw ‘em Van Gogh’s ear and see them swarm … And yet the poem in which 
Ginsberg foresees our kitsch cult of a painter’s ear is in reality a dream of 
the artist and the poet as a legislator of the world. Ginsberg imagines a 
republic of artistic vision, with Edgar Allan Poe as secretary of imagination, 
Ezra Pound as secretary of economics and “Van Gogh’s ear on the currency 
<http://www.chickensinliterature.com/post/59407594876/death-to-van-goghs-ear-by-allen-ginsberg>
”.

Everyone needs to believe in something. In the middle ages people revered the 
bones of saints. Van Gogh’s ear has become devalued just as saints’ fingers and 
toes were by the trade in relics. Yet it is still a grisly reminder that art 
should be more than the calculated pursuit of money and success. Today art is 
money andDamien Hirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/30/damien-hirst-what-have-i-done-ive-created-a-monster>
 sits in his luxury basement with both his ears. One day, though, our values 
may change. One day art may once again be a quest for truth and beauty, not 
wealth, and Van Gogh’s ear will be honoured as currency.
 