
Heart and Capital owner Global Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> has reported pre-tax losses of 
£27.7m for the year to the end of March thanks to a substantial payment to 
shareholders, while underlying profits grew by 12.5% to £56.6m.

Global Radio reported a 5.2% year-on-year increase in total revenues to 
£209.4m.

Ad revenues rose by a healthy 6.57% year on year to £193.1m, ahead of the 
growth across the radio market of 5.9%.

Adjusted earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation, a key 
underlying metric of profitability, rose by 12.5% from £50.3m to £56.6m.

The company reported a pre-tax loss of £27.7m, down from £32.7m the previous 
year, thanks to a £63.2m charge classified as "interest payable and similar 
charges".

According to a note in Global's financial report, which was made available at 
Companies House on Tuesday, a charge of £59.6m has been classified as "other 
loans".

This represents a coupon payment, effectively a dividend, to the controlling 
shareholders of the Jersey-based company that is the ultimate parent of Global 
Radio's operation.

A spokesman for Global Radio declined to comment on the payment.

The UK's largest commercial radio company's highest-paid director, understood 
to be founder and bossAshley Tabor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ashley-tabor>, received total remuneration 
of £2m.

Total director remuneration, which includes chief executive Stephen Miron, 
fell from £5.6m to £4.3m.

This was driven by a reduction in the remuneration of the highest-paid 
director, assumed to be Tabor, who received £3.3m in 2010/11.

Global Radio also reduced its bank debt by 15%, from £92m to £80m, as at 31 
March.

Total staff costs rose from £50.6m to £55.8m, while the average number of 
employees dipped slightly from 1,069 to 1,059.

Global is facing an investigation from regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/03/hunt-investigation-global-radio-gmg?INTCMP=SRCH>
 into its £70m acquisition of GMG Radio on grounds of potential competition and 
plurality issues.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 