
The Global Radio founder, Ashley Tabor, has called on the BBC to "put their 
money where their mouth is" and invest in the digital audio broadcasting (DAB) 
network to pave the way fordigital switchover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/08/ed-vaizey-digital-radio>.

Tabor said his company, which owns Heart, Classic FM, Capital and LBC, would 
not invest in new digital services until the DAB signal was sufficiently strong 
and widespread to match that currently provided by FM.

He said the cost of the rollout of DAB and the strengthening of the signal in 
areas which can already receive it – estimated at between £150m and £200m – was 
the sole responsibility of theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

The corporation has previously indicated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/03/bbc-asian-network-under-threat> 
that the full DAB rollout – it is currently adding extra transmitters to its 
DAB network totake it to about 90% of the population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/23/bbc-digital-radio-transmitters> 
– would be subject to a suitable licence fee settlement.

"Global has stepped up and said we are absolutely doing it, we have great new 
ideas of things we could do on digital but we are not going to do it until our 
listeners can hear it in decent quality and that is something that we have been 
clear from the start the Beeb will need to do," said Tabor, the Global Group 
founder and chief executive.

"They have always said yes [and] now is the time to do it. A lot of pressure 
is building on them to now actually put their money where their mouth is. It's 
not actually a lot of money because it's amortised over 10-12 years. I think it 
will happen."

Tabor was responding to yesterday's report by the Consumer Expert Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/sep/14/digital-radio-switchover> that 
warned that the target digital radio switchover date of 2015 was "far too 
early".

It said DAB rollout was "not just a matter of DAB matching FM; this would only 
give a partial picture. Mobile and indoor reception must be addressed to ensure 
a good DAB signal can be received in vehicles and within a building, not just 
on the windowsill."

Tabor, whose national classical music station Classic FM was given a licence 
roll over in the Digital Economy Act in return for its commitment to DAB, said 
he was "incredibly excited" by digital.

"The next step is the build-out of all the multiplexes," he said. "By 
build-out I don't just mean extending coverage further but deepening the 
quality of coverage in the areas that are covered so that you don't fly around 
a corner in London and lose the signal momentarily. This is now a BBC matter 
100% in terms of funding it."

Tabor said Global's advertising revenues had been hit hard by the cut in the 
government's ad spend through the Central Office of Information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/24/coalition-freezes-advertising-budget>
.

"It's been pretty brutal to be honest with you and it's going to make it a 
tough year," said Tabor. "Outside of the COI I'd say we had been trundling 
along nicely. The COI change has been larger than expected, very abrupt. It's 
been pretty severe, more than 50%.

"It [Global's advertising revenue] is going in the right direction despite the 
COI, but only marginally because of the COI."

Before the recent cuts, the COI accounted for around 8% of ad revenue at the 
group. Taking the COI out of the equation, underlying growth at the group this 
year is running at between 5% and 6%.

Tabor also said he was looking at two more mergers among stations in the 
group's national Heart network,recently reduced from 33 stations to 15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/21/global-radio-restructure>. He 
said the group was in negotiation with media regulator Ofcom, which will look 
at them on a case-by-case basis.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 