
Ashley Tabor's Global Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> 
has lost its appeal against a Competition Commission ruling ordering a 
wholesale sell-off of stations following its £70m takeover of GMG Radio.

Global Radio took its case to the Competition Appeal Tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/14/global-radio-appeals-sell-off-gmg>
 after regulators ruled it must sell stations in seven areas of the UK to 
appease competition concerns over the GMG purchase, including Real and Smooth 
Radio.

The CAT announced on Friday that it had dismissed the appeal, lodged by Global 
after the Competition Commission ruling in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/may/21/global-radio-ordered-sell-seven-stations?INTCMP=SRCH&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.

Global Radio said that it was disappointed at the CAT's decision.

A Global spokesperson said: "Obviously this is a disappointing outcome. We 
share the concerns of many within our industry, who believe the basis on which 
the Competition Commission formed their decision to be outdated."

Global Radio added that it would now consider the decision further.

The appeal defeat is a big blow for Global after it had originally offered to 
sell just three stations in response to the commission's provisional findings.

The only areas in which the GMG deal was cleared were in London and the West 
Midlands.

In all of the other areas affected – East Midlands, Cardiff, North Wales, 
Greater Manchester and the north-west, the north-east, central Scotland, South 
Yorkshire and West Yorkshire – the commission ruled that Global had to sell 
either a Real or Smooth station, or one of its own services, such as Heart or 
Capital.

The forced sell-off means Global may be lucky to recoup half of the £70m-plus 
it cost to buy GMG Radio.

Global bought the stations in June last year in an 11th-hour bidding war with 
arch-rivalBauer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer>, which recently 
bought Planet Rock and Absolute Radio.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 