
Heart and Capital owner Global Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> saw losses widen to almost £30m 
for the year to the end of March, thanks to a substantial payment to 
shareholders, while operating profits grew by a healthy 11% to £37m.

The UK's largest commercial radio operator reported a 4.8% year-on-year rise 
in revenues from £209.4m to £219.5m.

The company said this was an "excellent performance" against the wider 
commercial radio industry, which it says grew revenues by just 1.4%.

Operating profits rose by 11.4% year on year from £33.3m to £37.1m.

Overall, Ashley Tabor's radio business reported a pre-tax loss of £29.2m, up 
on the £27.7m reported in the previous year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/07/global-radio-losses>, thanks to 
a £67.7m charge classified as "interest payable and similar charges" related to 
loans.

According to a note in Global's financial report, a charge of £64.8m has been 
classified as "other loans".

 This represents a coupon payment, effectively a dividend, to the controlling 
shareholders of the Jersey-based company, Global Radio Group Limited, that is 
the ultimate parent of Global Radio's operation.

The company's highest paid director, who is unnamed in the filing but as in 
previous financial results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/07/global-radio-losses> is 
understood to be founder and boss Tabor, received a total remuneration of 
£2.04m.

Total director remuneration, which includes chief executive Stephen Miron, 
dropped slightly year on year from £4.3m to £4.2m.

The financial filing also reveals that Smooth and Real owner GMG Radio, which 
has been kept separate from Global Radiosince being acquired in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/25/gmg-radio-sold-global-50m>, was 
bought for £69m.

The company has never previously confirmed the accuracy of the £70m 
acquisition figurethat has been widely reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/25/gmg-radio-sold-global-50m>.

Global Radio's financial filing discloses that GMG Radio made £51.7m in 
revenues and a £1.8m pre-tax loss in the year to the end of March.

Global lists the GMG's net assets to be worth £66.4m.

Global Radio paid a hefty price to buy the loss-making operation – which was 
owned by Guardian Media Group, parent company of the publisher of the Guardian 
and Observer newspapers – and has just given up a fight against regulators to 
halt theforced sell-off of parts of GMG Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/13/global-radio-backs-down-competition-commission-ruling-gmg-radio>
 to satisfy competition concerns.

The company prefers to look at profitability by stripping out a wide array of 
charges, such as redundancy payments and "vacant property provisions", and to 
focus on adjusted earnings before interest, depreciation and amortisation.

Adjusted ebitda rose 8.3% year on year from £56.6m to £61.3m.

Global said it has now managed four consecutive years of profit growth 
"achieved against a background of continuing uncertainty in the major economies 
around the world as to when a sustained recovery will take place."

 Staff costs rose from £55.8m to £57m as numbers grew from 1,059 to 1,111.

 The company also paid £2.08m to the Radio Centre, the trade body that lobbies 
for the commercial radio industry, as a levy based on the volume of ad revenue 
Global makes.

Global Radio also substantially reduced its bank debt from £80m to £10m as of 
31 March.

The company reported that it refinanced a new three-year £80m banking facility 
on 26 April last year. The agreement allows for an extension to five years.

In June last year, Global repaid £50m of loans "from a connected party".

A Global Radio spokesman declined to comment on the latest financial report.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 