
The chief executive of Guardian Media Group has called on the BBC to open up 
its content to commercial rivals and criticised itsrecent expansion in Australia
 
<http://www.marketingmag.com.au/news/bbc-global-news-ramps-up-australian-team-and-native-offerings-ahead-of-g20-summit-in-brisbane-57166/#.VEkpdUj6rW4>
.

Andrew Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-miller> said the BBC 
should share its video feeds of breaking news stories and vast archive of 
programmes to create a “digital public space”.

Miller said the BBC’s launch of new services in Australia, including a 
dedicated news service onBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.com, went 
“beyond its public service remit”.

He said the BBC’s move into Australia, where the Guardian launched a local 
online edition <https://www.theguardian.com/au> last year, threatened to 
distort the market and had no benefit for UK licence fee payers.

Miller said in a speech on Thursday that he did not want to straitjacket the 
BBC, which he described as a “truly dominant global player” and an “enormous 
national asset”, or “give it a kicking”.

But he said the challenge for a licence fee-funded body that “doesn’t have to 
worry about its funding” was to “constructively support those British news 
brands that do”.

He said the expansion into Australia, which BBC executives have described as a 
“priority market”, was the latest in a series of “worrying commercial sorties”, 
including the ill-fated purchase of Lonely Planet.

“Australia is already a diverse and highly competitive market,” Miller said in 
a Polis public lecture at the London School of Economics.

“As such, the BBC’s expansion into Australia goes beyond its public service 
remit. More than that, it does not benefit UK licence fee payers or meet the 
requirement of the BBC to provide news in parts of the world where there are 
limited alternatives.

“It threatens a distortion that is not in the interests of audiences or other 
UK news providers.”

Miller said the BBC had to do more in partnership with the commercial sector, 
from external links on its website, where he said it had missed its targets, to 
sharing video content.

“What if UK commercial content providers, such as the Guardian, Mail Online, 
the Telegraph or the Times were able to access the raw news feeds coming in 
from court cases, royal weddings, key select committee hearings and other 
global breaking news stories?

“The BBC should also think about how content providers can tap into its 
unrivalled back catalogue, to create new content that the BBC doesn’t have the 
time, inclination or expertise to create.

“It is this new ‘digital public space’ for publicly-owned content that has 
often been a fiction. A new ‘digital public space’ that I hope the director 
general [Tony Hall] will now turn into fact.”

Hall has talked about the importance of the BBC partnering with other 
organisations such as its tie-up with the Arts Council, the Space digital arts 
initiative. New BBC Trust chair Rona Fairhead also flagged up the importance of 
partnerships whenshe appeared before MPs earlier this week. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/21/bbc-trust-chair-bbc3-tv-closure-rona-fairhead>

But opening up its archive has proved more problematic. The BBC Trust 
criticised management last year after it sold just 21 readings from its 
thousands of hours of archive children’s radio programmes, despite the sale 
being deemed a “priority” by the trust two years earlier.

A BBC spokesperson said: “The BBC’s commercial operations overseas are not 
funded by the licence fee and we are happy to compete on an equal footing with 
all other news providers. Independent research shows that the BBC’s global 
activities bring an economic return to the wider UK. The BBC does not stop 
other news providers being successful, and we already provide footage of events 
to news providers in the UK on a case by case basis.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 