
I have to sympathise with someone who doesn't want to drive an atheist bus, 
like theChristian bus driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/16/atheism-christian-advertisements-buses>
 who made the news today. I have enough trouble driving a car without hitting 
stationary objects, so the thought of driving any kind of bus makes my palms 
sweat. If I had to do it, I would definitely want God on my side, preferably 
willing to take the wheel in an emergency. Posters on the bus likely to put him 
in a bad mood would be a terrible idea.

Ron Heather's objection, however, is a principled one, concerned more with 
religious offence than road safety. He turns up for work, sees that he's 
expected to drive around in a big red denial of the existence of God, and 
refuses.

We all have things that we find offensive, and wouldn't want to be confronted 
with them in the course of our daily work. I'd hate to come downstairs of a 
morning to find Jeremy Clarkson's face stuck all over my laptop.

But the atheist bus poster still seems an odd thing to make such a fuss about. 
For a start it doesn't say anything nasty about God, just that he probably 
doesn't exist. Many people have said much ruder things about him, and he always 
seems to take it pretty well.

It also happens to be a statement of the basic religious beliefs of a lot of 
British people. Considering the number of religious groups who advertise on 
public transport, if all drivers took Heather's stance, the result would be 
pretty chaotic. No Christians, Muslims or other believers could drive an 
atheist bus. And if a bus had a poster with a verse form the Bible about Jesus 
dying for our sins, no atheist or Muslim could drive it. If it advertised the 
Qu'ran â€“ you get the picture.

And what would happen with a bus that had an ad for the Qu'ran on the inside 
and for Jesus on the back? It could only be driven by someone who believes all 
religions lead to God.

In fact, "There's probably no God" is more a statement of agnosticism than 
atheism, so a really principled hardline atheist ought to refuse to drive the 
so-called atheist bus too.

Most of us, I think it's fair to say, don't want a religiously segregated 
public transport system. Perhaps there's enough room on the buses for all 
religions to have their say without anyone walking out.

In fact, speaking as one myself, I think it shows quite a cheek for Christians 
to make a fuss about this. We've spent decades covering public places with 
verses from the Bible, and posters promising that if you let Jesus into your 
life everything will be all right for ever.

Then as soon as the opposition get the money together to do the same thing 
we're outraged, and think that God is as cross as we are.

Personally, I think that if God is anything like as big and clever as we claim 
he is, he can probably take it.
 