

Heavenly towers? ... Gaudi's Sagrada Familia and the new Aguas de Barcelona 
tower by French architect Jean Nouvel on the left. Photograph: Cesar Rangel/AFP

You can take your Pritzker Prizes, your Stirlings, even your life peerages; 
there's a new, elite architects' club on the scene. Well, not that new, 
actually, but very, very exclusive. Forget about even applying unless you've 
performed a few miracles, paid your dues to the Catholic church, led a life of 
heroic virtue and stopped living. Yes, I'm talking aboutsainthood 
<http://www.catholic.org/saints/faq.php#choose>, a status one of the world's 
best-loved architects, Antoni Gaudí, is apparently set to achieve pretty soon. 
Eat your heart out, Richard Rogers.

Pope Benedict XVI is looking over the paperwork, according to recent reports 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/features/article2481789.ece>, after 
sustained campaigning by theAssociation for the Beatification of Antoni Gaudí 
<http://www.Gaudíclub.com/ingles/i_links/i_beat.asp>. The man dubbed "God's 
architect" probably has the heroic virtue part covered, at least, judging by at 
the curvaceous wonders he left in Barcelona, including thestupendous Sagrada 
Familia <http://www.sagradafamilia.org/eng/index.htm>. His supporters claim the 
half-completed building has inspired legions of unbelievers, and his sensuous, 
organic structures were inspired by nature, and thus a tribute to God's work - 
though Richard Dawkins might have something to say about that.

Furthermore, Gaudí lived a quiet, frugal, pious life, although his dedication 
to getting the Sagrada Familia built conveniently combined piety and good old 
egotism. Selfless Christian or shameless self-promoter? The fact that his maker 
smote him down with a tram in 1926 should probably not be regarded as a 
celestial judgment on the matter. Nor should today's reports that, if 
Barcelona's town planners have their way,Gaudí's soaring church will soon be 
undermined by a high-speed rail link 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/art/news/story/0,,2065589,00.html> between Madrid 
and Barcelona.

There's certainly room for a patron saint of architects. Current claimants to 
the title include "doubting" Thomas the Apostle (whose connection to 
architecture is a mystery) and Barbara (who was killed by her father for adding 
a new window to the tower he'd locked her up in, and is surely, therefore, 
patron saint of home improvement).

But why stop at Gaudí? Pope John Paul II made sweeping changes to the way 
saints are chosen. If Benedict loosened the guidelines a little more 
(especially that tricky "has to be Catholic" bit), might there be other artists 
or architects worthy of beatification? St Christopher (Wren)? St Frank? St 
Zaha? St Norman?
 