
Australia is home to a wide range of religions and cultures, and many of their 
picturesque, historic buildings offer free accommodation as a reflective 
retreat for guests.


You don’t have to follow a certain religion, or even any religion at all, to 
appreciate these places and the unique way of life of those who inhabit them. 
These places can give a temporary escape from the pressures of daily life, as 
well as the opportunity to be exposed to different religious practices. If 
that’s not for you, then they are still the perfect places to just enjoy some 
peace and quiet.

Jamberoo Abbey, Jamberoo, New South Wales

Accommodation at the Jamberoo Abbey <http://www.jamberooabbey.org.au> is in 
small, isolated cottages situated among the sparse NSW countryside. The abbey 
offers spiritual guidance and prayers daily, but guests aren’t obliged to take 
part and are just as welcome to explore the nearby rainforest. Silence is 
strongly encouraged throughout the buildings and all meals are provided. 
There’s room for around 30 guests at the abbey, and while there is no set 
charge, donations are requested to cover the costs. This is a spot for those 
seeking some private time for reflection and discovery in a tranquil, isolated 
location. For some more exhilarating activities before or afterwards, the 
Jamberoo Action Park is nearby, featuring water slides and a range of other 
rides. There’s also a national park to traverse and a trek along the canyon 
cliff to keep you occupied. Jamberoo is just over 10km inland from the east 
coast and 120km from Sydney. DS


Amitabha Buddhist Retreat Centre, Nanango, Queensland 

Located in south-east Queensland, this Buddhist centre 
<http://www.abrc.org.au/> boasts a backdrop of rolling hills and blue skies. 
Opened in 2007, it’s a relatively new religious getaway. The centre puts on 
weekend retreats with lectures and discussions on Buddhist practices and 
training in meditation. The accommodation and activities are free of charge, 
and meals are available. It’s not the place for those looking for an adventure 
in solitude, it’s for those wanting a serious insight into the practices behind 
the religion through more structured activities, in a serene environment. It’s 
in Nanango, the fourth oldest town in the state, and is the perfect stopover 
spot for those on their way up to Rockhampton, or heading down the coast to 
Sydney or Melbourne. DS

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftravelling-on-a-budget-staying-in-religious-accommodation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433374955824%2F3939028220_366eb8324b_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Godly%20getaways%3A%20staying%20for%20free%20in%20religious%20accommodation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftravelling-on-a-budget-staying-in-religious-accommodation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Godly%20getaways%3A%20staying%20for%20free%20in%20religious%20accommodation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftravelling-on-a-budget-staying-in-religious-accommodation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433374955824%2F3939028220_366eb8324b_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Morning mist in Nanango, where the Buddhist centre accepts guests. Photograph: 
Jan Smith/flickr 
The Hermitage, Stroud, New South Wales

Operated by Anglican Franciscan brothers, the Hermitage 
<http://www.franciscan.org.au/the-hermitage-stroud> offers a more relaxed, 
hands-off retreat of up to a week for guests of all beliefs. It’s only 3km out 
of Stroud, which is an hour or so from Newcastle. There are daily prayer 
services where all guests are welcome, but none are compulsory.

 There’s also spiritual guidance on offer, but you can just as readily relax 
by yourself with a good book from the centre’s large library. There are four 
single rooms with shared facilities and meals are served along with the 
long-term inhabitants. The Hermitage doesn’t have a set fee for their 
accommodation, but they do request donations when possible. The historic Stroud 
monastery nearby also offers accommodation at a cost of $45 per person for 
groups of 10 or under.DS


New Norcia, Western Australia

Around two hours north of Perth is the unusual township of New Norcia. It’s 
like stumbling across a little piece of Spain in the farmlands of Western 
Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftravelling-on-a-budget-staying-in-religious-accommodation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433375460358%2F14447029378_ea54ebc7c7_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Godly%20getaways%3A%20staying%20for%20free%20in%20religious%20accommodation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftravelling-on-a-budget-staying-in-religious-accommodation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Godly%20getaways%3A%20staying%20for%20free%20in%20religious%20accommodation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Ftravelling-on-a-budget-staying-in-religious-accommodation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433375460358%2F14447029378_ea54ebc7c7_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Monks still work the farmland at New Norcia in Western Australia. Photograph: 
Chris Fithall/flickr 
Founded in 1847, New Norcia <http://www.newnorcia.wa.edu.au/> is Australia’s 
only monastery town. It’s a fascinating place to visit – the monks operate a 
bakery and chocolate shop, and make olive oil, wine, nutcake and biscotti.

The monastery itself follows St Benedict’s rule of hospitality for guests – 
which is that you can stay for free (although there is a suggested donation of 
$80 a night if you are flush, less if you are struggling.)

When I stayed at the monastery a few years back, I had meals in the dining 
room, but women weren’t allowed to eat with the monks. There were many guests 
at the time of my visit who were on silent retreat and had stickers on their 
jumpers advising people that they were being silent, and not to talk to them. 
(I learned this the hard way – after several excruciating one-sided 
conversations).

Guests are encouraged to fall in with the monks and attend daily prayer, with 
eight sessions on per day.

I also took a tour of the town, which ended with sampling some delicious 
chocolate panforte made by the monks. BD


The Convent, Glen Innes, New South Wales

Though no longer an active convent 
<https://www.gleninnestourism.com/business/the-convent-glen-innes/>, this 
cavernous redbrick complex, located just off the main road into Glen Innes in 
NSW’s New England region, retains the atmosphere of one. It’s more imposing 
than welcoming.


However, once you’ve tracked down Ralph, the manager, who gives you the pick 
of the rooms, it starts to feel a lot cosier. Of course, silence is not 
enforced or even encouraged, but you might well be the only guests there, so 
it’s an inherently peaceful place – and cheap too, at $53 a night.


More a hostel than a hotel, there’s a communal kitchen and games room yet none 
of the dishevelled and dirty downsides of typical backpacker joints. There’s 
not a lot going on in town either but they’re both charming enough for one 
night and the convent’s double beds more than comfortable enough for a solid 
sleep. FM

 