
Documentary film-maker Alex Gibney has written a comment piece for the Los 
Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-0412-gibney-scientology-20150412-story.html#page=1>
 criticising Scientology’s tax-exempt status.

Gibney, who recently made the controversial HBO documentary Going Clear: 
Scientology <https://www.theguardian.com/world/scientology> and the Prison of 
Belief, has called for the organisation’s definition as a religion to be 
revoked, so that it becomes liable for taxation.

Sundance 2015 review: Going Clear – Scientology film preaches to converted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/26/sundance-2015-review-going-clear-scientology-documentary-alex-gibney>
While he does believe that Scientology can be defined as a religion, he claims 
it fails to act in the way that a religion should, in order to be exempt from 
paying taxes. One of his key arguments concerns “private interests”, as a 
religion should not in any way serve the needs of just one individual.

“Regarding ‘private interests’, it seems clear that Scientology is ruled by 
only one man, David Miscavige,” he writes. “Further, powerful celebrities 
within the church, particularlyTom Cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tomcruise>, receive private benefits through 
the exploitation of low-wage labour (clergy members belonging to the Sea 
Organisation make roughly 40 cents an hour) and other use of church assets for 
his personal gain.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Going Clear 
Gibney also talks of the many illegal activities that the church has been 
accused of, again threatening its status as a religion with the US government.

“Numerous lawsuits, my film, other media accounts and an abandoned FBI 
investigation have turned up allegations of false imprisonment, human 
trafficking, wiretaps, assault, harassment and invasion of privacy,” he writes. 
“And the church doctrine of ‘disconnection’, in which members are forced to 
‘disconnect’ from anyone critical of the church, seems cruelly at odds with any 
reasonable definition of ‘life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness’.”

Since making Going Clear, Gibney has found himself targeted by the church, 
with Scientologists highly critical of the film, Gibney himself and those 
featured in it. “The ex-Scientologists who testify in Going Clear have been on 
the receiving end of surveillance and a smear campaign on the Scientology 
website Freedommag.org,” he writes. “In one of the attack videos, titled 
Crocodile Liar, a bull’s-eye frames a picture of Sara Goldberg, a grandmother 
who left the church in 2013. Rather than engage in informed debate, the videos 
accuse the critical ex-members of various misdeeds, including theft and 
perjury, without mentioning that some appear to have been committed on behalf 
of the church.”

The church responded to the film, describing it as full of “bald faced lies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/03/church-of-scientology-attacks-film-critics-going-clear-documentary>
” before its release, but has yet to respond to Gibney’s latest piece. Last 
week sawJohn Travolta defend Scientology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/08/john-travolta-defends-scientology-after-controversial-alex-gibney-documentary>
, saying he had no plans towatch the documentary 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/john-travolta-refuses-to-watch-new-scientology-documentary-going-clear-says-the-religion-is-beautiful-10161284.html>
, which seemed totally at variance with his own experiences of the church.

“I haven’t experienced anything that the hearsay has [claimed], so why would I 
communicate something that wasn’t true for me?” he said. “It wouldn’t make 
sense, nor would it for Tom [Cruise], I imagine.”
 