
Killing Jesus: Bill O'Reilly's film is touted as history. But facts aren't 
sacred to him | Brook Wilensky-Lanford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/29/killing-jesus-bill-oreillys-film-is-touted-as-history-but-facts-arent-sacred-to-him>
Using controversy to increase ratings is an age-old ploy. Remember when 
Roseanne Barrkissed a woman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cXOVZzDaRcY>? Or 
what about when South Park aired that episode that was an extended joke about
Tom Cruise not coming out of the closet 
<http://southpark.cc.com/clips/155090/tom-cruise-wont-come-out-of-the-closet>? 

Well, two new specials, airing this Sunday in the same time slot (8pm ET), 
have found themselves square in the middle of controversy – with different 
results. They areGoing Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief 
<http://www.hbo.com/documentaries/going-clear#/>, HBO’s Alex Gibney-helmed 
documentary about the embattled church, andKilling Jesus 
<http://killingjesus.nationalgeographic.com/?gclid=CL6m9ufTzcQCFQKJ2wodGLMATw>, 
NatGeo’s new dramatization of, you guessed it, the death of Jesus.

The Church of Scientology has attacked Going Clear since it premiered to 
protests at the Sundance Film Festival in January. The church, notoriously 
litigious, evencreated a Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/FreedomEthics?original_referer=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ibtimes.com%2Fdid-scientology-threaten-going-clear-director-alex-gibney-twitter-1859436&tw_i=580818244463816704&tw_p=tweetembed>
 to discredit the movie. HBO claimed that it had 160 lawyers vet the movie to 
make sure it couldn’t be sued over allegations that include torturing church 
members who have fallen out of favor, making members do menial labor for little 
to no money and harassing high-ranking members after they leave.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Going Clear 
The movie is based on the Lawrence Wright book of the same title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/30/going-clear-lawrence-wright-review>
, so the revelations are nothing new, but the documentary is using controversy 
for the right reason. If attacks by the Church of Scientology make people 
interested in what the film might expose, that is a powerful tool. (Naturally, 
the public will mostly be interested in what it has to say about Cruise and his 
marriages, but hey, who isn’t obsessed with celebrity culture?)

Killing Jesus, on the other hand, has fallen into the trap of a new kind of 
cable sensationalism that uses insane premises to lure viewers … and then 
doesn’t produce the goods. This dramatization is based on the book byBill 
O’Reilly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/26/bill-oreilly-former-colleagues-la-riots-bombardment>
 and Martin Dugard, the third in their series of “Killing” titles. NatGeo, 
which is co-owned by Fox and National Geographic, also dramatized Killing 
Kennedy and Killing Lincoln, and they are the channel’s highest-rated telecasts 
ever, both drawing inabout 3.4 million viewers 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/tv-ratings-killing-kennedy-edges-655049>
.

These specials usually put O’Reilly’s patented conservative slant on 
retellings of history, something that wouldn’t really sit well with Christians. 
The book fell into this trap, presentingsalacious detail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/18/killing-jesus-bill-oreilly-review>
 about Christ’s death and a Tea Party version of the son of God. Some claimedit 
was inaccurate 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/09/04/bill_oreillys_killing_jesus_is_fiction_fact_checking_the_fox_news_anchors_history_of_jesuss_death/>
 (a recent chargeagainst some of O’Reilly’s reporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/02/fox-news-bill-o-reilly-reports>, 
too). And the criticism isn’t only coming from the left. The movie was not 
without controversy among some conservative Christians for another reason: the 
man cast to play Jesus, Haaz Sleiman,was raised Muslim 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/killing-jesus-muslimraised-actor-haaz-sleiman-defends-role-as-jesus-in-ridley-scott-miniseries-9964608.html>
.

Killing Jesus is a natural extension of the franchise, especially given that 
the History Channel’s miniseries The Bible pulled in awhopping 11.7 million 
viewers 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/tv-ratings-historys-bible-pulls-432045>
 when it aired two years ago and touched off a spate of religious-tinged 
programming. But does showing Jesus’s death live up to more than just the good 
title that NatGeo has to promote?

It doesn’t seem like it. The New York Times called the movie 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/27/arts/television/review-killing-jesus-biblical-tale-retold-softer-on-its-politics.html?_r=0>
 “unrelentingly drab”.Variety said it 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/reviews/tv-review-killing-jesus-1201457048/> “must 
recover from a truly terrible opening”. The Boston Globe, with the highest 
level of vitriol,said: 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/arts/television/2015/03/26/killing-jesus-lackluster-telling-but-with-wigs/2rdbSVBLRYnmMwibGtFsKJ/story.html>
 “Killing Jesus is a shallow telling of the Jesus story, with no more 
distinction than you might find in the generic reenactments of some historical 
documentary.”

Many critics did note that the politics of Killing Jesus are abnormally even 
handed. At least there’s that.

Even the idea of Killing Jesus reminds me not of The Bible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/25/history-channel-the-bible-series-is-reality-tv>
 or NBC’s upcoming AD, a dramatization of the lives of early Christians, but of 
Discovery’s Eaten Alive. Yes, this summer the nature-focused channel promised 
that a giant anaconda would eat a man wearing a protective suit. The reptile
only attached to his head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/08/aten-alive-anaconda-snake-paul-rosolie>
, robbing us of the spectacle we were promised.

And then there’s Lifetime, which has made a programming strategy out of this 
bait and switch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/02/lifetime-clickbait-cable-tv-programming>
, offering ripped-from-the-headlines celebrity biopics (Whitney Houston, 
Aaliyah, Britney Murphy, the Saved by the Bell story) that are so horrible 
they’re almost insulting. Killing Jesus promises to let people in on the truth 
of the Christian savior’s demise, but only offers them up a staid recitation of 
what is taught in Sunday school.

Killing Jesus may be successful because of the vast, underserved Christian 
community in the US, or because O’Reilly commands a legion of devoted fans. But 
it’s not far from this trend of promising viewers something salacious and then 
failing to deliver.

Killing Jesus barely even offers up quality entertainment. Going Clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/going-clear>, on the other hand, piles on the 
horror stories about Scientology. Controversy may be one of the oldest ways to 
drum up attention, but in an increasingly cluttered television landscape there 
is a good way to use it and a bad way to use it.

Sadly, the bad way seems to be working. We’ll just have to wait and see who 
O’Reilly wants to kill next.
 