
American Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle>
 and12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156376/12-years-a-slave> emerged as the 
early frontrunners for awards season, as both films picked up seven nominations 
at the 71st annual Golden Globes. David O Russell's conman caper dominated the 
Globes' comedy-or-musical section, while Steve McQueen's slavery saga held sway 
in the neighbouring drama category. The race towards Oscar night now looks set 
to pit the disreputable crime romp against the weighty expose of 
institutionalised American evil.

Based on Solomon Northup's 1853 memoir, 12 Years a Slave stars the British 
actorChiwetel Ejiofor <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chiwetel-ejiofor> as 
a free man from New York state, sold into bondage in Louisiana. Its nominations 
include best director, best dramatic actor and the crowning best film drama.

American Hustle, meanwhile, stars Christian Bale and Amy Adams as a pair of 
con artists who find themselves press-ganged into helping with an FBI 
operation. It was shortlisted for best comedy-or-musical, in addition to the 
best actor and actress prizes in the comedy-or-musical section. The two main 
contenders are only brought together in the directing category, where O Russell 
and McQueen are bracketed alongside Paul Greengrass (forCaptain Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154515/captain-phillips>), Alexander 
Payne (Nebraska <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155224/nebraska>) and 
Alfonso Cuarón (Gravity <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156058/gravity>
).

Announced at a dawn press conference in Beverly Hills, the Globe nominations 
spelled good news for British acting talent. In addition to Ejiofor and Bale, 
the race finds room for Idris Elba (nominated for his role inMandela: Long Walk 
to Freedom <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156450/mandela>), Kate 
Winslet (Labor Day <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156630/labor-day>), 
Emma Thompson (Saving Mr Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156373/saving-mr-banks>), Sally Hawkins 
(Blue Jasmine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155586/blue-jasmine>) and 
Judi Dench (Philomena <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156219/philomena>
).

In the immediate wake of the announcement, bookmakers established Cate 
Blanchett as the favourite to win the dramatic actress award for her acclaimed, 
anguished turn in Woody Allen's Blue Jasmine, with Greta Gerwig tipped to win 
the comedy-or-musical prize for her performance in Noah Baumbach'sFrances Ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148737/frances-ha>. Ejiofor is the 
runaway frontrunner for the best dramatic actor Globe, while 77-year-old Bruce 
Dern looks to have the edge in the neighbouring category thanks to his role as 
a desperate American dreamer in Payne's black-and-white Nebraska.

Elsewhere, several of the year's most critically acclaimed pictures were left 
to fight it out in the best foreign language section. The sidebar is dominated 
by the French romanceBlue Is the Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155325/blue-is-the-warmest-colour>, 
winner of the Palme d'Or award at the Cannes film festival, and the dark 
Italian satireThe Great Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154524/great-beauty>, which swept the 
European film awards last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/08/catherine-deneuve-lifetime-achievement-european-film-awards-berlin>
. Rounding out the section isThe Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154520> (Iran), The Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149718/hunt> (Denmark) and Hayao 
Miyazaki's animated epicThe Wind Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159053/wind-rises> (Japan).

Voted for by approximately 90 members of the Hollywood Foreign Press 
Association, the Golden Globes have a reputation for establishing a consensus 
ahead of the Oscar nominations which follow in January. The main winners at 
last year's event included the Ben Affleck thrillerArgo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148728/argo>, Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149491/lincoln> actor Daniel Day-Lewis 
and Jennifer Lawrence, star ofSilver Linings Playbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148764/silver-linings-playbook>. All 
went on to repeat their victories at the Academy awards.

The 71st Golden Globes will be announced on January 12 2013 in a ceremony 
presented, for the second year running, by US comedians Amy Poehler and Tina Fey
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/15/tina-fey-amy-poehler-host-2014-2015-golden-globes>
.

• Golden Globes 2014: full list of nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/12/golden-globes-2014-nominations-full-list>
• Golden Globes 2014 nominations - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2013/dec/12/golden-globes-2014-nominations-in-pictures>
 