
Some goals are considered great because of their meaning, others because of 
the high level of skill involved in their execution, and then others still 
because in a single moment they encapsulate and magnify their scorer’s very 
essence. With more than 300 goals to choose from, you might think that 
determining whichAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> goal best does this would 
be an arduous task. It isn’t.


Shearer is uncomplicated to the point of parody, his cursory analysis as a 
pundit proving painful for a new generation of demanding football observer who 
craves detail. To be fair, he’s improved in the past year, using the limited 
time he has on the Match of the Day sofa to pick out, more often than not, 
attacking traits that he himself took for granted. Perhaps he previously 
struggled to offer insight because he found the job of being a professional 
footballer such a simple one. He did what came naturally with the minimum of 
fuss.

Golden Goal: Raúl for Real Madrid v Ferencvaros (1995) | Jacob Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/15/golden-goal-raul-for-real-madrid-v-ferencvaros-1995>
Some players doubt themselves in front of goal, Shearer never gave himself the 
chance to. He wouldn’t think about crafting the perfect goal, just scoring a 
goal was enough to fill him up. In this obsession he was similar to another 
often criticised pundit, Michael Owen. If they went to a firing range they 
wouldn’t waste five shots missing the target in the hope that they could revel 
in the glory of a sixth and final lethal shot to the dummy’s head, they’d just 
put all six shots in the chest. Job done.

For Shearer, this usually meant taking a shot early and hitting it hard, 
increasing the chances of a goalkeeper not being set properly and allowing the 
rapid speed of the ball to do the rest. That’s not to say he couldn’t be 
inventive,his scooped finish from outside the box against Norwich for Blackburn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nW6nJPfnAPU> in the 1992-93 season was a 
sumptuous example of his rarely seen creative side. But even here, you get the 
impression that Shearer’s brain was just automatically computing the quickest 
route to goal when a defender and goalkeeper stood in his path.

In Shearer’s most prolific period, at Blackburn, the goals came in a torrent: 
112 in 144 games – and they got increasingly more violent. As Sir Alex Ferguson 
once said of the second of Shearer’s two goals for England against Poland in 
1996:“He hit it as if he meant to kill it.” <https://youtu.be/mx5Pn8F3Cyg?t=96> 
It was a common theme.

There was a bubble of pressure surrounding Shearer when he joined Blackburn 
for a British record fee of £3.6m in 1992. Shearer emphatically took a needle 
to it. A fiercely struck 25-yard looping strike over Crystal Palace’s 
goalkeeper Nigel Martyn <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mf2PGiv6egs> on his 
two-goal Blackburn debut made it clear that here was a player who was too 
strong, physically and mentally, to be weighed down by expectation. The nascent 
Premier League needed its most expensive player to succeed. He did more than 
that. He showcased the power-play for which British football was lauded,
hammering home crosses <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1qjTa65Y44I>, arrowing 
shots into the top corner <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Jrg2L2b9eM>, 
rippling the net from long range <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N4aXZZ08gTk> 
and even finishing off impossible-to-miss tap-insas if there were an element of 
doubt <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1qjTa65Y44I&t=4m23s>. And good luck if 
you stood in Shearer’s way. If his sharp elbows didn’t find a way past you,his 
thunderous shots would <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p9phlkdP7N0>. 

Shearer was a master of capitalising on the knockdown, too. He was lucky 
enough to play with some of the 90s’ most effective target men – and he tuned 
his antennae in to the signals being sent his way with regular success. “I 
always preferred playing up front with someone else,” Shearer tells me before 
taking part in aWalking Football match in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/07/walking-football-harry-kane-alan-shearer>
, wherehe doesn’t hold back <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7shFboVazQg&t=2m15s>
, even in this more sedate version of the game. “It was just a lot easier, 
whether that was with Chris Sutton or Mike Newell at Blackburn, or Les 
Ferdinand and Duncan Ferguson at Newcastle, or Teddy Sheringham with England, 
you’re not fighting two centre-halves all the time on your own. You get a 
little bit of help up there.”

Alan Shearer's statue | The Gallery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/mar/10/alan-shearers-statue-the-gallery>
This was particularly true at Blackburn, where Kenny Dalglish encouraged a 
more direct style of football than he ever did at Liverpool, coaching from the 
youth level up for diagonal balls to be played in to a target man, who could 
create an angle by opening up his body and diverting the ball downfor his 
strike partner to have a shot on goal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mf2PGiv6egs>. It was a tactic used to great 
effect during the title-winning season of 94-95, with Shearer scoring a 
staggering 34 league goals and Sutton weighing in with 15.

Shearer isn’t a huge man but he played as though he was. He stands 6ft tall 
but could get above much bigger defenders by timing his jump to perfection. He 
made every muscle work to his advantage and was as hard as nails. When he 
clattered into a defender it was usually he who got up first, wearing a wry 
smile that suggested he was already 1-0 up.

Shearer’s career was pockmarked by severe injuries. In December 1992 he 
snapped a cruciate knee ligament for Blackburn against Leeds but returned to 
embark on his most abundant five-year period. In 1997, he broke an ankle and 
snapped ligaments in a pre-season friendly for Newcastle at Goodison Park. He 
was never as prolific after this one, although to be so would have been absurd. 
Shearer admits that he had to recalibrate his approach after this second 
debilitating injury.

“By the time 2000-01 came I’d had three serious injuries, one left knee 
injury, one right knee injury and one on my ankle. I definitely had to change 
my game. I always tried to hit the ball early, though, so that didn’t change. I 
always thought you should hit it before the centre-half and goalkeeper can set 
themselves. But I certainly lost a half a yard of pace after the injuries and I 
became more of a target man. But you can still score goals as a target man 
providing you get into the box.”

Even in Shearer’s less bountiful “second career”, he still scored regularly 
enough … and brilliantly. The goals didn’t go in with the high-tempo drumbeat 
of his early years, but when they did go in, if anything,they were louder 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Owbw1VSJ-zg&t=0m12s>, more bombastic 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Owbw1VSJ-zg&t=2m51s>. Here was an ageing force 
fighting to be relevant – and making himself heard. In 2001-02 he scored 23 
goals, including a stupendous volley from the most acute of angles against 
Aston Villathat was a lesson in footballing mathematics for Peter Schmeichel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Owbw1VSJ-zg&t=1m59s>. A season later his 17 
league goals fired Newcastle into a three-way title race with Arsenal and 
Manchester United – the last the club were involved in. They finished third. 
Newcastle’s decline in the coming seasons would match that of Shearer’s.

But it was in this season that he scored his golden goal – the ultimate Alan 
Shearer strike <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Owbw1VSJ-zg&t=3m31s>. A pitiful 
match that was meandering towards a 1-0 win for a stubborn Everton team was 
given an electric jolt with six minutes left. It was a magnificent 
magnification of a Shearer goal. A diagonal ball lofted up by Laurent Robert to 
the target man, Shola Ameobi? Tick. A knockdown towards Shearer? Tick. A shot 
struck with the force of a biblical storm? Tick, tick, tickety, tick!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgolden-goal-alan-shearer-newcastle-everton-2002%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd05d69b70838e22c82284a356f7ca336bc749190%2F0_187_2686_1613%2F2686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Alan%20Shearer%20for%20Newcastle%20United%20v%20Everton%20(2002)%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgolden-goal-alan-shearer-newcastle-everton-2002%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Alan%20Shearer%20for%20Newcastle%20United%20v%20Everton%20%282002%29%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgolden-goal-alan-shearer-newcastle-everton-2002%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd05d69b70838e22c82284a356f7ca336bc749190%2F0_187_2686_1613%2F2686.jpg>
 Alan Shearer celebrates after levelling the game against Everton at 1-1. Craig 
Bellamy sealed the win for Newcastle in the dying minutes. Photograph: Lee 
Smith/Action Images 
“That volley was one in a hundred I think,” says Shearer. “Volleying is such a 
difficult technique, and it was coming out of the sky too, so to hit it 25 
yards into the top corner was something. But when I hit it I knew I’d caught it 
sweet and the keeper wasn’t stopping it.” No, he definitely wasn’t, Alan.

It’s a goal that should stand as a reminder of just how good Shearer was. One 
of the best English centre-forwards there has been. Let’s not forget that.
 