
Easter weekend doesn't offer quite the feast of programming that Christmas and 
New Year bring, but there are plenty of delicious little gems to keep you glued 
to the sofa this weekend as you gobble the chocolate haul. Get the kettle on, 
find the remote control, set the PVR for the inevitable clashes and hunker down.

Good Friday

Masterchef (BBC1, 7.30pm)

Yes, I know. It's on all the time in some form or another. But now we're 
through the rather dull (and madly scheduled) first rounds, things are 
definitely looking up. Also, all four semi-finalists this year are dauntingly 
good cooks. And Gregg seems to have toned down his off-putting CORRRR!s and 
stopped trying to "TAKE MY CLOTHES OFF AND DIVE INTO THAT PUDDING" at every 
opportunity.

Ashes to Ashes (BBC1, 9pm)

Gene Hunt's back for one last series – as is Alex, as you may have noticed 
from all the publicity. So how do you think the final Ashes to Ashes is going 
to pan out? Join Richard Vinehere to discuss your predictions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/apr/01/ashes-to-ashes-series-three>
 – 1983-appropriate attire optional.

The Door (ITV, 9pm)

You know that mind-boggling feeling when you first watched Pineapple Dance 
Studios 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/06/charlie-brooker-screen-burn>
and tried to work out if it was real? I had the same kind of reaction to The 
Door – mainly because I couldn't believe the celebrities had agreed to go on 
it. It's essentially I'm A Celebrity… but with all the camping and jungle stuff 
stripped out, and only the bush tucker trials left. The celebs choose a door 
then must compete against each other to complete the gruesome trials inside 
(fish guts, rats, spiders, scorpions, general goo – the usual). Think of a 
really horrible Crystal Maze, with Amanda Holden and Chris Tarrant as 
presenters, and you're beginning to get the idea. It's odd, but also oddly 
compelling. Even if it does come with a soundtrack of non-stop wretching, 
courtesy of Dean Gaffney.

Saturday, April 3

Doctor Who (BBC1, 6.20pm)

Obviously you'll already have organised your Saturday evening to ensure 
there's a lovely free 65 minutes at 6.20. And you'll possibly havea fair idea 
of what to expect 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/18/matt-smith-doctor-who-debut>
 fromthe new Doctor, Matt Smith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/06/matt-smith-doctor-who-interview>
. But will he match up to expectations? See you back here after The Eleventh 
Hour finishes on Saturday, to discuss the episode.

The Door (ITV1, 8.25pm)

The second installment of the celebrity-horror-challenges show, with one of 
the six taking away £25,000 for charity. You'll probably be more focused on how 
revolting the tasks are though.

Easter Day

Jonathan Creek (BBC1, 8pm)

Sheridan Smith really hits her stride as Creek's sidekick in this 
feature-length installment. Things perhaps feel a bit rushed towards the 
conclusion, but the trickery involved is satisfyingly fiendish and Alan Davies 
a treat, as always.

A Touch of Frost (ITV1 8pm)

This is it for Frost: the detective's last ever case before David Jason 
retires him for good. ITV appears to be behaving rather carelessly with its 
more mature police series of late – it only axed the The Bill last week, and 
now it's losing one of its most bankable coppers (although 17 years' service is 
pretty good going from TV detective). Frost is certain to be missed: catch him 
while you can.

Wonders of the Solar System (BBC2, 9pm)

Professor Brian Cox reaches the end of a series that has had viewers (and 
critics) in raptures 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/08/wonders-of-the-solar-system>
. And after all that sci-fi over-excitement earlier in the weekend, his subject 
matter this week – could there be life on other planets – seems particularly 
apt.

Easter Monday

University Challenge (BBC2, 8pm)

The Boat Race will have been won on Saturday. But there are still 
Oxford/Cambridge scores to settle. Jeremy Paxman barks his way through the 
grand final between St John's College, Oxford, and Emmanuel College, Cambridge

A Touch of Frost (ITV1, 9pm)

Apparently there are two separate endings for tonight's show to keep viewers 
guessing – although given that we know Frost isn't coming back, one wonders how 
much guessing there really is to be done. Anyway, this is it Frost fans: the 
detective's final episode.

The Pacific (Sky Movies Premiere/HD, 9pm)

Band of Brothers fans have been waiting for almost a decade for a follow up to 
the much-lauded miniseries. And now Speilberg and Hanks reunite as executive 
producers of a companion piece to the second world war drama – this time 
focused on battles in the Pacific 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/gallery/2010/apr/01/the-pacific-hbo-steven-spielberg>
. Sky Movies subscribers will get a double bill tonight; and while things take 
a little while to get moving, some of the sustained fighting in the second 
episode is gruelling stuff.

Channel 4's Comedy Gala (C4, 9pm)

In a scheduling masterstroke, Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> rounds off Easter weekend with a 
wealth of comedy talent to ward off the back-to-work blues. Bill Bailey, David 
Mitchell, Jack Dee, Jo Brand and James Corden are among the comedians 
performing in aid of the Great Ormond Street Hospital – and hopefully making 
Tuesday morning seem more bearable.
 