
I wonder if Alan Yentob, BBC creative director and chair of the defunct Kids 
Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/aug/07/kids-company-closure-lessons-trustees-charity-sector>
, watches rival ITV’s Downton Abbey. On Sunday 1 November, the Dowager Countess 
of Grantham finally faced being prised from her near-lifelong position as 
president of the Downton Cottage Hospital. (She had to go to France for a month 
to recover from the shock.) Perhaps it is something Yentob can relate to.


We all know that good trustees are like gold dust – just as a good treasurer 
and chair are like frankincense and myrrh



If Camila Batmanghelidjh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh> is lucky, she’ll 
merely be remembered as the lady who dressed in hundreds of colours. But what 
about the charity’s boss? However charismatic and long-serving a chief 
executive might be, a charity is ultimately run by its chair.

In my opinion, Mr Yentob has to take the blame for Kids Company hitting the 
buffers. In spite ofPR coaching for his recent car crash appearance before the 
Commons public administration committee 
<http://www.prweek.com/article/1369023/kids-company-chair-alan-yentobs-pr-taken-care-of-dear-friend-edelman>
 he gave no hint that he understood that, having been a chair for almost two 
decades, he might have been part of the problem.

Do charities expect too much of their trustees?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/nov/04/do-charities-expect-too-much-of-their-trustees>
We all know that good trustees are like gold dust – just as a good treasurer 
and chair are like frankincense and myrrh. In any size of charity, the ability 
to support without interfering, to challenge without carping and to take 
pleasure rather than credit in success are always hugely welcomed by staff and 
volunteers.

However, just as it’s often forgotten that trustees are one of a charity’s 
most important group of volunteers, it’s also often forgotten that they 
shouldn’t become part of the furniture – there are such very obvious risks.

Friendship is one, particularly with a long-serving chief executive or 
director. I’ve only ever wanted my trustees and chairs to be friendly, not 
friends. (There’s always been time for that after they, or I, have stepped 
down.) The loyalty of friends is one of life’s joys, but it’s not always an 
organisational elixir.

If trustees are too long-serving then priorities or ways of working that they 
once championed risk not being subject to the sort of revision or scrutiny that 
might be needed three, five or seven years later. For example there were 
reports that Kids Company accounts showed significant cause for financial 
concernsas early as 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/06/kids-company-directors-were-warned-to-build-up-reserves>
. Many trustees regard their projects like their children. How comfortable 
would you be having your children subject to a 360-degree appraisal by 
strangers?

And if trustees enjoy association with a successful charity –what motivation 
do they have to move on?

Kids Company closure: lessons for trustees in the charity sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/aug/07/kids-company-closure-lessons-trustees-charity-sector>
Most businesses now accept that a non-executive director – in many ways 
similar to a trustee – has a shelf life. Many have a three year appointment, 
renewable for two years and then sometimes one year more model of tenure.

Some charities match this, with a six year ceiling. A few have nine. But too 
many have no such constraint. You don’t have to be a “governance junkie” to 
worry about this.

Arguably, only someone who came in from outside – fresh and without residual 
loyalty – would have been able to challenge the chief executive’s 
organisational stranglehold atKids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>.

Some boards – shockingly to me – will even try to circumvent a limit on tenure 
by trying to redraft a charity’s constitution or articles. If yours ever tries 
to do that in the years ahead and you’re in the room, remind them about Kids 
Company. However wonderful a trustee or chair may be, they’re not bigger than 
the charity ecology – they are a small, even if important, part.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> – it’s free!
 