
Smartphone gaming is a tough business – even for the companies at the very 
top. Candy Crush Saga developer King has struggled to develop new games beyond 
its hit “match-three” puzzler, whileRovio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/rovio> announced more than 200 lay-offs 
in August as part of an attempt to restructure and refocus its increasingly 
bloated business. The app stores are dominated by a handful of longstanding 
titles, and that makes developing, marketing and launching new IPs even more 
expensive and risky, especially as it can take several months to start seeing 
significant returns.


It’s a problem Rovio is about to face head-on. The Finnish company’s latest 
title, released this week on the Apple and Google stores, is Nibblers, a 
match-three puzzler featuring a cast of aquatic creatures. As ever, players 
need to line up similar pieces of fruit to clear each level. Unlike the 
company’s other recent attempts to explore new genres – including Angry Birds 
Stella Pop andAngry Birds <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/angry-birds> 
Go – there are no furious avian creatures or porcine antagonists. The cast – if 
not the design concept – is entirely new.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwvmoiFBRMo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwvmoiFBRMo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwvmoiFBRMo&media=>
According to executive producer, Teemu Hämäläinen, the development process 
hasn’t been straightforward, despite the familiarity of the genre. “Rovio is 
all about the characters,” he says. “Everybody knows that Angry Birds is about 
the birds and the piggies. We looked around and thought, what do we need to do 
to have the characters right in the centre of a game – actually on the game 
board itself? You see a lot of puzzle games where the characters are at the 
very sides of the screen, but you’re not playing with them.”

Last year, a small team of 10 staff started the prototyping process, toying 
with the fundamentals of the match-three genre. “We played with ideas that let 
us combine a game board with the characters, within a set of game mechanics 
that balanced skill and luck,” he says. “We built more than 20 prototypes, but 
often we just couldn’t get that balance right – it was a long journey.”

Eventually, the team had the idea of including characters among the fruit as 
gameplay elements. In Nibblers, the heroes are a bunch of amphibian creatures 
who stumble onto a beach and find lots of delicious fruit, unaware that 
fish-eating reptiles are watching. In each level, then, the board features not 
just fruit to match, but also reptilian enemies who have to be dispatched by 
matching fruit nearby. When the player matches more than three fruit in one go, 
a friendly fish character pops up onscreen offering a power-up, which can be 
used immediately, or saved. Match four fruits and you get Coral, who can be 
swiped vertically or horizontally across the screen, destroying all fruit and 
enemies in her wake. Five or more matches earns Octo, who stomps through three 
rows of fruit in one go. Players can even unlock a giant battler called Bouncer 
who can splat a whole screen in one landing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fgoodbye-angry-birds-rovio-takes-on-candy-crush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441887220709%2F90e3e792-de4b-4eee-895c-4dd4ec95444b-1020x612.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Goodbye%20Angry%20Birds%20%E2%80%93%20Rovio%20takes%20on%20Candy%20Crush%2C%20but%20not%20in%20the%20way%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fgoodbye-angry-birds-rovio-takes-on-candy-crush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Goodbye%20Angry%20Birds%20%E2%80%93%20Rovio%20takes%20on%20Candy%20Crush%2C%20but%20not%20in%20the%20way%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fgoodbye-angry-birds-rovio-takes-on-candy-crush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441887220709%2F90e3e792-de4b-4eee-895c-4dd4ec95444b-1020x612.png>
 The huge Bouncer character can smash through vast quantities of fruit and 
reptiles, giving players huge scoring potential in the style of an action game. 
Photograph: Rovio 
It’s a series of special-move mechanics taking from the fighting game genre. 
Although it’s not exactly a revolution, it’s a neat skill-based addition, 
accentuated by a combo mechanic that lets you combine the abilities if you have 
multiple characters on screen at once. As you progress the enemies start eating 
Nibbler characters and breaking up fruit chains, adding more sense of peril. 
The game even adds end of level boss fights between different map areas, 
including a giant snake that sucks up fruit and fish – these need to be hit 
with multiple fruit matches to defeat. Some of the enemies also move around the 
board, adding a timing element missing from most match-three titles. “The game 
is full of surprises,” says Hämäläinen. “We wanted to create a living 
environment with small movements and animations, even in the backgrounds.”

So why just Nibblers? Why not Angry Birds Nibblers? “We did ask ourselves: do 
we want to launch another Angry Birds game or do we want a new IP?” says 
Hämäläinen. “We felt we needed to be more daring. We wanted to create a wider 
cast of characters. In Angry Birds it’s clear that Red is the leader - we 
wanted it to be less clear this time. It’s more about the group. We also wanted 
characters that aren’t too childish - that are likeable but not as much 
huggable. They’re not too cute or over-polished. But we thought a new IP would 
allow us to take more liberties - we didn’t need to be worried about the brand 
or other constraints.”

There’s doubtless something else behind the decision, however. Through its 
cartoon-style character design and relentless merchandising, Angry Birds has 
become very much a kid’s brand – but the match-three genre tends to be aimed at 
an older demographic. Candy Crush saga has proveda huge hit with female players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/11/candy-crush-saga-games> – 
its key demographic is women aged between 25 and 45. Nibblers had to take a bit 
out of that sector, so its characters are cute but not childlike.

The game was soft launched in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Finland in 
January (the latter so the development team’s friends and families could play). 
Rovio watched how the design was appreciated, but also how well it monetised. 
Unlike Angry Birds, a premium game with an upfront cost, Nibblers is swimming 
straight into the free-to-play ocean, with players able to buy extra moves or 
new characters when they’re stuck. Rovio is also toying with the currently 
trendy “incentivised video advertising” model: if you fail a level, the game 
asks if you want to look at a video advert in return for a free power-up at the 
start of your next go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fgoodbye-angry-birds-rovio-takes-on-candy-crush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441887384676%2F69e8b9ed-beb9-45e7-bad0-a6560e2e96e9-680x1020.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Goodbye%20Angry%20Birds%20%E2%80%93%20Rovio%20takes%20on%20Candy%20Crush%2C%20but%20not%20in%20the%20way%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fgoodbye-angry-birds-rovio-takes-on-candy-crush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Goodbye%20Angry%20Birds%20%E2%80%93%20Rovio%20takes%20on%20Candy%20Crush%2C%20but%20not%20in%20the%20way%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fgoodbye-angry-birds-rovio-takes-on-candy-crush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441887384676%2F69e8b9ed-beb9-45e7-bad0-a6560e2e96e9-680x1020.png>
 The snake is one of several boss characters that players face at key points in 
the game. The battles are multi-stage, with characters pulling out extra moves 
when they’re shot on health. Photograph: Rovio 
In terms of the gameplay, the big lesson has been to introduce the fresh 
gameplay elements slowly – match-three puzzle titles don’t usually have 
characters that move about the board, or boss baddie encounters – these are 
small but important shifts toward more “hardcore” gaming content.


Apparently, the priority for the development team – now up to 20 people – is 
to ensure a fast flow of new content. Free-to-play games have to battle for 
retention in such a crowded market place and allowing a title to stagnate for 
even a few weeks will see players moving on elsewhere.

“We want to make sure we can produce a lot of levels in a very short time 
frame,” says Hämäläinen. “You have to keep giving your audience more things to 
play. We’re launching with 200 levels, and the first update will be two weeks 
later when we’re giving an extra 60 levels, and then we’re releasing more 
content every fortnight – more levels, new islands, new opponents or new game 
play types. That’s why we have a big team.”

Nibblers certainly resonates with typical Rovio qualities: the visuals and 
sound are super-polished, with lots of smooth animation and the usual 
over-the-top victory displays at the end of each stage. And the slightly more 
complex play dynamics may well bring back match-three fans, who have grown 
tired of the genre’s staid and limiting properties.

It is, however, still fundamentally a very recognisable game type in a 
massively overcrowded market, where everyone is using similar visual feedback 
systems and cunning compulsion loops to ensnare bored commuters. “Competition 
is fearsome,” admits Hämäläinen. “Launching games is not simple - we have to be 
humble, it’s always a risk.”
 