
Google has launched its latest mobile chat app, Allo, and with it Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Assistant – a chatbot that can 
be used in online conversations with friends.

The messaging app, which is available for Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> and the iPhone, has similar 
features to most other messaging clients: stickers, emoji, the ability to draw 
on images like Snapchat and the choice of group or one-on-one chats. Messages 
are not encrypted end-to-end by default – unlike on WhatsApp, which it will 
compete with – but can be switched to an incognito mode to do so and set how 
long they exist before they’re deleted.

Google’s “smart reply”, first introduced with its Inbox mail app, will also 
feature, predicting responses to the messages and content received, such as 
“yup” to the question “are you on your way”. While text-based prediction is not 
uncommon, Google is going one-stage further and bringing its image recognition 
from its Photos service, providing smart replies when sent images of pets or 
holiday pictures, suggestion responses such as “nice dog” or “beautiful sunset” 
when appropriate.

 Allo’s big new feature though is Google’s Assistant, represented as an 
@google chatbot. You can have one-on-one conversations with it, asking for 
restaurant recommendations, navigation instructions, find photos, get the 
weather, save information or even command the smartphone to do things on 
Android. Those interactions can also be made in group chat, by dragging the 
Google Assistant into the conversation for instant recommendations or 
information.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgoogle-whatsapp-allo-google-assistant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a150af386e4d24f337dfe3d4cdb5e3b859015d%2F0_0_1440_1449%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20launches%20WhatsApp%20competitor%20Allo%20%E2%80%93%20with%20Google%20Assistant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgoogle-whatsapp-allo-google-assistant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20launches%20WhatsApp%20competitor%20Allo%20%E2%80%93%20with%20Google%20Assistant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgoogle-whatsapp-allo-google-assistant%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a150af386e4d24f337dfe3d4cdb5e3b859015d%2F0_0_1440_1449%2F1440.jpg>
 You can type or ask questions of Google Assistant using voice in a one-on-one 
chat. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Whether Google will be able to gain traction with Assistant-powered chatbot 
where others have failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/29/please-facebook-dont-make-me-speak-to-your-awful-chatbots>
 remains to be seen.

Google Assistant is the next evolution of the search company’s efforts with 
Android’s Now on Tap, natural language search and voice assistant features. The 
company says it will learn from your day-to-day activities and improve its 
suggestions, in the same way Google Now currently does within the Google search 
app on the iPhone and built-in to Android.

Allo will be the first place users can interact with Assistant, but Google 
will bring it to more and more of its products, including its Google Home 
smarthome hub voice-activated assistant, which is due for release later this 
year to rival Amazon’s Echo and Alexa.

Google Allo and Assistant were first announced alongside the company’s video 
chat app Duo at theI/O developer’s conference in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/19/google-io-2016-what-you-need-to-know-from-allo-to-daydream>
 and have been released ahead of the expected launch of new Google own-brand 
smartphones on 4 October.

 * Duo video calling app: Google launches cross-platform answer to FaceTime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/16/duo-video-calling-app-google-android>
 