
Google has dismissed the European commission’s charges that it abuses the 
market dominance of itsAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> 
operating system to prevent rivals from competing with alternative software and 
services.


The EC filed charges in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/20/eu-commission-google-android-skew-market-competition-antitrust-vestager>
 that could carry a fine for Google of up to $7.4bn (£5.9bn), or 10% of its 
global revenue, and centre on what the commission saw as “unjustified 
restrictions and conditions” placed on smartphone and tablet makers, preventing 
them from choosing other, non-Google default search engines and browsers.

Kent Walker, senior vice president and general counsel for Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, said: “Android hasn’t hurt 
competition, it’s expanded it. Android is the most flexible mobile platform out 
there, balancing the needs of thousands of manufacturers and operators, 
millions of app developers and more than a billion consumers. Upsetting this 
balance would raise prices, hamper innovation, reduce choice and limit 
competition.”

In its response to the EC today, Google objects to several of the commission’s 
premises, including the view that Google’s Android does not compete with 
Apple’s iOS operating system that runs iPhones and iPads.

Walker said: “The commission’s case is based on the idea that Android doesn’t 
compete with Apple’s iOS. We don’t see it that way. We don’t think Apple does 
either. Or phone makers. Or developers. Or users.

“To ignore competition with Apple is to miss the defining feature of today’s 
competitive smartphone landscape.”

The company claims that its agreements with smartphone makers, which insist 
that a suite of Google apps be pre-installed on devices with some positioned on 
the homescreen when a device is first started, allow Google to distribute 
Android for free and continue investing in the development of the platform.

Industry watchers said Google’s prospects of making money from advertising 
could diminish if its apps were not pre-loaded on devices, despite users being 
free to delete many of them and replace all of them apps of their choosing.

It also insists that its agreements are crucial to allow anyone to take 
Android and modify it to suit their requirements, but maintain a level of 
control on compatibility to help prevent so-called fragmentation, where one 
version is incompatible with another.

Walker said: “Our voluntary compatibility agreements enable variety while 
giving developers confidence to create apps that run seamlessly across 
thousands of different phones and tablets. This balance stimulates competition 
between Android devices as well as between Android and Apple’s iPhone.”

Google’s Play Store has more than 2.2m third-party apps available for download 
across 1,000s of devices, including apps from the search company’s chief 
rivals, Apple, Microsoft and Facebook, of which Facebook, Facebook Messenger, 
Instagram and WhatsApp have been downloaded more than 1bn times.

Commenting on the EC’s case, Daniel Castro, vice president of tech policy 
think tank ITIF said: “If Google instead only sold Google-made devices, it 
would … control all aspects of the operating system plus the apps it includes 
on Android devices.

“This is exactly what companies like Apple and Blackberry have long done with 
their respective mobile operating systems, yet the practice is not considered 
anti-competitive for them.”

The case against Android comes at a time when Google is also embroiled in a 
battle with the EC over its Shopping search engine feature and its AdSense text 
advertising service. Last week, Googledismissed the commission’s Shopping case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/03/google-european-commission-shopping-charges>
 with similar rhetoric, saying that its competition with Amazon should be taken 
into account.

 * Europe v Google: how Android became a battleground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/20/google-android-european-commission> 