
Google’s new own-brand Pixel smartphones have been revealed a day before their 
official unveiling afterCarphone Warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carphonewarehousegroup> leaked 
promotional content.

The new Pixel phone by Google marks a step-change for the Android-maker, 
putting the Google brand front and centre in an obvious direct challenge to 
Apple and its iPhone. Both Apple, and nowGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, have the advantage of being 
able to develop both hardware and software simultaneously.


Most other smartphone manufacturers, including the world’s largest, Samsung, 
useAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> but do not actively 
develop the software, only modify it, relying on Google for primary development.

Google has previously used Nexus branding for its smartphones, where it has 
partnered with manufacturers such asHuawei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/29/google-nexus-6p-review-android-smartphone-best-phablet-fingerprint-huawei>
,LG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/23/google-nexus-5x-review-android-60-marshmallow-smartphone-battery>
 and HTC. The new Pixel brand is in-keeping with that used for Google’s
Chromebook Pixel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/20/google-chromebook-pixel-review-beautiful-powerful>
 and recentPixel C Android tablet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/11/google-pixel-c-review-best-android-tablet-ipad-competitor>
.

The leaked images captured by Android Police 
<http://www.androidpolice.com/2016/10/02/pixel-phone-listings-at-carphone-warehouse-offering-new-shots-more-info/>
 show two sizes of the phone –a regular and “XL” version, USB-C fast charging, 
a new interface, video calling and the Google Assistant, which first launched 
within the company’s Allo messaging app.

Both devices will have 32GB or 128GB of storage, 4GB of RAM, Qualcomm’s latest 
821 processor, AMOLED screens, fingerprint scanners on the back, an 
eight-megapixel selfie camera and a 12-megapixel camera on the back with 
optical image stabilisation, according to the smartphone retailers listings 
which have since been removed.

Google is expected to unveil the new smartphones at an event on Tuesday along 
with the next version ofAndroid Nougat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/android-7-nougat-review-battery-life-multitasking-operation-notifications-facial-recognition-android>
 7.1, which will feature more of Google’s conversational AI in the form of 
Assistant.

 * Google launches WhatsApp competitor Allo – with Google Assistant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/21/google-whatsapp-allo-google-assistant>

 * Duo video calling app: Google launches cross-platform answer to FaceTime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/16/duo-video-calling-app-google-android> 