
Google’s ambitious Project Ara modular smartphone concept with interchangable 
components has been shelved.

Reuters reports that Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
canceled the project as part of a broader push to streamline the company’s 
hardware efforts, according to two people with knowledge of the matter.

The move marks an about-face for the tech company, which announced a host of 
partners for Project Ara at its IO developer conference in May and said it 
would ship a developer edition of the product this autumn.

The company’s aim was to create a phone that users could customise on the fly 
with an extra battery, camera, speakers or other components, and be able to 
replace broken bits, which runs in the face of an increasingly disposable 
gadget market.

A spokeswoman for Google declined to comment on the matter.

While Google will not be releasing the phone itself, the company could work 
with partners to bring Project Ara’s technology to market, potentially through 
licensing agreements.

Modular smartphone concepts have generated buzz for years in the tech 
community for their potential to prolong the lifespan of a device and reduce 
electronic waste. But they have proved bulky and costly to produce.

Bob O’Donnell, of TECHnalysis Research, said he was unsurprised Google shelved 
the project: “This was a science experiment that failed, and they are moving 
on.”

Project Ara was one of the flagship efforts of Google’s Advanced Technology 
and Projects group it inherited as part ofits purchase of Motorola in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/aug/15/google-buys-motorola-mobility>
. The division aims to develop new devices, but it had various stops and starts.

Axing Project Ara is one of the first steps in a campaign to unify Google’s 
various hardware efforts, which range from Chromebook laptops to Nexus phones. 
Former Motorola president Rick Osterloh rejoined Google earlier this year to 
oversee the effort. Google sold Motorola Mobility to Lenovo Group in 2014.

The change comes ahead of the launch of the company’s latest own-brand 
smartphones, which will reportedly ditch the Nexus branding Google has used in 
partnership with various manufacturers since 2010 infavour of the company’s 
Pixel brand 
<http://www.androidpolice.com/2016/09/01/exclusive-googles-new-phones-will-be-called-the-pixel-and-pixel-xl/>
.

The Chromebook Pixel and the Google Pixel C were the first products designed 
in-house at Google, and have signified an effort by the Android maker to cement 
and differentiate its hardware arm from the various third-partyAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> device manufacturers including 
Samsung.

 * Android 7.0 Nougat review: longer battery life and faster operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/android-7-nougat-review-battery-life-multitasking-operation-notifications-facial-recognition-android>

 * Android 7.0 Nougat: 11 tips and tricks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/23/android-7-nougat-tips-tricks-replies-settings-app-emoji>
 