
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has launched two 
own-brand smartphones, the Pixel and Pixel XL, in a bid to take on Apple and 
its iPhone 7 head on.


The two Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> smartphones 
are the first to carry Google’s branding without being associated with another 
manufacturer and are a clear mark in the sand by the Android-maker: the fight 
with Apple is now on for the top premium smartphone.

Google even went as far as to reference Apple on stage, showing a “storage 
full” message from an iPhone, something it said thePixel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pixel> would avoid with unlimited full 
resolution backups of photos and videos using Google Photos’ cloud storage.
Samuel Gibbs (@SamuelGibbs) 
Burn. Unlimited full res photo and video (4K included) backup on Google Pixel. 
No more storage full alerts. Apple.pic.twitter.com/2yICubIVLQ 
<https://t.co/2yICubIVLQ>
 <https://twitter.com/SamuelGibbs/status/783345201788116994> October 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SamuelGibbs/status/783345201788116994> 
James Nugent, product manager for Pixel, said: “We’re putting a stake in the 
ground for the Android ecosystem in terms of what we think is the best from 
both the software and hardware point of view, which has been developed and made 
by Google.”

The Google phones come in two sizes with either a 5in or a 5.5in screen, have 
the latest processor the Snapdragon 821 from industry leader Qualcomm, 
aluminium bodies and the next version of Android 7.1 Nougat.


The Pixel smartphones also have 12 megapixel cameras with large 1.55 
micrometre pixels for boosted low light performance on the back, which were 
awarded a rating of 89 by camera analysts DxOMark, making it the highest ranked 
smartphone camera to date, beating both Apple’s iPhone 7 with 87 and Samsung 
Galaxy S7 Edge with 88.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f9a6bf526bf1e690ac1568c95ac0da84dd2e1c2%2F106_84_1390_834%2F1390.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple's%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple%27s%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f9a6bf526bf1e690ac1568c95ac0da84dd2e1c2%2F106_84_1390_834%2F1390.jpg>
 Sabrina Ellis speaks about the Pixel’s quick charging - 7hrs in 15mins - at 
the Google launch event Photograph: Google 
For Google, however, the most important part of the Pixel phones is the new 
Google Assistant, which replaces Google Now and Google voice search previously 
available to other Android smartphones with a new integrated smart assistant.

Nugent said: “This is the first device with Google Assistant, a 
conversational, contextually aware assistant that will help you through you 
day. You can talk to it, ask it various questions and it will provide a 
consistent experience throughout, as well as prompting you with information 
when it thinks its relevant.”

Ana Corrales, vice president of global operations and Google Store, said: 
“We’re leveraging 18 years of search and evolving it into an assistant powered 
by machine learning and artificial intelligence that we believe will be the 
next wave of computing for the next 10 years or so and it will get better and 
better as people use it.”

Google Assistant will be available through the familiar “OK Google” hotword, 
which can be said at any time, and a long press of the Pixel’s home button. But 
the Assistant access through the Pixel is just one of a new roster of devices 
Google is pushing, including a new Amazon Echo-like speaker, Google Home, and 
future products including tablets and smartwatches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffaac015741ab5981a7e2971891fd87c082afd9%2F51_18_1622_973%2F1622.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple's%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple%27s%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffaac015741ab5981a7e2971891fd87c082afd9%2F51_18_1622_973%2F1622.jpg>
 Google Assistant on the Google Pixel phone Photograph: Google 
Assistant will be able to answer questions, perform actions and help get 
things done through voice and text, learning your preferences and habits over 
time and pulling information from all of Google’s disparate services. Google 
Assistant will be the Pixel phones’ unique selling point, at least in the short 
term, in a very competitive market where Apple and Samsung dominate, but 
neither have been able to crack the useful integrated and intelligent personal 
assistant.

The Pixel will also have unlimited full resolution phone backup with Google 
Photos, where other smartphones are limited in photo size and quality. They 
will be some of the first devices to feature the latest version of 4G - cat 9 
LTE advanced - for the fastest possible data speeds, 4G calling and Wi-Fi 
calling, supported by EE as Google’s exclusive network partner in the UK.

Google will also provide a so-called Quick Switch Adapter to import iMessages, 
photos, videos, contacts and other data directly from Apple’s iPhone, clearly 
targeting users disenfranchised with Apple’s recent efforts.

The 5in Pixel will cost £599 with 32GB of storage or £699 with 128GB of 
storage. The 5.5in Pixel XL will cost £719 with 32GB of storage or £819 with 
128GB of storage. Both models match the pricing of Apple’s iPhone 7 and iPhone 
7 Plus. They will be available through EE, via Google’s online store and 
Carphone Warehouse in the UK.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3626644fe2beb223d6abc1a0382a46b5c561b66b%2F1_0_6066_3641%2F6066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple's%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple%27s%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3626644fe2beb223d6abc1a0382a46b5c561b66b%2F1_0_6066_3641%2F6066.jpg>
 Google Daydream Viewer with the new Google Pixel phone. Photograph: Google 
The Pixel and Pixel XL will also be the first smartphones compatible with the 
Google’s new virtual reality headset called Daydream View, and a controller. 
The device, similar in idea to Samsung’s Gear VR accessory, is a step up from 
the company’s basic Cardboard viewer and represents the next phase in Google’s 
push for virtual reality, complete with a new minimum specification for 
Daydream compatible smartphones.

Andrey Doronichev, Google’s product Manager for VR, said: “Most of the other 
headsets out there that are bulky, made of plastic with connectors and cables 
everywhere. Daydream is none of these things. It’s made of fabric, very 
lightweight and it feels like clothing, not like a piece of electronics.

“Cardboard is a great way to get introduced to VR with short experiences, but 
we designed it without a head strap for a reason for quick, bitesize 
experiences. By contrast Daydream is designed for long term, high quality VR 
for a much more immersive and richly interactive experience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcac602816d243e3e3017213f034db541f3bdd98%2F0_0_3169_1902%2F3169.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple's%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple%27s%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcac602816d243e3e3017213f034db541f3bdd98%2F0_0_3169_1902%2F3169.jpg>
 Google’s new Home voice-controlled speaker. Photograph: Google 
Alongside the Pixel smartphones Google also launched its take on the Amazon 
Echo called Google Home, which represents a different in-home outlet for the 
company’s smart assistant.

Home is a small speaker equipped with a series of far-field microphones 
capable of responding to voice commands, controlling other smarthome devices, 
setting timers, playing music and giving access to Google’s voice search. But 
Assistant goes beyond relatively simple voice recognition, and as on the Pixel 
smartphones, can pull personal information, schedules, the weather and other 
day-to-day activities. It is designed as an artificial intelligence in-home 
helper.

Explaining how Home would work in day-to-day life, Gummi Hafsteinsson, product 
management director on the Assistant engineering team said: “The other day I 
was trying to cook some eggplant, so I said ‘OK Google, how do I cook an 
eggplant?’ It then described it to me and said I had to cook it for 25 minutes, 
so I just said ‘OK, Google, set a timer for 25 minutes’ and it was done. I 
didn’t have to touch anything, because my hands are busy doing something in the 
kitchen, and I can just get it to play music while I wait.

“The long-term vision is for the assistant be available wherever you need it, 
not just on your phone. In your home, your car, wherever. For now, it’s just 
the new phone from Google and the Home,” added Hafsteinsson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3989a22f4ee95f1a08dc73848898d13eca298e1%2F0_0_3564_2138%2F3564.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple's%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20launches%20Pixel%20phone%20in%20direct%20bid%20to%20take%20on%20Apple%27s%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fgoogle-launch-pixel-xl-iphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3989a22f4ee95f1a08dc73848898d13eca298e1%2F0_0_3564_2138%2F3564.jpg>
 The base of the Google Home speaker comes in multiple colours. Photograph: 
Google 
Google Home will be released in the US in the near future, but the company has 
yet to announce release details for the UK. Google also launched an updated 
version of it’s instant smart TV dongle, the Chromecast Ultra, which supports 
4K streaming and will cost £69.

 * Google Pixel phone launch – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/live/2016/oct/04/google-pixel-phone-launch-live>
 * Google launches new Assistant and puts it at heart of Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/04/google-launch-new-assistant-home> 