
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> is to close its 
engineering office in Russia in the wake of growing restrictions on internet 
freedoms, including a law that comes into effect next year targeting foreign 
web companies.

The law, which authorities say will improve data protection, requires foreign 
firms to store Russian users’ personal data on servers located inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Critics say it is designed to make 
it harder for US internet companies to operate in the country and will give 
Russia’s secret services – which are reportedly able to monitor virtually all 
data transmitted by domestic internet service providers – greater access to 
information held by foreign firms.

A Google Russia spokeswoman declined to comment on why it was closing its 
engineering office. “We are deeply committed to our Russian users and customers 
and we have a dedicated team in Russia working to support them,” the company 
said. It will retain support and marketing staff in the country.

President Vladimir Putin is no fan of the internet, calling it a CIA project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/24/vladimir-putin-web-breakup-internet-cia>
, and saying he prefers to get his information from other sources. Russian 
security services have reportedly advised officials against using Gmail, and 
legislation was considered recently that would prohibit government employees 
from discussing official information over non-state email accounts.

Another law, passed this year, requires bloggers with more than 3,000 
followers to register their personal information with the government, a 
regulation that has been decried as an intimidation tactic. Whereas 
state-controlled television offers generally pro-Kremlin views, dissent has 
been able to flourish on social media and blogs, which played a key role in the 
opposition protests that swept Moscow in 2011-13.

Google has criticised state restrictions on the internet in the past. Last 
year,Eric Schmidt <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/eric-schmidt>, the 
executive chairman, said he was worried that Russia was beginning to copy China 
in internet censorship. Google closed its internet search service in China in 
2010 after it stopped cooperating with government censors.

Anton Nossik, a web entrepreneur often called the father of the Russian 
internet, who now runs the internet marketing startup Fuzzy Cheese, said that 
besides the law requiring Russia-based servers, growing anti-western rhetoric 
following the Ukraine crisis posed a threat to foreign companies such as Google.

“The changes in the political situation make it less viable, less feasible to 
maintain engineers here, and that is not even counterbalanced by the fact that 
engineers get cheaper by the day because of the [falling value of the] rouble,” 
Nossik said. “There are a lot of counterproductive measures, not only 
[government] pressure but also the general unpredictability of how the 
situation will develop. One thing that is predictable is that it will develop 
for the worse. The only thing we don’t know is how fast regulations limiting 
foreign activities on the Russian market will be adopted.”

In September, Adobe Systems shut down its Russian office. The Vedomosti 
newspaperreported <http://itar-tass.com/en/economy/751438> that the US firm was 
unable to meet the requirements of the new law and had been unable to close 
several deals because of western sanctions against Russia.

In April, Pavel Durvo, the founder of Russia’s most popular social network 
Vkontakte,left the company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/02/founder-pavel-durov-leaves-russian-social-network-site-vkontakte>
 after a dispute with its new Kremlin-linked owners.

Although Google is widely used in Russia, the homegrown search engine Yandex 
controls 60% of the country’s search market, reports say. Yandex.ru emerged as 
the most popular media channel in a recent study by the marketing research 
company TNS Russia, with 4.3 million daily visitors among people in Moscow aged 
12-64. Google.ru was the fourth most popular media channel, behind Yandex.ru 
and two state-owned television stations, with 3.2 million daily visitors.
 