
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has announced that it 
will stop accepting ads made with Adobe’s much maligned Flash in June this year 
and ban them entirely from 2 January 2017.


Both arms of Google’s advertising business, Google Display Network and 
DoubleClick willstop showing Flash 
<https://plus.google.com/+GoogleAds/posts/dYSJRrrgNjk>, meaning that all ads 
will have to use HTML5 for animations.

Google said: “To enhance the browsing experience for more people on more 
devices, the Google Display Network and DoubleClick Digital Marketing are now 
going 100% HTML5.”

Video ads, however, will still be able to use Flash for the time being, but 
the clock appears to be ticking for those as well.

Over 100m Flash-based adverts were displayed to users globally in the year to 
June 2015, while 84% of banner ads were still Flash, according todata from Ad 
Age 
<http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/flash-obsolete-time-agencies-adapt/298946/>
. That number is expected to be significantly reduced year-on-year and 
eventually taper to zero as other advertising services follow suit, such as 
Amazon which recently blocked Flash ads from its own site.


Google’s war on Flash also includes its Chrome browser, which began blocking 
Flash elements by default in September last year, requiring users to click on 
the the ads to activate them – essentially something no one is likely to do. 
Chrome is currently in use by 57.8% of the desktop internet market and 47.8% of 
the global internet-using public across mobile, desktop, tablet and consoles, 
according todata from Statcounter 
<http://gs.statcounter.com/#desktop-browser-ww-monthly-201501-201601>.

With video services, including YouTube, dumping Flash for HTML5 or digital 
rights management-laden Microsoft Silverlight, Flash’s last bastion will likely 
be embedded tools for software-as-a-services, such as administration packages.

For all those without SAP or Oracle in our lives, the world will soon be 
practically Flash free.

 * Flash is dying a death by 1,000 cuts, and that’s a good thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/24/adobe-flash-dying-amazon-google-chrome>
 