
For Gordon Reid the fact wheelchair tennis is even being discussed in the 
media whileAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
 andJamie Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/jamie-murray-wins-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-bruno-soares>
 were chasing titles at the Australian Open shows how far he and the sport have 
come.

The 24-year-old Scot won his first grand slam singles title on Saturday, 
beating the Belgian Joachim Gérard 7-6, 6-4 in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/gordon-reid-australian-open-wheelchair-singles-title-andy-jamie-murray-tennis>
, adding the trophy to the two grand slam doubles titles already in his 
possession.

It was an impressive performance from Reid, who was a promising junior player 
before contracting the spinal disease, transverse myelitis, when he was 12.

Gordon Reid celebrates Australian Open wheelchair singles win with Murrays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/gordon-reid-australian-open-wheelchair-singles-title-andy-jamie-murray-tennis>
Having also played in the doubles final here – he and the world No1, Shingo 
Kunieda, lost 7-5 in the final set, despite leading 5-0 and holding two match 
points – an exhausted Reid was pepped up by a wave of support from home.

He said: “It’s been overwhelming. It’s been crazy. My phone’s run out of 
battery about three times since the final because everyone keeps sending me so 
many messages. It’s amazing to have all that support.

“It’s been incredible. It’s fantastic and the number of messages I’ve had from 
back home, includingme alongside Jamie and Andy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/gordon-reid-australian-open-wheelchair-singles-title-andy-jamie-murray-tennis>
, is kind of surreal. It’s an honour for me to be named alongside those guys 
anyway, it’s great for wheelchair tennis and disability sport, everyone’s 
putting us next to each other, we’re on the same level, everyone’s tweeting and 
messaging, newspaper articles about three Scots in the finals, it’s everyone 
equal – and that’s the way it should be. I’ve noticed a big difference here. I 
got my two doubles titles last year but in terms of media interest, I’ve had 
way more here. It’s brilliant for us and brilliant for the sport. Hopefully we 
can continue to raise the profile.”

As he relaxed in the players’ restaurant, enjoying some rare peace after a 
hectic 24 hours, Reid said his achievement in winning the singles title was 
beginning to hit home. “When I woke up it sunk in a little bit and I just kind 
of realised what happened. It’s a pretty good feeling. It means a lot. 
Obviously, that’s why we do what we do, why we train and commit basically our 
lives to training and working hard, and dedicating ourselves to the sport.”

For all the success of the Paralympics at London 2012, disability sport 
continues to fight a battle for funding, column inches and media attention, and 
victories such as Reid’s can have a huge impact, showing players they can make 
a living.

With the Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> 
title in the bag, Reid said his main goals for the year would be the Rio 
Olympics and Wimbledon, which is to hold wheelchair singles competitions for 
the first time in 2016.

He said: “I’ve been building towards Rio ever since London. It’s been a long 
journey but it is right around the corner now. I’m just excited, looking 
forward to getting out there and playing for GB.

“And it would be pretty special to take the first singles title for a 
wheelchair event at Wimbledon. We’re all looking forward to playing singles. 
It’s extra special for all us British players to play singles at the home slam 
for the first time. It’s really exciting and I just need to sharpen up my 
grass-court game.”
 