
Australia’s wide open spaces are home to some spectacular gorges. Here are 
five prime examples.

Hancock gorge, Karijini national park, Western Australia

Karijini national park <http://parks.dpaw.wa.gov.au/park/karijini> is 
Australia’s best-kept secret, conspicuously absent on the itineraries of both 
international backpackers and domestic “grey nomads”, and astonishingly unknown 
by many West Australians.

Karijini’s baked landscapes are more quintessentially Australian than anything 
even Baz Luhrmann could muster: at dusk, the skies are a beautiful violet 
against the backdrop of scarlet sand and burnt-black trees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdd28a59cff67b90dffc32a6ed90567a19db1e62%2F0_166_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia's%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia%27s%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdd28a59cff67b90dffc32a6ed90567a19db1e62%2F0_166_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Hancock gorge, Karijini national park, Western Australia. Photograph: James 
Draven for Guardian Australia 
By contrast, the plunging slot canyons that riddle the park are often shaded 
and cool even under the midday sun, meaning the geological kaleidoscope of 
Hancock gorge can be explored all day.

This moderately short trek still requires hikers to wade, swim and spider-walk 
between its narrow walls – rusty escarpments of burnished bricks, teetering 
like a forgotten game of Jenga – and winds up with a splash in the 
cobalt-streaked grotto of the viridescent Kermits pool. Dry off by basking in 
the sun-soaked natural amphitheatre on the return journey. Then head straight 
to the park’s equally stunning Weano and Joffre gorges, too.

Nitmiluk (Katherine) gorge, Nitmiluk national park, Northern Territory
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7da53c58f8f3c08c1f96cc239eebd5146138d7fe%2F0_8_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia's%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia%27s%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7da53c58f8f3c08c1f96cc239eebd5146138d7fe%2F0_8_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Nitmiluk gorge in the Northern Territory. Photograph: James Draven for 
Guardian Australia 
Little red buoys bob innocuously along the Katherine river, anchored to the 
trees on its banks. When these floats are free of crocodile bite marks for 28 
consecutive days,Nitmiluk gorge  <http://parks.dpaw.wa.gov.au/park/karijini>is 
opened to canoeists and swimmers.

The tour boat crews are likely to still give them a last-minute check to make 
sure no estuarine crocodiles have been using them as chew toys before letting 
you launch yourself into the water for a post-cruise dip after a morning spent 
inspecting the park’s ancient Jawoyn rock art (and rock wallabies) that adorn 
bluffs of billion-year-old sandstone.

Nitmiluk gorge consists of a network of 13 ravines that become interconnected 
by the Katherine river during the wet season. It’s during this time that 
saltwater crocodiles ply its length, becoming stranded when the waters recede. 
Rangers bait and relocate the salties, and leave those gleaming floats – which 
are bizarrely irresistible to the crocs that mistake them for food – to signal 
that it’s safe for visitors to get out and explore from the water,a rare treat 
in rural NT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/29/kakadu-national-park-what-to-do-where-to-go-what-to-see>
.

The best time to visit, perhaps unsurprisingly, is the dry season, from May to 
September, when flooding, activity restrictions and, of course, salties are 
least likely. Although you could always take thehelicopter tour 
<http://www.nitmiluktours.com.au> at any time of year to see those beguiling 
beasts from above.

Carnarvon gorge, Queensland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0ca4220f3a7917f7a707c105e85dd77ff491dd4%2F0_0_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia's%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia%27s%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0ca4220f3a7917f7a707c105e85dd77ff491dd4%2F0_0_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Carnarvon gorge is lush and densely verdant, supporting a carpet of mosses. 
Photograph: Darren Jew/Tourism and Events Queensland 
An art gallery featuring some of Australia’s finest Indigenous works, a 
cavernous amphitheatre, a frescoed cathedral and a secluded swimming pool: the 
many-tentacled Carnarvon gorge may be way out in Queensland’s central 
highlands, but there’s almost as much going on here as in the state’s glitzy 
capital, Brisbane. Even the rock art is under 24-hour video surveillance.

In contrast to the other gorges on our list, Carnarvon is lush and densely 
verdant, supporting a carpet of mosses, the world’s largest fern, waterfalls, 
turtles, swamp wallabies and platypuses. Carnarvon creek, which carved the 
600-metre-deep gorge into the landscape, has run dry only twice since records 
began.

Accordingly it has a cooler climate than the surrounding terrain, which means 
you won’t be able to blame the swelter for not getting around all 22km of track 
in the eight-hour day the park guide pamphlet recommends. However, it would be 
a shame not to take it slow and stayovernight to see one of the gorge’s 
<http://www.ausnatureguides.com/Pages/Carnarvon_Gorge_Nightlife_Tour.html> five 
species of glider wafting between the treetops.


Windjana gorge national park, WA

There’s a whiff of mysticism around Windjana gorge 
<http://parks.dpaw.wa.gov.au/park/windjana-gorge>, which cuts through the 
Kimberley’s Napier range, part of a 350m-year-old “Great Barrier Reef” of the 
Devonian period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aac869a995e0e088a1ae5f044869c546bd61063%2F236_0_2264_1358%2F2264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia's%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia%27s%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aac869a995e0e088a1ae5f044869c546bd61063%2F236_0_2264_1358%2F2264.jpg>
 Windjana gorge is beautifully set off by the mesmerising Lennard river. 
Photograph: James Draven for Guardian Australia 
Approach the wide canyon from along its sandy-bottomed centre and you are 
dazzled by glorious reflections of tiger-striped cliffs under azure skies, the 
seasonally fluctuating Lennard river providing a perfect mirror, occasionally 
rippled by the tail-flicks of dozing freshwater crocodiles.

Peek among the undergrowth and you’ll see magnificent nests, built by 
bowerbirds as a tunnel of twigs surrounded by a courtyard, elaborately 
decorated with bones and shells plucked from the limestone gorge walls.

Meanwhile the treetops teem with screeching corellas and fruit bats, the 
latter occasionally found desiccated among the branches, suspended in slumber.


Kings canyon, Watarrka national park, NT

No catalogue of the Australia’s best gorges would be complete without its most 
regal: Kings canyon.

Although its sylvan gorge-bottom walk would be suitable for all fitness 
levels, those with some more energy should strap on a pack and test their 
tickers with a hike up Heartbreak hill to the park’s drawcard: the canyon rim 
walk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dc87a252b02dc37dd6702b7bc8367268b88ab7e%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia's%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gorgeous%20gorges%3A%20where%20to%20find%20five%20of%20Australia%27s%20best&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fgorgeous-gorges-where-to-find-five-of-australias-best%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dc87a252b02dc37dd6702b7bc8367268b88ab7e%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Scaling Kings canyon rewards you with views across a landscape of immaculate 
isolation. Photograph: James Draven for Guardian Australia 
Up here you’ll realise just how young we all really are when confronted with 
ancient, honeycombed cliffs offering views across a landscape of immaculate 
isolation. Striped, beehive domes – whittled by millennia of elemental erosion 
– crown these crags, while antediluvian marine fossils are etched into the 
330m-year-old sandstone.

Allow time to make the detour down to the canyon’s verdurous waterhole: lined 
by 400-year-old cycads that have scarcely evolved since the Jurassic period, 
this natural oasis is known as the “garden of Eden”, which is kind of ironic 
given the prehistoric surroundings.

Where to stay

Hancock gorge:

Karijini Eco Retreat <http://www.karijiniecoretreat.com.au> is right in the 
park and offers campsites, ensuite eco tents, or cabins.

Nitmiluk gorge:

Nitmiluk gorge is an optional half-day excursion on the Ghan train  
<http://www.greatsouthernrail.com.au/trains/the_ghan>from Darwin to Alice 
Springs, so you can get some shut-eye in a sleeper carriage en route to Kings 
canyon.

Carnarvon gorge:

You’ll want your bed close by after a night wildlife tour, so check in to 
Carnarvon Gorge Wilderness Lodge <http://www.carnarvon-gorge.com>, adjacent to 
the park.

Windjana gorge:

Windjana gorge campground is suitable for caravans (but lacks powered sites), 
so you might want to hire a4WD camper 
<http://www.britz.com.au/campervans-australia/Pages/default.aspx>. 


More upmarket is the Spinifex Hotel <http://spinifexhotel.com.au>, just over 
two hours west in the town of Derby, orFitzroy River Lodge 
<http://www.fitzroyriverlodge.com.au/>, which offers a range of accommodation, 
and is about two-and-half hours south from Windjana gorge, but only an 
hour-and-a-half from the awesome Tunnel creek, which is worth a visit en route 
to Windjana.

Kings canyon:

Kings Canyon Resort  <http://www.kingscanyonresort.com.au)>offers 
accommodation ranging frofrom campsites to spa suites.
 