
Paul Giamatti and Thomas Haden Church in Sideways. Photograph: AP.

News yesterday <http://film.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,2138929,00.html> 
that there'snot one, but two 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/film/2007/08/why_hollywood_keeps_making_the_same_film_twice.html>
 films to be made about the1976 Judgment of Paris 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judgment_of_Paris_(wine)>, (the painful day for 
French viticulture when wine experts blindly chose a bunch of California wines 
over France's finest - no, I didn't know either), got me thinking about some of 
the great food and drink films that have been made.

One of the best, according to the folk on egullet's discussion board 
<http://forums.egullet.org/index.php?showforum=258>, is Mostly Martha, a German 
romcom <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mostly_Martha_(film)> which has just been 
remade, American style, asNo Reservations 
<http://noreservationsmovie.warnerbros.com/>. Warner Brothers have it set 
inside a fictional New York restaurant with Catherine Zeta-Jones playing the 
head chef. Looking atthe trailer 
<http://www.apple.com/trailers/wb/noreservations/trailer1/> , there seems to be 
some emphasis on food and the celebration of cooking, but I suspect it 
degenerates into a Hollywood feelgood; as Zeta-Jones cavorts with her sous chef 
she breathes such wistful lines as: "I wish there was a cook book for life." Oh 
dear. Still, it's probably worth a look just for some food porn.

And, no matter, because there have been some damn fine food and drink films 
made already.

I finally got round to watching Sideways last week - the story of a 
mid-life-crisis-ridden pair trekking through California's wine countryside - 
there were some great throwaway lines, mostly from the vino-loving Miles: "No, 
if anyone orders Merlot, I'm leaving. I am NOT drinking any fucking Merlot" and 
impassioned passages such as his paen to pinot: "It's a hard grape to grow ... 
It's, uh, it's thin-skinned, temperamental, ripens early. It's, you know, it's 
not a survivor like cabernet". Watching it left me somewhere between wishing I 
knew my wines and fearful of ever knowing wines that well.

Naturally enough, films about eating and drinking span all genres and budgets, 
from blockbusters, to art house films, documentaries, such as the Oscar-winning 
West Bank story, featuring duelling falafel joints on the West Bank (via 
foodmuseum 
<http://foodmuseum.typepad.com/food_museum_blog/films_featuring_food/index.html>
) or, of course, Spurlock's Supersize Me. But what makes a good foodie film?

I guess that's a matter of opinion. The gastronomically obsessive among us 
would probably stick with films specifically concerned with the celebration of 
food, such as Chocolat (on the manyonline discussions 
<http://stratsplace.zeroforum.com/zerothread?id=11716> around this subject, 
people often mention two films I haven't seen: Tampopo for comedy, Babette's 
Feast for drama), and perhaps entertain those that peripherally touch on the 
preparation of or and enjoyment of food and drink (I'm thinking of the likes of 
Fried Green Tomatoes,The Cook, The Thief <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0097108/> 
...). But then there's the largest category of all: those films that are not 
foodie at all but have culinary references or great food scenes that have taken 
oncult status 
<http://images.google.com/images?svnum=10&um=1&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&q=i+ate+his+liver+with+some+fava+beans+and+a+nice+chianti&btnG=Search+Images>
.

The sequence in Pulp Fiction springs to mind: "And you know what they call a 
... a ... a quarter pounder with cheese in Paris." Obviously, I have to allude 
here to what Hannibaldid to the census taker 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0102926/quotes>'s liver - yes, that's right, "with 
some fava beans and a nice Chianti" - incidentally, in the book, he favoured 
the lesser known Amarone - a full bodied red. Someone onChowhound's talk thread 
<http://www.chowhound.com/topics/303279> on the same subject voted the lobster 
sketch in Annie Hall 
<http://kitchen.apartmenttherapy.com/food/the-celluloid-pantry/the-celluloid-pantry-lobster-wrangling-and-annie-hall-1977-011215>
 the funniest food scene ever, others favoured the pastrami orgasm scene in 
When Harry Met Sally (personally, I know it's in a deli, but I don't think it's 
a foodie enough scene to count, although it's been good for the New York
restaurant where it was filmed <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katz's_Deli>). 
There was the fridge scene between Basinger and Rourke in eighties classicNine 
1/2 Weeks <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0091635/> - but I fear that takes us in 
to analtogether different discussion 
<http://www.gnovies.com/discussion/nine+weeks.html>. 

Moving swiftly on, which other great food and drink movies should we know 
about? And which are your favourite food scenes or lines? And worst?
 