
The government has backed down over plans to cut funding for training young 
apprentices a week before a House of Commons debate on the matter.

In a statement released shortly before the long-awaited announcement of a 
third runway at Heathrow,the government said it would change the proposals. 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-10-25/HCWS214>

Britain’s young and poor are being hit yet again – this time on 
apprenticeships | David Lammy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/young-poor-apprenticeships-social-mobility-cuts-funding>
Justine Greening <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, the 
education secretary, said there would be an extra 20% payment where training 
providers train apprentices aged 16-18. She also announced a “simplified 
version” of support for disadvantaged areas.

The change of heart follows a campaign led by the Labour MP and former skills 
minister David Lammy, whose north London Tottenham constituency would have been 
severely affected by the cuts.

Last month, 55 Labour MPs wrote to Robert Halfon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/04/uk-apprenticeship-funding-rethink-attacked-labour>
, the apprenticeships and skills minister, asking him to rethink proposals they 
said would involve cuts of 30-50% next year to funding paid to some colleges 
and training providers that teach young apprentices.

Lammy, who secured next week’s debate, said Greening’s changes addressed the 
main concerns of the proposals’ opponents: hitting 16- to 18-year-olds and 
scrapping support for the disadvantaged. But he criticised the government for 
releasing the original proposals during the summer recess and publishing the 
climbdown alongsidethe Heathrow decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
.

Lammy said: “Today’s U-turn shows that the government has begun to listen to 
the further education sector and to the strong opposition from the Labour 
party, particularly when it comes to protecting funding for 16-18 year olds and 
young people from disadvantaged backgrounds.

“If this government is serious about social mobility they must stop damaging 
the life chances of working class kids by slashing support for apprenticeships 
and skills training.”


As part of a push to raise productivity and address skills shortages, 
ministers have set targets to increase apprenticeship numbers and are
introducing a levy on larger employers from April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/12/apprenticeships-levy-will-go-ahead-next-year-uk-government-confirms>
 to help to fund new placements. The government has also presented 
apprenticeships as a way of tackling inequality.

But analysis of the proposed funding rates by the further education newspaper 
FE Week 
<http://feweek.co.uk/2016/08/19/exclusive-funding-rates-cuts-up-to-50-for-the-most-deprived-16-18-apprentices/>
 found the two most popular apprenticeships for 16- to 18-year-olds – the level 
2 apprenticeships in business administration and in construction – faced cuts 
of up to 52%, depending on location. The analysis also found that funding for 
many apprentices aged 24 and over would rise, particularly for those living in 
affluent areas outside the south-east and working for large employers.

Greening and Theresa May were questioned in parliament last month about the 
cuts by Labour MPs. Greening said she was working to get the plans right during 
a consultation periodbut May said she did not recognise the potential cuts 
identified by campaigners 
<http://feweek.co.uk/2016/09/14/theresa-may-does-not-recognise-30-50-potential-apprenticeship-funding-cuts/>
.

Announcing the changes, Greening said: “After extensive discussions with 
employers and training providers we are today publishing the final funding 
policy … The adjustments we have made to the funding policy since our proposals 
in August will help ensure that the reforms benefit more employers, providers 
and apprentices.”


Lammy said the backbench debate, supported by six political parties, would go 
ahead as planned.
 