
The Government Procurement Service (GPS) has said it wants to gain a complete 
picture of government software and generate more flexibility in its use of 
software licences.

Last week, the Cabinet Office confirmed that a recent prior information notice 
(PIN) for a system that would provide a centralised view of government software 
and "dynamic management of licence transfer" was issued in error.

The pre-tender for the management of government software assets and related 
licence transfer services was originally issued on 30 May and has now been 
cancelled.

But, the Cabinet Office told Guardian Government Computing: "..while the PIN 
has been published prematurely, we can confirm that we have undertaken some 
early market and stakeholder engagement to define the requirement before 
commencing full market engagement in the coming weeks.

"Further information will be published in due course. We recognise the 
importance and value of having a centralised view of government software assets 
with the dynamic management of licence transfer."

The government's recent end of first year ICT strategy report 
<http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/resource-library/one-year-on-implementing-government-ict-strategy>
 revealed that in the 12 months from April 2011 to April 2012, the total number 
of software licences held in the government's assets and services register was 
18.4m. But the total number used was around 12m, suggesting that 6m software 
licences are currently not being used.

Stephen Roberts, managing director of public sector market intelligence firm 
Kable, said: "The onus is on the government to make the most of licence 
consolidation deals with established vendors, so revenue is linked directly to 
the aggression with which consolidation is pursued, and the reliability of the 
data held.

"CDS, the web publishing SME which built the low-spec assets and services 
information repository Ask ICT, hopes to include a resource description 
framework in the next release. Perhaps the efficiency reform group plans to 
procure something more robust? When a formal tender emerges, the important 
questions would be quite how dynamic a licence transfer model, and what type of 
provider, the ERG has in mind."

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>.
 