
The education secretary asserts that "real" A-levels (Gove's bid to grab 
headlines will narrow pupils' learning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/27/michael-gove-headline-tory-leader-education>
, 28 January) engender a mysterious property known as "deep thought". There are 
many reasons why this isn't the case. First, each subject has a syllabus that 
states what will be taught and examined; this immediately limits the field of 
enquiry. Second, there has been a reduction in teaching time allotted to 
A-levels, leading to more cramming and stockpiling of "correct" knowledge. 
Third, it's an examination, not a programme of learning. A-levels are very good 
at excluding inquiring minds and those who ask challenging questions and at 
encouraging conformity; asNell Keddie suggested 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1754-8845.1971.tb00172.x/abstract>
 in 1971, "It would seem to be the failure of high-ability pupils to question 
what they are taught in schools that contributes in large measure to their 
educational achievement."
Peter Scales
Derby

• It is claimed that to get into Russell Group universities sixth-formers need 
to have grades of AAB in three "facilitating" subjects at A-level – maths, 
further maths, the three sciences, history, geography or a classical or modern 
foreign language. That 23.4% of schools, offering A-levels do not have any 
students achieving this outcome (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jan/24/gcse-results-success-sponsored-academies?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 25 January) was used to suggest that there is a serious failing in sixth-form 
provision. In fact it has never been the case that three of these so-called 
"facilitating" subjects are necessary for entry to our top universities. Unless 
their criteria are about to change (in which case could they tell us before the 
next generation of sixth-formers is advised?), it has always been the case that 
two of them are required. Otherwise someone who wants to read music at Oxford 
should not do music at A-level, or economics is not a relevant A-level for PPE 
at university.

The claim that a quarter of our A-level providers are failing by this measure 
is unfair. Many schools in very challenging circumstances have developed sixth 
forms to cater for students whose university and career aspirations lie 
elsewhere – in the 300 other institutions that offer degree courses. These 
students are well served by staff who work very hard on their behalf. Their 
task of now having to implement yet another wholesale revision of the post-16 
curriculum is not made easier by damning them with false claims and statistics.
Peter Rawling
Bracknell, Berkshire

• The AS examinations Michael Gove wants to abolish have widely benefited 
students, schools and universities (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jan/23/michael-gove-labour-exams?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 24 January). Students have been able to begin sixth form with four subjects 
(or more), then in the second phase focus on their core three; and year 12 
examinations have been a good preparation for later A-levels. Schools have 
valued the flexibility and additional structure of the system. Universities 
have been able to offer places on the basis of higher-level, if intermediate, 
exam results. The idea that removing AS will increase rigour, by concentrating 
minds on an end-of-course, make-or-break final exam, is a fond fiction, as 
those of us who knew the old system are well aware. Mr Gove's move appears 
calculated to reduce opportunity, narrow the sixth-form curriculum and make 
entry to higher education more of a lottery. In brief, there is no educational 
case for it.
Rev John Caperon 
Former head, Bennett Memorial diocesan school, Tunbridge Wells, Kent

• When A-levels were taken at the end of sixth form, 20% or 30% would fail 
individual subjects and thus would have effectively wasted two years of their 
life. The current modular system enables those who are struggling withA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> to make an informed choice 
about whether to continue after a year, and helps universities make offers 
based upon actual results at AS, rather than what are often inflated predicted 
grades. End-of-course exams are risky and many working-class pupils are likely 
to think them too risky, especially if their family has little history of 
academic success. So if Gove wants an education system that wastes people's 
time and taxpayers' money, emphasises failure rather than success, undermines 
fair selection for university places and narrows rather than widens 
participation, he is going the right way about it.
Martin Holborn
Carnforth, Lancashire

• Where are parents' – and indeed students' – voices in this sea of change 
that constitutes our education system? Among the barrage of initiatives 
introduced in less than three years, I have not once seen reference to any 
consultation with the key stakeholders. It is destabilising for young people to 
be uncertain about the hoops they will need to jump through to enable them to 
move on to the next stage of education, training or work. Surely those in 
receipt of a public service should have a say in shaping it? As things stand in 
education, they don't really know what that service is, let alone how to 
contribute to any dialogue about how it might be improved.
Fiona Carnie
Parent Councils UK  <http://www.parentcouncils.co.uk/>

• Apart from the highly contentious objectives of Michael Gove's proposals, 
their sheer number and timing should be ringing alarm bells throughout the high 
command of the coalition. If we only lived in a democracy, all the main 
partners would have to be consulted – teachers, parents, employers and 
students. In our elective dictatorship, successive secretaries of state since 
1988 have simply imposed their policies on those who must enact them. In doing 
so, however, they fatally weaken any claim they have to democratic legitimacy.
Frank Coffield
Emeritus professor of education, Institute of Education, University of London

• This year, just 38% of the independent Westminster school's year 13 managed 
A-levels in "facilitating subjects". Oddly, that didn't stop half of them being 
offered places at Oxbridge (the highest percentage of any sixth form in the 
country). Today's universities aren't looking for the narrow education that 
created Gove.
Lisa Freedman
Chief executive, At the School Gates <http://attheschoolgates.co.uk/>
 