
Nearly every major department could be in breach of the government's own open 
data license, after Cabinet Office ministerFrancis Maude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/francismaude> committed to force them to 
publish their spending data in transparent formats today.

The Minister, in charge of the government's transparency drive, said that 
departments who continue to publish the data in their annual reports in PDF 
format would be 'dealt with'.

"Data in annual reports in PDF, that is in breach of our own open government 
license - and we will deal with that," he said

The Open government License 
<http://data.gov.uk/blog/new-open-government-license> commits the government to 
publishing data inmachine readable formats 
<http://reference.data.gov.uk/id/open-government-licence> - spreadsheet files 
such as CSV or excel.
 Cabinet Office minister Francis Maude: "There's nothing fluffy about 
transparency." Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
Every year each department publishes its annual report including comprehensive 
total figures for each area of spending. The reports are the final word in each 
department's finances and are laid before parliament in July, according to 
Treasury best practice rules. Only theDepartment for International Development 
routinely publishes the data in its annual report as an excel download <>. 
Every department publishes them as Adobe PDDF files.

This year, both the Ministry of Defence and the Department of Health have 
still not published their annual reports and have said they will not do so 
until November - seven months after the end of the financial year they cover.

"There hasn't been a uniform enthusiasm" for the government's open data drive, 
Maude admitted.

The only alternative to annual reports is the Treasury COINS database 
<http://data.gov.uk/dataset/coins>, which at over 1GB, is inaccessible to those 
without the software to handle big data dumps. The treasury does publish the
Public Expenditure Statistical Analyses (PESA) 
<http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/pespub_index.htm> but it is less detailed than 
the reports themselves.

Maude called for journalists to embrace the thousands of datasets released by 
the Government to hold it to account. "Journalists everywhere need to engage 
with this data to expose waste, incompetence and corruption wherever they see 
it.

"That's why I'm issuing a call to arms to the media the world over to hold the 
feet of government officials and ministers like me squarely against the fire."

He says the the government has now published 8,000 datasets 
<http://data.gov.uk/>, making it the world leader in open data. 

"I don't have any doubt that giving our Press a lot of data to pore over will 
at times be uncomfortable for us in Government. But that's the whole point. A 
closed door culture encourages complacency at best and at worst corruption."

The Minister was speaking at an event 
<http://www.reform.co.uk/content/13958/events/future_events/the_future_is_open_conference>
 to mark the first anniversary of theOpen Government Partnership 
<http://www.opengovpartnership.org/> - of which Britain is now co-chair with 
Indonesia until September next year. The government is encouraging others 
around the world to duplicate what it has done by making the site's source code 
open.

"There's nothing fluffy about transparency. It's hard edged and demanding and 
serious," he said. "You have to mean it, you have to stick with it and when it 
gets uncomfortable you have to go through with it."

"Once it starts, you can't go back."

NEW! Buy our book

• Facts are Sacred: the power of data (on Kindle) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Facts-are-Sacred-Guardian-ebook/dp/B006PI9PQG/>

More open data

Data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data>

World government data

• Search the world's government data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world-government-data>

Development and aid data

• Search the world's global development data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store/global-development-data/search?q=>

Can you do something with this data?

• Flickr Please post your visualisations and mash-ups on our Flickr group 
<http://www.flickr.com/groups/1115946@N24/>
• Contact us at data@guardian.co.uk <mailto:data@guardian.co.uk>

• Get the A-Z of data <http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/page/2009/jun/17/1>
• More at the Datastore directory <http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store>
• Follow us on Twitter <http://twitter.com/datastore>
• Like us on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guardian-data/155291341187950>
 