
In all the years that I presented Autumnwatch 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/natureuk/2010/09/announcing-autumnwatch-2010.shtml> 
and have filmed nature as she distances herself from summer I have constantly 
been amazed by what I see.

Keats poetically catalogued autumn as the season of "mists and mellow 
fruitfulness", implying quiet and reflection.

But there is a drama unfolding amidst this seasonal shut-down that demands we 
get our walking boots on and the camera out.

Autumn <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/autumn> is nature's showtime. 
It displays "look what I've done this summer" brazenness, and an in-your-face 
final flourish before the chill of winter closes in.

The latest evidence is that autumn has dismissed an indecently late spring and 
is now appearing at a traditional time of year. Already hedgerow hawthorn is 
changing colour, the berries are brilliant, and we can expect our trees to 
reach full autumn tint this month.

Who would have thought that records started in 1736 by Robert Marsham as 27 
Indications of Spring 
<http://www.robertmarsham.co.uk/about-robert-marsham/indications-of-spring/> on 
his Norfolk estate would have survived and blossomed to be the UK's foremost 
index of seasonal sightings?

For 62 years Marsham recorded some 27 natural events relating to more than 20 
animals and plants. His records were resurrected, expanded to cover autumn and 
today the Woodland Trust'sNature's Calendar <http://www.naturescalendar.org.uk/>
 represents a unique snapshot of climate change thanks to citizen-science data 
fed in by thousands of nature lovers. Oak leaves are now, for example, not 
falling until at least the end of October, a week later than 30 years ago.

But autumn data still lags behind that for spring, when we all get excited by 
first hazel catkins and snowdrops. So why not record your own sightings? 
Otherwise we won't advance the evidence of how autumn is changing.

I personally love to see the first fieldfares returning in October, those 
bustling, upright mistle thrush lookalikes with a dash of breast ochre whose 
flocks will straggle across our countryside until spring.

Redwings, our smallest true thrush, are also coming back from Scandinavia. 
Look for the creamy strip above the eye and orange-red flank patches.

Has there ever been a better display of nature's fruits too? Fat red rose hips 
remind us of the days we turned to the fruits of the humble dog rose for our 
vitamin C, and hawthorn hedges are packed with vibrant red berries.

Look for the sun gleaming on tiny ripening crab apples, compare the purple of 
wild plums, damsons, the damask and the "brave the thorns if you dare" clusters 
of sloes on prickly blackthorn.

It's a bumper crop of blackberries and hanging clusters of elderberries are 
just begging to go into a wine brew.

Our trees are reluctantly giving up their precious walnuts, chestnuts, acorns 
and cob nuts with a fleeting good luck wish as these miniature works of art 
fall to the ground. Will they germinate or be eaten? Either way the tree's job 
is done.

The jury's still out on any serious colour-rush Indian summer. If it does 
happen, look for ash, birch, field maple, silver birch, rowan, wild service and 
wild cherry to lead the way.

For any photographer, the magic of autumn has much to do with the light. The 
sun never gets high, resulting in a special golden light as the perfect 
backdrop for camera work. Even the bark on a tree looks different.

Last winter a friend planted a new wildlife wood with help from the Woodland 
Trust MOREwoods programme 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/en/plant-your-own-wood/morewoods/Pages/freewoods.aspx>
 helping landowners to plant native trees on their own land. His tiny field 
maple, rowan, hazel and hornbeam saplings are now approaching their first 
winter.

He's been like an anxious parent, nurturing them through a summer drought, 
watching as his Lilliputian forest takes on an autumn hue like infants donning 
their first school uniform and taking the most amazing pictures as nature has 
started to colonise.

For years to come he will have his own nature's studio on the doorstep. What a 
lucky man.

• Share your photos of autumn on our Flickr group 
<http://www.flickr.com/groups/guardiangreenshoots/>

• Simon King will soon be launching his new website, Wildlife Whisperer 
<http://www.wildlifewhisperer.tv/>, for people to find, watch, photograph and 
enjoy wildlife. He is also an official ambassador forWoodland Trust's 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk>, 'More Trees, More Good' campaign 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/en/more-trees-more-good/Pages/campaign.aspx>.
 