 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409937851577%2Fa0cf6f20-9720-41fc-8d87-5b0a5bbb736c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409937851577%2Fa0cf6f20-9720-41fc-8d87-5b0a5bbb736c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Grafenegg festival’s outdoor stage, built in 2007. 
An unseasonally cold August Saturday, the Grafenegg Estate on the borders of 
the Danube, northeast Austria. Inside a new glass-fronted concert hall a young 
woman in jeans sits cross-legged on the foyer’s floor, head bent in 
concentration, conducting an imaginary orchestra as she reads a score. Inside 
the auditorium sit another four young composers, one eye also on their own 
scores, the other on the young man on stage tentatively conducting the 
Tonkünstler orchestra’s wind and percussion sections as they rehearse his own 
composition. This young conductor/composer is only 16 and it’s his first 
experience of conducting a professional orchestra. Indeed it’s his first time 
of even using a baton. At his sideLothar Zagrosek 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lothar_Zagrosek> watches intently and shows the 
gloriously named Franz Ferdinand August Rieks how, say, to bring the musicians 
in with a more decisive upbeat, how to communicate with the orchestra and 
establish exactly what he wants from them and from his piece.

Rieks and his five fellow composers are participants in Grafenegg festival 
<https://www.grafenegg.com/>’s Ink Still Wet scheme, presided over this year by 
the festival’s composer-in-residenceJörg Widmann <http://www.joergwidmann.com/>
. Taking place over the second (of four) weekends of the festival, the scheme 
comprises a series of workshops enabling composers to rehearse and conduct a 
new work with a professional orchestra, culminating in a public performance of 
each short composition conducted by the composers themselves. This year’s six 
participants (two women, four men) are aged from 16 to 33, and come from 
Cyprus, Denmark, Germany, Spain and South Korea. No conditions are imposed on 
entry levels, although it does invariably attract young and relatively 
inexperienced composers. What sets this scheme apart though is its emphasis on 
conducting.

Which makes it, Widmann admits, particularly tough. “It’s painful - you’re 
exposing yourself in front of everybody, you’re standing in front of the 
orchestra, you’re hearing your piece for the first time, you’re nervous, and 
then you have to conduct!” But, “even if a composer, at a later stage in life, 
will not conduct his own work, this will have helped him know it’s not his 
thing,” says Widmann, who believes that perhaps the most important thing for a 
composer is simply to hear their own music.

Widmann is in huge demand as a performer as well as as a composer, and his 
hectic schedule meant that he asked Zagrosek to assist him on the scheme’s 
conducting duties. Not that Widmann is shirking. He sits, too, watching the 
morning’s workshops from the stalls, offering feedback and advice after each 
composer’s 30-minute session. Over three days, the composers work with the 
string and then the wind sections finessing their compositions, they then get 
to conduct the full orchestra, and are videoed, and their work on the page and 
the podium are analysed at a further workshop. On the third final day they 
conduct their short pieces in a public concert.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409938298519%2F2c822447-d99b-4d25-b793-4b39a9fb103b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409938298519%2F2c822447-d99b-4d25-b793-4b39a9fb103b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Widmann (far left) and Zagrosek (next left) work with young composers in an 
Ink Still Wet workshop, at 2014’s Graffenegg festival. 
“I take very seriously and literally the term composer in residence. I’m not 
somebody who accepts something like that and then turns up just one time and 
then disappears,” says Widmann. “Ink Still Wet is a great scheme. To work with 
a professional orchestra, there’s no better way - no theory book, no teacher - 
for a young composer to learn.” Widmann might not have had access to such 
schemes when he was still wet behind the ears, but he did have the advantage of 
musician friends and a violinist sister. “I would always be asking my sister 
stuff like ‘what happens when you turn the violin upside down and scratch it?’ 
he smiles. “She would look at me and say ‘it’s not possible’, but then the next 
morning she’d have came up with an idea about it and together we’d discover 
something new!”.

“The most difficult thing for a composer is to find your own voice. It’s to do 
with trusting yourself,” he says. “The majority of these young composers have 
written traditional pieces. They’re writing rhythms that have existed for 100, 
150 years which is understandable as there you can find security, but while 
what Lothar is trying to do is to give them more security in their conducting, 
my task in a way is to give them less security - to tell them to take risks. 
Create your own rhythm. Don’t write what already exists!”

Widmann’s works and his own virtuosic and exquisistely lyrical clarinet 
playing form the backbone of this year’s festival. Over its four weekends, he 
performs in six concerts, his compositions feature in seven; his specially 
composed fanfare opened the festival itself on 14 August. Over the next four 
weeks a dazzling array of world-class orchestras and soloists are visiting, and 
the festival concludes this weekend with a visit from theVienna Philharmonic 
and Gustavo Dudamel <https://www.grafenegg.com/programm/16617>. Most concerts - 
weather permitting - are in the Greek-style ampitheatre theWolkenturm 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/81/Wolkenturm_Grafenegg.jpg> 
(tower of clouds) built in 2007, the year the festival began. “When architects 
were bidding for the contract to build the outdoor stage,” the estate’s owner 
Tassilo Metternich-Sandor says, “we told them they would have to work with an 
acoustician, and warned that in the event of disputes, the acoustician would 
always have the last word!”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409938792172%2F8ca824f5-184c-4dcc-be04-5ce45d080398-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409938792172%2F8ca824f5-184c-4dcc-be04-5ce45d080398-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Graffenegg’s fairytale castle, modelled on Surrey’s Strawberry Hill. 
Metternich-Sandor <https://www.grafenegg.com/spielstaetten/schloss_/Metternich>
 is a descendant of the famous 19th centuryAustria diplomat Prince Metternich 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klemens_von_Metternich>, his family lived in the 
castle until 1945. It’s an eccentric mix of styles (some as early as the 
renaissance), with a predominantly 19th century exterior, modelled on the 
faux-gothicStrawberry Hill <http://www.strawberryhillhouse.org.uk/>. It was 
occupied by Soviet troops from 1945-1955 who stripped it of most of its 
furniture and valuables when they left Austria, taking 12 wagonloads-full back 
east, but they did leave the library furnished with books of Soviet 50s 
propaganda, include 12 volumes of the Life of Stalin, all still on display 
today.

The festival has given new life and purpose to the estate, its parklands are 
now beautifully landscaped, and the futuristic ampitheatre feels an organic 
part of the landscape, and several rooms on the ground floor have just this 
year been converted to state-of-the art rehearsal spaces. (Just continuing the 
castle’s traditional hodge-podge of styles, Metternich-Sandor laughs.) In 2008 
an indoor concert hall was built (capacity 1,400) to which performers are 
relocated in the event of rain. Not all 1,700 ticket holders for the outdoor 
stage can then be accommodated, but as well as the option of full refund, you 
can opt to watch a live relay of the performance in another large indoor hall 
next to the auditorium. But you’re not just buying a ticket to a concert, but, 
Glyndebourne-style, entry to the beautiful and tranquil grounds of the 32-acre 
estate where on a sunny day, I can think of no more idyllic place to while away 
several hours, lazing in one of the yellow deckchairs that dot the lawns, 
picnicking and gently exploring. Seek out the “composer trees” - each year’s 
composer-in-residence is given a tree planted in his (or her, but its only been 
his so far) honour. Penderecki (purple indian bean tree) still asks about his, 
says Metternich-Sandor, and adds that all the trees are flourishing although 
one - he won’t say which, did have to be discreetly replaced when it succumbed 
to disease.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409938065356%2Fff8148e1-6b2d-4a78-b0c3-ff21ad7f276a-1020x1005.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grafenegg%20festival%3A%20the%20best%20of%20both%20worlds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fgrafenegg-festival-jorg-widman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409938065356%2Fff8148e1-6b2d-4a78-b0c3-ff21ad7f276a-1020x1005.jpeg>
 A case in the castle’s library displays details of Widmann’s tree and a signed 
page of his Babylon Suite that premiered at the festival. 
Widmann (lime tree) meanwhile is heading to London as soon as the final notes 
of this year’s festival sounds. He’s got two UK premieres in the Proms, with 
the Cleveland Orchestra pairing his music with Brahms’. “What an orchestra!” he 
says. “It’s a great honour. I was their composer-in-residence for two years, 
they really know my music well. Franz Welser-Möst is not a man of many words, 
but when he believes in something he just does it!”

He wrote his flute concerto for their principal flautist Joshua Smith, who 
plays it on Sunday evening’s concert. The next evening brings Teufel Amor, 
inspired by Schiller’s lost poem. Widmann also reveals tantalising glimpses of 
future UK plans, including a 17/18Wigmore <http://www.wigmore-hall.org.uk/> 
residency, and that he’s in ongoing talks with Covent Garden about a new opera. 
“But I want to find a librettist first and a subject I’m interested in,” he 
says. “That’s a better way than accepting a commission and waiting and waiting 
for inspiration that maybe does not come.”

Plus his head, he admits, is still full of 2012’s Babylon 
<http://www.bayerische.staatsoper.de/889-ZG9tPWRvbTEmaWQ9Mjg1MyZsPWVu-~spielplan~oper~veranstaltungen~vorstellung.html>
, whose revival under Daniel Barenboim is currently being discussed, and whose 
music formed the basis for the Babylon Suite premiered at the festival the day 
before. “For me, Miles Davies was, along with Picasso and Stravinsky, the 
artist of the 20th Century,” he says. “As a player, the notes hedidn’t play, 
are the most wonderful I’ve ever heard! The silence he created in between notes 
is just… fantastic.”

 “And, like a snake, he always got rid of his skin. When people thought they 
knew what he was going, say cool jazz, he was always somewhere else. That’s 
what I very much believe in. I don’t want to repeat myself.”

The Cleveland Orchestra give the UK premiere of Widmann’s Flûte en suite on 7 
September <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/september-07/15122> and of 
Teufel Amor <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/september-08/15128> on 8 
September.The Grafenegg Festival runs until 7 September 
<https://www.grafenegg.com/>.

 