
Graham Linehan <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/graham-linehan> and Adam 
Buxton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/15/adam-buxton-favourite-tv> 
are writing a sitcom set in space for Channel 4.

The Cloud centres on the crew of a station floating around the Earth.

Cloud Station 13 is described as a place set up to protect the vast amounts of 
information humanity now hoards on its devices – the majority of which 
comprises selfies, pictures of kittens and a lot of porn.

The disparate group manning the hub are billed by the makers as being far from 
technical whizzes which is problematic as the technology – including a largely 
voice-activated ship - is unreliable.

Linehan is the creator of Father Ted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/father-ted> and The IT Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/27/it-crowd-finale-great-comedy-ayoade-odowd>
, while Buxton boasts credits includingAdam & Joe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/01/adam-and-joe-return-to-bbc-6-music>
 andThe Persuasionists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jul/06/adam-buxton-six-to-watch>
.

Nerys Evans, deputy head of comedy at Channel 4 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/graham-linehan-adam-buxton-captain-new-channel-4-comedy-pilot?hootPostID=f73a70590e3d60a4f1a29ccfa88f9ae1>
, commissioned the pair to come up with the pilot, which is set to shoot in 
this spring.


Buxton will star alongside Aisling Bea <http://www.aislingbea.com/> (Trollied) 
andJamie Demetriou 
<http://www.theinvisibledot.com/events/the-invisible-dot-ltd-edinburgh-2013/171-jamie-demetriou-people-day>
 (Cockroaches) in the pilot produced and directed by The IT Crowd’s Richard 
Boden.


Boden has an established working relationship with Linehan, sharing 
directorial duties on previous series The IT Crowd, The Walshes and Count 
Arthur Strong.

The comedy writing duo have been working together on a space-based idea for 
some time, according to reports.

Buxton told the British Comedy Guide <http://www.comedy.co.uk/> in 2013 that 
he was working with Linehan on a show that was sci-fi, describing it as 
“something I’ve always wanted to do”.

Linehan and Buxton previously teamed to develop East European animator 
character Pavel, which Buxton rolled out during a spot at the Edinburgh Fringe 
in 2005. The Cloud is the pair’s first TV project together.


Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> is expected to decide 
on whether or not to commission a series later this year.
 