
Graham Carr is set to stay at Newcastle United following a meeting with Mike 
Ashley, the club's owner. Newcastle's super-scout was widely regarded as de 
facto director of football beforeJoe Kinnear's shock appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/18/newcastle-united-joe-kinnear-hired>
 to that newly formalised role and had been considering his position on 
learning he would be answerable to the former Wimbledon manager.

Although Carr and Alan Pardew have not always seen eye to eye with Newcastle's 
manager frustrated by his inability to have the final say on signings, some of 
which he disagreed with, Carr has made some excellent buys, most notably Hatem 
Ben Arfa and Yohan Cabaye.

Carr's departure would have left Kinnear solely responsible for recruitment 
but now the pair will work together, with recruiting a striker – possibly Aston 
Villa's Darren Bent – their top priority. Meanwhile Douglas, the FC Twente 
defender is reported to be heartbroken by the late collapse of hislong mooted 
move to Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/18/newcastle-twente-brazil-defender-douglas>
, which was due to be finalised this week but instead ended up being vetoed by 
Kinnear at the 11th hour.

Meanwhile Alan Shearer has rebutted the suggestion from John Irving, 
Newcastle's financial director that the club had liaised with him over the name 
change which will see St James' Park'siconic Shearer's bar re-invent itself as 
a venue called "Nine" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jun/20/newcastle-alan-shearer-bar-sign>
 when it re-opens next month.

"There was no consultation," said Shearer. "I was simply informed by email of 
the decision to change the name, it was not a question of agreeing or 
disagreeing. It's their ground and it's up to the owners to do what they want 
with it. It won't stop me from buying my season ticket and supporting the team."

Although it was a coincidence that news of the name change emerged shortly 
after Shearer criticised Kinnear's appointment, the long planned switch can be 
seen as a clear reflection of Ashley's lack of affection for the club's former 
centre-forward.

Shearer is still adored by Newcastle fans who will regard Irving's comment 
that the popularity of "Shearer's" bar had "dwindled" as a slight on the 
one-time England striker.
 