
There is a strong rumour that gravitational waves – one of astronomy’s holy 
grails –have been found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/12/gravitation-waves-signal-rumoured-science>
. Rumours have been circulating since November that ‘something’ was detected in 
September 2015. Analysis is currently ongoing and if everything checks out an 
announcement is expected in February.

The rumour of this possible detection was first mentioned in The Guardian on 7 
December by Paul Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/07/einstein-universe-gravitational-waves-theory-relativity>
. Now the story has now taken on a life of its own, thanks to a tweet by the 
physicist and author Lawrence Krauss.

However, we must regard this with caution at the moment. In the past, the 
Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (Ligo) management team has 
“injected” signals into the data to check whether the team can actually 
recognise them. The most recent of these “blind injections” occurred in 2010.

Scientists struggle to stay grounded after possible gravitational wave signal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/12/gravitation-waves-signal-rumoured-science>
After months of painstaking analysis 
<http://www.ligo.org/news/blind-injection.php#sthash.xcYObjtZ.dpuf>, everyone 
involved was convinced that they had seen a signal from two dead stars 
colliding to create a black hole. They wrote three scientific papers to 
announce the discovery and fully detail the procedures they went through to 
convince themselves. The “discovery” paper was titled Evidence for the Direct 
Detection of Gravitational Waves from a Black Hole Binary Coalescence.

Then 300 of the scientists involved gathered in California in March 2011, with 
a further 100 connecting in via video links, to decide where to publish the 
paper and how to make the announcement.

It was here that the management told them it was a hoax. A blind injection to 
test the team’s ability to recognise and react to a real discovery.

So even if the rumours are true and scientists have now seen something in 
their data, it may not be real. The procedure in the past has always been that 
the scientists are only told after the analysis and paper writing is done. 
However, Krauss went on to claim that he had been told this is not a blind 
injection.

Even if it isn’t an injection, it may not be a gravitational wave. A 
gravitational wave researcher told me this morning, “There are many noise 
sources other than injections that could at first glance look promising. Hence 
it would be a bold call to come to any conclusions before the analysis has been 
completed, analysis that has been very carefully designed.”


One reason for the excitement is that a gravitational wave detection would 
represent the beginnings of a revolution in astronomy. Not the kind of PR-hype 
revolution that seems to happen as frequently as people wash their socks but an 
actual bona fide revolution in astronomy.


It would represent a unique way to study celestial objects; one that is 
totally removed from the traditional methods of collecting light and associated 
emissions such as radio waves, infrared and X-rays.

Instead, gravitational waves are minuscule ripples in the fabric of space that 
are predicted to exist by Einstein’s monumental gravitational theory, General 
Relativity. They are given out when matter is accelerated, such as when stars 
explode or black holes are pulled together to collide.

The great man himself thought that gravitational waves would be impossible to 
measure because they are so small as to almost defy imagination. He had a point.

Just like ripples on a pond cause floating leaves to bob up and down, so 
passing gravitational waves cause atoms to do the same. But the movement is 
less than one-thousandth the width of an atomic nucleus.

It has taken decades of effort to build detectors capable of seeing such 
signals. Around 1000 scientists from all around the world collaborate on Ligo, 
which has two detectors in the US. There is also the Virgo interferometer in 
Cascina, Italy.

An interferometer consists of two arms that stretch for several miles at right 
angles to one another. Mirrors bounce laser light along these arms repeatedly, 
increasing the distance travelled to about 60 miles.

The lasers are synchronised so that they race along their different arms in 
perfect synchrony. This is known as “full lock”. Any passing gravitational 
waves will minutely alter the laser paths knocking them just off full lock. The 
effort has been in developing equipment that is sufficiently sensitive to 
register this eventuality.

A series of major upgrades at the Ligo and Virgo sites mean that the teams now 
have equipment that is entering the sensitivity needed according to Einstein’s 
predictions. Ligo is the detector at the heart of the current rumour. Virgo is 
not set to finish its upgrade and begin taking data until the autumn.

Because the two detectors will double check each other, physicists involved 
had even given a tongue-in-cheek prediction for the first detection:1st January 
2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/feb/12/the-hunt-for-gravitational-waves-could-be-nearing-success>
. If this rumour is true, then they have improved on that by a year and Ligo 
has “scooped” Virgo.

Whether this latest rumours turns out to be a gravitational wave or not, what 
is clear is that there is an unmistakable movement towards opening this window 
and studying the gravitational universe.


In December 2015, the European Space Agency launched the LISA Pathfinder  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/mar/03/european-space-agencys-gravity-probe-leaves-uk-for-final-tests-before-launch>
spacecraft to test super-sensitive technology needed for detecting 
gravitational waves from space that will always remain impossible to pickup 
from the ground.

Stuart Clark <http://www.stuartclark.com/> is the author of The Unknown 
Universe 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Unknown-Universe-About-Chapters/dp/1781855749/ref=tmm_hrd_title_0>
 (Head of Zeus), and co-host of the podcastThe Stuniverse 
<https://www.acast.com/stuniverse> (Bingo Productions 
<http://www.bingofilms.co.uk/>).
 