
The discovery of gravitational waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
 could “revolutionise astronomy”, Prof Stephen Hawking said as he congratulated 
scientists on their groundbreaking work.

The top cosmologist said the breakthrough tallied with predictions he made 
more than 40 years ago at Cambridge University.

He told the BBC: “Gravitational waves provide a completely new way of looking 
at the universe. The ability to detect them has the potential to revolutionise 
astronomy. This discovery is the first detection of a black hole binary system 
and the first observation of black holes merging.”

Gravitational waves: breakthrough discovery after two centuries of expectation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
Hawking, research director at Cambridge University’s Department of Applied 
Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, said: “The observed properties of this 
system is consistent withpredictions about black holes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/jan/08/stephen-hawking-science-greatest-hits>
 that I made in 1970 here in Cambridge. The area of the final black hole is 
greater than the sum of the areas of the initial black holes as predicted by my 
black hole area theorem.”

Asked what more could be discovered if scientists scanned for gravitational 
waves, he said: “Apart from testing general relativity, we could hope to see 
black holes throughout the history of the universe. We may even see relics of 
the very early universe during the big bang at the most extreme energies 
possible.”

Prof John Womersley, chief executive of the Science and Technology Facilities 
Council, paid tribute to the UK’s contribution to the discovery. He said: “It 
has taken 100 years and the combined work of many hundreds of the cleverest 
scientists, engineers and mathematicians on Earth to prove that this key 
prediction ofAlbert Einstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alberteinstein> is correct and show that 
gravitational waves exist.

“Of course, Einstein was always the smartest guy in the room. Today’s results 
also remind us just how important the UK’s contribution to world-leading 
science is. I’d certainly like to think that some of the smartest people on 
earth today are living and working in the UK.”
 