
So what? I heard on the radio on Thursday that scientists had discovered 
gravitational waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
 and were thus closer to the dawn of time. I was walking past a newsstand 
shouting of a Syrian massacre and an NHS meltdown. A beggar asked me for a few 
pence. What really mattered?

We can understand cancer cures and Alzheimer’s breakthroughs. We can cope with 
genetic engineering and crop improvement. But what of big bangs and black 
holes? They remind me of putting men on the moon and buildingHadron Colliders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2015/dec/16/end-of-year-event-at-cern>
, Big Science extracting vast sums from naive politicians with no clue of value 
for money in research. This is rich man’s science, and should probably be left 
to rich men to finance. That is what I thought as I walked down the street.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20discovering%20gravitational%20waves%20changes%20everything%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20discovering%20gravitational%20waves%20changes%20everything%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video&media=>
Why discovering gravitational waves changes everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video>
Then I began to wonder. The vastness of the universe has always been the 
greatest challenge to the human imagination. Gazing at the stars was the 
earliest manifestation of humanity struggling to rise above life on Earth. This 
was not just the search for extraterrestrial guidance, phoney or real. It was 
the overwhelming question, one that sent some people mad and others screaming 
into religion. It was the taxi driver who asked Bertrand Russell: “So what’s it 
all about then, Bert?”

Gravitational waves: breakthrough discovery after two centuries of expectation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
There is no bigger question than the Genesis one: how did it start? I read 
news of “ripples in the fabric of space-time”. I read that scientists had 
“listened for 20 milliseconds” as two black holes circled each other like wary 
boxers, then collapsed into “a dark and violent merger”. They had detected “a 
distortion one thousandth of the diameter of one atomic nucleus across a 4km 
strip of laser-beam”. I could only gasp. The verification of the gravitational 
waves emitted by the earliest cataclysm does not answer the Genesis question, 
but even a layman can see it as a building block of an answer.

Our knowledge now stretches far beyond the bounds of the visual universe. We 
can deploy measuring systems at the outer limits of understanding. To explain 
their work astrophysicists have to rely, like theologians of old, on earthly 
metaphors. Adam and Eve are now wary boxers, bangs and mergers.

Curiosity is the essence of being human. Science, which systematises that 
curiosity, is programmed to plunge into the unknown, to marry reality to 
curiosity. We all want to know how we all came to be. It is the deepest 
question of all.
 