
On the one hand, this was expected. We know that mass bends space and time, 
and so when mass moves it really should cause ripples in space and time, in 
much the same way that a gymnast moving on the surface of a trampoline causes 
ripples in the cloth.

On the other hand ... Well, there are several other hands actually.


Gravitational waves: 'we can hear the universe' – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/live/2016/feb/11/gravitational-wave-announcement-latest-physics-einstein-ligo-black-holes-live>
Firstly, we have seen ripples in space-time!  And the fact that we expected 
them makes that even more amazing in some ways. The understanding of the fabric 
of the universe which is contained in Einstein’s general relativity has made 
yet another valid prediction. In fact, the beautiful elegance of that theory is 
a little deceptive – actually solving those equations to get a real prediction, 
which tells you what kind of experiment you need to build to test the 
prediction, is a major mathematical challenge and a towering achievement in 
itself.


Then there is the experiment. As gravitational waves pass through the Earth 
(and now we know for sure they must be doing this all the time) they distort 
distances, compressing them in one direction while stretching them in the 
perpendicular direction. The experiment measures the ratio of these distances, 
down to a precision of thousandths of the size of a proton. This achievement, 
and the scientific discipline required to make sure you are not fooling 
yourself, is daunting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20discovering%20gravitational%20waves%20changes%20everything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20discovering%20gravitational%20waves%20changes%20everything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fgravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video&media=>
Why discovering gravitational waves changes everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-changes-everything-video>
Again, this is perhaps especially true when you think that the waves were 
expected. A “null result” would have been amazingly interesting, and also quite 
hard to believe. The obvious explanation would be that the experiment just 
wasn’t working properly, did not in fact have the claimed sensitivity. So 
preparing the defence against that criticism was a major concern, involving the 
injection of fake data, lots of double-blind internal secrecy and so on, to 
make sure that if these ripples were there, LIGO would indeed see them. They 
were there, and it has seen them. The data, the same wave pattern seen in two 
detectors, are stunning and totally convincing.


Gravitational waves: everything you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/09/gravitational-waves-everything-you-need-to-know>
I’d like to draw an analogy with my own research at CERN’s Large Hadron 
Collider. Before it was discovered in 2012, the Higgs boson was expected by the 
majority of particle physicists. Many theorists (including Peter Higgs) would 
have been astonished if it didn’t show up. But when it did, it still had a huge 
impact, both emotionally and scientifically. Knowing is different from 
guessing, measuring is different from predicting. In the case of the Higgs, we 
are now exploring the higher-energy reaches of inner space armed with an 
understanding of the origins of mass. In the case of gravitational waves, we 
can now begin to observe the universe in an entirely new way, and it is 
difficult to predict what we may learn from that.


For example, so-called Dark Energy, which drives the accelerating expansion of 
the universe, may affect the way gravitational waves travel to Earth from their 
distant sources, and that means we might get some clues as to what Dark Energy 
actually is. There may be unexpected sources of gravitational waves out there. 
Gravitational waves are obviously a lot harder to see than electromagnetic 
waves – light, radio, microwaves – but if we think how much we have learned 
from astronomy using ripples in electromagnetic fields, it is impossible not to 
be thrilled by the prospect of studying the universe using ripples in spacetime 
itself.


Jon Butterworth is a physics professor at University College London 
<http://www.hep.ucl.ac.uk/~jmb/>. He is a member of the UCL High Energy Physics 
group <http://www.hep.ucl.ac.uk/> and works on the Atlas <http://atlas.ch/> 
experiment atCern’s <http://public.web.cern.ch/public/> Large Hadron Collider. 
His bookSmashing Physics: The Inside Story of the Hunt for the Higgs 
<http://www.dianebanks.co.uk/science-current-affairs-and-history-authors/smashing-physics>
 was published in May 2014
 