
It began life dismissed by critics, and with just 2 million viewers on BBC2. 
NowThe Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> is on 
course to be the biggest TV show of 2015, breaking its own ratings records set 
last year and attracting an average audience of 12 million.

At a time when some of TV’s biggest shows are struggling to reverse a 
long-term decline in ratings, the current series of the BBC1 cookery show, 
presented by Mel Giedroyc and Sue Perkins, is up 2 million viewers on last year.

Mel and Sue return as ringmasters of Bake Off tent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/31/mel-and-sue-back-for-the-great-british-bake-off-again-next-week>
 The programme “feels like a phenomenon that is still on the rise”, said 
Charlotte Moore, the controller of BBC1.

“It’s very joyful – it came out of a time when the country was deep in 
recession – and I think there is something brilliantly warm and pure about it,” 
said Moore, seeking to explain the series’ extraordinary popularity.


Last year’s final, won by Nancy Birtwhistle, was watched by 13.5 million 
viewers – making it the biggest entertainment show of the year, beaten only by 
England’s defeat by Uruguay in the football World Cup. It looks set to be 
surpassed by this year’s final, in two weeks’ time

“It might be about baking and putting things in the oven but actually you are 
on the edge of your seat,” argued Moore. “It creates tension out of something 
so simple – it makes you care that someone’s buns turn out all right, or their 
cake rises like they want it to. It’s a very intense personal drama.”

The show can also be unconventional. One episode last year was “all about 
waiting”, Moore remembered. “They had to work out when to take it out of the 
oven, and nothing happened for about six minutes. It was brilliant.”

Among those bidding to make it through Wednesday’s semi-final is the 
programme’s youngest contestant, a 19-year-old student, Flora Shedden. She will 
be up against a photographer, Ian Cumming, the competition’s early favourite, 
trainee anaesthetist Tamal Ray, and Nadiya Begum, who said she was “so excited 
I could streak down the river” afterbeing named star baker in last week’s 
quarter-finals. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/live/2015/sep/23/the-great-british-bake-off-episode-eight-live>

Bake Off’s Mel and Sue: It’s just a show about cakes – but it means a lot to 
people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/19/great-british-bake-off-mel-giedroyc-sue-perkins-its-a-show-about-cakes>
Richard McKerrow, creative director of the programme-maker, Love Productions, 
said: “We have this saying – love the bakers, love the baking.”

Before the launch of the current series, McKerrow said: “That is the crucial 
heartbeat of the show, to love the characters, to care about the contributors, 
and to look after them. Mel and Sue do that. Cooks tend to be show-offs – this 
is a very broad statement – but bakers are great people, they are givers, they 
are people who give to society.”

The current series peaked with episode five, which was watched by 12.4 million 
viewers, narrowly behind the most-watched programme of 2015 to date, the final 
of Britain’s Got Talent on ITV, which reached 12.7 million.

Despite a perception that the programme is only popular with older viewers – 
the average age of BBC1’s viewers is 59 – almost a third of Bake Off’s audience 
are under-35s, according to theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

The series is now being remade for a US audience, with Mary Berry reprising 
her judging role in the show, which will be filmed for American networkABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> using the same marquee in the grounds 
of Welford Park in Berkshire.

It doesn’t need scandal or huge incident, it is just incredibly watchable
Boyd Hilton 
Producers will hope it is a bigger success than The American Baking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/baking> Competition, for rival US 
network CBS, which featured Berry’s fellow judge, Paul Hollywood, and was axed 
after one series two years ago.

The UK version has been screened in nearly 200 territories and the format sold 
to more than 20 countries. It does not make money for the BBC in the same way 
as shows such as Top Gear, Doctor Who and Strictly Come Dancing, however, 
because it is made by independent producer Love, which is majority-owned by Sky.

Boyd Hilton, TV editor of Heat magazine, said: “This show must drive Simon 
Cowell crazy. He keeps changing The X Factor to find better or more interesting 
judges, whereas Bake Off has been the same lineup since year one.

“It’s the increasing realisation that it is the most purely enjoyable thing to 
watch. It doesn’t need scandal or huge incident, it is just incredibly 
watchable. It might be the cosiest of genres – baking cakes – but it’s not 
bland, there is still the competitive element. It’s become a cultural 
phenomenon; it almost feels like you have to watch it.”
 