
Ansel Adams' pioneering photographs of great American landscapes have inspired 
millions and made him one of the US's most popular photographers.

A new exhibition opening today at London's Greenwich Maritime Museum brings 
together a large collection of his work â€“ showing not just his more famous 
images of US mountains and national parks but also pieces that capture the 
country's ocean and rivers.

Inspired by the quality of photographs we get sent each month to the Been 
there photography competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/series/been-there-photo-competition>, we'd 
love to see your images of great wildernesses around the world. We'll be 
publishing a selection of the best photos onguardian.co.uk/trave <http://www..>.
In the meantime take a look at the photos we've been sent so far:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fcooliris.sw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fcooliris.sw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fcooliris.sw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
And take a look at a gallery of images from the exhibition here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/gallery/2012/nov/09/ansel-adams-photography-exhibition-london>
.

How to share your photos with us

Email a high resolution jpeg or tiff photo file (maximum file size 20mb) to 
your.photos@guardian.co.uk <mailto:your.photos@guardian.co.uk> with "Mountains 
and seas" in the subject heading and a short description in the email with your 
name, location and where and when the picture was taken. The deadline is at 6pm 
on 16 November 2012.

We'll feature some of our favourite pictures from the group on 
guardian.co.uk/travel <http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel>. By sending us your 
pictures you a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have 
permission to do so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence 
to publish your pictures as described. Copyright resides with you and you may 
reuse your pictures however you wish.Full terms and conditions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/help/terms-of-service>.
 