
In the case of Judi Dench, one is confronted by an embarrassment of riches. I 
could choose her famous 1976Lady Macbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/31/fright-nights-theatre-rarely-scares>
, opposite Ian McKellen, that suggested a terrified apprehension of the satanic 
powers the thane’s wife has invoked. In that same Stratford season, Dench was 
also an unforgettable Beatrice to Donald Sinden’s Benedick inMuch Ado About 
Nothing <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/12/donald-sinden>: this was 
a woman whose bright-eyed merriment concealed a badly bruised heart.

Best Shakespeare productions: what's your favourite Antony and Cleopatra?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/02/best-shakespeare-productions-antony-and-cleopatra>
If I finally select her Cleopatra in Peter Hall’s 1987 National Theatre 
production ofAntony and Cleopatra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/02/best-shakespeare-productions-antony-and-cleopatra>
, it’s because the performance contained everything that makes Dench a great 
actor: her deeply Shakespearean ability to blend the tragic and the comic, her 
lightning shifts of mood, her capacity to make the verse sound as it sprang 
from her imagination.

Her initial reaction when Hall cast her as Cleopatra is well known. “I hope 
you know what you are doing,” she told him. “You are setting out to direct 
Cleopatra with a menopausal dwarf.” That, of course, was the very last thing we 
saw. In place of the conventional sultry temptress, Dench gave us a Cleopatra 
whose sexuality stemmed from her volatility, intelligence and wit: a woman of 
infinite variety who was enthralling company and an irresistible magnetic 
force, drawing Anthony Hopkins’s jaded warrior of an Antony back to Egypt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwZ_xoXWhW5o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwZ_xoXWhW5o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwZ_xoXWhW5o&media=>
All the great Dench qualities were there. She caught both the vanity and 
humour of a Cleopatra who, on being told by a messenger that Antony’s new Roman 
bride was 30, huffily picked up her skirts and sped for the exit. Dench also 
showed her matchless ability to shift, in a few moments, from breathy languor 
to ironic humour and a pensive melancholy as she wanly reflected on “my salad 
days when I was green in judgment”.

But, for me, the true test of the performance came when Cleopatra is 
confronted by Antony’s death. I often get restless during the long adagio of 
that final act. But Dench made one magnificently aware that Cleopatra’s 
recollection of a heroic Antony (“His legs bestrid the ocean; his reared 
arm/Crested the world”) was a sustaining fantasy: Dench delivered the words 
with the fierce intensity and intoxicated rapture of someone reliving a dream.

I am reminded of something the critic James Agate said of one of Dench’s 
illustrious predecessors,Edith Evans 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/features/2011/greatest-stage-actors-edith-evans/>: 
“That she takes hold of the dramatist’s conception, absorbs it and then gives 
it out again, re-creating it in terms of her own personality and delighted 
imagination.” That fits Dench perfectly. In the case of Cleopatra, she took 
Shakespeare’s character and endowed her with a restless vivacity and emotional 
ecstasy that must have come both from within Dench herself and her own 
extensive imagination.
 