
The UK's maverick weather has claimed its most expensive victim with the 
cancellation of theGreat Yorkshire Show <http://www.greatyorkshireshow.co.uk/>, 
one of the biggest events in the national farming year.

Organisers at the Yorkshire Agriculture Society <http://www.yas.co.uk/> 
reluctantly took the unprcedented decision at 6.15pm today, Tuesday 10 July, 
after it became clear that car parks would be unusable tomorrow and on Thursday.

The cancellation is the first caused by weather in the show's 154-year 
history, although the Second World War and the2001 foot and mouth epidemic 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/february/21/newsid_2519000/2519703.stm>
 led to previous closures.

Emergency measures had already been put in place to limit parking and provide 
extra shuttle buses from Harrogate station to the Yorkshire Showground, a 
permanent site which has almost always resisted weather problems in the past. 
Coaches dropped off passengers nearby rather than parking on site, but the 
system was wrecked by a massive afternoon downpour.

Cars slid around in mud and every animal trailer needing to move on, off or 
around the site had to be hauled by a fleet of tractors and caterpillar-tracked 
vehicles. By 4.30pm the teams had to turn their attention to rescuing stranded 
cars.

Staff running the Â£2.2 million event, which brings a huge annual boost to the 
region's economy, cancelled all horse events early in the afternoon but soon 
realised that this would be enough. After an emergency meeting, the show's 
spokeswoman Lady Emma Ingleby emerged from the management tent to say that the 
decision had been taken with great regret but was unavoidable on safety grounds.

It is extremely upsetting because of all the tremendous hard work and 
disappointment which has gone into the organising, as well as the great 
disappointment for visitors.


The cloudburst later moved east towards the North Sea and tomorrow and 
Thursday's weather in the Harrogate area is forecast to be dryer, with even 
some sunshine. But the damage had been done and in spite of vast piles of straw 
and absorbent dried grass prepared as an emergency surface for muddy areas, the 
society decided that it had no way of guaranteeing safe access in time.
 