
The Greens will announce that they will spend $265.2m on community-owned 
renewable energy projects, including allowing these to generate tax-free 
profits from the electricity created.

The Greens energy spokesman, Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, will announce the 
four-year package on Saturday in North Fitzroy at an apartment block seeking to 
establish a community-owned renewable project.

The Greens plan to create a $150m community energy start-up fund for 50 
projects. The money will go towards planning, development, part of the capital 
costs and two years of operational funding.

They will spend $102.9m on community groups, schools and other local 
institutions to invest in solar panels and storage, including some capital 
costs.

Renewable energy smashes global records in 2015, report shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/01/renewable-energy-smashes-global-records-in-2015-report-shows>
The policy proposes allowing households and businesses to generate tax-free 
profits from their investment in community-owned clean energy. This will be 
capped at 150% of the annual average household electricity consumption and cost 
$4.3m over four years.

The Greens also want to fund a network for community organisations to share 
information about renewable projects and have reiterated their opposition to 
regulatory barriers to such ventures.

Bandt said: “The Greens want Australia to become a renewable energy powerhouse.

“Not everyone is able to put solar on their home but by investing in 
community-owned renewable projects they are still able to be part of the solar 
revolution,” he said.

“Australians are fed up with their energy companies. They want to take control 
of their electricity bills and do their bit to turn Australia’s energy system 
from one of the dirtiest in the world to one of the cleanest and help tackle 
climate change.”

Labor has promised $98m for community power hubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/01/australian-election-2016-bill-shorten-malcolm-turnbull-campaign-politics-live?page=with:block-574e3165e4b098522011d4b6#block-574e3165e4b098522011d4b6>
, which it said would give people who don’t own their own roofs access to solar 
power.

In a statement on Wednesday, the Labor climate change spokesman, Mark Butler, 
said: “While the rest of the world added 2m jobs in renewable energy over the 
last two years, Australia went backwards and lost over 2,000.

Renewable energy: rapid acceleration needed to meet 2020 target
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/04/renewable-energy-rapid-acceleration-needed-to-meet-2020-target>
“It is in everyone’s interest that confidence be restored, and that 
small-scale renewables be encouraged. Not just so that all Australians can have 
equal access to lower electricity bills, but also to secure jobs and lower 
carbon emissions for the economy as a whole.”

Labor has also promised that, if elected, the federal government will source 
50% of its energy from renewable sources by 2030.

It has set a target for Australia to be using 50% renewable energy by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/malcolm-turnbull-labors-climate-targets-will-destroy-australias-bargaining-power>
, compared with the Greens’ target of 90%.

In May, the Greens pledged a five-year support package for battery storage 
technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/05/greens-want-12m-households-to-install-renewable-energy-storage>
 that would be rolled out to 1.2m homes and 30,000 businesses, estimated to 
cost $2.9bn.
 