
A Greenpeace ship impounded by Russia has left the country nearly a year after 
armed coastguards stormed it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/19/greenpeace-protesters-arrested-arctic>
 in response to a protest against oil drilling.

The Arctic Sunrise, one of three of the group’s fleet, left Murmansk in the 
Arctic circle on Friday, following several weeks of repairs.

Last September, the ship was held in custody by Russian authorities and 30 
campaigners and journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2013/oct/14/greenpeace> 
were imprisoned after two Greenpeace activists boarded a Gazprom oil rig in 
protest at the company’s plans to drill for oil in the Arctic.

The detainment of the so-called “Arctic 30” without charge prompted 
international calls for them to be freed, leading to the Russian authorities
eventually bailing the final activist in November 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/28/arctic-30-final-greenpeace-activist-bailed>
.

Greenpeace said the ship, which Russia released in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/06/arctic-30-sunrise-russia-to-release-greenpeace-ship>
, was in a state of disrepair when crew were finally given access to it.


Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> International 
Arctic campaigner Faiza Oulahsen said: “When the captain and crew boarded the 
Arctic Sunrise they found it in a bad state, with no maintenance for 10 months, 
and the ship’s navigation, communications and safety systems either removed or 
destroyed.

“The Arctic Sunrise is now headed for Amsterdam, where the ship will need to 
undergo extensive repairs, so that it can get back to protecting the Arctic 
from reckless oil companies like Shell and Gazprom”.


Referring to the number of people who have signed up to the group’s campaign 
against oil drilling in the Arctic, captain Daniel Rizzottisaid 
<https://twitter.com/gp_sunrise/status/495116929187991552>: “We sail home with 
with the voices of 5 million Arctic defenders in our ears. This is a new 
beginning.”
 