
The Greens have struck a preference deal with LGBTI rights party Australian 
Equality which may help the Greens win key Victorian seatsHiggins 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/vic/higgins.htm> and Batman 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/vic/batman.htm>.

The Greens will give their second preference to the Australian Equality party 
in the Victorian Senate and in return will receive the minor party’s 
preferences in those two inner-city Melbourne seats andMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> Ports.

The Australian Equality party (Marriage), also known as the Marriage Equality 
party, was founded in 2014 and could prove a wild card in the double 
dissolution as it has not contested a federal election before.

Fairfax's YourVote same-same but a little different from ABC's Vote Compass
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/10/fairfaxs-yourvote-same-same-but-a-little-different-from-abcs-vote-compass>
It is running in the Queensland, Victorian and South Australian Senate races 
and plans to preference the Sex party after the Greens in those races.

Batman and Higgins, held by Labor’s David Feeney and assistant treasurer Kelly 
O’Dwyer, aretwo of the eight lower house seats the Greens are targeting at the 
2016 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/01/the-third-man-greens-leader-richard-di-natale-campaigns-his-own-way>
.

At the 2013 election the Greens polled 16.8% in Higgins, behind Labor on 24% 
and O’Dwyer on 54.4%. The Greens hope that the Australian Equality party will 
draw votes from the Liberals in Melbourne’s inner east, which has a high LGBTI 
population.

Australian Equality preferences may be crucial in helping the Greens’ 
candidate Jason Ball finish ahead of Labor candidate Carl Katter, which may 
then help the Greens beat O’Dwyer with Labor preferences.

In Batman, the Greens aim to topple Feeney, who has struggled in the campaign 
due tofailing to declare a $2.3m house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/labors-david-feeney-i-racked-my-mind-about-forgetting-to-declare-23m-house>
 andan interview in which he failed to explain Labor’s position on the school 
kids’ bonus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/25/david-feeney-endures-car-crash-tv-interview-and-blames-23m-house-furore>
.

Greens MP Adam Bandt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> 
said the party welcomed the support of the Marriage Equality party.

“This is a big boost for our campaign to take a seat off the Liberals and to 
unseat factional warlord David Feeney,” Bandt said. “Both parties want to end 
discrimination and achieve marriage equality so this agreement makes sense.”

Australian Equality party lead Victorian Senate candidate, Jason 
Tuazon-McCheyne, said: “Though there is much we respect about the Labor party 
and the Coalition, it is the Greens’ strong human rights approach to policy 
that resonates most with the core values of the Australian Equality party.”

He described the Greens as “the most consistent of the large parties” on LGBTI 
rights issues.

Tuazon-McCheyne is a married gay man, a marriage celebrant and former 
Christian minister. He told Guardian Australia the Equality party is just the 
second LGBTI rights party in the world.

He said the party is “a definite wild card chance for the last Senate seat in 
Victoria”, citing as reasons for confidence three years of campaigning, 800 
members nationwide and a planned advertising blitz in the last weeks of the 
campaign.

Many Australians don't understand new Senate voting system, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/10/many-australians-dont-understand-new-senate-voting-system-poll-finds>
“The Australian Equality party will ensure Australia has a consistent voice 
for fairness, equality and LGBTIQ inclusion in parliament. We’re not a 
left-leaning party, and 43% of our members are Liberals or usually vote 
Liberal.”

Tuazon-McCheyne said gay and lesbian Liberals were disillusioned with the 
party’s policy to hold a marriage equality plebiscite, which he said was an 
attempt by opponents of same-sex marriage to block the social change.

The Greens have already decided to preference Labor in five inner-city 
Melbourne seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/08/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup>
: Batman, Higgins, Melbourne, Melbourne Ports and Wills.

However, the Greens are still considering running open tickets in other seats, 
whichLabor has warned may help the Liberals win other marginal seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/labor-liberals-greens-asylum-policy>
.

On Wednesday, Bandt it was the Greens’ “longstanding position” that branches 
have a say in preference allocation and “to give voters power by saying vote 
one Greens and decide the rest of preferences yourself”.

“At almost every election that I can recall there have been seats that have 
run what’s called open tickets ... and I imagine you’re going to see people 
doing that again.”

Bandt also called on Labor to rule out preferencing the Liberals ahead of Nick 
Xenophon in South Australia as part of a deal whereby the Liberals would 
preference Labor ahead of the Greens in inner-city seats to disadvantage both 
the minor parties.
 