
The Greens are struggling to pick up extra lower house seats targeted in 
Sydney and Melbourne where supporters were hoping for an upset and look set to 
return to parliament with the same number of senators the party had in the 
previous term.



Melbourne MP Adam Bandt <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>
 was comfortably elected for a third time but as it stands he remains the lone 
Green in the House of Representatives, while in the Senate, the party has lost 
Robert Simms in South Australia but looks to gain a Senator in Queensland.

Greens hopes of gains in Batman and Melbourne Ports hanging in the balance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/greens-celebrate-close-election-contests-in-batman-and-melbourne-ports>
But Greens leader Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale> was 
high-spirited on Sunday, saying the party maintained hopes for taking the 
Victorian seats of Melbourne Ports and Batman from Labor, which remain too 
close to call. The party stood candidates in all 150 lower house seats across 
the country, with party sources claiming there has been a national swing 
towards them of around 2%.

However, Australian Electoral Commission figures have the party with 9.9% of 
the lower house vote, representing a swing towards them of 1.3%.

“We have had an extraordinary result in terms of the Greens vote across the 
country and certainly here in Victoria in some key seats,” Di Natale said.

“What we’ve seen in some states like Victoria is a swing higher than our 
national average. Victoria clearly is a powerhouse for theAustralian Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-greens> right now.”

Di Natale said early on in the election campaign he believes the seats that 
will turn to the Greens within the next decade include Batman, Wills, Kooyong, 
Melbourne Ports, and the Liberal seat of Higgins in Victoria, Grayndler, 
Wentworth, Sydney, and Richmond in NSW, and Fremantle in Western Australia.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jul/2016-07-03T02:10:48/embed.html>
This election, they had highest hopes for the increasingly gentrifying seats 
surrounding Bandt’s in Victoria; Higgins, Wills, Melbourne Ports and Batman.

The Greens deployed extraordinary resources into Batman in a bid to get 
perpetual candidate Alex Bhathal over the line. Despite an army of 600 
volunteers knocking on 30,000 doors, key campaign strategists from Bandt’s camp 
being assigned to the electorate, and sitting Labor MP David Feeneystumbling 
his way 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi14NmMu9bNAhXDkJQKHec4Ba4QFggbMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Flabors-david-feeney-i-racked-my-mind-about-forgetting-to-declare-23m-house&usg=AFQjCNE0wk4l1pG891lhvtbs5ufm4XBa-Q&sig2=uhXSjSCvnOz1nHEQC6vW1A&bvm=bv.126130881,d.dGo>
 through anembattled campaign 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjQ1q-mu9bNAhUCJZQKHW-lAIYQFggbMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fdavid-feeney-criticised-for-supporting-500000-grant-for-school-under-investigation&usg=AFQjCNGdFlyG9RaEdTVbqglpVzy77saAbA&sig2=doJiEJYuuhyz0a8p2LKJ7Q>
, election night did not deliver a clear result.

With 45 of 48 polling places returned, Feeney remains just ahead with 51.45% 
of the vote. But Di Natale rejected suggestions the Greens had been too 
optimistic in trying to target four Victorian electorates and should have 
instead focussed resources solely on Batman. He also denied that given the 
resources allocated to the seat, Bhathal should have polled more strongly.

“We were coming from a mile behind,” Di Natale said. 

“Let’s remember what needed to be achieved here. We needed an extraordinary 
swing, because the Liberal and Labor party exchanged preferences. Unlike other 
marginal seats, what we needed to do was get over the combined Labor-Liberal 
vote.

“That’s a huge mountain to climb. To be right near the pinnacle of that in 
Batman and Melbourne Ports is a reflection of a terrific campaign. I don’t 
think anyone could suggest that a swing of 10-to-12% is anything other than an 
extraordinary success.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Frichard-di-natale-im-most-proud-of-how-we-have-campaigned-for-refugees-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Di%20Natale%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20most%20proud%20of%20how%20we%20have%20campaigned%20for%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Frichard-di-natale-im-most-proud-of-how-we-have-campaigned-for-refugees-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Di%20Natale%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20most%20proud%20of%20how%20we%20have%20campaigned%20for%20refugees%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Frichard-di-natale-im-most-proud-of-how-we-have-campaigned-for-refugees-video&media=>
Richard Di Natale: I’m most proud of how we have campaigned for refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/01/richard-di-natale-im-most-proud-of-how-we-have-campaigned-for-refugees-video>
Preferencing is what has left Melbourne Ports hanging in the balance, where 
Greens candidate Stephanie Hodgins-May is fighting to pull ahead of Labor’s 
Michael Danby, who has preferenced the Liberal candidate Owen Guest before the 
Greens.

A strong grassroots campaign for LGBTI activist and former Australian Rules 
footballer Jason Ball in Higgins saw most polling stations in the electorate 
plastered in green, and a visible force of volunteers on the ground before 
election day. But Liberal MP Kelly O’Dwyer held on, achieving 56.7% of the vote 
with 69.5% of ballot papers counted.

In the days before the election the Di Natale talked-up Ball’s chances, saying 
it could be “the upset of the election” and describing it as one to watch. It 
was a tough ask of Ball, with Higgins previously considered a safe Liberal 
seat. Ball nonetheless achieved 43.3% of the vote, with a 3.2% swing against 
O’Dwyer.

Di Natale maintained the seat and that of Wills were likely to fall to the 
Greens in the next federal election, when much smaller swings will be required, 
saying; “we have cemented the foundations of our party”.

Meanwhile, Di Natale attributed Simms failure in the Senate to the success of 
the Nick Xenophon Team. Currently in the Senate, they have 8.84% of the vote, 
representing a swing against them of 0.39%. He took aim at far-right One Nation 
leader Paulin Hanson, whose political career has resurrected after she gained a 
Queensland Senate spot.

“We can be certain that Pauline Hanson has made a successful return to the 
Senate,” he told reporters on Sunday.

“Let me just say; the Greens will stand against her racist and bigoted agenda. 
We won’t roll over like John Howard did when Pauline Hanson first came onto the 
political scene federally. We’ll take it right up to her.

Police to investigate ALP text messages warning Coalition to privatise Medicare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/police-to-investigate-alp-text-messages-warning-coalition-to-privatise-medicare>
“In a modern Australia there is no place for racism, there is no place for 
bigotry, there is no place for the sort of hatred she’s spreading through her 
views.

“We will be the opposition to her in the senate, taking it right up to her and 
letting her know that we would rather a country that doesn’t pray on people’s 
fears and anxieties, but rather that appeals to their better nature, that 
brings this country together rather than divides it in the way that she will.”

Whoever formed government would find the Greens pushing for strong action on 
climate change and more compassionate treatment of asylum seekers, Di Natale 
said.

He criticised the Labor party for its approach to campaigning on the 
privatisation Medicare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/police-to-investigate-alp-text-messages-warning-coalition-to-privatise-medicare>
, saying “of course, the Labor party over-egged it,” but he added the Coalition 
had “brought it upon themselves”.

“Unfortunately under the Coalition, with the freezing of the Medicare rebates, 
with the gutting of the public hospital agreement and ripping billions away 
from public hospitals, they did take the hatchet to our health system,” he said.

“The privatisation issue was, to be frank, a side-show. The truth was scary 
enough.”
 