
The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, has spent the 
day before the election campaigning in Higgins, where his candidate Jason Ball 
hopes to make history by defeating the Liberals’ Kelly O’Dwyer, and in 
Melbourne, the only lower-house seat the Greens hold.

The Melbourne MP, Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, in 2010 became the 
first Greens MP elected to the House of Representatives in a general election 
and held on to his position in the 2013 election despite the Liberal party 
directing preferences to Labor.

Jason Ball says the Greens are 'in with a chance' against Liberal Kelly O’Dwyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/10/jason-ball-says-the-greens-are-in-with-a-chance-against-liberal-kelly-odwyer>
Bandt has sent key members of his 2013 campaign team to work with Ball in 
Higgins in the hope that it will give the former Australian rules footballer 
the boost he needs to make a federal Liberal seat turn Green for the first 
time. The campaign has been a grassroots one, relying on door-knocking and 
phone calls from hundreds of volunteers.

Flanked by Di Natale and dozens of Greens volunteers, Ball told reporters on 
Friday morning that he believed he had done enough to win.

“People in Higgins want strong action on global warming,” he said. “They want 
an economy powered by clean, renewable energy. And they are dismayed by the 
race to the bottom from the old parties when it comes to the issue of people 
seeking asylum. They also want equality, for their sons, daughters and 
grandchildren, and they don’t want money spent on a wasteful plebiscite that 
won’t be binding.”

A poll commissioned by the Greens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/14/polling-shows-kelly-odwyers-seat-within-greens-grasp-after-collapse-in-support>
 last month found O’Dwyer’s vote in the seat thought to be safe Liberal had 
fallen by 10.3% to 44.1%. While, if true, it would make her vulnerable to Ball, 
she may still scrape over the line after preferences. The poll found Ball had 
increased his party’s primary vote by nearly eight percentage points to 24.1%, 
putting his party in second position on primary votes, ahead of Labor’s 
candidate, Carl Katter.

It has been a difficult week for O’Dwyer, who has faced questions about 
campaign advertising and been embarrassed bya Twitter investigation 
<https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__www.smh.com.au_federal-2Dpolitics_federal-2Delection-2D2016_federal-2Delection-2D2016-2Dkelly-2Dodwyer-2Dunder-2Dfire-2Das-2Dtwitter-2Dgives-2Dgreen-2Dto-2Dfake-2Daccount-2D20160629-2Dgputu4.html&d=CwMFaQ&c=ptMoEJ5oTofwe4L9tBtGCQ&r=ZRm2XwhewrM1EFKhCSrxP4D5f1w9AeAz1-lbHjtao38&m=SIj4HOb4mXT6Df0esP90QkJF1Rkmv23spRUXLO8QRKI&s=pt1QJddx9pB6Ai_fEPnP0jiHuta6wUqUzLP1ooV15dI&e=>
 into why the Liberal party claimed copyright over photos that allegedly 
belonged to Fairfax in order to have them removed from the social network. The 
Twitter page has since been restored.

“I think all elections are really important, they’re hotly contested,” she 
told reporters. “I don’t take this seat for granted.”

Asked about confusion over her campaign advertising, she said “I’m just 
focused on the issues in this electorate” before cutting the interview short.

Distractions aren't helping David Feeney hold off a Greens tide in Batman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/30/distractions-arent-helping-david-feeney-hold-off-a-greens-tide-in-batman>
Di Natale told Ball supporters: “It’s the Greens that are saying let’s create 
jobs in the renewable economy, let’s save the reef by taking strong action on 
climate change, let’s stop locking up those young kids and families in those 
hellholes offshore and let’s transition Australia to a fairer, more 
compassionate, more prosperous place.


“At this stage, our job is to get people elected to the lower house of 
parliament and, if we do it, we’ll have constructive negotiations. Our aim is 
to make sure our focus is on those policy outcomes.”

However, he later said that strong climate laws were “the No 1 priority” for 
the Greens going into the next parliament.

“No matter who wins the election this Saturday, the most important challenge 
for the next three years is taking strong action on global warming,” he said.

In Melbourne with Bandt later on Friday, Di Natale spoke with voters at an 
early polling centre on Queen Street and handed out how-to-vote cards. Bandt 
said he was confident of retaining the seat, despiteLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> insiders saying he is 
vulnerable to their candidate, the lawyer Sophie Ismail.

In the line of early voters was Dragan Kitanovsai, 36, who lives in Fitzroy 
but is originally from Canada where same-sex marriage is legal. He said he 
would be voting for Bandt.

“The main platform I’m concerned about is gay marriage and I support the 
Greens view on that,” he said. “It’s a vote for the LGBTI youth, for them to 
know that they are equal. It’s a human right for them to grow up knowing that.”

Richard Di Natale: Greens will not deal on closing offshore processing centres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/30/richard-di-natale-greens-will-not-deal-on-closing-offshore-processing-centres>
The Greens believe same-sex marriage should be legalised through a vote in 
parliament and the plebiscite, which they say will be divisive and a waste of 
money, should be scrapped.

A voter in the electorate of Higgins approached Di Natale in Melbourne, 
introducing himself as Pete. He told Di Natale that he and his husband would be 
celebrating their 10-year wedding anniversary in September, adding that they 
were married in Canada “and yet it’s still not legal here”.

“Well, we’re gonna change that,” Di Natale replied. 


Edward Dean, 19, voting for the first time, said he would also be voting 
Greens, in the Melbourne electorate.

“I was discouraged by how split Labor was in terms of policies on refugees and 
asylum seekers,” he said.
 