
Builders would be pushed to advertise for and hire Australians and use 
Australian steel under two amendments to the building code attached to the 
industry watchdog bill proposed by the Greens.

The amendments are calculated to wedge the Nick Xenophon Team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon-team> and One Nation, 
who the Greens fear are close to a deal with the government to reinstate the 
tougher Australian Building and Construction Commission.

Attached to the ABCC bill is a construction code that extensively regulates 
the industrial conditions of companies who wish to bid for government work.

In amendments to be circulated on Friday, the Greens propose that companies’ 
agreements must include provisions ensuring nobody is employed on a building 
site unless the position is first advertised in Australia, and “the employer 
demonstrates that no local worker is suitable for the job”.

Rod Culleton and the associates who claim 50 years of Australian laws are 
invalid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/rod-culleton-and-the-associates-who-claim-50-years-of-australian-laws-are-invalid>
Construction is one of the biggest industry employers of workers on temporary 
skilled 457 visa 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/BN/2012-2013/SkilledMigration>
, and employs many working holidaymakers and other visa holders.

In comments to Guardian Australia in October, Dave Noonan, national 
construction secretary of the Construction Forestry Mining Energy Union,argued 
that One Nation should oppose the ABCC bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/12/xenophon-calls-for-subcontractor-protections-and-may-back-abcc>
 because the government’s version of the code would ban agreements that 
preference Australian workers over visa-holders.

The second Greens amendment would require companies to ensure that “no less 
than 90% of the steel ... used in a particular building work” is made in 
Australia, except if it is a special kind of steel not manufactured in 
Australia.

Nick Xenophon has asked the government for an amendment to encourage use of 
Australian building products, similar to one he proposed earlier.That amendment 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22legislation%2Famend%2Fr5602_amend_e781767b-55a2-494e-a1d1-294efc6f0da7%22>
 does not mandate use of Australian steel, but merely states materials must be 
of Australian standard and requiring companies to explain the extent to which 
they will use local products.

On Monday, One Nation, NXT and senator Derryn Hinch combined to pass the 
government’s registered organisations commission bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/one-nation-senator-shoots-down-labor-bid-to-amend-anti-union-bills>
 after the Coalition made concessions on whistleblower laws.

Hinch has said that a deal on the ABCC bill is likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/22/abcc-bill-stands-good-chance-of-passing-derryn-hinch-says>
 because the government is taking crossbench demands seriously, although 
Xenophon has said he does not expect an agreement before next week.

Greens industrial relations spokesman, Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, said the amendments 
are a test of Xenophon and One Nation’s “professed commitment to Australian 
jobs and industry”.

“Senator Xenophon is set to sell out local industry by giving the government 
another early Christmas present with little to show in return,” he said.

“Senator Xenophon talked big about Australian steel before the election and 
now is his chance to do something about it.”

Bandt said Pauline Hanson would be tested to “see whether [she] is serious 
about looking after local jobs or whether she just talks protectionist in 
Queensland to win votes then backs the elites when she’s Canberra”.

Xenophon told Guardian Australia it was good that the Greens were “on the same 
page” about the need to encourage use of Australian products.

He said his amendments would be “practical and effective”, and rebutted Greens 
claims he was not driving a hard enough bargain by noting they had not seen his 
amendments.

“We need to rethink the culture of Australian procurement to maximise 
Australian industry and jobs across the board.”

Xenophon is negotiating with the government on a range of other amendments 
includingconsideration of uniform security of payments laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/12/xenophon-calls-for-subcontractor-protections-and-may-back-abcc>
 to prevent subcontractors being ripped off.

On Tuesday Hinch said he wanted the government to promise not to apply the 
build code retrospectively, or at least only to apply to workplace deals struck 
in the past six months.

The code attached to the ABCC bill would apply to enterprise agreements struck 
after 24 April 2014, whichgives it retrospective effect because it bars builders
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/26/michaelia-cash-criticised-over-industrial-relations-bill-with-retrospective-powers>
 from government work based on deals struck before the code was in place.

Although One Nation senator Rodney Culleton has criticised the ABCC, on 
Wednesday Hanson said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/pauline-hanson-reasserts-control-of-one-nation-after-chaotic-day>
 it was “not the case” he would vote differently to his One Nation colleagues.
 