
From David Attenborough to Rob Hopkins, founder of the Transition Town 
movement, the Observer Ethical Awards has honoured many movers and shakers in 
ecological and social justice. So it seems fitting to launch our sixth awards 
by profiling the 20 global figures who'll exert influence in 2011. For those on 
our list, the coming year might best be described as "take your partners" time, 
as activists and corporates scramble for power – and we're predicting some 
unlikely marriages ahead. Commentators have noted that big business is taking 
an unprecedented interest in the environment and are pushing for conservation 
capitalism. The really big decisions from the climate-change conference in 
Cancun have effectively been rolled over to December's summit in Durban when 
the pressure is on to come up with a successive treaty to Kyoto, and we 
highlight the likely stars in Durban. It also celebrates those who inform our 
cultural, political, business and activist lives. From retail to politics, 
these are the people who will set the tone for how green issues are perceived 
and how the planet is protected.

ECO ICON: DAVID TAKAYOSHI SUZUKI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/mar/12/conservation.climatechange>

The eco warrior's eco warrior, Suzuki is a scientist and author of dozens of 
books (his latest isThe Legacy) who has long been frustrated by time-wasting 
over the planet's precarious position: "We're in a giant car heading towards a 
brick wall and everyone's arguing over where they're going to sit." Now his 
radical conservation methods are the subject of a film,Force of Nature, 
directed by Sturla Gunnarsson. Billed as Suzuki's last definitive lecture 
(let's hope not: he's only in his 70s and the planet could do with him for a 
good while longer), it also charts how Pearl Harbour changed the course of his 
Japanese family's history and how Suzuki was one of the first scientists to 
become a counter-culture folk hero. It is the first green film of 2011 and may 
turn out to be the most important.

DEFENDER OF THE RURAL POOR: HENRY SARAGIH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jan/05/activists.ethicalliving>


There are grassroots organisations, and then there's La Via Campesina. An 
alliance of small-scale farmers and rural workers in their millions, it has 
become their most vociferous champion as "peasant farmers" all over the world 
face down forced evictions because of the rise in agrofuels and monocultures 
backed by transglobal corporations. It is widely believed that the world is at 
a crucial crossroads and that without a struggle small-scale producers will 
disappear. Not if General Secretary Henry Saragih has anything to do with it – 
as head of the Indonesia Peasant Union, he has also fought the so-called "palm 
oil barons". As theGuardian's John Vidal puts it: "How this struggle plays out 
in the next 20 years will determine whether there is any rainforest left intact 
in southeast Asia in 50 years' time, and possibly the political future of many 
developing countries."

BIRD-LOVING NOVELIST: JONATHAN FRANZEN


Franzen has given previous hints to a green disposition in his novels – 
climate change has twice been a minor character – but inFreedom, published last 
year, the theme was more overt. Protagonist Walter Berglund is "greener than 
Greenpeace", a professional ecologist who makes a Faustian pact with 
a mountaintop-mining company in an effort to save a rare warbler. Grist.org 
(the online resource for ecovists everywhere) was smitten, suggesting that
Freedom was the new Silent Spring (Rachel Carson's 1962 book that gave rise to 
the modern eco movement). "I've moved away from that sort of deep-ecological 
extremism," Franzen replied. "I started to think: what can we do for wild birds 
right now? I don't want these particular species to disappear." That's more 
than enough evidence for him to be crowned the (reluctant) eco novelist.

THE GREEN PRESIDENT: EVO MORALES


The leader of Bolivia's Movement for Socialism has become a self-proclaimed 
defender of Mother Earth. His dramatic rhetoric was perhaps the highlight of a 
lacklustre Cancun conference: "We are familiar with the slogan 'Country or 
Death', but it is better now to talk about 'Planet or Death'." Bolivia's 
radical position includes a proposal to the UN to make water a human right, and 
nationalising the oil industry. His critics point out that, while he talks the 
green fight, his country is dependent on hydrocarbon and extraction industries. 
Can he prove he's more than hot air?

RE-FORESTING GURU: CAROLE SAINT-LAURENT 
<http://www.iucn.org/about/work/programmes/gender/gender_news_and_events/?6573/Women-in-REDD-critical-for-climate-action>


Saint-Laurent is a woman with a plan, rather literally. The International 
Union for Conservation of Nature's senior advisor on forests has headed up a 
study that maps 1.5bn hectares of potential new forest; that's an area the size 
of Russia. This doesn't negate the outrage that three-quarters of the world's 
forests have either been cleared, destroyed or fragmented, with a third lost 
forever – but restoring forest has big benefits for communities and ecosystems. 
And this year is the UN Year of Forests. In case you missed it, last year was 
the UN Year of Biodiversity. Since 80% of biodiversity is land based, and much 
of that in forests, we hope that this year's choice has double the resonance 
and double the impact.

CLIMATE CHANGE-BUSTING MAYOR: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG


This year humankind will pass the 7 billion population marker and, as the US 
Center for Urban Restoration puts it: ''Some time during this decade, a child 
will be born who will mark humanity's transformation into an urban species – 
for the first time, more people will live in cities than in the rural areas of 
the earth." The C40, set up in 2005, brings together leaders of 40 of the 
world's largest cities to organise a co-ordinated response to climate change. 
The mayor of New York,Michael Bloomberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michaelbloomberg>, is in charge. "Our 
cities have demonstrated that we are prepared to boldly confront climate 
change," Bloomberg says. "As mayors, we know that we don't have the luxury of 
simply talking about change without delivering it." Think of it as a 
particularly high-end town hall meeting with a very serious outcome.

NGO LEADERS: NNIMMO BASSEY <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nnimmo_Bassey> 
(FRIENDS OF THE EARTH), <http://www.foe.co.uk/> KUMI NAIDOO 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kumi_Naidoo> (GREENPEACE) 
<http://www.greenpeace.org.uk/>


For the first time, the heads of the two most famous planet-saving NGOs, 
Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, hail from Africa: Bassey from Nigeria and 
Naidoo from the Durban townships. Both have gritty experience as activists. 
Bassey became an environmentalist after he witnessed the massacre when Nigerian 
forces opened fire on the village of Umuechem in the Niger Delta, where 
residents had campaigned against the Shell Petroleum Development Company. "Oil 
has been the destruction of the Nigerian economy," he says. "It destroys the 
relation between the people and the state." Naidoo began campaigning against 
apartheid in education as a 15-year-old. He was exiled in 1987. Years of 
experience have taught him that "having a seat at the table is very different 
from being equal voices at the table, and it is very different from being 
listened to." Come December both men will make politicians listen in Durban.

GREEN RETAILERS: WALMART <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wal-mart> 
VERSUS TIMBERLAND <http://community.timberland.com/Earthkeeping> 


There may soon come a time when you won't be able to buy anything from 
toothpaste to shoes without knowing the quantity of emissions it's responsible 
for or how it compares to the hemp version. Big retailers have big plans for 
green labelling: Jeff Swartz, CEO of Timberland, has already kicked things off 
with the Earthkeeper boot that minimises your footprint's footprint. Timberland 
is one of 200 clothing companies creating a giant Eco Index. Meanwhile the 
planet's biggest retailer, Walmart, has promised to apply eco labels to 
thousands of product lines. Less impressive for those who think planet saving 
is about not buying stuff.

ECO FESTIVAL FOUNDER: EDUARDO FISCHER <http://www.swu.com.br/en/>


Eduardo Fischer has been described as the Richard Branson of Brazil, which may 
or may not be a compliment. As well as owning the advertising group Grupo 
TotalCom, he is the founder of SWU – Starts With You – a populist 
sustainability movement. SWU hosts an annual awareness-raising music festival 
in Brazil which, with a capacity of 300,000, is one of the biggest in the 
world. Fischer views it as the modern Woodstock. Well, perhaps – if Woodstock 
had had corporate sponsors including Nestlé.

TREE-PLANTING TWEENIE: FELIX FINKBEINER <http://www.plant-for-the-planet.org/>


Without so much as a Prince Charles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> picture book, the nine-year-old 
Felix Finkbeiner announced he wanted to plant 1m trees in his native Germany. 
Like a junior Wangari Maathai (the Nobel Prize winner who has planted 30m 
trees), he achieved his goal by the age of 12. Now the organisation he set up, 
Plant for the Planet, has gone international. In December Felix spoke in 
Cancun: "We children feel really cheated because such a lot was done for 
Copenhagen and at the end, what was really achieved there?" Don't mess with 
Felix.

YOUTH EDUCATOR: ELLEN MACARTHUR <http://www.ellenmacarthur.com/>


The English sailor has become one of the major advocates for sustainable 
resource use, and champions the idea of viewing nature as natural capital. She 
had a Damascene conversion when she was still racing and came across abandoned 
whaling stations in South Georgia. What did humankind do when the number of 
whales plummetted? Just moved on to the next resource: oil. MacArthur's 
Foundation has become one of the leading sustainable educators of young adults.

SUSTAINABLE BUILDERS: BRAD PITT AND WILLIAM MCDONOUGH 
<http://www.ted.com/speakers/william_mcdonough.html>


"I don't even like the word green," Brad Pitt told historian Douglas Brinkley 
in a recent interview. But the 13 new homes recently completed by hisMake It 
Right Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/mar/14/brad-pitt-architecture-new-orleans>
 in the Lower 9th district of New Orleans are undeniably so. Post Hurricane 
Katrina, Pitt raised funds and teamed up with sustainable-building visionary 
William McDonough to get these houses built and now, according to the Green 
Building Council, it's the "most high-performing clean neighbourhood in the 
world". The self-confessed "architecture junkie" is clearly delighted by the 
results. "You know, out of all the Lower 9th homes we built, all are producing 
more energy than they are consuming. They're all pollution-free. This is an 
amazing story to me. Many of our home owners don't owe anything for energy use. 
We can prove that low-income and high- performance houses work."

ECO DIPLOMAT: SALEEM H ALI <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saleem_Ali>


The pervading fear is that global disputes over water and land-based resources 
are likely to escalate into conflict. But professor of environmental studies at 
the University of Vermont and experienced mediator Saleem H Ali thinks natural 
resources have the capacity to unite, not just divide. A fan of peace parks 
(border regions used to resolve disputes by giving conflicting countries 
incentives to maintain them), he considers consumption of material goods to be 
a good thing."Money from oil wealth can be used to invest in other sectors. And 
that in turn can yield sustainable development," 
<http://www.forbes.com/forbes/2009/0907/opinions-environment-consumption-ideas-opinions.html>
 he toldForbes magazine. He does, however, agree that Nigeria is the exception 
to this idea. Good – we'd hate him to be in conflict with Nnimmo Bassey.

"LUNATIC" FARMER: JOEL SALATIN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/31/food-industry-environment>


There's a certain rock 'n' roll energy about Joel Salatin of Polyface – a 
"multi-generational, pasture-based, beyond organic, local-market farm" in 
Virginia. The "lunatic" prefix is one he applied to himself (just in case you 
thought us unspeakably rude), because he is apt to come out with statements 
such as: "Industrial food never asks whether the pig is happy. The pig-ness of 
the pig never enters the conversation." But his surprisingly sane beliefs are 
finding plenty of traction internationally. The debate he has generated goes 
far beyond the usual "conventional versus organic" conversation (he deems 
"organic" irrelevant). Ultimately it's all about the soil. "The soil is the 
only thread upon which civilisation can exist. If a person could ever realise 
that our existence depends on literally inches of active aerobic microbial life 
on terra firma, we might begin to appreciate the ecological umbilical to which 
we are all still attached," Salatin told treehugger.com. "The food industry, 
I'm convinced, actually believes we don't need soil to live." Which is where 
the real lunacy lies.

ELECTRIC CARMAKER: ALAN MULALLY, CEO, FORD MOTOR COMPANY 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2011/jan/09/ces-2011-ford>


We're reliably informed by everyone that 2011 will be the year of the electric 
car, which makes a nice change from wondering Who Killed The Electric Car? (as 
per the 2006 indie documentary). At home the UK welcomes the Plug-In Car Grant, 
although only three qualifying models are currently on the market. Across the 
Atlantic, last week's big unveiling byAlan Mulally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-mulally> was his company's new 
electric Ford Focus. Time to plug in?

HOLLYWOOD'S CONSCIENCE: DEBBIE LEVIN <http://www.ema-online.org/>


Twenty years ago Ted Turner and other Hollywood luminaries set up the 
Environmental Media Association (EMA) to put star power to work on behalf of 
the planet. It went well; by mid-2000 it was de rigueur to turn up at the 
Oscars in a Prius. Debbie Levin, who took over the EMA presidency 11 years ago, 
has her sights trained on young Hollywood: A-listers under 35: "They are the 
ones we really want to model these sustainable behaviours we are all talking 
about," she says. EMA events now feature young starlets such as Rosario Dawson, 
Amy Smart and Olivia Wilde talking about sustainable solutions and EMA 
programmes, including the 16 organic gardens it runs around Los Angeles. 
Levin's plans are for more projects, more stars and more green chatter. "We 
never stop. While you sleep we're greening the world!" she says.

THE GREEN ROYAL: PRINCE CHARLES 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/apr/21/prince-charles-harmony-book>


To build on Harmony, his book (and accompanying NBC documentary) on 
sustainability, His Royal Greenness is releasing a picture-book version for 
children this year. Naturally his eco efforts in the next few months run the 
risk of being eclipsed bythat wedding. The famous ecological activist Vandana 
Shiva says: "Prince Charles has been a very courageous man because he has never 
thought through the throne he will occupy – but he has thought through the 
planet."

ONLINE ACTIVISTS: AVAAZ <http://www.avaaz.org/>


Youthful dissent is in the air. Blame WikiLeaks, the protests against tuition 
fees, or both. The question is: can environmental campaigns capitalise and 
rally slacktivists and activists alike? Campaigning global web community Avaaz 
promises "new nimbleness and flexibility" and claims more than 6.5m active 
members worldwide. Campaign ideas are polled to a sample group, and only those 
that get a strong response are "taken to scale". But once up and running 
campaigns can become "supercharged" in a way the old guard could never have 
imagined.

THE GREEN GUZZLER: JAY LENO, TALKSHOW HOST 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jay-leno>


There's deep green and then there's Tonight show host Jay Leno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jay-leno> – the proud owner of 240 cars. 
"The two are not mutually exclusive," he has explained. "You can be interested 
in the environment and still like cars. And there is a way to just do it 
sensibly." To underscore the fact, he has made his cars as green as possible. 
One even runs on tequila, and he recently took delivery of the new electric 
Chevrolet Volt.

THE (EX) GOVERNATOR: ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER


Officially the Emissions Terminator has left the building. Arnie effectively 
outlawed his own Hummer and ignored Washington to commit California to a 25% 
cut in the state's greenhouse emissions by 2020. Expect the former Governator 
to become an influential champion of green technology and a wandering eco 
ambassador. Never has his former catchphrase "I'll be back" seemed more likely.

• This article was amended on 21 January 2011 to correct the number of years 
that Debbie Levin has chaired the Environmental Media Association from five to 
11.
 