
In a hung parliament Labor will have to agree to the Greens’ conditions to 
form government or risk returning to the polls, treasury spokesmanAdam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> has said.

Bandt issued the blunt warning that Labor cannot take the Greens’ support for 
granted in a future hung parliament in a chapter ina forthcoming book How to 
Vote Progressive in Australia: Labor or Green? 
<http://www.publishing.monash.edu/books/hvp-9781925377149.html>

Greens leader Richard Di Natale takes election battle to Anthony Albanese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/battle-for-grayndler-greens-take-on-anthony-albanese-on-his-own-turf>
He said the Greens’ demands could include everything from ministries in 
cabinet, detailed policy changes, parliamentary reform to input into the budget.

In a chapter entitled Making Progressive Government Happen, Bandt reasons that 
although the Greens aim to be a party of government in the future, their best 
chance to influence policy in the meantime is to hold balance of power in both 
the Senate and House of Representatives.

Bandt took aim at Labor’s shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, who said in a book 
before Labor’s 2013 election defeat thatLabor must “govern alone or not at all” 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/changes-key-to-a-rejuvenated-labor-party/story-fn59niix-1226678618376>
 due to perceptions an alliance with the Greens in that hung parliament had 
harmed Labor.

Bandt said the Greens should aim to form government with Labor but if Bowen’s 
view won out and Labor refused to deal with the party “then all bets are off 
and don’t count the Greens in either column on questions of confidence and 
supply”.

He said “some might wish to entertain the thought of advancing Greens policies 
by striking a deal with the Liberals”, but he ruled it out on practical grounds 
that progressive voters would mark them down for it and an “enlightenedLiberal 
party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> start[ing] a 
bidding war with Labor on climate policy ... seems far away”.

In fact, Bandt thought it was more likely if Labor couldn’t form government 
with the Greens, in the future Labor might consider a grand-coalition with 
“their soul mates in the Liberals”, as occurs in Germany.


“A substantial section of the Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> would rather side with 
the Liberals than with the Greens, just as they routinely do in parliament,” he 
claimed.

If no two of the three major parties would agree to govern together, Bandt 
said that “sounds to me like a great basis to go back to the people and seek 
another electoral mandate”.

“We should be unafraid to fight a new election called because Labor wouldn’t 
accept a reasonable proposal from the Greens for stable, effective and 
progressive government.”


The ultimatum fires a warning shot ahead of the 2 July election, in which 
tight polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/2016/may/08/pooling-the-polls-how-were-tracking-opinion-polling-for-the-australian-election>
 andthe number of popular crossbench MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/08/eight-things-to-know-at-the-start-of-this-eight-week-election-campaign>
 may bring about another hung parliament, just six years after Julia Gillard 
formed government with Greens and independents’ support in 2010.

About a quarter of Australian voters did not choose Labor or the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> at the 2013 election, 
Bandt noted. “The crossbenchers are coming,” he warned.

'Expect madness': the 2016 Australian election – Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/a-beginners-guide-to-the-2016-australian-election>
Bandt said the Greens’ balance of power in the lower house after the 2010 
election had helped deliver progressive policies on climate change, dental care 
and the establishment of the parliamentary budget office.

He rejected the view that the Greens’ vote collapsed in 2013 because they had 
supported Labor to form government. He cited as evidence the fact in his seat 
of Melbourne the Greens vote went up 18% at the 2013 election, compared with a 
34% fall in the Senate vote nationally.

The lesson to draw from those results was that “many progressive voters 
actively want the Greens and Labor to share power to achieve progressive 
outcomes, including by striking agreements to form government where 
appropriate”.

Bandt said “if Labor is up for it” and “if any deal is good enough”, the two 
parties could make progressive change happen. But he warned “we Greens would be 
better to stand alone than sign up to something substandard”.

“We should always be prepared to walk away from a bad deal, because power for 
its own sake is no power at all.”

In a future Labor government supported by the Greens “everything should be on 
the table, from taking ministries to staying on the crossbench, from detailed 
policy changes to parliamentary reform, from guaranteeing supply sight unseen 
to wanting to help craft budgets”, Bandt said.

Bandt claimed the Greens are the true social-democratic party in Australian 
politics, noting Gillard’s comments in 2013 that Labor was not called the 
Social Democratic party 
<http://australianpolitics.com/2013/02/18/julia-gillard-speech-to-awu-conference.html>
, and that Bowen had said it is the party of liberalism.
 