
The Greens want millions of households to install renewable energy storage 
units, saying battery storage could “revolutionise” Australia’s energy system.

They have announced a five-year support package for 1.2m homes and 30,000 
businesses, to encourage the take-up of solar storage across Australia.

Renewable energy: rapid acceleration needed to meet 2020 target
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/04/renewable-energy-rapid-acceleration-needed-to-meet-2020-target>
The Greens say the program - estimated to cost $2.9b - could be funded by 
scrapping concessions to fossil fuel-intensive industries, and are promising to 
make the policy central to their post-budget and post-election negotiations 
with theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> and 
Labor.

“We’ll be opposing most of this budget, which grows inequality and does 
nothing for clean energy, but if the government comes to us to talk about some 
of their less-offensive measures, we’ll want to talk to them about programs 
like this one,” the Greens energy spokesman,Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, told Guardian 
Australia.

“Now is the time to jumpstart the battery industry, encourage the take up of 
storage and help make Australia a renewable energy leader.”

The Greens’ battery storage program - announced two days after the Turnbull 
government’s first budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-budget-2016> - would run 
for five years, starting from 2016-17. It is part of their plan toshift 
Australia to 90% renewables by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/22/greens-unveil-push-for-90-target-for-renewable-energy-by-2030>
.

It includes a 50% refundable tax credit for individuals to help them install 
solar energy storage systems.

Individuals would get up to half the cost of their storage system covered, up 
to a maximum of $5,000 in the first year of the program. The credit would then 
taper off to $1,500 by 2021, reflecting the projected decline in battery 
storage costs over five years.

Renewable energy target: Senate sits late to pass bill without amendment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/renewable-energy-target-senate-sits-late-to-pass-bill-without-amendment>
A separate grant scheme would also be available for people on low incomes. It 
would be available in addition to the refundable tax credit, for households 
with taxable income of less than $80,000. The low income grants would be capped 
at $5,000, and would decline to $1,000 by 2021. The number of grants would be 
capped at 20,000 each year.

They say the household policy is estimated by the Parliamentary Budget Office 
to cost $2.8b over four years, supporting 1.2m homes with an average storage 
capacity of 10 KWh.

For businesses, the Greens want to allow battery storage installations to be 
depreciated for tax purposes over three years - rather than the current 15 
years - to drive the take-up of renewable energy storage.

They say 30,000 units could be installed by businesses for $38m, over four 
years.

The household and business programs could be funded by scrapping accelerated 
asset depreciation for aircraft and the oil and gas industry, they say.

According to the PBO, the removal of accelerated depreciation would save 
$2.75bn over four years.

The Greens say their program would only be necessary for five years, since the 
costs of battery storage are predicted to decrease rapidly over the next decade.

The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, on Wednesday 
criticised the Turnbull government’s budget for doing nothing to help Australia 
become a renewable energy powerhouse.

“There are small businesses right around Australia who will be so disappointed 
that the prime minister has ignored the transition to the clean-energy 
economy,” Di Natale said. “We’re talking about solar installers, mums and dads 
who have set up small businesses to engage in the installation of solar panels 
around the country.

“They don’t get a benefit because the prime minister refuses to accept that 
this is a part of the economy that needs to grow, that can grow, that can 
create jobs and investment.”

The Turnbull government has confirmed it will retain the Clean Energy Finance 
Corporation, and the Australian RenewableEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency, with plans to refocus 
part of their activities towards the government’s innovation agenda.

The budget papers show $1b of the CEFC’s existing funding will be used to 
establish a clean energy innovation fund, to provide debt and equity financing 
to help emerging clean energy technologies “make the leap from demonstration to 
commercial deployment”.
 