
There can be no more difficult musical task than writing songs that 
successfully tell stories while also including gags that avoid landing with a 
loud clanging noise. And no Australian act has ever achieved this feat with the 
same strike rate as This Is Serious Mum (TISM).


TISM formed in 1982, playing their charismatically named the Get Fucked 
Concert the following year. But it was their 1995 song Greg! The Stop Sign!! 
that first turned my then young head in their direction. It was one of those 
rare moments where after hearing one song, you know you’ve got to seek out 
everything in the artist’s back catalogue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJwI2NrVYqIE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJwI2NrVYqIE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJwI2NrVYqIE&media=>
A postmodern take on the Dead Man’s Curve 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S1Cuekbklkg>-style “death song”, Greg! The 
Stop Sign!! uses the tragic fate of a carload of fictional teenagers as a 
metaphor for our collective mortality via a tribute to a series of road safety 
ads. In our current, media-saturated environment, it’s difficult to remember 
how shockingthose ads <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7zhgyawyv8> were back 
then.

In typical TISM fashion the accompanying video attempts to torpedo any hope of 
chart success by opening on the baffling sight of AFL players Shane Wakelin, 
Chris Hemley and Justin Peckett earnestly riding exercise bikes in St Kilda’s 
Moorabbin Oval gymnasium while Josh Kitchen works the heavy bag. TISM were 
Saintersfrom way back <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gqgdjm3bZ9g>, but how 
were those of us just coming on board supposed to know? All I saw was that for 
the first time Australian music was more thanDaryl Braithwaite and his bloody 
Horses <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lnigc08J6FI>. It could also be 
thrillingly bizarre.

 During their career TISM obsessed over death at 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sTrqVyW0Z5s> considerable 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IW5kwUhEu_o> length 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ym9mga_puf4> and in Greg!’s lyrics “we get to 
do the driving, don’t choose the direction we travel” you find the song’s key 
contention: that whether you’re the most popular kid in school or the one who 
chooses to “graffiti the Dandenong line”, death is inevitable. It was hardly 
going to be played at your local Blue Light disco, but at the same time you 
can’t fault their logic. Who else could merge rock-solid philosophy with some 
of the greatest punchlines in Australian music history?

Such timeless wisdom as: “Sometime in the next 10,000 years a comet’s going to 
wipe out all trace of man / I’m banking on it coming before my end-of-year 
exams” spoke to me as a 14-year-old who would do anything to get out of going 
to school.

It is a song that burns less successful attempts at humour off at the lights. 
Lyric like “The rich kid becomes a junkie, the poor kid an advertiser / What a 
tragic waste of potential (being a junkie’s not so good either)” would die a 
thousand deaths in the hands of the Offspring.

One of TISM’s most endearing features was their refusal to go all-out for 
world domination. Had they been offered the choice to write a risible hit like 
Offspring’sWhy Don’t You Get A Job? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxSEW3sUitA> or a song like The TISM Boat Hire 
Offer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0rCm8TI8h4g>,with lyrics like “Bon Scott 
would be alive this week if he just went fishing from Mordialloc Creek”, I’m 
sure they’d have chosen the latter, and if they’re not richer for it, the world 
of music certainly is.

It wasn’t all jokes; in Greg! we’re also treated to one of the all-time great 
skewerings of consumerism in eight lines so perfect that I expect to see them 
in Russell Brand’s next revolutionary manifesto:

Bought a car just the other day
 Man could that baby run!
 But you know what they always say
 There’s always a better one
 Got a tumour in my brain
 It’s creeping to my lungs
 And I’ve searched around in vain
 Can’t find me a better one.

In a track that demands repeat listens to enjoy its subtleties, they are the 
lines that should be cut out and inducted into the Aria hall of fame. The point 
is that while he who dies with the most toys wins, we’re all equal while 
six-foot under.

A final furious monologue takes us home with the reminder that “growing up’s 
not a matter of choice, it’s a matter of wait and see”. And then the neatest 
balance of comedy and gruesome death ever written closes on the titular 
vehicular tragedy that is playing out in front of us: “I thought I heard a 
semitrailer. Greg! You missed the stop sign!!”

This in a year where Australians were too busy flirting with Coolio to notice 
the song failed to chart (albeit entering the Triple J Hottest 100) – but that 
was this country’s loss. Anonymity might have always suited TISM well, but 
there was no need to look to Los Angeles when all the best wisdom was coming 
from Melbourne’s suburbs.
 