
In 1956, Allen Ginsberg’s poem A Supermarket in California 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/supermarket-california> placed famous poets 
in supermarket aisles: “Wives in the/avocados, babies in the tomatoes!–and you, 
Garcia Lorca, what/were you doing down by the watermelons?” Back then, the 
unlikely union of supermarkets and poetry was both literally and figuratively 
like chalk (used to write poetry on boards) and cheese (available from all good 
supermarkets). This week, the two worlds have collided again.

St Andrews University students Isabelle Bousquette and Tomi Baikie were so 
disgruntled that their localTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> 
stopped selling a particular brand of popcorn that they “resorted to the only 
thing we really know, Shakespearean sonnet”. The verbally gifted duo sent in a 
poem of complaint, which included lines such as “Have I Butterkist my true love 
goodbye?/Let this be a dream. Restock when I wake.” Tesco’s complaints team 
whirred into action, penning an apology poem that made the word “continued” 
rhyme with “discontinued”, and offering a £10 gift card. The response intoned 
“A decision was taken though not in great haste,/To de-list this item ’cos it 
ended in waste.”

But why stop at customer service poems? Having exhausted the marketing 
possibilities of randy penguins demanding a concubine (John Lewis) and the 
senseless slaughter of millions during the first world war (Sainsbury’s), 
perhaps supermarkets could advertise their products with well-known lines of 
poetry. “Water, water, everywhere/Makes you want to drink.” “Rage, rage, 
against the dying of the Sprite.” “Shall I compare thee to a cheese soufflé?” A 
few supermarket chains have already taken steps in this direction. Back in May, 
Waitroseemployed poet Roger McGough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/08/waitrose-roger-mcgough-sell-poetry-supermarkets>
 to adorn the stores’ walls with verse in order to make the experience of 
shopping there more pleasurable (one of the poems is called Tofu and the 
Tiger). A few years back,Morrisons appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/28/morrisons-supermarket-poets-food-laureates>
 poets Ian McMillan, John Mole and Peter Sansom as “food laureates” to write 
recipes in verse (sample line: “Add yeast to the water: let’s go!/Mix salt in 
the flour. Make dough”), and encouraged shoppers to write their own rhymes.

However, poetry and supermarkets don’t always go hand-in-hand. Earlier this 
year a mystery employee at Sainsbury’s in Mornington Crescent, north London, 
penned protest poems and tucked them inside Taste the Difference cookie 
packets. The haikus expressed the baker’s displeasure at working conditions and 
wages. “Enjoy your cookies/Every bite is a minute/I’ll never get back,” said 
one, in the 5-7-5 syllable format of haikus. “Seven pound an hour/Is the price 
of my labour/Loyalty costs more,” went another. When the baker was inevitably 
fired, he or shetook to Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/TheBoredBaker/status/469886374469173249> to share the 
news: “Unsurprisingly,/I Totally Lost My Job./Re-apply For LOLZ.”
 