
Guinea

Qualification saw a battling Guinea side overcome Tunisia and Kenya as well as 
earn a respectable draw against Morocco, and they this month defeated [an 
admittedly Emmanuel Adebayor-less] Togo in a warm-up match - but coach Patrice 
Neveu is realistic to set the quarter-finals - the stage they reached in 2004 
after nestling under Tunisia in group A - as the height of Guinea's ambition 
here.

He may have a strong European-based contingent at his disposal, but Neveu's 
side can't claim to be demonstrably stronger than South Africa and Zambia every 
day of the week.

The frontline has taken a blow with the exclusion of Souleymane Youla and Titi 
Camara, and fellow striker Pascal Feindouno's decision to step down as captain 
because he couldn't handle the pressure could work either way. Certainly the 
fear that Youla, Feindouno and Sambegou Bangoura were able to strike into the 
hearts of opposition defences last time out has been diminished.

Player to watch Feindouno, assuming the sudden lack of responsibility releases 
rather than nags at him, is a key man for Guinea, but 23-year-old Bangoura will 
bring the sparkle - he's produced eight goals in 13 domestic appearances this 
season - and that in a Stoke side struggling to make its presence felt in the 
Championship.
Coach Patrice Neveu.

Full squad Kemoko Camara (Hafia FC), Diarso Naby (Satellite FC), Aboubacar 
Bangoura (Chateauneuf); Dianbobo Balde (Celtic), Oumar Kalabane (AJAuxerre), 
Ibrahima Camara (Parma), Alimou Diallo (Lokeren),Daouda Jabi (Ajaccio), Mamadi 
Kaba (Gueugnon), Morlaye Cisse(Sedan), Kanfory Sylla (Ethintos Asperas, 
Greece), Aboubacar Camara (AS Kaloum); Mohamed Sylla (Leicester City), Pablo 
Thiam(VfL Wolfsburg), Ibrahima Souare (Jura Sud Foot), OusmaneBangoura 
(Charleroi), Sekouba Camara (AS Kaloum); Pascal Feindouno (Saint Etienne), Fode 
Mansare (Toulouse), Ismael Bangoura (Le Mans), Ibrahima Bangoura (Troyes), Kaba 
Diawara (Ajaccio), Sambegou Bangoura (Stoke City), Ibrahima Yattara 
(Trabzonspor), Victor Corea (Fello Star).

South Africa

The South Africans' preparations for 2004's outing were nothing short of a 
disaster as vital players walked out before the troublesome sacking of coach 
Ephraim Mashaba.

Sadly things aren't much different for 2006: they just about qualified after 
stumbling through defeats to Ghana, DR Congo and a plucky Burkina Faso outfit 
and were grateful to Uganda for managing an unlikely draw against Faso in their 
last game. And then manager Stuart Baxter walked out in November, leaving 
caretaker Ted Dumitru to pick up the pieces - something he's not exactly 
flourishing at.

His efforts so far have seen key defender Aaron Mokaena withdraw from the 
squad after being ousted as captain, and his squad now features seven uncapped 
players, including Tshepo Masilela, a baby of a defender who has never played 
top league football. The defence won't exactly be strengthened by the inclusion 
of Pierre Issa, either - he hasn't kicked a ball in six months.

In 2004 they somehow attracted odds of 10/1 but failed to escape their group, 
this time around, they're at 14/1. The price is lead by the shambolic set-up 
rather than the pockets of quality in their squad, but they're still not worth 
even a speculative punt on recent performances.

Player to watch Benni McCarthy, when he's not busy being linked with any and 
every Premiership club, is South Africa's best bet in front of goal, but 
defensive players are more likely to be important if the Bafana Bafana are to 
escape this tournament with their dignity in tact.
Coach Ted Dumitru.

Full squad Moneeb Josephs (Ajax Cape Town, SA), Calvin Marlin (SuperSport 
United, SA), Avril Phadi (Jomo Cosmos, SA); Siboniso Gaxa (SuperSport United, 
SA), Pierre Issa (OFI Crete, Greece), Ricardo Katza (SuperSport United, SA), 
Mbulelo Mabizela (Valerenga,Norway), Tshepo Masilela (Premier United, SA), Vuyo 
Mere (Mamelodi Sundowns, SA), Jimmy Tau (Kaizer Chiefs, SA); Mlungisi Gumbi 
(Lamontville Golden Arrows, SA), Joseph Makhanya (Orlando Pirates, SA), 
Siyabonga Nkosi (Bloemfontein Celtic, SA), Daniel Tshabalala (Orlando Pirates, 
SA), Simphiwe Tshabalala (Free State Stars, SA), Elrio van Heerden (FC 
Copenhagen, Denmark), Benedict Vilakazi (Orlando Pirates, SA); Benni McCarthy 
(Porto, Portugal), Lebohang Mokoena (Orlando Pirates, SA), Katlego Mphela 
(SuperSport United, SA), Nkosinathi Nhleko (Viking Stavanger, Norway), 
Siyabonga Nomvete (Orlando Pirates, SA), Sibusiso Zuma (Arminia Bielefeld, 
Germany).

Tunisia

The Tunisians shrugged off the pressure as hosts to take the title last time 
out, and they're in good shape to retain their crown - not least because, 
having been placed alongside Zambia, Guinea and South Africa in group C, they 
should reach the knockout stages without breaking into a sweat.

Qualifying top of their group with a +16 goal difference [that 7-0 thumping of 
Malawi helped], Roger Lemerre's team is dominated by familiar names to make 
them a strong and settled prospect. Conscious of the summer's trip to Germany, 
Lemerre has drafted in inexperienced players like Issam Merdassi and striker 
Amine Eltaif to help keep things fresh - which won't hurt in the latter stages 
of this competition either.

They're a fair way off the pace with the bookies at 6/1, but having beaten 
joint-favourites Egypt 2-0in Cairo in November and won six of their 10 
qualifying matches, reaching the final isn't such an unrealistic ambition.

Player to watch The usual suspects present themselves here: Hatem Trabelsi 
offers the Carthage Eagles resilience at the back and a useful forward ball 
when the mood takes him, while Santos can cause opposition defences no end of 
trouble.
Coach Roger Lemerre.

Full squad Ali Boumnijel (Club Africain), Khaled Fadhel (Erciyespor), Hamdi 
Kasraoui (Esperance); Hatem Trabelsi (Ajax Amsterdam), Anis Ayari (Samsunspor), 
Alaeddine Yahia (St Etienne), Issam Merdassi (CS Sfaxien), Radhi Jaidi (Bolton 
Wanderers), Karim Hagui (Strasbourg), Jose Clayton (El Qatari); Chawki Ben 
Saada (Bastia), Adel Chedli (Nuremberg), Kais Ghodhbane (Samsunspor), Sofiane 
Militi (Foscala), Jawher Mnari (Nuremberg), Riadh Bouazizi (Kayseri 
Exciysspor), Slim Ben Achour (Guimares), Hamed Namouchi (Rangers); Amine Eltaif 
(Esperance), Zied Jaziri (Troyes), Haikel Guemamdia (Strasbourg), Issam Jomaa 
(Lens), Silva Dos Santos (Toulouse).

Zambia

Twice runners-up the Chipolopo landed a place at this year's tournament with 
ease - even beating World Cup qualifiers Togo on their way to third spot in 
qualifying group one. A very different story from 2004's Nations Cup, when 
Zambia, still faltering in the shadow of a 1993 plane crash that killed all 18 
players on board, were put out of contention by lowly Benin [the fact that 
Benin went on to lose every group game to crash out with not a single point to 
their name should tell you how bad things were for Zambia.

Odds of 66/1 on their success suggests they're not in much better form now, 
and though they're unlikely to really trouble anyone in Egypt once it starts to 
count, the squad is eager if nothing else and will fancy their chances against 
South Africa and Guinea to sneak into second-place.

Player to watch Bundesliga's Andrew Sinkala and Moses Sichone will be heavily 
relied upon for experience on a bigger stage, while Collins Mbesuma, unlikely 
as it sounds on the little evidence we have from Portsmouth, is the man to get 
them goals.
Coach Kalusha Bwayla.

Full squad George Kolola (ZANACO), Kennedy Mweene (Free State Stars, South 
Africa); Clive Hachilensa (Free State Stars, South Africa), Misheck Lungu 
(Primeiro Agosto, Angola), Joseph Musonda (Free State Stars, South Africa), 
Billy Mwanza (Lamontville Golden Arrows, South Africa), Kennedy Nkethani 
(ZANACO), Elijah Tana (Petro Atletico, Angola), Mark Sinyangwe (Green 
Buffaloes); Ian Bakala (Primeiro Agosto, Angola), Isaac Chansa (Orlando 
Pirates, South Africa), James Chamanga (Umtata Bush Bucks, South Africa), 
Rainford Kalaba (Nice, France), Chris Katongo, Felix Katongo (both Jomo Cosmos, 
South Africa), Numba Mumamba (ZANACO), Clifford Mulenga (Ã–rgryte, Sweden), 
Lameck Njovu (Lusaka Dynamos), Andrew Sinkala (FC Cologne, Germany); Harry 
Milanzi (Primeiro Agosto, Angola), Collins Mbesuma (Portsmouth, England), Jacob 
Mulenga (Chateauroux, France), Dube Phiri (Red Arrows).
 