
Angola

The Palancas Negras, as they're affectionately, if rather lengthily, known, 
are being talked about as the World Cup's dark horses after seeing off Nigeria 
to qualify for the summer's action in Germany.

That might be over-egging it somewhat - they're still only 25/1 shots to 
produce a result here - but Luis Oliveira Goncalves has certainly produced a 
squad to expect at least one upset from later this month.

Angola can be a bit like Bolton - solid defensively and a unit that comes 
together to produce something superior to its component parts - but their best 
results come at home, so their success in Egypt will depend on that changing.

There will be a massive weight of expectation on the team's shoulders 
regardless and not many would put it past them to make a surprise sprint to the 
quarter-finals. Whatever they do from there, Angola's appearances on the big 
stage this year are a massive move forward. As captain Fabrice Akwa said after 
qualifying for the World Cup: "We have proved that Angola is not just about 
oil, war and poverty."

Player to watch Undoubtedly the best known is Benfica forward Pedro Mantorras, 
and his form will be important to Angola, but Akwa is the real talisman. Expect 
to see Ze Kalanga's name a fair bit - and coach Goncalves', too, for that 
matter. Angola's success is as much his as anyone's.
Coach Luis Oliveria Goncalves.

Full squad Goliath (Sagrada Esperanca), Joao Ricardo (no club), Lama (Petro 
Atletico); Delgado (Primeiro Agosto), Jacinto (AS Aviacao), Jamba (Aviacao), 
Kali (Santa Clara/Portugal), Lebo-Lebo (Sagrada Esperanca), Loco (Benfica 
Luanda), Marco Abreu (Portimonense/Portugal) Midfielders: Andre (Kowe√Øt 
SC/Kuwait), Edson (Pacos Ferreira/Portugal), Figueiredo (Varzim/Portugal), 
Gilberto (Al Ahly/Egy, Mendonca (Varzim/Portugal), Miloy (InterClube), Ze 
Kalanga (Petro Atletico); Akwa (Al Wakra/Qatar), Andre Titi Buengo (Clermont 
Foot/France), Flavio (AlAhly/Egy), Love (AS Aviacao), Pedro Mantorras 
(Benfica/Portugal), Maurito (Al-Wahd/UAE).

Cameroon

The Indomitable Lions missed out on a place at the World Cup by a single point 
and my, they're not happy about it - so expect them to be out to prove a point 
in Egypt this month.

They failed to add to Nations Cup titles from 2000 and 2002 after crashing out 
at the quarter-final stage in 2004 and were unsettled by coach Winfried 
Schafer's messy departure shortly after, but their powers of recovery have kept 
them at the top of African football.

Ranked as joint favourites with the hosts at 9/2, they're virtually dead certs 
to escape this group, and Cameroon's performances could well provide some of 
the highlights of the competition if stars like Samuel Eto'o perform.

Coach Artur Jorge has also found room for some new names in his squad, with 
potential debuts for Panathinaikos keeper Pierr Ebede, Partizan Belgrade 
striker Pierre Boya, and defenders Jean Hugues Bilayi Ateba (PSG) and Andre 
Bikey (Locomotiv Moscow). Their inclusion is the sign of a confident coach and 
Cameroon will consider the semi-finals a minimum requirement.

Player to watch Like you need to ask. Cameroon fans will hope Barcelona's 
Samuel Eto'o is at his twinkle-toed best during the tournament.
Coach Artur Jorge.

Full squad Idriss Carlos Kameni (Espanyol, Spain), Pierre Ebede Owono 
(Panathinaikos, Greece), Souleymanou Hamidou (Denizlispor, Turkey); Benoit 
Angbwa (Alaves, Spain), Thimothee Atouba (SV Hamburg, Germany), Armand Deumi 
(FC Thun, Switzerland), Raymond Kalla (Sivasspor, Turkey), Rigobert Song 
(Galatasaray, Turkey), Jean Hugues Bilayi Ateba (PSG, France), Andre Bikey 
(Locomotiv Moscow, Russia); Geremi Njitap (Chelsea, England), Jean II Makoun 
(Lille, France), Achille Emana (Toulouse, France), Daniel Ngom Kome (Murcia, 
Spain), Salomon Olembe (Al Rayyan, Qatar), Alioum Saidou (Galatasaray, Turkey), 
Eric Djemba Djemba (Aston Villa, England); Rudolph Douala (Sporting Lisbon, 
Portugal), Samuel Eto'o (Barcelona, Spain), Guy Feutchine (PAOK Salonika, 
Greece), Albert Meyong Ze (Beleneses, Portugal), Pierre Boya (Partizan 
Belgrade, Serbia), Achille Webo (Osasuna, Spain).

DR Congo

Claude LeRoy's outfit have somehow been seeded second in this group but odds 
of 66/1 on them winning the title tell a more accurate story - they're about 
that likely to even make it into the knockout stages.

Their preparations have been marred by bonus disputes, an abandoned friendly 
with Tunisia that 14 players couldn't even get to after being denied visas by 
the French government, a recent 3-0 thrashing by Morocco and, most critically 
of all, the absence-through-injury of star Roma-based striker Shabani Nonda.

The biggest threat they pose is that they're playing under virtually no 
pressure - and could have the same effect that already relegated clubs always 
seem to manage when they derail someone's championship challenge on the last 
day of the season. Yes, that was the sound of several straws being frantically 
clutched.

Player to watch The loss of Nonda places even more responsibility on captain 
Lomana LuaLua, and given previous foul-tempered outbursts when on international 
duty, it'll be interesting to see how he handles the pressure. Slick midfielder 
Mbuta Mbala is a favourite with the fans, and recently earned himself a move 
from Daring Club Motema Pembe.
Coach Claude LeRoy.

Full squad
 Francis Chansa (Orlando Pirates, South Africa), Pascal Kalemba (Telestar, 
Gabon), Tampungu Dikete (Umtata Bush Bucks, South Africa); Gladys Bokese 
(Daring Club Motema Pembe), Herita Ilunga (St Etienne, France), Tshimalanga 
Kabundi (TP Mazembe Englebert), Christian Fuanda Kinkela (Amiens, France), 
Mayasisilwa Lubanzadio (SC Cilu), Cyrille Mubiala (Ajax Cape Town, South 
Africa), Dituabanza Nsumbu (AS V Club), Tshinyama Tshiolola (Ajax Cape Town, 
South Africa); Ngasanya Ilongo (Daring Club Motema Pembe), Jean-Paul Kamudimba 
(Grimsby Town, England), Ngandu Kasongo (TP Mazembe Englebert), Franck Matingou 
(Bastia, France), Zola Matumona (AS V Club), Tresor Mputu (TP Mazembe 
Englebert), Mbuta Mbala (Yverdon, Switzerland), Marcel Mbayo (Sakaryaspor, 
Turkey), Mutamba Milambo (Le Havre, France). Lomana LuaLua (Portsmouth, 
England), Blaise Mbele (Orlando Pirates, South Africa), Kabamba Musasa 
(Istanbulspor, Turkey).

Togo

The Hawks are another surprise package who look like going toe-to-toe with 
Angola for second spot. Their qualification for the World Cup - a clear two 
points ahead of Senegal - was nothing short of amazing, but with seven wins in 
10 games, it can't be called a fluke.

Coach Stephen Keshi, previously Nigeria's captain and more recently their 
assistant coach, has turned Togo around, instilling the same stern defensive 
mindset the Angolans get by on. They rely on Emmanuel Adebayor to pinch a goal 
but are certainly capable of more - as their 3-1 qualifying defeat of Senegal 
proves.

Odds of 25/1 will bring the Togolese back down to earth with a bump though - 
much improved as they are, they face a scrap if they're to escape the group and 
will probably come up against joint favourites Egypt in the quarter-finals even 
if they do.

Player to watch Adebayor, who scored 10 goals in qualifying, will be central 
to Togo's progress - but then so will their stingy defence. Young full-back 
Emmanuel Mathias will hope to continue his good work since debuting last March.
Coach Stephen Keshi.

Full squad Yet to be announced.
 