
Every year, Maurice Amon, the billionaire head of the banknote security firm 
Sipca, holds a massiveChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> party in Gstaad, 
Switzerland: bowls of cigarettes, bottomless champagne, table after table 
covered in colourful salads, smoked salmon and meat skewers, all perfectly 
untouched. Last year, Madonna reportedly left the party with her tearful 
daughter, Lourdes, and a tart message as she departed: “This party isn’t 
happening.”

It is not possible to understand Gstaad until you have spent a Christmas 
season there. The mountain air loses its typical crispness, robbed by the 
social angst that comes with keeping up with the uber-wealthy. It’s a game of 
hoping you will not get caught out in the tale of your not-fabulously-rich 
upbringing. Even the millionaires are adrift in a sea of billionaire guests: 
the Latsis family of Greek shipping heirs, the American property tycoon André 
Balzas … They’re all here to do one thing: celebrate Christmas, Hanukkah or a 
non-religious equivalent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62879a50adf89c1822503c9d1560882808927640%2F0_169_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gstaad's%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire's%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gstaad%27s%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire%27s%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62879a50adf89c1822503c9d1560882808927640%2F0_169_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Anne Hathaway and Adam Shulman in Gstaad with Valentino Garavani (centre). 
Photograph: INFphoto.com/Corbis 
The town is a sleepy mountain resort for 11 and a half months of the year. The 
main attractions are knitting exhibitions and Gstaad’s award-winning honey and 
top-showing cattle. Outside of agriculture, the primary excitement comes from 
the single cinema. The monthly magazine,GstaadLife <http://www.gstaadlife.com/>
, features reports on stand-up paddleboarding and the vandalism of sawn down 
birch trees.


For hotel staff, who work up to 14 hours a day, Christmas is often celebrated 
on 28 December

But for nine days in December its residents normal lives go to bed and Gstaad 
dons the red velvet cloak of its alter ego: Christmas host for the world’s very 
richest. Each year, the municipality of Saanen swells from 7,445 residents to 
more than 30,000, as 17,000 temporary workers flood in to cater to around 6,000 
of the world’s starriest VIPs: names like Valentino, Julie Andrews and Anne 
Hathaway. Out go the knitting circles, in come the red carpets and last-minute 
film premieres – in 2014 Harvey Weinstein hosted aprivate screening of Big Eyes 
<http://www.thewrap.com/roman-polanski-art-glitterati-at-harvey-weinstein-screening-of-big-eyes-in-gstaad/>
 at the Alpina. The town even stars in 1975’s The Return of the Pink Panther.

Until 1916 Gstaad was primarily known as the next best thing to St Moritz. 
Though lacking the nightlife and Olympic pedigree of its rival to the east, 
Gstaad has one thing St Moritz does not: Le Rosey. Described by Nicholas 
Foulkes inSwans: the Jet Set Society 
<http://www.harpersbazaar.com/culture/art-books-music/interviews/a1210/inside-swans-interview/>
 as the “jet-set Eton”, this elite boarding school has educated everyone from 
Prince Rainier III of Monaco to the last Shah of Iran to the current Aga Khan, 
head of the Ismaili faith. With tuition fees of $110,000 a year, a winter 
campus in Gstaad is one of the perks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc82f1ed44e0bb3548cc46d8df5abcb250e8b67d6%2F0_0_3555_3036%2F3555.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gstaad's%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire's%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gstaad%27s%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire%27s%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc82f1ed44e0bb3548cc46d8df5abcb250e8b67d6%2F0_0_3555_3036%2F3555.jpg>
 Brigitte Bardot and Gunther Sachs walk their dog in Gstaad in 1967. 
Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
Gradually, Gstaad began to be known as the most exclusive of the Alpine towns, 
and the rich and famous began coming here for their festive holidays. Richard 
Burton, Liz Taylor,Brigitte Bardot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/brigitte-bardot> and Roger Moore all helped 
turn Gstaad into something unique: a resort built almost exclusively around 
staging Christmas for the beautiful people.

Like St Moritz, Gstaad also has a Palace Hotel. Owned and run by the Scherz 
hotelier dynasty, it is hailed as the only option for jet-setters who lack the 
privilege of owning their own chalet. It is fully booked each season, with 
reservations coming in as early as three years in advance. Christmas is often 
celebrated in the suites – complete with tree and festive decoration – or in 
one of the hotel’s five restaurants, overlooked by an 18ft fir in the lounge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6803381653f5d3ad17aea2fa739cba03098b568%2F184_151_1421_2130%2F1421.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gstaad's%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire's%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gstaad%27s%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire%27s%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6803381653f5d3ad17aea2fa739cba03098b568%2F184_151_1421_2130%2F1421.jpg>
 Roger Moore in Gstaad. Photograph: Mauro Carraro/Rex 
The Palace is central to Gstaad’s odd double identity. Situated atop the town, 
it is a stone castle overlooking quiet streets below. The Palace leads down to 
the town promenade, a pedestrian area lined with Louis Vuitton, Hermes and 
Trois Pommes boutiques. At the end is the Hotel Olden, a celebrity haunt from 
the 1960s, whose traditional facade makes it look more like an old-fashioned 
Swiss restaurant than a hotel. Down from the Olden is the train station, where 
the resort’s English-language newsstand is a mainstay for guests like Harvey 
Weinstein, who can often be found sifting through books for hours, usually 
walking out with every newspaper and a handful of M&Ms.

The station brings in the small army of workers who must spring into life to 
cater to the festive season guests. Gstaad’s workers commute from the 
neighbouring town of Lauenen, a town of 812 people. Many of them are drivers: 
the number of cars on the road during Christmas jumps from the usual 700 or so 
to more than 3,000. For the family-run Taxi Simon, the Christmas season is a 
time of no sleep. “During the year, we have two full-time employees and two 
part-time,” says owner Mario Simon. “In high season, that increases to 20. And 
even that is often not enough. We have partnerships with other limousine 
service companies from different cities inSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland> to bring in extra Mercedes 
Vianos and cars to accommodate our guests.”

At the Palace, the staff are expected to maintain the mystery of their guests 
while silently catering to their needs. It’s a little city in itself, which 
must fulfill requests for everything from daily massages to one-on-one yoga 
sessions and fresh organic goat milk. “During the Christmas season there are no 
holidays, no days off,” says guest relations manager Barbara Branco-Schiess. 
Hotel staff typically work 13 or 14 hour days. Christmas is often celebrated on 
28 December – the only lull before New Year’s Eve. To service 104 guest rooms, 
the hotel has more than 200 staff rooms – the team swells from 50 to 300 in 
December, all there to play their part in the production of making Christmas, 
well, the most wonderful time of the year.


For some, at least. The staff themselves are kept strictly away from the 
guests. They are free to party in the 13 nightclubs in Gstaad, but the hotel 
restaurants and bars, including thePalace’s Greengo 
<http://www.palace.ch/restaurants-bars/greengo/>, are off limits. Mingling 
between guests and staff is not permitted on hotel property, and alcohol is 
strictly forbidden during work hours. (The rule is broken for Christmas Eve, 
when staff get a meal of steak frites with wine instead of the usual water.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3181c72cf5e1521591253a7a973d9088ed7312da%2F0_134_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gstaad's%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire's%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gstaad%27s%20double%20life%3A%20from%20sleepy%20resort%20to%20billionaire%27s%20Christmas%20playground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fdec%2F22%2Fgstaad-double-life-switzerland-billionaire-christmas-rich-famous-madonna-weinstein%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3181c72cf5e1521591253a7a973d9088ed7312da%2F0_134_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
 Richard Burton and Liz Taylor on Boxing Day 1967 in Gstaad. Photograph: James 
Andanson/Apis/Sygma/Corbis 
Gildo Boscini, manager of the hotel’s Italian restaurant, Gildo’s, has been 
working at the Palace for 45 years. “We are fully booked on a nightly basis 
over the season, and we always have to shuffle around tables for last-minute 
reservations,” he says. The busiest night of the year is not Christmas, he 
explains, but New Year’s Eve: “It is a special time in Gstaad – we serve 
lobster and caviar, there is endless champagne and music. It is so good, one 
year Bono even joined the band.”

From Beyoncé to Gary Neville: what are celebrities doing for their home cities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/16/beyonce-neville-celebrities-cities>
The extra capacity requires extra voltage. In the run-up to the millennium in 
1999, the visitors’ energy usage overwhelmed the town’s power grid, leading to 
a four-day blackout from 26-31 December. There are now 300 back-up generators 
hauled out of storage for the winter season. Lucia, director of operations at 
the Palace, describes the romance of the loss of electricity – candle-lit 
dinners – but says the workers in the resort had to resort to hand-written 
receipts, and worked double time to catch up in the early days of 2000.

The students and graduates of Le Rosey stand on a middle ground between the 
famous VIPs and the working residents of Gstaad. For them, the town is a second 
home. Alexandre Putman is a Le Rosey graduate who has spent Christmas in Gstaad 
since he was a child. “Gstaad is family for me, it is just a nice quiet place 
for family holidays,” he says. “A place where I don’t need to go out, don’t 
have to ski too much and can really enjoy time with my inner circle. I may see 
Madonna at a party but I would never go up to her.”

Come 3 January, there is a complete switchover. The western jet-setters depart 
on their private planes from Gstaad-Saanen airport, and the Russian oligarchs 
arrive for their own Christmas celebrations: 7 January on the Orthodox 
calendar. Eventually the Russians too depart, the 17,000-strong army of 
temporary workers heads home, and GstaadLife resumes features on the latest 
wave of vandalism: severed Christmas lights.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 