
It will be a significant occasion for Katharine, who launched Guardian 
Australia in 2013 and Lenore, the edition’s first Australian editor, who has 
overseen award-winning journalism such as the Nauru files since her appointment 
in May.

This will be a rare opportunity for Australian readers to hear Katharine 
elaborate on her powerful long-read, ‘How technology disrupted the truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
’ discussing the threats facing the funding of public-interest reporting and 
the post-truth era.

Katharine and Lenore will also touch on the proliferation of fake news during 
the US presidential election and the responsibility of publishers and social 
media organisations to foster meaningful conversations and create informed 
societies.

Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian News & Media said: “The past year 
has been one of the most dramatic in living memory, from the election of Donald 
Trump as US president to the referendum vote for Britain to leave the EU; and 
the advance of new technology has been at the heart of it all, from Trump’s use 
of Twitter to the rise of ‘fake news’ as a business model. I’m excited to be in 
Australia and to be joining Lenore and our guests to discuss how technology has 
changed so much about the funding and distribution of news, and why we need 
independent journalism in the public interest now more than ever before.”

Lenore Taylor, editor, Guardian Australia said: “Technical disruption means it 
is harder to finance quality civic journalism and more important than ever 
before that we keep producing it.”

Mark Colvin (presenter of ABC Radio’s leading current affairs program PM) will 
moderate the discussion in Sydney at the Seymour Centre and Dr Margaret Simons 
(Director of the Centre for Advancing Journalism) will moderate the 
conversation in Melbourne.

Both events will be offered to Guardian Australia readers free of charge and 
members will be given priority access. Tickets can be reservedhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/dec/20/guardian-live-presents-katharine-viner-and-lenore-taylor-in-conversation-does-the-truth-matter>
.
 