
New York, NY, November 4, 2016: The Guardian US mobile innovation lab 
<https://medium.com/the-guardian-mobile-innovation-lab> today announces the 
launch of the most dynamic 2016 presidential election results notifications 
that have ever been available through a news app, uniquely delivered directly 
to mobile lock screens for Guardian iOS and Android app users.

The lab, working with the Guardian’s in-house app development team, will bring 
real time updates not just to the web or within an app, but to the lock screen 
for the first time. The updating alert will deliver instantaneous, 
up-to-the-minute results with the latest Associated Press election data, 
automatically loaded directly to lock screens for Guardian app users who sign 
up. Readers will receive the latest information within one continuously updated 
notification, which will be always visible without additional taps, searches, 
or further access to a mobile app.


Users will see the latest number of electoral votes won, how many states have 
been called, and the breakdown of the popular vote between the top two 
candidates. The notifications will then allow users to open the alert and 
access a live data visualization of the results and have the option to tap 
through to the live blog or the full results pages.


Sarah Schmalbach, product manager for the Guardian US mobile innovation lab, 
comments: “This will be the quickest and most convenient way to get live 
election night results on mobile. We’re the first to take advantage of this 
brand new mobile alert feature, that allows us to update the latest data 
straight on readers’ lock screens. No news app, or any other mobile app, has 
said they’ll be doing this on November 8th.”


The notifications for the presidential election build on the success of live 
data notifications tested as part of the mobile innovation lab’s experiment 
during the UK referendum on EU membership in June 2016.


Sasha Koren, editor of the lab says: “In adapting the technology the lab has 
built, and by applying the lessons we learned during the Brexit experiment, our 
goal is to bring live results notifications to a larger stage and to serve a 
wider audience during the biggest news event of the year. By adopting these 
notifications formats, the Guardian is taking the opportunity both to innovate 
within news delivery and to bring US election results to mobile users in the 
most accessible way possible.”


US app users will be prompted to sign up for live results notification via an 
opt-in screen starting November 4th and the alerts will be available globally 
through the Guardian’s app notification settings. To download the Guardian’s 
iPhone or Android apps, please click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
.


-Ends-


Media inquiries


E: press.office@theguardian.com


T: + 1 917-900-4675

About Guardian News & Media


Guardian US, with newsrooms in New York, Washington DC and San Francisco, 
covers US and global news for an online audience across America.

Guardian News & Media (GNM), publisher of theguardian.com 
<http://theguardian.com/>, is one of the largest English-speaking newspaper 
website in the world. Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 
2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over 
two-thirds of the Guardian’s total digital audience.


First published in 1821, the Guardian is most recently renowned for its 
award-winning investigation, The Counted, which exposes and documents lethal 
police force across America, its agenda-setting NSA surveillance revelations 
following disclosures by whistleblower Edward Snowden, globally acclaimed 
investigation into phone hacking, and its trailblazing partnership with 
Wikileaks in 2010.

 