
Mail Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> and 
theguardian.com continued to increase traffic in November, as all other UK 
national newspaper websites saw a reduction in monthly browsers.

Guardian.co.uk passed 40 million monthly browsers for the first time and also 
finished November with a record average of 2.32 million daily browsers, 
according to the latest figures from the Audit Bureau of Circulations 
Electronic published today.

Guardian News & Media's website network, which includes MediaGuardian.co.uk, 
increased its average daily browsers by 11.74% from 2,080,691 in October, a 
20.67% improvement on November last year.

The network's traffic was boosted towards the end of the month when the first 
stories on the US embassy cables from WikiLeaks were published online on 29 
November. Guardian.co.uk is likely to see a further traffic boost from its 
WikiLeaks coverage when the December ABCe figures are published next month.

Mail Online remains the most visited UK newspaper website and is closing in on 
another traffic record – 3 million average daily browsers.

The Associated Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> 
website network registered 2,939,799 average daily users last month, up by 
6.56% from October and 55.77% on the same month last year. Mail Online's 
monthly browser total of 51,434,953 is a 2.76% lift on the previous month.

Telegraph.co.uk, the third most-visited UK newspaper site, registered 
1,724,153 daily average browsers in November, a slight increase of 0.1% on the 
previous month's total. The website's monthly browsers fell by 3% to 32,896,824 
in November.

Independent.co.uk was up 0.42% month on month to 555,908 average daily 
browsers, a 30.29% jump year on year. The site suffered a 3.6% drop in monthly 
browsers to 11,998,851 from October.

Mirror Group Digital's average daily browsers grew 0.8% month on month to 
534,188, up 6.2% on November 2009. Monthly browser figures fell 2% month on 
month to 11,443,999.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 2,939,799

Month-on-month change: +6.56%

Year-on-year change: +55.77%

Monthly browsers: 51,434,953

Monthly change: +2.76%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 2,324,949

Month-on-month change: +11.74%

Year-on-year change: +20.67%

Monthly browsers: 40,804,452

Monthly change: +8.92%

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 1,724,153

Month-on-month change: +0.1%

Year-on-year change: +6.03%

Monthly browsers: 32,896,824

Monthly change: -3.09%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 559,927

Month-on-month change: +0.72%

Year-on-year change: +36.78%

Monthly browsers: 11,998,851

Monthly change: -3.62%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 534,188

Month-on-month change: +0.76%

Year-on-year change: +6.25%

Monthly browsers: 11,443,999

Monthly change: -2.03%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 