
Underlying losses at the Guardian and Observer publisher Guardian News & Media 
are expected to remain flat at about £20m for the 2015 financial year, as 
investment in editorial and commercial operations offsets growing digital 
revenues.

Revenues are expected to increase 3% to £215m at GNM parent company Guardian 
Media Group <https://www.theguardian.com/media/guardianmediagroup>, owner of 
Guardian News & Media which publishes the two newspapers, according to a 
trading update covering the year to 29 March.

A 20% increase in digital sales over the year has more than compensated for 
declines in print circulation and advertising.

The GNM editor-in-chief, Alan Rusbridger, said: “Thanks to our balance sheet 
transformation, we can look forward to a period of targeted investment in the 
world-class journalism, digital excellence and increasingly international 
readership that is now the hallmark of the Guardian.”

Andrew Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-miller>, the GMG chief 
executive, said further investment in new products and international expansion 
is likely to mean greater losses in the future.

He said: “You’ll see the losses increase over the next four or five years as 
the revenue lags behind. We’re investing in more mobile-facing products, more 
video-formatted content which is expensive, and more international growth, 
particularly in America.”

The Guardian has cash reserves of more than £800m, about £600m of which comes 
the sale of its 51.1% stake in Trader Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/22/guardianmediagroup-theguardian> 
early last year. The company retains a 32.9% stake in business media company 
Top Right Group.

GMG is owned by the Scott Trust, which is tasked with ensuring the survival of 
the Guardian in perpetuity.

Miller said: “In very high-level terms, we have more than £1bn worth of 
assets, of which £800m is cash, and we have underlying losses running at a 
level of £20m-odd right now.

“The judgment is we’ll take a chunk of that £1bn and reinvest it over four to 
five years to bring revenue back in, but it’s a constant refining.”

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has invested 
heavily in its US operation, first in building an editorial team in New York, 
and more recently in commercial staff to sell advertising aimed at a US 
audience.

The US audience has grown by 37% over the last year and now accounts for a 
greater proportion of the Guardian’s more than 120 million unique browsers a 
month than the UK.

“[The Guardian in] America journalistically did fantastic work over the last 
few years, it’s really working now economically too,” said Miller. “We’re doing 
120 million global uniques now a month, that is definitely equal to the New 
York Times. What we’ve now got to do is take that reach and build the 
engagement and loyalty and monetise it.”

The Guardian has also launched in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/guardian-to-launch-new-digital-operation-in-australia>
 in partnership with internet entrepreneur Graeme Wood, and Miller says further 
expansion globally is under discussion.

He said: “The primary decision about where we go next internationally sits 
with the new editor. [It could be] India like every other media company, 
sub-Saharan Africa, even Canada which now has a very similar political 
situation to Australia which could be interesting for us.”

Both Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/10/alan-rusbridger-stand-down-guardian-editor-in-chief>
 andMiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/29/andrew-miller-to-stand-down-guardian-media-group>
 are standing down this summer.
 