
The panel for the first in a series of debates presented by the Guardian and 
Battersea Arts Centre has been announced. The debate, part of the joint project
A Nation’s Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/a-nations-theatre>
, will explore issues of devolution and its impact on the arts. It will take 
place at Manchester’s new cultural space,Home <http://homemcr.org/>, on 
Saturday 23 May from 5.15-6.15pm.

Guardian critic Lyn Gardner and BAC’s David Jubb will be joined by Walter 
Meierjohann <http://www.waltermeierjohann.com/>, artistic director: theatre at 
Home;Matt Fenton <http://contactmcr.com/staff/executive/matt-fenton/>, artistic 
director at Contact theatre;Gemma Bodinetz 
<https://www.everymanplayhouse.com/artistic-and-executive-directors>, artistic 
director of the Liverpool Everyman & Playhouse;Blanche McIntyre 
<http://www.nuffieldtheatre.co.uk/about-us/whos-who/associates/blanche-mcintyre>
, associate director at Nuffield theatre and director of Home’s production of 
The Oresteia;Alison Clark-Jenkins 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/who-we-are/transparency/human-resources/organisation-review/>
, director of combined arts and director, north, at Arts Council England; and 
the poet, playwright and actorYusra Warsama <http://www.yusrawarsama.com/>.


As Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> looks ahead to the 
prospect of devolution, and Wales and Scotland are assured of ever-greater 
autonomy, we will be asking what effect these changes might have on theatre and 
the arts in the UK. Can a country that is increasingly regionally divided still 
be brought together by art? Will greater autonomy lead to a greater disparity 
of funding in the arts? And how do we ensure that the benefits of investment in 
the arts are felt by everyone?


A Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/35901/see_whats_on/whats_on/shows/a_nations_theatre>
 is a year-long celebration of theatre and creativity, presented by BAC in 
partnership with the Guardian.


 * Book tickets (£3) for the event here 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/a-nations-theatre-nationhood-and-devolution-16713147474> 