
Guardian Australia has launched an exclusive film, Under the Surface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/07/naomi-klein-at-the-great-barrier-reef-under-the-surface>
, made with the award-winning writer and environmental campaigner Naomi Klein. 
The film captures her trip to the Great Barrier Reef with her son, Toma, to see 
the impact of coral bleaching caused by climate change.

Klein tells how she wants him to bear witness. “Just in case, amid the coral 
that is still alive, he can find something beautiful to connect with, something 
he can carry with him as he navigates life on a warmer, harsher planet than the 
one I grew up on. Because climate change is already here – and kids are on the 
frontlines.”

In an accompanying article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/climate-change-is-intergenerational-theft-thats-why-my-son-is-part-of-this-story>
, she tells why she was persuaded to join the Guardian on the project, and why 
she decided to include her son. “I started thinking: maybe this was a chance to 
get at aspects of climate disruption that scientific reports and political 
arguments just can’t convey. Perhaps it could communicate, in a visceral way, 
the intergenerational theft at the heart of this crisis.”

For the past eight years Klein has been writing and speaking about climate 
change around the clock and she is visiting Australia toto receive the Sydney 
peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/15/naomi-klein-gives-australian-climate-policy-a-serve-after-sydney-peace-prize-win>
.


The film follows Guardian Australia’s Reef on the brink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/series/reef-on-the-brink> series in 
June, which presented new data and exclusive photographs mapping the increase 
in water temperatures causing the mass coral bleaching on the Great Barrier 
Reef.

Lenore Taylor, Guardian Australia’s editor, will join Klein on the panel To 
Change Everything We Need Everyone 
<http://sydneypeacefoundation.org.au/events/conversations-with-naomi-klein-to-change-everything-we-need-everyone/>
 at the City Recital Hall in Sydney on Wednesday 9 November. Klein will accept 
the peace prize at Sydney Town Hall on Friday 11 November.
 