
Guardian US saw record traffic in March 2016 according to the latest report 
released by comScore. Monthly unique users reached 34.7 million, beating 
November 2015’s previous record of 34.5 million, and showing an increase of 29% 
year-on-year.

Web-only page views stood at 120.3 million in March. Internal metrics also 
point to an additional 26 million page views from the fast-growing US audience 
on theGuardian app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/ng-interactive/2014/may/29/-sp-the-guardian-app-for-ios-and-android>
.

Guardian US also had 30 million mobile visitors in the same period, up 55.8% 
from the same time last year, and reported an almost 50% year-on-year increase 
in its millennial audience, with almost 16 million 18-34 year olds visiting the 
site in March.

March’s record traffic was largely driven by the Guardian’s coverage of the 
race for the White House <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>
, as well as reporting on theBrussels attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks>, and a series focused on 
thechallenges faced by the millennial generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
. New political columnistJill Abramson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/2016/mar/28/guardian-us-appoints-jill-abramson-as-political-columnist>
’stake on Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/28/hillary-clinton-honest-transparency-jill-abramson>
 was also amongst the most read articles that month.

Source: comScore




Media inquiries

t: +1 646.937.5878

e: pressoffice@theguardian.com

About Guardian News & Media

Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/>
 which, with 150 million unique browsers a month, is one of the largest 
English-speaking quality newspaper websites in the world. Since launching its 
US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from 
outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian’s total 
digital audience.

The Guardian is most recently renowned for its Pulitzer Prize and Emmy-winning 
revelations based on the disclosures made by whistleblower Edward Snowden. In 
2014, the Guardian was named newspaper and website of the year at the Society 
of Editors UK Press Awards and is the most trusted news source in the UK (Ofcom 
digital media report, 2014).
 