
Today Guardian Australia has published the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
, containing 2,000 leaked incident reports from Australia’s detention camp for 
asylum seekers on the remote Pacific island of Nauru.

The Nauru files lifts the secrecy surrounding Australia’s hidden detention 
regime for asylum seekers through vivid reporting and the words of the guards 
and officials on the island themselves. It is the single largest cache of 
documents to be leaked from within Australia’s asylum seeker detention regime 
and details assaults, sexual assaults and self-harm.

The series uses a variety of digital storytelling techniques including a 
database interactive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
, apowerful video story on the children of Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/aug/10/nauru-australia-refugees-detention-centre-asylum-migration-video>
 detailedexplainers about the lives of the young people in detention, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/10/i-want-death-nauru-files-chronicle-despair-of-asylum-seeker-children>
an image gallery featuring 12 of the most harrowing incident reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2016/aug/10/twelve-of-the-most-harrowing-accounts-from-the-nauru-files-in-pictures>
. It also showcases powerful commentary fromDavid Marr, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-are-raw-evidence-of-torture-can-we-look-away>
Kristina Keneally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/australia-fails-the-same-lesson-every-time-the-nauru-files-show-how-secrecy-hides-abuse>
 andBen Doherty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/a-short-history-of-nauru-australias-dumping-ground-for-refugees>
.

The Nauru files comes just weeks after Guardian Australia published a major 
interview with specialist Paul Stevenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/20/the-worst-ive-seen-trauma-expert-lifts-lid-on-atrocity-of-australias-detention-regime>
, who described conditions in the detention camps on Nauru and Manus as the 
worst he’d seen in 43 years working across the world on the treatment of trauma.

Since launching in 2013, Guardian Australia has been dedicated to reporting 
the stories that matter and the ones that often don’t get told. As reaction 
around the world has shown, our readers including many authorities on this 
subject share our view that is important for journalists to shed light on the 
secretive world of offshore detention.

The Guardian’s team has been working on the Nauru files for months and there 
will be further stories from the Nauru files in the coming days.

For more information or an interview with Guardian Australia’s reporter Paul 
Farrell, please contact:

Guardian Australia press office: katie.haffner@theguardian.com (+61 403 357 
831) or get in touch with Paul Farrell directly paul.farrell@theguardian.com 
(+61 431 216 127).

About Guardian News & Media

Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/>
, one of the largest English-speaking quality newspaper websites in the world. 
Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 
respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of 
the Guardian’s total digital audience.

In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first 
published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer.

The Guardian is most recently renowned for its Pulitzer Prize and Emmy-winning 
revelations based on the disclosures made by whistleblower Edward Snowden. In 
2014, the Guardian was named newspaper and website of the year at the Society 
of Editors UK Press Awards and is the most trusted news source in the UK (Ofcom 
digital media report, 2014).

The Guardian is also known for its globally acclaimed investigation into phone 
hacking, the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011 and 
its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010.

About Guardian Australia

Launched in 2013, Guardian Australia is a premium digital news brand in 
Australia, with a total reach of 3.1m unique audiences each month (Nielsen, 
June 2016). We engage our audience with up-to-the-minute reporting, 
investigations, commentary, blogging, in-depth analysis, cutting-edge data 
visualisation and humour. Our team is committed to open journalism and 
supporting a diverse range of voices in Australia. Guardian Australia now 
offers national news coverage and has expanded to five offices/bureaus located 
in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Canberra and Darwin.
 