
Remember, Remember the Fifth of November, the day Guy Fawkes was discovered in 
the cellar of the House of Lords with 36 barrels of gunpowder, in one of 
history’s great conspiracies. The precise details of the gunpowder plot have 
been contested over the centuries. Was Fawkes part of agroup of Catholic 
militants <http://www.bl.uk/learning/timeline/item104139.html> planning on 
blowing up the Parliament at its 1605 state opening, as the best-known story 
goes. Or was the whole plot organised by the Earl of Salisbury as a way of 
pressuring King James I to toughen up his anti-Catholic laws, asrecent 
conspiracy theorists 
<http://epicfireworks.com/blog/2010/03/guy-fawkes-and-the-gunpowder-plot-conspiracy/>
 have suggested? Either way, we’ve decided to celebrate bonfire night with 
eight of the best literary conspiracy theories.

1) Charlotte Brontë killed her sisters

According to criminologist James Tully, the author of Jane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> was not the secluded, 
intellectual spinster we imagine, but a violently envious and lustful 
murderess. All was peaceful in the Brontë household, Tully says, until the 1845 
appearance of a(debatably) handsome 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Bell_Nicholls#mediaviewer/File:Arthur_Bell_Nicholls.jpg>
 and wily curate named Reverend Arthur Bell Nicholls. Tully claims that 
Nicholls encouraged Charlotte’s already envious disposition, and together they 
poisoned each one of her siblings. Emily and Branwell (whoanother theory says 
<http://www.online-literature.com/forums/showthread.php?22769-Who-really-wrote-Wuthering-Heights>
 wrote Emily’sWuthering Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/16/emily-bronte-wuthering-heights-100-best>
) died in 1848 at ages 30 and 31 respectively.Anne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jan/17/anne-bronte-sister-men-charlotte-emily>
 died in 1849 at 29. The common conception is that they all contracted 
tuberculosis or cholera, but Tully, who is also an expert in 19th-century 
poison, is convinced that they were murdered. A few years later Charlotte’s 
father “angrily chased” Nicholls from their estate. Soon after that, Charlotte 
eloped with Nicholls, only to die a year later. Tully claims that it was 
Nicholls’s plan all along to inherit the Brontë estate, and thus Charlotte met 
the same bleak fate as her siblings. Tully originally wrote his theory as 
non-fiction, but was unable to find a publisher; so he retold the story as 
fiction from the point of view of real-life maid Martha Brown. His book,The 
Crimes of Charlotte Brontë 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/99/10/10/bib/991010.rv102718.html>, gained some 
recognition, but was generally rejected by Brontë enthusiasts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415207096771%2Fef6e33da-05a3-4ce1-baae-fac0a64618f5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunpowder%2C%20treason%20and%20plot%3A%20literary%20conspiracy%20theories%20for%20bonfire%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunpowder%2C%20treason%20and%20plot%3A%20literary%20conspiracy%20theories%20for%20bonfire%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415207096771%2Fef6e33da-05a3-4ce1-baae-fac0a64618f5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 JK Rowling: too quick, surely... Photograph: Suzanne Plunkett/Reuters 
2) JK Rowling didn’t write Harry Potter

No one that pretty could actually have been that poor and that good at 
writing, right? No, Rowling is obviously an actress hired by a panel of shadowy 
ghostwriters. Or at least that’s what Norwegian film-makerNina Grunfeld believes
 
<http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1129&dat=20051209&id=haokAAAAIBAJ&sjid=43ADAAAAIBAJ&pg=6798,6688102>
 . “But can a person be so productive and commercially successful in a media 
industry where nothing is left to coincidence?” Grunfeld asked in an article 
for the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten. Grunfeld put forward the theory that 
the Potter series was in fact written by a large team of people, all of whom 
were perfectly happy to receive no credit for the worldwide phenomenon. Rowling 
is an actress they hired to be the face of the series, and her story was 
cleverly crafted to give hope to impoverished single mothers everywhere. After 
all, “is it possible that one person can write six thick books that are 
translated into 55 languages and sell more than 250 million copies in less than 
10 years?” Yes, if you have a million-pound paycheck dangling in front of you 
as motivation.

3) Hunter S Thompson was assassinated

According to this internet theory, Thompson knew the truth about 9/11. This 
“truth” is that it was clearly a ploy to give the “Neo-conservatives their 
Pearl Harbor,”as the site thompsonmurder.com says 
<http://www.thompsonmurder.com/>, and was entirely organised by the American 
government. Therefore in 2005, the CIA or the Illuminati or someone, decided 
Thompson had to be taken down before he shared this knowledge with the world, 
and so they staged his suicide. Thompson was on the phone with his wife as he 
died, and he left behind a brief though characteristic suicide note titled 
Football Season Is Over. According to his friends Thompson had talked of 
suicide for decades, but the site insists the suicidewas clearly staged 
<http://www.thompsonmurder.com/> for a number of reasons including: “He was on 
good relations with his wife, Anita, a cute young blonde with no problems.” The 
most convincing cause for suspicion mentioned by thompsonmurder.com, is that 
the day before he had reportedly told a friend: “They’re gonna make it look 
like a suicide, I know how these bastards think.” Personally, I wouldn’t put it 
past Thompson to have said that just to keep us guessing.

4) William Godwin killed Percy Shelley’s first wife

Frankenstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/11/100-best-novels-frankenstein-mary-shelley>
 author Mary Godwin and poet Percy Shelley began their affair when Mary was 16 
and Shelley was still married to his wife Harriet. The pair ran off for a 
holiday with Lord Byron and his mistress in Geneva, where they launched a 
contest as to who could write the best horror story, and the manuscript of 
Frankenstein was begun. While they were away, Harriet Shelley abandoned her 
child with Percy and went missing. She was discovered a month later, in an 
advanced stage of pregnancy, floating dead in a lake – an apparent suicide. The 
incident was relatively hushed up, and Harriet’s name was smeared for years 
afterward by the Shelleys and Godwins with accusations of alcoholism, 
infidelity and prostitution.Consipiracy theorists have suggested 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/lynn-shepherd/harriet-shelley-life_b_3780254.html>
 that Mary’s father, William Godwin - a well-known author - was responsible for 
Harriet’s demise, basing the theory on the fact that he insisted on Mary and 
Percy’s wedding happening less than a month after the death, and that he noted 
Harriet’s death in his diary several weeks before anyone knew she was dead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415206887951%2F633d35dc-bcc2-426c-8f84-65c32a531463-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunpowder%2C%20treason%20and%20plot%3A%20literary%20conspiracy%20theories%20for%20bonfire%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunpowder%2C%20treason%20and%20plot%3A%20literary%20conspiracy%20theories%20for%20bonfire%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415206887951%2F633d35dc-bcc2-426c-8f84-65c32a531463-1020x612.jpeg>
 Queen Elizabeth I: knew how to write, so... Photograph: Culture Club/Getty 
Images 
5) Queen Elizabeth I wrote Shakespeare’s plays

I am not normally one to buy into all the “Shakespeare was too poor to be 
smart” theories, but this one is particularly appealing. The argument is that 
Shakespeare was simply too uneducated and untravelled to have penned so many 
genius plays about historical figures, famed myths, strange and distant lands. 
Elizabeth, on the other hand, had a royal knowledge of history, politics and 
geography. She also published some poetry under her own name in her lifetime, 
so we know she had a decent handle on a phrase. She could never publish such 
raunchy plays under her own name, she paid Shakespeare to use his, which is 
probably how he could afford thatgolden hoop earring 
<http://images.npg.org.uk/800_800/7/4/mw11574.jpg>.

6) Albert Camus was killed by the KGB

“I heard something very strange from the mouth of a man who knew lots of 
things and had very informed sources,” wrote the Czech poet and translator Jan 
Zábrana in his self-published diary Celý život. “According to him, the [car] 
accident that had cost Albert Camus his life in 1960 was organised by Soviet 
spies.” This passage was omitted from translations of the book and was only 
noticed in 2011 by Italian academic and poet Giovanni Catelli. It was then 
published in anarticle in the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/07/albert-camus-killed-by-kgb>. 
Camus had a history of angering Russian leaders; at one point calling Moscow’s 
move to crush the 1956 Hungarian uprising the “Shepilov Massacres” in a 
published article, at another publicly supporting Boris Pasternak, whose novel 
Doctor Zhivago had been banned by Stalin. The KGB have been known to get up to 
some pretty nefarious activities, so an organised car accident does not seem 
too far-fetched. Even so, some Camus experts still vehemently reject this 
theory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415206809560%2Fb0f14bca-3b47-4071-b102-483fb1a1c8ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gunpowder%2C%20treason%20and%20plot%3A%20literary%20conspiracy%20theories%20for%20bonfire%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gunpowder%2C%20treason%20and%20plot%3A%20literary%20conspiracy%20theories%20for%20bonfire%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliterary-conspiracy-theories-for-bonfire-night%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415206809560%2Fb0f14bca-3b47-4071-b102-483fb1a1c8ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stephen King: ordered conspiracist to cease and desist. Photograph: Stephen 
Schofield/Guardian 
7) Stephen King shot John Lennon

According to Steve Lightfoot and his website lennonmurdertruth.com 
<http://lennonmurdertruth.com./>, in 1980 Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan had 
had enough of Lennon’s peace movements and political songs. After a failed 
attempt to deport him, the two banded together and decided that the only 
logical plan of action was to get horror writer Stephen King to shoot him. 
Lightfoot claims that Chapman was an actor hired to take the fall for King. 
Lightfoot based this claim on “codes” in newspaper and magazine headlines 
published before and after the event (supposedly the method used by Nixon and 
Reagan to communicate their plan to King). Lightfoot has collected evidence 
from King’s books and interviews over 30 years, and has published a book on the 
matter. In spite of King ordering him to cease and desist, he has continued to 
spread his “truth”, occasionally following the author in a van painted with the 
words “Come Together Over This”. Even if you don’t buy Lightfoot’s theory, you 
have to admire his commitment.

8) Edgar Allan Poe was “cooped”

It would have been so disappointing if Edgar Allan Poe, the master of mystery 
himself, had died peacefully of old age in his sleep. A week before his end, 
40-year-old Poe went missing in Baltimore only to show up a few days later in a 
gutter, apparently drunk and dressed in someone else’s clothing. He died in the 
hospital four days later without ever being able to utter a sensible word. Most 
assume he was murdered, some say by his girlfriend’s protective brothers, but
many are sure he was “cooped”. 
<http://www.crimelibrary.com/notorious_murders/celebrity/edgar_allan_poe/6.html>
 Cooping was a sinister 19th-century trend in which political gangs would 
kidnap men off the street, get them drunk, and force them to vote multiple 
times for one candidate. They would often dress them in multiple outfits so 
they were not caught while voting. The gang would usually rough their hostages 
up afterwards, for good measure. This explanation is quite convincing, but it 
must be noted that Poe did have a severe alcohol problem. It is perfectly 
possible that he went on a bit too much of a bender, borrowed a stranger’s 
clothing, and decided a gutter was a good place for a nap. But we’ll go with 
cooped.
 