
With apologies to Dylan Farrow 
<http://kristof.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/02/01/an-open-letter-from-dylan-farrow/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0>
, who would attach sterner moral implications to this question than those I 
intend: what's your favourite Woody Allen movie of the 21st century? It's been 
a slightly painful question for a while now, usually drawing less-than-ringing 
endorsements along the lines of: "Midnight in Paris  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141834/midnight-in-paris>was harmless 
enough", or: "Vicky Cristina Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126605/vicky.cristina.barcelona>, if 
you mute the voiceover bits." At last, however, there's an easy answer:Blue 
Jasmine(Warner, 12), imperfect as it is in fractious and interesting ways, is 
something genuinely remarkable.

Much of that comes down to Cate Blanchett's daring, last-nerve performance as 
the title character, a spoilt society wife experiencing the mother of all Xanax 
comedowns after her husband is jailed for tax fraud – a tragicomic turn of Gena 
Rowlands proportions that isall but certain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/11/oscar-favourites-best-actress-costume-animation-song>
 to win her a deserved second Oscar in two weeks' time. But it also boasts 
Allen's most angular script sinceHusbands and Wives – one with characters who 
actually respond to each other, rather than just glassily mouthing Allen's own 
foibles and intellectual preferences. (They do that too, of course, but with 
genuine personal vim.)

His real-world impressions are still weirdly off-base, and the dive into 
Tennessee Williams melodrama more a lurch, but it's only half a slight to say 
this would have been even-par Woody in his golden run of the 1980s: it's a film 
that feels directly transported from that most brittle, literate, 
female-fascinated phase of his career.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKK7_xLxf4o0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKK7_xLxf4o0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKK7_xLxf4o0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It also features a pithy shorthand turn from Alec Baldwin, but for those who 
prefer him flabby and ever-present there's Seduced and Abandoned 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Seduced-And-Abandoned-James-Toback/dp/B00ECVPONG> 
(Soda, 15), a droll if dauntlessly smug not-quite-documentary starring Baldwin 
as himself, swanning around the Cannes film festival with his leering 
writer-director pal James Toback. As they pitch a misbegotten-sounding remake of
Last Tango in Paris  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77724/last-tango-in-paris>to a 
glittering array of bemused/befuddled A-listers, none of whom comes off better 
than Ryan Gosling reflecting on past audition horrors, the idea is to expose 
the industry's absurdities, but their own are made equally clear.

Somehow they avoid running into Benedict Cumberbatch, despite his having 
featured in 78% of all films made in the last year: a great big-screen showcase 
still eludes him, though he's a playfully frosty, film-saving presence as 
Julian Assange inThe Fifth Estate 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Fifth-Estate-Benedict-Cumberbatch/dp/B00FRD7RVA> 
(Entertainment One, 15), Bill Condon's otherwise drab, box-ticking trudge of a 
WikiLeaks thriller. It's a wonder he hasn't yet been absorbed into the plummy, 
reptilian ensemble ofGame of Thrones 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Game-Thrones-Season-3-DVD/dp/B00AQGE43M> (Warner, 15), 
the third season of which hits DVD shelves tomorrow. I'm a late convert to this 
particular TV phenomenon, but am now alarmingly hooked on its combination of 
arch classical dramatics and gleefully trashy, healthily pansexual 
bodice-ripping.
 'Playfully frosty': Benedict Cumberbatch stars as WikiLeaks founder Julian 
Assange in The Fifth Estate. Photograph: Frank Connor/Unit 
This week's streaming pick is the last gasp of My French Film Festival 2014 
<http://www.myfrenchfilmfestival.com/en/>, an online collection of recent, 
lower-profile Gallic cinema now accessible at a bargain rate viaCurzon Home 
Cinema 
<http://www.curzoncinemas.com/film_on_demand/1079/my-french-film-festival-2014---complete-festival/>
: 12 films for £12. They're a predictably mixed bag: I advise skipping past 
Louis-Do de Lencquesaing's smarmyAu galop and alighting instead on Alice 
Winocour's sensually reckless period dramaAugustine, which is the film David 
Cronenberg'sA Dangerous Method should have been. Those wary of discovery, 
meanwhile, can fall back on the inclusion of Jacques Demy's evergreen, 
ever-luminousThe Umbrellas of Cherbourg – also recently reissued on gorgeous 
Blu-ray 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Umbrellas-Cherbourg-Anniversary-Edition-Blu-ray/dp/B00GDEZNHM>
.
 