
Every year, the aisles of Easter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/easter> greeting cards in stationers' 
shops grow wider, as more commercial enterprises clock to the holiday's 
prettier-than-Christmas potential – but the film industry, by and large, has 
resisted. The list of great Easter-related films is short, and the list of 
those available online considerably shorter. Happily, iTunes recently 
identified an exception by adding Pier Paolo Pasolini's rapturousThe Gospel 
According to St. Matthewto their download roster – and you could not ask for a 
more bracing antidote to the hoary biblical epics that TV programmers routinely 
trot out over this particular weekend.

Not at all the reading one might expect from the bristly gay Marxist, this 
spare, serene observation of Jesus Christ's trajectory from birth to death to, 
well, beyond instead surprises with its devotion to the text, making its stray 
flourishes of subversion – notably the bluesy surge of Odetta's Motherless 
Child on the soundtrack – hit that much harder. Fifty years old this year and 
pristine as ever, it's a film about belief for viewers of all persuasions.

Working from slightly less sacred source material, that's very much what Ben 
Stiller'sThe Secret Life of Walter Mitty (Fox, 12) would like to be. 
Redesigning the 1947 Danny Kaye comedy (itself fairly far removed from James 
Thurber'ssatirical short story 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1939/03/18/390318fi_fiction_thurber?currentPage=all>
) into a very 21st-century paean to self-actualisation, it's a film that goes 
to impressive technical lengths to make pamphlet-sized points: chase your 
dreams, only connect, and so on and so forth. Stiller plays the eponymous 
fantasist – oddly, a photo editor at the long-defunctLife magazine – as a kind 
of guarded Forrest Gump figure, living out the spirit of his publication 
through elaborate, CGI-heavy flights of fancy. It's handsome, agreeably earnest 
and ephemeral as a daydream.
 Daniel Radcliffe as Allen Ginsberg in Kill Your Darlings. Photograph: Allstar 
It's hard to say whether Allen Ginsberg would have been sneerier about the 
tidy liberation sentiments ofMitty or Kill Your Darlings (Universal, 15), John 
Krokidas's diverting but oddly puppyish portrait of the Beat poet's Columbia 
University days. Daniel Radcliffe is eager, if uncomfortably cast, as the naive 
English student finding his sexuality and creative voice via an unrequited 
crush on destructive fellow student Lucien Carr – played by Dane DeHaan with an 
amped-up vigour and eroticism the film could use more of. The man wears the 
hell out of a herringbone coat, too – it may be the mostcovetably styled  
<http://www.thestylecon.com/2013/10/23/kill-darlings/>anti-establishment movie 
in memory.

The sad death last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/01/paul-walker-dies-car-crash> of 
impeccably sculptedFast & Furious star Paul Walker hasn't stirred quite enough 
morbid sentiment to grant unapologetically lurid B-movie trifectaHustlers (
Lionsgate, 18) a cinema release, but it has pushed him to the fore in the 
film's marketing campaign. Luckily enough, his go-for-broke gonzo performance – 
as a meth-head embroiled in a botched heist – is one of the best things Wayne 
Kramer's strung-out collection of deep south underworld stories (released in 
the US asPa wn Shop Chronicles) has going for it.
 A Megan Boyd fly from Kiss The Water. 
As restful and gently rippled as Hustlers is manic, Eric Steel's documentary 
Kiss the Water(Soda, E) is quite the best cinematic study of fly-fishing since 
Robert Redford's featureA River Runs Through It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/98923/river-runs-through-it>. It's also 
the only one, but that's not to deny its modest loveliness: a fond portrait of 
eccentric Scottish fly designer Megan Boyd, coated in misty-silver landscape 
photography, it's a film that exudes its own kind of non-denominational 
spirituality.
 