
If you see a lurid version of Sarah Palin arm-in-arm with Joe the Plumber 
walking down a New York street this Friday, don't be alarmed. It's onlyHalloween
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween>. This is a city which 
likes its fancy dress costumes to be topical.

A New York chain of beauty supplies, Ricky's <http://www.rickyshalloween.com/>
, has carved out a lucrative niche in selling up-to-the-moment outfits for 
October 31.

For most of the year, Ricky's sells make-up, hair products and cosmetics at 23 
locations in the city. But each October, it takes temporary leases over vacant 
stores to create impromptu Halloween bazaars.

"Every Halloween, our beauty supplies stores were becoming more 
Halloween-ish," says Ricky's chief executive, Todd Kenig. "People kept asking 
for wigs, costumes, facepaint. The stores would have such an overflow of 
customers that we started looking for temporary locations each year."

Kenig seems to have hit upon a winner. Three years ago, he had six temporary 
Halloween shops in New York. This year, there are 19, making them ubiquitous in 
parts of lower Manhattan.

He says about 20% of his company's $45m (Â£28m) annual sales now derive from 
the brief run-up to Halloween. "I go up and down the entire city of New York, 
from 125th Street to Battery Park, looking for empty stores every year," he 
says.

Americans like their pumpkin-themed festival. The National Retail Federation 
<http://www.nrf.com/modules.php?name=News&op=viewlive&sp_id=578>(NRF) reckons 
the US public will spend $5.77bn on Halloween costumes this year - a rise of 
14% on 2007. On average, each shopper will splash out $24.17 on a costume and 
$66.54 on the holiday as a whole.

While Europeans tend to stick to dressing as witches, wizards and ghosts for 
Halloween, pretty much anything goes in the US. Each year brings an eclectic 
assortment of random costumes from superheros to antiheros, generally with an 
adult theme.

Two years ago, Borat was very much in vogue, complete with hideously revealing 
mankinis <http://boratswimsuit.com/>. Then there was Amy Winehouse's rehab 
look, which was something of an easy target, plus Lindsay Lohan and Britney 
Spears in their car crash descents from stardom.

This year, Ricky's offers a jumpsuit embroidered with the words "client nine" 
in honour of Eliot Spitzer, the hooker-loving former governor of New York 
state. There are Obama and McCain masks or a do-it-yourself "greedy banker" 
outfit, comprising a business suit and a pig's face. There's even a costume for 
pet dogs based on Star Wars' Yoda character.

But the hottest look, according to Kenig, is the Palin costume. Ricky's has 
offloaded mre than 600 sashes bearing the words "Miss Alaska", together with 
about 200 Palin wigs. "She's the biggest seller, certainly, of all the 
politicians," he says.

Ricky's prides itself in getting an outfit into the shops in a matter of days. 
The Republican hero, Joe the Plumber, only emerged into the limelight on 
October 15, when John McCain began to trumpet his virtues during the third and 
final presidential debate. It didn't take long for an outfit to emerge - 
complete with plunger.

"What really sells is what's happening now," says Kenig. "It's current items 
that do so well."

The recession seems to be doing little to dampen spirits. The NRF points out 
that this year's Halloween is on a Friday, providing a good excuse to party all 
weekend.

"Though the economy is struggling, Halloween sales may be a bright spot for 
retailers this fall," says the federation's president, Tracy Mullin. 
"Consumers, who have been anxious and uncertain for the past several months, 
may be looking at Halloween as an opportunity to forget the stresses of daily 
life and just have a little fun."

About 35% of consumers expect to dress up and 31% will be going to a party. 

There's a more complex psychological explanation for this outburst of jollity 
from Bob Thompson, a professor of popular culture at Syracuse University.

"Lately, Halloween has been reclaimed as a holiday celebrated by adults," he 
told Conde Nast'sPortfolio magazine 
<http://www.portfolio.com/views/blogs/daily-brief/2008/10/01/just-dont-wear-a-dick-fuld-mask>
. "I think this year that the state of the stockmarket, and the economy, and a 
hotly contested presidential election taking place on November 4 all make 
October 31 an even riper time to let loose and have a party."
 