
The Afghan president, Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, has questioned whether 
western troops were "fighting in the wrong place" during their decade-long 
mission in Afghanistan, saying security was better in southern Helmand province 
before the arrival of British forces.

Speaking exclusively to the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2013/feb/04/hamid-karzai-troops-afghanistan-video?mobile-redirect=false>
 andITV News <http://www.itv.com/news/> in London, Karzai said he was unclear 
if western forces were leaving Afghanistan because they felt they had achieved 
the aim of making their own countries more secure by tackling international 
terror groups – or because they had realised the mission was mistaken.

"They feel fulfilled with regard to the objective of fighting terrorism and 
weakening al-Qaida, or they feel that they were fighting in the wrong place in 
the first place, so they should discontinue doing that and leave," Karzai said 
in an interview ahead of trilateral talks with David Cameron and the Pakistani 
president,Asif Ali Zardari <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asif-ali-zardari>.

The man who has led Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban in 2001 said the 
greatest long-term threat to the country was not the insurgents but meddling by 
foreign powers. He did not name Pakistan, but he has long been a strident 
critic of the neighbouring country, which has provided sanctuaries for the 
Taliban for years, and his government has accused Islamabad's military 
intelligenceof manipulating the insurgents 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/01/karzai-taliban-peace-pakistan-spies>
.

The trilateral meetings follow moves by Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> to build confidence, such as the 
release of several batches of Taliban prisoners whom Kabul wanted freed. They 
have raised hopes of progress towards substantive Afghan peace talks, which 
would be almost impossible without Pakistani support.

Karzai said: "There will not be peace in Afghanistan by having an agreement 
only between us and the Afghan Taliban. Peace will only come when the external 
elements involved in creating instability and fighting, or lawlessness in
Afghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, are involved in 
talks." He added that he was more optimistic than a year ago that extensive 
behind-the-scenes contacts between his government and the Taliban would bear 
fruit, as relations with Pakistan improved.

"Britain's role at this point is highly valued in the pursuit it has for the 
peace process in Afghanistan and bringing Afghanistan and Pakistan together in 
a close dialogue for improved relations," Karzai said.

As a pullout for the Nato-led mission draws closer, the focus on peace talks 
is gaining ground. All forces must be gone by the end of next year but hopes 
that Afghanistan would be relatively secure by then have been abandoned. The 
country is still plagued by widespread instability, and the Afghan police and 
army will face a tough fight against theTaliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban>.

Karzai admitted that it was utopian to think the government could survive 
without some western military and financial aid after the mainNato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> mission ends.

Afghans were not concerned whether the west felt it had succeeded or failed in 
their country, Karzai said, because they were focused on trying to recover from 
30 years of war. He expects fighting to diminish after most foreign troops have 
gone, however, as their departure would remove a grievance that drove many 
fighters to take up arms.

"The exit of foreign forces will not bring more violence for them to 
perpetrate against their own people, but a serious, strong, good reduction in 
violence will occur," Karzai said, adding that he thought Helmand had been more 
peaceful before tens of thousands of US and British troops arrived to fight the 
Taliban in 2006.

Karzai was quoted as telling an official in 2008: "The question is why do we 
have Taliban controlling these areas now, when two years ago I had control of 
Helmand … we had girls in schools and only 160 foreign troops."

Asked about those comments, and whether he felt the substantial international 
presence had helped the area, Karzai paid tribute to the sacrifices the 
Nato-led troops had made and said it was not clear why violence had risen, but 
stood by the statement.

"Factually, what I said then was true, and it remains true today.

"In 2002 through 2006, Afghanistan had a lot better security. When we had our 
own presence there, with very little foreign troops, schools were open in 
Helmand and life was more secure," he said.

"But I am not going to blame, and it should not be seen as such. I don't want 
to be interpreted as saying that the arrival of foreign troops brought less 
security or worsened security for us. Whatever happened was the past, and now 
we are looking forward to the future."

The president has long opposed the presence of foreign troops in Afghan towns 
and villages, but he said it was critical that some stay on in large bases.

The US is considering leaving a few thousand troops in Afghanistan, probably 
bolstered by soldiers from Nato allies, to hunt groups linked to al-Qaida in 
the wild area around the Pakistan border and provide more training to the shaky 
Afghan security forces.

But the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has also said it is 
considering removing all troops, dubbed the "zero option", which Karzai warned 
could be disastrous for Afghanistan.

"Zero option would be a failure, not success," Karzai said.

"We wish to have that utopian state of mind, that's the ideal. Why wouldn't I 
– or why wouldn't any citizen of a country – want no troops on our side?"

"[But] Afghanistan needs to rebuild itself … For that we need the presence of 
the international community with us, our allies."
 