
A stone’s throw from the presidential palace in Kabul, you can see the lines 
of dignitaries awaiting their appointments from early in the morning: tribal 
leaders and elders from across the country queue up to get inside, where the 
audience also counts foreign ambassadors and cabinet ministers.

It’s not, however, the current Afghan president they are queuing to see, but 
his predecessor at his nearby city centre residence.

 Nine months after he relinquished power in Kabul, Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai> is a lingering, but formidable 
presence on the political scene, and his influence and interventions are 
increasingly seen as a threat to Afghanistan’s political stability.

The former president has curtailed the erratic behaviour that so irritated his 
international partners during his near-decade long rule, casting himself as a 
genial statesman and supposed unifier of the country.


Hamid Karzai: Afghanistan should not give up control of its foreign policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/09/hamid-karzai-if-we-give-up-control-of-our-foreign-policy-pakistan-taliban-ashraf-ghani-india>
The new president, Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, has failed deliver on 
promises to jumpstart the economy, struggled to appoint officials to key 
security positions, and risked significant political capital by making 
overtures to Pakistan.

Given its history of harbouring insurgents, Ghani’s pivot to Pakistan is 
controversial, and Karzai’s response has been ambiguous. In an interview with 
the Guardian in March Karzai insisted he would keep quiet and advise Ghani 
behind the scenes. “I absolutely support this government,” he said.

Many, however, question how genuine this assertion is. A senior western 
diplomat told the Guardian that Karzai has been trying for months to undercut 
Ghani’s government, with the intention of bringing it down. Should this happen, 
an interim government would likely take over, and Karzai would step forward to 
fill the vacuum as the self-styled father of the nation, the diplomat said.

Aware of Karzai’s intentions, but keen to avoid an open clash he might not 
win, Ghani has in the past tolerated the former president’s manoeuvres to a 
certain extent. “In the political game, Karzai is leagues ahead of almost 
everyone else here. Frankly, he is leagues ahead of us too. It just took us a 
while to figure it out,” the same source said.

A presidential aide who regularly meets Karzai agreed. “Karzai knows everyone 
in this country. Ghani does not,” he said.

The former president denies he is building up opposition. “Meeting tribal 
leaders and elders from around the country is nothing new for Mr Karzai. This 
is how it used to be during the last 14 years,” said Aimal Faizi, a long-time 
aide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhamid-karzai-seen-as-increasing-threat-to-afghanistans-political-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feacffc2fbb3f296a4837ab76857aea9ce8bfe89c%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamid%20Karzai%20seen%20as%20increasing%20threat%20to%20Afghanistan's%20political%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhamid-karzai-seen-as-increasing-threat-to-afghanistans-political-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamid%20Karzai%20seen%20as%20increasing%20threat%20to%20Afghanistan%27s%20political%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhamid-karzai-seen-as-increasing-threat-to-afghanistans-political-stability%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feacffc2fbb3f296a4837ab76857aea9ce8bfe89c%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The Afghan president, Ashraf Ghani. Photograph: Reuters 
“It is the Afghan political culture and also his personal style,” he said. 
“The strong bond between President Karzai and Afghan elders and leaders from 
all around the country can not be ignored by either side.”

Either way, Ghani now seems to have had enough. Last month on a trip to 
Kandahar, he struck back.

Kandahar is a Karzai stronghold and home to his half-brother Shah Wali Karzai, 
who heads the Popalzai tribe and wields considerable influence. The former 
president ruled largely through patronage, building personal relations with 
strongmen whose excesses and corruption he is accused of ignoring. They now 
stand in the way of Ghani’s pledge to centralise power and create more 
transparency.

“There are lots of warlords in Kandahar. They are like rats,” said Mohammad 
Yusuf, a member of the provincial council. “The Karzai government dug channels 
for the rats underground, brought them to government, made them officials, and 
today they have power.”

According to local media, Ghani told a group of civil society members: “From 
now on, there are no parallel governments in Kandahar.” The newly appointed 
governor, Humayun Azizi, was his official representative, he said.

Afghan backlash over security deal with Pakistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/19/afghan-backlash-over-governments-security-deal-with-pakistan>
When Ghani came to Kandahar, one of the strongest power brokers in the south, 
the police chief Lt Gen Abdul Raziq, made a point of leaving town.

“What did piss off the Ghani camp was that ahead of Ghani’s visit, people 
close to Karzai rang around to tribal leaders and said ‘don’t turn up’,” a 
western security official said. The president’s advisers supposedly convinced 
the elders to come after all, but the incident reinforced the impression that 
Ghani has very little wiggle room.

“You don’t want your former boss breathing down your neck,” the same source 
said.

The conflict between Ghani and Karzai came to a head with a memorandum of 
understanding signed in May between the Afghan and Pakistani spy agencies and 
confirmed by Pakistan’s army, to enhance intelligence cooperation. Many Afghans 
saw the deal as selling out to a sworn enemy.

The deal gave Karzai a platform to launch an attack on Ghani that chimed with 
public opinion. As a result, he has come to be seen by many as a protector of 
national sovereignty. To reinforce this image, he keeps up a busy travel 
schedule to countries uncomfortable with closer Afghan-Pakistani cooperation 
such as India, China and Russia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhamid-karzai-seen-as-increasing-threat-to-afghanistans-political-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1951e2fdd589943e4f697133ba70d3e3c95b2419%2F120_5_4032_2420%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamid%20Karzai%20seen%20as%20increasing%20threat%20to%20Afghanistan's%20political%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhamid-karzai-seen-as-increasing-threat-to-afghanistans-political-stability%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamid%20Karzai%20seen%20as%20increasing%20threat%20to%20Afghanistan%27s%20political%20stability&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fhamid-karzai-seen-as-increasing-threat-to-afghanistans-political-stability%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1951e2fdd589943e4f697133ba70d3e3c95b2419%2F120_5_4032_2420%2F4032.jpg>
 Hamid Karzai meets Vladimir Putin in Moscow Photograph: Mikhail Klimentyev/AP 
Faizi, Karzai’s aide, said Afghans were right to protest against the 
memorandum, “which is against the national interests of their country. The 
protest is [not] against individuals but against inappropriate policies of the 
Afghan government.”

Karzai may partly be fighting for his legacy. In rooting out corruption, Ghani 
will inevitably target people who amassed astonishing fortunes on the former 
president’s watch.

Karzai allies have been sidelined, among them the former vice-president Yunus 
Qanuni and the intelligence chief Rahmatullah Nabil, who opposed the memorandum 
with Pakistan. That puts Karzai in an awkward position given his tacit support 
for Ghani during the elections.

“Karzai feels like Ghani wouldn’t have gotten the presidency without him,” 
said the western security official.

The infighting could have wider repercussions, said Haroon Mir, a political 
analyst, pointing out that Ghani needs wide political support to begin peace 
talks with the Taliban.

“It’s not good at this time to lose political support or create opportunities 
for political opposition to emerge,” Mir said.

If Ghani has tried to send a message to Karzai to back off, the former 
president is unlikely to comply. Aides and analysts agree that he is 
positioning himself as the only viable alternative to a government that so far 
has not delivered.

“Karzai knows a lot of games, and one of his games is the loya jirga,” Ghani’s 
aide said, referring to the assembly that can pave the way for, among other 
things, a change in the constitution. Afghan presidents can currently only 
serve two terms, which Karzai has already done, but if he rallies support for a
loya jirga, he can mount a challenge on a whole different level.

Karzai “is the only known political leader of Afghanistan”, Mir said. “He has 
all the ingredients to be a national leader – many resources, political 
support, his own network of influential people. If there is a crisis, he will 
emerge as the only national leader.”

Additional reporting by Mokhtar Amiri
 