 Activate New York 2012: Hannah Jones 
Hannah Jones is Nike Inc's VP of sustainable business and innovation. As VP of 
sustainable business and innovation, she leads the team mandated with enabling 
the company to thrive in a future state sustainable economy through closed loop 
business models. Nike defines the sustainable economy as an economy where 
people, planet and profit are in balance. The SB&I teams role is to fuel and 
hothouse sustainable innovation, embed sustainability into the heart of the 
business model and mobilize key constituencies (employees, consumers, policy 
makers, civil society and other industry) to enable a rapid transition to a 
sustainable economy.

Hannah is a founding member of the business advisory council to the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), chairs the Sustainable 
Consumption initiative for the Consumer Industries grouping of the world 
economic forum and was named a Global Young Leader by the World Economic Forum 
in January of 2007.

Hannah joined Nike in 1998 as director or government and community affairs, 
EMEA. She has also held the positions of director of corporate responsibility, 
EMEA region and vice president, corporate responsibility.

Before joining Nike, Hannah served as a consultant to Microsoft and 
Kimberly-Clark on both companies' community affairs programs. Prior to that she 
worked for CSV, a European non-governmental organization, where she led 
pan-European media campaigns centering on youth issues. Hannah began her career 
as a reporter, researcher and producer for the social action unit of BBC Radio 
One and Radio Five.
 