
Harper Lee’s hometown of Monroeville plans to create a major tourist 
attraction for fans of the To Kill a Mockingbird author. The attraction, which 
is backed by a coalition of local business people led by the late author’s 
lawyer Tonja Carter, is expected to open in March, according to reports in the
Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> press.

The creation of the Harper Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harper-lee> 
Trail is expected to attract hundreds of thousands of fans of the reclusive 
novelist who died earlier this year. At the centre of the scheme is the 1909 
bank building where Lee’s father – the model for Atticus Finch – kept a law 
office. This is due to be refurbished and turned into a dedicated museum in the 
Alabama town that was the model for Maycomb in the book.

Harper Lee – a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-a-life-in-pictures>
There are also plans to build replicas of three houses that feature in the 
novel, including the homes of the heroine Scout and Boo Radley. Peter Black, a 
board member of the Mockingbird Company, a not-for-profit company set up 
shortly before the author’s death, toldAL.com <http://al.com/>: “There’s a 
bigger vision that we’re working on in Monroeville,” he said. “With Ms Lee’s 
passing in February we’ve been working with leaders in Monroeville on how do we 
honour Ms Lee, and our vision is, with some time, how do we create a Harper Lee 
Trail?”

According to the critic Sarah Churchwell, the plans risk something “far more 
pernicious than the commercialisation of Lee’s legacy”.

“The so-called ‘alt-right’ is white nationalism repackaged as retro-chic,” 
Churchwell said, “and its discourse constantly invokes nostalgia for a golden 
age in the Confederate South when racism when reigned supreme. The leaders of 
this project will need to be very careful that they don’t end up just creating 
a Disneyland for racists.”

To Kill a Mockingbird is a novel that “responds, angrily, to America’s history 
of violence against its own citizens”, Churchwell continued. “Let’s hope the 
leaders of Monroeville bear in mind that there is nothing entertaining about 
that.”

Whether Harper Lee herself would approve of the plans is open to question. In 
a letter to a friend, from 1993, she strongly objected to the evolution of “a 
new holiday sport in Monroeville … That of people bringing their visiting 
relatives to look at me.”

“There is so little in the way of entertainment, looking at Harper Lee is 
something to do. Thanksgiving weekend was such hell that it got on [her sister] 
Alice’s nerves as well – they came in VANS,” wrote the novelist. The letter was 
one of 29 that wereauctioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/29/harper-lee-donald-trump-taj-mahal-letters-auctioned>
 in March this year, a month after she died at the age of 89.

In the same month an Alabama judge signed an order to seal Lee’s will from 
public view 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/08/harper-lees-will-to-be-sealed-protecting-authors-final-secrets>
 after lawyers for Lee’s personal representative and attorney, Tonja Carter, 
had asked for it to remain private. “As the Court is no doubt aware,Ms Lee 
highly valued her privacy, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/20/harper-lee-to-kill-a-mockingbird-monroeville-alabama>
” wrote the lawyers.

Publication of the Go Set A Watchman, the prequel to To Kill a Mockingbird, 
last year brought the world’s press to Monroeville amidfears that Lee might 
have been subject to elder abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/12/harper-lee-elder-abuse-investigation-alabama-report>
 – a claim laterdeclared unfounded by the authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/03/alabama-harper-lee-elder-abuse-allegations-unfounded>
.

That novel, written before Mockingbird but kept under lock and key for more 
than 50 years, wasseen by many to destroy the heroic image of the lawyer 
Atticus Finch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/17/go-set-a-watchman-harper-lee-review-novel>
. Seen through the eyes of the adult Scout, he was revealed as just another 
small-town racist.

However, publication did nothing to dent Lee’s standing in the US literary 
pantheon. Following her death in February, Barack Obama declared that her work 
had “changed America for the better.”

“When Harper Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harper-lee> sat down to 
write To Kill a Mockingbird, she wasn’t seeking awards or fame. She was a 
country girl who just wanted to tell an honest story about life as she saw it,”
the Obama family said in a statement. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/19/harper-lee-tribute-aaron-sorkin-tim-cook-fans>


Oprah Winfrey tweeted: “Harper Lee my 1st favorite author! I always wanted to 
interview her. She said ‘honey I already said everything I had to say’.”

The launch of the new attraction will coincide with the annual staging by the 
Mockingbird Company of a play based on Lee’s novel. The company was established 
last year to continue the ritual performance of the dramatisation, which has 
been performed in the town every year since 1993.


In July, Carter visited Stratford-upon-Avon with Black and Judge Greg Norris, 
all part of a consortium of local businesspeople behind the trail, in search of 
ideas on how to continue Lee’s legacy. They plan to register as a foundation in 
the new year, which Black said would: “honour the literary legacy of Ms Lee and 
at the same time get more people to visit Ms Lee’s Maycomb.”

Harper Lee obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/19/harper-lee> 
The Harper Lee Trail also plans to renovate the last house where the famously 
reclusive writer lived with her sister Alice. Black told the Guardian: “The 
project is in the early conceptual stage. No details right now.”
 