
“Whoah, no, no, no. No running!” Fabrice Muamba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fabrice-muamba> has just ticked me off 
from his role as quasi-sweeper in the seven-a-side game of walking football 
we’re playing. I’ve been bawled out for doing all kinds of wrong on a football 
pitch but never this.

Having replaced Alex Scott as a second-half substitute in a game at Wood Green 
to promote this fledgling branch of football aimed at the over 50s, my first 
instinct is to run, even though I know I shouldn’t.

It is not the only trouble I have recalibrating my approach to the game. I 
play a pass down the line toAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> that draws a scornful look 
as he is forced into a full-on waddle to retrieve it. To be fair, he’s a nifty 
walker and gathers possession.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwalking-football-harry-kane-alan-shearer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28f83fb07f02ee5b8efeed1b43deda1819feacd4%2F0_268_5616_3368%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Kane%20shows%20the%20way%20as%20walking%20football%E2%80%99s%20popularity%20takes%20off%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwalking-football-harry-kane-alan-shearer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Kane%20shows%20the%20way%20as%20walking%20football%E2%80%99s%20popularity%20takes%20off%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwalking-football-harry-kane-alan-shearer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28f83fb07f02ee5b8efeed1b43deda1819feacd4%2F0_268_5616_3368%2F5616.jpg>
 L-R back row: Goalkeeper Chris Smith, Sylvia Gore MBE, Alan Shearer, walking 
football promoter Steve Rich. L-R front row: Alex Scott, Fabrice Muamba, Gregg 
Bakowski,and aspiring footbal coach Rachel Key. Photograph: Alicia Canter for 
the Guardian 
In Britain, despite attempts to change the style of the game, there’s still 
the expectancy from fans and coaches that footballers work hard, cover the 
ground and be combative. So it’s staggering that walking football, in little 
under four years, has become so popular with players who have been shaped by an 
amateur culture that, more often than not, rewards fast and physical football 
above tactical nous or skilful bursts – particularly players in their 50s who 
cut their teeth on the lumpy British battlefields of the 1970s and 80s.

Steve Rich was one such player. The 54-year-old has been a catalyst for the 
game’s rapid growth. “I saw a report about the game 18 months ago. I work in a 
leisure centre in Folkestone and someone approached me – one of the trustees – 
and asked me if I’d thought about starting a session,” he says. “I had a knee 
impact injury when I was 26. I got run over by a car and tore my ligaments and 
couldn’t play football. I was devastated. So to go back into football 25 years 
later was such a wonderful feeling. I want to give as many people as possible 
the chance to share in that and rekindle the passion they thought they’d lost.”

It is also a decent workout, as the sweat gathered on the brows of those 
taking part in our game proves. “Any walking is great exercise, so why not with 
a ball? It’s great cardiovascular at a slightly higher tempo. It improves your 
co-ordination and motor skills and conditions your legs. The other aspect that 
we do not talk about is the social side. There’s a camaraderie and new 
friendships are formed,” says Rich.

Tackling social isolation among fifty-somethings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/10/walking-football-wins-over-older-men-to-new-form-of-the-beautiful-game>
 is one of walking football’s biggest benefits. Other sports aimed at older 
people – particularly men – are not natural platforms for letting off steam, 
engaging in physical contact and nurturing teamwork and tactical thinking.

Rich created a website, Walking Football United 
<http://www.walkingfootballunited.co.uk/>, to harness the enthusiasm for the 
sport and to help grow the social side of it. In a short space of time he has 
connected a staggering 427 clubs around Britain. A key role of the website is 
to help shape a sport still very much in its infancy. There are numerous 
articles inviting competitors to have their say on how they think the game 
could be improved. Unlike many football websites, it brims with respectful 
debates about age restrictions, tactics and physicality. But above all else the 
issue of running dominates.

There is a moment in our match when Harry Kane strides away with just the 
goalkeeper to beat. He looks as if he’s broken into a run that should be 
penalised by a free-kick, but it’s incredibly hard to tell if he really has 
done or not. The former Premier League referee, Chris Foy, brings the whistle 
to his lips and then chooses not to blow and instead signals a goal as Kane 
crashes the ball home. It’s clear that walking football is already more than a 
fad but for the game to expand in the way Rich would like – with more regular 
tournaments, leagues and even internationals – determining what is running, on 
and off the ball, is a key issue.

“I’d like some of the competitive, harder stuff to be eliminated and to cut 
down on the running. There have got to be codes of conduct and unified rules 
for competition – whether that comes from the FA or people like me who do it 
independently,” says Rich. “People are getting knocked over and there are hard 
tackles going in. A lot of people play it non-contact. Referees vary depending 
on what they are used to. Even FA-affiliated coaches are not quite on spec. 
These guys referee regular football so some just can’t quite get to grips with 
the no-running. It’s difficult for the refs, though. That’s what we’re working 
on improving.”

Rich doesn’t want those who are considering trying it for the first time to be 
put off by players who are more physical. “If you don’t want a session that is 
too competitive you can choose one that is less intense. Many of the daytime 
sessions are tailored to people who don’t work because they’re a bit older. The 
evening sessions are often a little more physical and active as those people 
are still working and a little younger.”

As our game develops it becomes increasingly clear, thanks to Rich’s growing 
influence and experience of playing walking football regularly, that one- and 
two-touch football is the most effective way to be successful (we race, sorry, 
stroll into a 4-2 lead). Short movements and sharp passing advance you up the 
field as a unit far more effectively than longer passes, particularly given 
that there is a no-over-head-height rule in place (in some parts of the country 
this rule is tougher and prevents the ball going over waist height).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwalking-football-harry-kane-alan-shearer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1fe249caa06317fa33ea4b9eedb03edcbf7123e%2F348_268_3076_1845%2F3076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Kane%20shows%20the%20way%20as%20walking%20football%E2%80%99s%20popularity%20takes%20off%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwalking-football-harry-kane-alan-shearer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Kane%20shows%20the%20way%20as%20walking%20football%E2%80%99s%20popularity%20takes%20off%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fwalking-football-harry-kane-alan-shearer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1fe249caa06317fa33ea4b9eedb03edcbf7123e%2F348_268_3076_1845%2F3076.jpg>
 Gregg Bakowski is congratulated by Alan Shearer and Graham Taylor after 
scoring in the last minute of the 6-6 draw. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
But it’s also understandable why physical strength might be an advantage when 
receiving the ball with your back to goal. Perhaps that is no bad thing. For 
older players coming back to the game who are heavier than they used to be, 
their ability to shield the ball would be a big advantage and make them feel 
useful and engaged straight away.

So often in regular football, players fall away as they get out of shape or 
pick up confidence-sapping injuries. At present many of the sessions around the 
country are for the over 50s but Rich wants more clubs to run open-age sessions 
to encourage these people to come back. “I think it’s healthy to open the game 
up to all ages. Fathers could play with sons, and healthy grandparents could 
knock it about with two generations of family members. How good would that be? 
I’ve heard of an 83-year-old playing. There really is no huge advantage of 
being 25 years younger than another player. Not at walking pace.”

With 100,000 players having abandoned the grassroots game since April 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jan/17/grassroots-football-england-abuse-death-threats-withering>
, walking football is well placed to help fill pitches again, either with 
returning amateurs or a new breed of player who has no previous experience of 
the game. There are women-only sessions as well as mixed ones and both men and 
women took part in the national tournament last year.

Sylvia Gore, who scored the first ever goal for England’s women’s team – 
against Scotland in 1972 – plays the whole 30 minutes of our match at Wood 
Green. She’s 70. Yet age is no barrier to her worth on our team. She gives us a 
2-0 lead early on with a smart finish. “It’s hard work but lots of fun,” she 
says afterwards, with gleaming eyes. There are nearly 50 years between Gore and 
Kane, who scores five goals for our opponents in a highly entertaining 6-6 
draw. Yet with their engines stripped down, they face each other as equals. 
It’s little wonder the FA is on board and keen to grow this most inclusive, and 
intriguing, version of the game.

Football for all? Maybe. But just remember, keep it slow if you want it to 
grow.

The walking football fixture was staged by Barclays Digital Eagles 
<http://www.barclays.co.uk/DigitalEagles/P1242671738729>, who gave Steve 
practical advice on how to improve his website. To find out how a Digital Eagle 
can improve your online skills, search Spirit of The Game.
 