
In 1920, two of the biggest celebrities of the age met for the first time. One 
was Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the famed creator of the great detectiveSherlock 
Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/jun/29/sherlock-holmes-examining-the-evidence-in-charts>
, and the other wasHarry Houdini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/mar/24/harry-houdini-google-doodle-137>
, the illusionist and escapologist who became one of the world’s highest-paid 
entertainers for his ability to escape from a steel and glass coffin filled 
with water in which he had been suspended upside down, or to make elephants 
disappear.

Some believed that Houdini was not an illusionist but had real magical powers. 
The actorSarah Bernhardt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/24/sarah-bernhardt-robert-gottlieb-review>
 apparently asked him to conjure her a new leg to replace the one she had 
amputated following a stage accident.

Conan Doyle and Houdini were an improbable pair. One was very much the bluff 
Scottish Victorian gentleman, educated at a minor Catholic private school; the 
other a largely self-educated Hungarian immigrant to the US who had spent most 
of his life in rackety vaudeville. The two men were brought together by a 
shared interest in spiritualism, but it was also spiritualism that destroyed 
this unlikely friendship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fhoudini-and-conan-doyle-impossible-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F9%2F1439136672659%2F31954ace-9f61-4280-a924-16f7e50cfd11-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Houdini%20and%20Arthur%20Conan%20Doyle%3A%20a%20friendship%20split%20by%20spiritualism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fhoudini-and-conan-doyle-impossible-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Houdini%20and%20Arthur%20Conan%20Doyle%3A%20a%20friendship%20split%20by%20spiritualism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fhoudini-and-conan-doyle-impossible-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F9%2F1439136672659%2F31954ace-9f61-4280-a924-16f7e50cfd11-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Phill Jupitus as Conan Doyle and Alan Cox as Houdini in Impossible, premiering 
at this year’s Edinburgh festival. Photograph: Idil Sukan/Draw HQ 
The theatre is a place where ghosts rise. It has been described by Alice 
Rayner inGhosts: Death’s Double and the Phenomena of Theatre 
<https://www.upress.umn.edu/book-division/books/ghosts> as “a specific site 
where appearance and disappearance reproduce the relations between the living 
and the dead”. Since it often also involves the audience suspending disbelief, 
it is a good place to explore the tale of the two men, one who believed the 
most important thing was to “prove immortality 
<http://www.arthur-conan-doyle.com/index.php/Sir_Conan_Doyle._Belief_in_Spiritualism>
”, and one who feared it was impossible.

Their story is told in Impossible, a play that premieres at the Pleasance on 
the Edinburgh fringe withPhill Jupitus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/13/phill-jupitus-my-family-values>
 as Conan Doyle andAlan Cox 
<http://nypost.com/2013/06/13/alan-coxs-star-making-performance-in-cornelius-is-a-must-see/>
 as Houdini. The show plays upon the duality of theatre and the way it uses 
sleight of hand and sleight of mind to make us see what does not exist. Cox has 
even been learning some magic tricks.

Director Hannah Eidinow <http://theagency.co.uk/the-clients/hannah-eidinow/> 
is fascinated that Conan Doyle, who believed he saw the faces of the dead, 
including his own nephew, in a photograph (later proved to be a fake)taken at 
the Cenotaph <http://martynjolly.com/2013/10/03/photographing-the-dead/>, once 
set up in practice as an eye doctor.

Harry Houdini, the king of the handcuffs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2012/oct/31/harry-houdini-handcuff-trick-archive>
“There is something interesting about the way he was always so convinced by 
the evidence of his own eyes. Theatre is all about directing the eye,” Eidinow 
says, “and where people look. It’s about controlling what people see and don’t 
see.” Many 19th- and early 20th-century mediums used theatrical techniques. 
What, after all, is the spirit cabinet used by famed practitioners such as the
Davenport Brothers <http://www.prairieghosts.com/davenport.html>, but a form of 
puppet theatre that appears to animate the dead?

Following the death of his son, Kingsley, during the first world war, Conan 
Doyle became a devout believer in life after death and an untiring missionary 
for the spiritualist cause, donating the equivalent of millions of pounds in 
today’s money in trying to prove that the dead were all around us and eager for 
a chat.

Houdini, the showman, longed to believe that he might be able to communicate 
beyond the grave with his beloved mother, but knew far too much about the 
trickery and faking of the stage to be easily convinced. Early in his career, 
before he found fame as an escape artist, Houdini and his wife, Bess, were not 
above drawing on their own theatrical skills to give public seances on the 
vaudeville circuit in order to ensure there was bread on the table.

It was Houdini’s public campaign to expose fraudulent mediums who he described 
as “human leeches” – particularlyMargery Crandon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mina_Crandon>, a Boston medium who performed 
scantily clad and on occasion apparently emitted ectoplasm from her vagina – 
that led to a rift between the two men that had not healed by the time that 
Houdini died from a ruptured appendix in 1926.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fhoudini-and-conan-doyle-impossible-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F9%2F1439136800546%2F87021b78-b572-4cb3-8cf3-4317482e075c-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Houdini%20and%20Arthur%20Conan%20Doyle%3A%20a%20friendship%20split%20by%20spiritualism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fhoudini-and-conan-doyle-impossible-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Houdini%20and%20Arthur%20Conan%20Doyle%3A%20a%20friendship%20split%20by%20spiritualism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F10%2Fhoudini-and-conan-doyle-impossible-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F9%2F1439136800546%2F87021b78-b572-4cb3-8cf3-4317482e075c-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Jean Conan Doyle shared her husband’s belief that the dead could speak to the 
living. Photograph: EO Hoppé/Corbis 
Conan Doyle, a medical doctor and the creator of that great rationalist, 
Sherlock Holmes, might seem like an unlikely person to fall for the claims of 
mediums. But from the mid-19th century onwards, spiritualism had a widespread 
following both in the UK and across the Atlantic, its rise coinciding with the 
industrial revolution and a period of great technological and scientific 
advances.

“Maybe,” suggests Cox, “the faster that new technologies bring change and the 
more we think we know about the world or how it works is being explained to us, 
the more we look for something beyond, something that can’t be explained. It 
could be the inner world of the imagination and theatre, which is a kind of 
magic, or something like spiritualism.”

 The huge loss of life in the first world war only gave spiritualism more 
converts.Public seances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/04/blithe-spirit-theatre-as-seance> 
in the Albert Hall and other huge venues were common, and the appeal of the 
movement cut across the classes. Rudyard Kipling’s sister was a society medium, 
and while Conan Doyle might have been teased in some quarters for his belief in 
the authenticity of thefairy photographs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2012/aug/29/classic-faked-photographs-in-pictures>
 taken by two young cousins in 1917 at Cottingley in Yorkshire, his claims that 
there was an afterlife and a direct conduit between our world and the next was 
treated with respect by many, including the media.

Conan Doyle’s own wife, Jean, became a self-proclaimed medium and purveyor of 
automatic writing. At their Sussex home, they had their own personal spirit 
guide calledPhineas 
<http://www.abebooks.co.uk/PHINEAS-SPEAKS-Direct-Spirit-Communications-Family/5934628298/bd>
 who regularly predicted global catastrophe. Phineas also dictated when the 
Doyles should move house or travel. In his entertaining book Houdini and Conan 
Doyle: Friends of Genius, Deadly Rivals,Christopher Sandford 
<http://us.macmillan.com/author/christophersandford> recounts an occasion when 
Jean got the local station master to reschedule a train that her husband was 
due to take on the advice of Phineas. The counsel of Phineas, it appears, quite 
often chimed with the desires and interests of Jean herself.

Stephen Mangan to play Conan Doyle in new ITV drama Houdini & Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/24/stephen-mangan-play-conan-doyle-itv-drama-houdini>
In fact, it was after Jean’s attempt to contact Houdini’s mother during a 
seance in a hotel room in Atlantic City in 1922 that serious cracks in the 
men’s relationship began to appear. Although following the private seance, in 
which Houdini’s mother apparently made contact via automatic writing, the 
Doyles thought he Houdini appeared deeply moved, he subsequently publicly 
announced that he did not believe that the 15 pages of grammatical English were 
a genuine message from beyond the grave. Not least because his mother’s English 
had been terrible.

The relationship barely survived that incident, and when Houdini increasingly 
denounced mediums who Conan Doyle was convinced were utterly genuine, their 
relationship broke down.

“There may have been an element that Houdini knew that in denouncing 
spiritualism it kept him in the headlines, but I think that he was being cruel 
to be kind when he told people, Conan Doyle included, that they were being 
deceived, because he thought grief was making them susceptible to charlatans,” 
says Cox. “He wanted spiritualism to be true, but he was convinced by his 
investigations that it wasn’t, and he couldn’t stand by and say nothing.”

After Houdini’s death, his widow, Bess, held a yearly seance 
<http://www.magictricks.com/houdini-seance.html>, hoping that her husband might 
make contact and give her message using a prearranged code. He was always a 
no-show. In 1936 she gave up, supposedly declaring that “10 years is long 
enough to wait for any man”.

 * Impossible is at the Pleasance Dome 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/impossible>, Edinburgh until 31 August. 
Box office: 0131-226 0000

 * This article was amended on 10 August 2015 to correct Arthur Conan Doyle’s 
nationality from English to Scottish.  