
Harry Kane has admitted that he dreams of breaking Alan Shearer’s Premier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> scoring record, 
after bagging his 21st goal of the season against Bournemouth on Sunday.

Kane’s double in the 3-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/tottenham-hotspur-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
 at White Hart Lane means the Tottenham Hotspur striker has now equalled last 
season’s tally while his total haul in the top flight now stands at 45.

He also becomes only the fifth Englishman to hit 20 goals in consecutive 
Premier League campaigns, joining an esteemed group that includes Shearer, Les 
Ferdinand, Andy Cole and Robbie Fowler.

Mauricio Pochettino hails ‘complete’ Tottenham performance in latest win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-bournemouth-harry-kane>
Shearer remains top of the division’s all-time scoring list with 260 and Kane 
says he is inspired by the former Newcastle man’s record.

“It’s a lot of goals and I’m still a long way off but Shearer was an idol of 
mine growing up, to see how many goals he scored was incredible,” Kane said. “I 
take it season by season. I don’t like looking too far ahead because you never 
know what can happen.

“But is it good to aim for? Definitely, they’re the goals you dream of. When 
you’re a younger player, you watch them scoring goals week in and week out, so 
to be doing that now is a dream come true.”

Kane’s 21 goals this season means he moves two clear of Jamie Vardy and three 
ahead of Romelu Lukaku in the race for the Golden Boot.

If the 22-year-old can hold off his scoring rivals, he would become the first 
Englishman to finish top of the charts sinceKevin Phillips hit 30 for Sunderland
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/apr/28/kevin-phillips-size-retires-leicester-sunderland>
 in 1999‑2000.

As England prepare to face Germany and Holland over the upcoming international 
break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/danny-drinkwater-england-squad-friendlies-germany-holland>
, Kane hopes his excellent form will help other young English forwards to make 
the step up at the highest level.

“If I can be a role model or if I can maybe make another manager play a young 
player coming through, rather than buy a player, that’s incredible,” Kane said.

“I think sometimes managers like to buy players because they’re more 
experienced from abroad or when they’ve got players under their nose that will 
give everything to the club they’ve been brought up with.

“The more people get chances at a young age, I think you’ll see more talent 
coming through as we have done this season.”

Tottenham’s comfortable win against Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/20/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-bournemouth-harry-kane>
 reduced the gap behind Leicester City back to five points while Eddie Howe’s 
side remain 13th, 12 points above the relegation zone.

Kane’s opener came after just 44 seconds and the visitors never recovered as 
the Spurs forward made it two soon after before Christian Eriksen added a third 
in the second half.

The Bournemouth defender Steve Cook said: “Conceding a goal after 44 seconds 
against a top-class team meant our game plan went out the window. It set the 
tone for the whole game. It was a massive kick in the teeth. In the second half 
we got a bit of respect back but they were excellent.

“That’s where we want to be, what we want to be like. It shows the gap. We’re 
up for the challenge. Tottenham I thought were unplayable today.”

Bournemouth are all but guaranteed safety, having accumulated 38 points with 
seven games left, but Cook insists there is no room for complacency.

“Everyone is very disappointed, there were some very strong words,” Cook said. 
“We won’t be taking our foot off the gas. No one is happy. We still have a 
points mark to get to, the magic 40, and we’re still not there. There is work 
to do.”
 