
I was grubbing up dandelions and bindweed in the brassica cage when I felt 
something brush against my hand. The creature’s oversized legs and loping gait 
gave it an alien appearance, reminding me of the towering Martian 
fighting-machines inHG Wells’s The War of the Worlds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/19/war-worlds-hg-wells-review>. It 
was aharvestman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/26/blaydon-tyne-harvestmen-flee-blades>
, so named because most species mature and become more conspicuous in late 
summer and early autumn.

At first glance harvestmen are easily mistaken for spiders, but aside from 
having eight legs and belonging to the class arachnid, they have little in 
common withtrue spiders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/quiz/2014/oct/03/how-to-spot-a-dangerous-spider-from-a-harmless-uk-spider-take-our-quiz>
. They don’t produce silk, so are unable to spin webs and they lack venom 
glands. Their appearance is also very different from that of a spider, as the 
cephalothorax is fused with the abdomen, giving their bodies the appearance of 
a coffee bean.

This individual was beautifully marked with a dark-brown saddle, bordered by a 
broad, indented white line. Where a spider generally has six or eight eyes set 
at the front of its cephalothorax, the harvestman had two beady black eyes 
perched on a little turret. Its legs splayed out on either side of its body 
like inexpertly applied false eyelashes. As it strode across my palm, I noticed 
that it used its first, third and fourth pairs of legs to walk, while its 
elongated second set of legs tapped my skin as it felt and scented the 
unfamiliar terrain beneath its feet.

As the harvestman headed towards the damp, dark cover of a rosette of kale, it 
passed a sunbathingwolf spider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/the-northerner/2014/jun/04/wolf-spider-crook-county-durham>
. In the manner of its namesake, the spider began to stalk the unsuspecting 
harvestman, keeping out of sight behind protruding flints. Sensing danger, the 
harvestman picked up its pace, using its stilt-like legs to effortlessly scale 
the mountainous clods of earth in its path. Just as it appeared to be losing 
ground, the spider surged forward and lunged at the harvestman, pinning it to 
the ground, but the harvestman shed a leg and slipped from its grasp. As the 
amputee bolted for cover, the spider struck repeatedly at the still-twitching 
limb.

Twitter: @ClaireStares <https://twitter.com/ClaireStares>
 