
Charlie Dimmock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/1999/sep/26/life1.lifemagazine> has 
lost the plot! She’s dug herself into a hole! The puns have been coming thick 
and fast since the former Ground Force presenter toldAmateur Gardening magazine 
<http://www.amateurgardening.com/news/national-allotment-society-hits-out-at-charlie-dimmocks-plan-to-carve-up-plots-12673>
 that allotment plots should be divided not just in half, but into quarters to 
provide more manageable plots for the modern, time-poor gardener.

Allotment aficionados have reacted with fury. “This wouldn’t be enough to feed 
the family dog, let alone the family,” said Sean James Cameron, host of the 
onlineHorticultural Channel <http://thehorticulturalchannel.info/>. Karen 
Kenny, president of theNational Allotment Society <http://www.nsalg.org.uk/> 
(NAS), also criticised the idea. “You will frequently find half-plot tenants 
are back on the waiting list for a second plot in a short time, realising that 
half is not enough,” she said.

Allotments are sensibly measured using an Anglo-Saxon system. Ten rods (or 
perches or poles) is the accepted size 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/allotment-info/brief-history-of-allotments/> – 250sq 
metres in 21st-century language, or about the size of a doubles tennis court. 
This size allows a gardener to grow enough food to feed a family of four, 
giving enough room for crop rotation, perennial plants and even hens.

But 10 rods can be an intimidatingly large area for modern gardeners who do 
not have the time to aim for self-sufficiency and so, in many places, 
half-sized allotments are now standard, according to Diane Appleyard of theNAS 
<http://www.nsalg.org.uk/>.

“I live in Bristol and the norm is half a plot,” she says. “Since that 10-rod 
plot was conceived, society has changed. A family where both mum and dad work 
would struggle with a full-sized plot. Councils should be offering people a 
choice, but a full-sized plot should always be an option as well. Cutting their 
size shouldn’t be seen as the solution to long waiting lists, but cutting sizes 
is fine to make plots more accessible to people.”

Allotments that lack legal protection are threatened by developers, but 
Appleyard is optimistic: councils in Liverpool and Chorley have created new 
allotments and housing developers inBudleigh Salterton 
<http://www.exmouthjournal.co.uk/exmouth-life/property/stone_marks_completed_new_homes_1_4181987>
, Devon, have provided new allotments, too. The NAS’s “allotment mentor” in the 
south-west has helped to create 60 new sites, leased by collectives of local 
people.

This do-it-yourself approach has been adopted in Ashburton, Devon, where a 
group of residents recently created their own hilltop allotment. One of them is 
my dad. No 10 rods for him, though – he’s tending a 2,000sq metre plot. His 
three freezers and countless boxes full of veg could probably feed his entire 
town if global apocalypse were to strike. Never underestimate the gardener’s 
appetite for a bigger plot.
 