
Assuming that the deal completes as expected, today is the day that, for some 
people, a little bit of the craft-beer dream will die.In a reported £85m deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/camden-town-brewery-sold-inbev-worlds-biggest-drinks-company>
, AB InBev will take over Camden Town Brewery (CTB), and one of the UK’s 
leading craft breweries will henceforth be run by the global giant that makes 
Budweiser.

This sale has, not unexpectedly, caused much angst among the craft 
cognoscenti, many of whom (particularly those who last yearhelped CTB crowdfund 
£2.75m 
<http://ftalphaville.ft.com/2015/12/21/2148837/heres-camden-town-brewerys-letter-to-shareholders-about-the-ab-inbev-takeover/>
) felt emotionally invested in the company’s David-and-Goliath-type struggle. 
That struggle ended, amidthe usual PR spin about “partnership” 
<http://www.camdentownbrewery.com/partnership-ab-inbev/> and acting in the 
company’s long-term interests, with Goliath getting his wallet out and making 
David and his backers very rich.

Camden Town Brewery sold to world's biggest drinks company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/camden-town-brewery-sold-inbev-worlds-biggest-drinks-company>
Is this surprising? No. With its slick branding, rapid expansion and flexible 
attitude to local provenance 
<http://boakandbailey.com/2014/01/not-as-local-as-it-looks/> (its “Camden” 
beers areregularly brewed in Belgium <http://www.camdentownbrewery.com/faq/>), 
CTB always had the feel of a brewery that was shaping up to sell out. It is not 
the first; it will not be the last. A significant minority of new-wave British 
breweries are run, not by hapless beer enthusiasts, but by ambitious business 
people.

Despite the more hysterical online reactions, no one knows whether or not this 
will signal a dive in the quality of CTB’s beers. In the face of stagnant sales 
in established markets, the global brewing behemoths are buying into craft 
breweries (see also: Meantime, Goose Island,Ballast Point 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-11-16/constellation-to-acquire-ballast-point-brewery-for-1-billion>
,Lagunitas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/08/heineken-buys-stake-lagunitas-craft-beer>
) as bridgeheads into a booming sector they barely understand. Around 1,500 
small breweries are now said to account for7% of UK beer sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/23/why-camden-town-brewery-sale-craft-beer>
 and the big brewers know these drinkers want flavourful, high-quality beers, 
meaning that, short-term, they may leave their new acquisitions alone. But, for 
me, the idea that this corporate interference is benign, welcome or necessary, 
is naive.

Some optimistic supporters 
<http://www.pencilandspoon.com/2015/12/camden-town-brewery-and-ab-inbev.html> 
argue that AB InBev’s investment will simply provide the company with a new, 
high-spec brewery and a wealth of technical expertise (which is true), while 
enabling it to penetrate new markets nationally and internationally. At the 
announcement of the CTB buyout, its founder, Jasper Cuppaidge, talked of making 
it “world famous”.

But, why? Why does CTB need to be ubiquitous in Britain, much less 
internationally? In any serious expansion of a brewery’s capacity, growth is 
talked about as if it is a self-justifying rationale. But – and this goes to 
the nub of the ethics around craft beer – beyond a certain point, growth is all 
about profit, not exciting beer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fhas-camden-town-brewery-ruined-craft-beer-ab-inbev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5afbb0752de1cc426f44a1757861412b32050e08%2F0_0_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20ruined%20craft%20beer%20for%20everyone%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fhas-camden-town-brewery-ruined-craft-beer-ab-inbev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20Camden%20Town%20Brewery%20ruined%20craft%20beer%20for%20everyone%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwordofmouth%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fhas-camden-town-brewery-ruined-craft-beer-ab-inbev%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5afbb0752de1cc426f44a1757861412b32050e08%2F0_0_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Hells lager … soon to be found at a supermarket near you? Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
It is reasonable to assume that by aggressively pushing CTB beers in 
discounted package deals with its more popular, mass-market brands, AB InBev 
will get CTB’s Hells lager and Gentleman’s Wit into more off-licences, 
supermarkets and pubs. But who benefits from such uniformity, other than AB 
InBev shareholders? Yes, it is useful to have one or two craft beers widely 
available, but, frankly, Brewdog got there first with Punk IPA. No craft 
drinker worth their salty gose <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gose> wants to 
see, as is increasingly the case, the same handful of corporate-backed craft 
beers everywhere.

Indeed, rather than international craft brands, I would argue that what beer 
needs is more small local breweries, for both practical and ideological reasons.
Beer begins to deteriorate 
<http://www.examiner.com/article/taking-care-of-your-craft-beer-is-critical>as 
soon as it is shipped from the brewery, so drinkingfresh, local beer is the 
ideal <http://brewcult.com/2013/04/29/hops-drink-them-fresh-ok/>. Moreover, 
local breweries are more creatively flexible than their larger rivals, and are 
staffed, in the main, by passionate beer-lovers who know their brewery, its kit 
and their recipes inside-out. They want to experiment. They don’t get third 
parties to brew their beer. They don’t cut corners.

There is an argument that, technically, such small breweries struggle to 
produce truly exceptional beers. But as Siren, Marble, Cloudwater, Wiper and 
True or Burning Sky (to name but a few) prove, that is nonsense. Plus, wouldn’t 
you rather spend your money within your local economy,with all the benefits 
that accrue from that 
<http://content.time.com/time/business/article/0,8599,1903632,00.html>, rather 
than lining the pockets of the directors at a brewing mega-corp?

For breweries that do sell-up, as this Brewdog blog relates 
<https://www.brewdog.com/lowdown/blog/nailing-our-colours-to-the-motherfucking-mast>
, it can be a sobering experience. Ruthless corporate efficiency, the constant 
pressure to slash costs while growing sales, will always, eventually, militate 
against good beer. Beers are rebranded. Recipes are compromised. They end up 
being brewed by new staff at remote sites. Disillusioned brewery founders move 
on. Meantime’s recent fate is a parable that certainly counsels caution. Barely 
had the dust settled on its sale to SABMiller than, with a merger of SABMiller 
and AB InBev now imminent,reports began to circulate 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/comment/12033349/BHP-Billiton-cannot-afford-another-derailment.html>
 that that this new company may soonsell Meantime on 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/meantime-could-be-put-up-for-sale-for-second-time-in-six-months-as-ab-inbev-pushes-through-sabmiller-a3128661.html>
.

As news of the CTB sale filtered through, Brewdog removed all CTB beers from 
its bars. It was a PR stunt. But such a boycott is, perhaps, overdue. Is it 
time to start actively avoiding corporate craft beers? Should we be supporting 
small local brewers? Do you care who brews your pint?
 