
Last month, I went to see a traveling painting show at the Taft Museum of Art 
in Cincinnati, Ohio <http://www.taftmuseum.org/?page_id=196>. The show was a 
greatest hits survey of mostly mid to late 19th- early 20th-century US art. The 
accompanying text explained that after the civil war, the aesthetics of the 
country shifted away from representations of the war’s devastation in favour of 
nostalgic, idealistic images of country suitors and boat parties or endless
Frederic Remington <http://www.fredericremington.org/>-esque heroic cowboys and 
marauding Native Americans in the wild west. (Never mind the fact that the 
“untamed” west had already been colonised, and, with theHomestead Act of 1862 
<http://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/homestead-act/>, the government had 
been giving swaths of land to interested white settlers like a Manifest Destiny 
fire sale.)

Casing the galleries, I was struck by this wilful avoidance of darker, 
pressing realities. Art preferred to revel in a certain pastoral romanticism 
that seemed to promise the limitless expansion of the American dream. Only in 
one of the last galleries, devoted to the 1900sAshcan school 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/ashc/hd_ashc.htm>, did painters merge 
imported impressionistic techniques with gritty, impoverished cityscapes of the 
New York waterfront. More signage told the story: The Ashcan school was not 
very popular. I thought about the current state of the artworld in New York, 
where, in the midst of predatory capitalism, global disenchantment with the 
American ethos, and the widening gulf between rich and poor, a new form of 
painterly abstraction was the reigning genre. Once again, visual art seemed to 
be washing its hands of bleaker truths.

 Literature, on the other hand, has always taken a more complicated and 
occasionally far more direct, moralistic stance on the American dream in the 
face of everyday struggle – even, or especially, when that dream is packed in a 
moving truck, driven out of the city, and restaged in some sort of pastoral 
Eden. One could argue that the American dreamis the subject of every American 
novel, a sort of blurry-eyed national obsession with having it all and coming 
out on top, or in the case of most plot-driven literature, the failures and 
breakdowns in that quasi-noble pursuit. I’ve asked a few voracious reader 
friends to name a book where the American dream is a happy one: most were stuck 
for an answer. I offeredThe Talented Mr Ripley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77406/talented.mr.ripley>, because Tom 
does get away with Dickie Greenleaf’s money and murder at the end.

The city, of course, has so often been characterised as an infernal, workaday 
dream destroyer: from poor Lily Bart’s descent on the social ladder to working 
in a hat shop in Edith Wharton’sThe House of Mirth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/dec/19/house-of-mirth-edith-wharton-review>
 all the way to the Bret Easton Ellis’s murderous Wall Street yuppie 
phantasmagoria inAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/10/american-psycho-bret-easton-ellis-irvine-welsh>
. (There are exceptions: in the 80s, Tama Janowitz and Jay McInerney 
occasionally painted more upbeat travails of urbanity;Armistead Maupin’s Tales 
of the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/14/armistead-maupin-tales-of-the-city-guardian-book-club>
 presented a utopia of unconventionality if only one were willing to move to 
San Francisco.)

But American writers really let loose with social critique and the collapse of 
the American dream outside of city borders. Perhaps no American novel explored 
the cruelty and chaos underneath the received wisdoms of country life better 
thanMark Twain’s Adventures of Huckleberry Finn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/30/mark-twain-american-sarah-churchwell>
 (“That’s just the way: a person does a low-down thing, and then he don’t want 
to take no consequence of it”). And then, of course, there’sThe Great Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/08/100-best-novels-great-gatsby-scott-fitzgerlad-robert-mccrum>
. People often consider Fitzgerald’s novel the ultimate New York City novel, 
but it isn’t: it’s a Long Island novel, and it’s essential that Jay Gatsby 
creates his own self-propelling mythic fantasy land outside of the city in “the 
great wet barnyard of the Long Island Sound”.

Gatsby is something of an east coast Frederic Remington, re-inventing the 
domesticated edges to his own liking, drawing the embodiment of the American 
dream that is built on champagne bubbles and moody green lighting. There’s 
nothing subtle about the symbolism of Gatsby found floating dead in his 
mansion’s swimming pool – that definitive emblem of transforming raw nature 
into a luxury item. By the time the wall-to-wall sprawl of suburbia made its 
claim for middle-class happiness, writers like John Cheever were re-framing 
such places as soul-deadening zones of over-consumption and work commutes. The 
rot inside the picture-perfect house became a literary genre all its own: from 
Don DeLillo’s paranoiacWhite Noise 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1985/01/13/books/delillo-noise.html>, to Stephen King’s 
horror shows in tight-knit, white-picket-fenced communities, all the way to 
Jonathan Franzen’s The Shining-set-in-suburban-“houses with no mortgage”The 
Corrections <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/nov/09/fiction.reviews>. 
(Come to think of it: is the slaying of the American dream a white, straight, 
male American writer’s obsession? Women, minority, and gay writers, excluded 
from the fantasy from the start, have tended to write outside this bubble).

The question is, has the American dream run out of road? Perhaps an exhaustion 
with national myths explains the recent advent of post-apocalyptic literature: 
from Cormac McCarthy’sThe Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview4> 
to Colson Whitehead’sZone One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/13/zone-one-colson-whitehead-review>
. When the dream has been blown to bits for more than a century, all that’s 
left is to tell bleak stories of human survival set in the wreckage of a 
junkyard. But I believe there are still some bits of the dream left to explore 
in the country’s literature. Because people still come to America hoping for 
more – and writers are there on the Ellis Island of the last brick-and-mortar 
bookstores to break the bad news in clever and incendiary ways.

 * Christopher Bollen’s Orient is published by Simon & Schuster 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/orient.html>.  