
A metal sheet, some small bones and an “ointment pot” may be the final 
artifacts of Amelia Earhart’s failed 1937 journey around the world, if a small 
group of wreckage huntersis to be believed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/30/amelia-earhart-aeroplane-fragment-identified-aluminium-found-pacific-island-american>
. They could also be the remains of some other plane, a turtle and trash.

But the International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery (Tighar) 
<http://tighar.org/>, which first found the warped bit of aluminum on a 1991 
trip to the tiny atoll of Nikumaroro, in the Republic of Kiribati, says the 
19in-by-23in slab has to be part of Earhart’s Lockheed Electra aircraft, which 
disappeared while she was flying over the Pacific.

 Tighar’s executive director Ric Gillespie made headlines this week 
<http://news.discovery.com/history/us-history/aluminum-fragment-appears-to-belong-to-earharts-plane-141028.htm>
 by announcing “new research” into the 1991 fragment that he says answers 
earlier critics and proves it is from Earhart’s plane.

The story he proposes is not implausible: the metal’s rivets don’t match with 
the Electra’s design, but that’s because because it’s actually a patch made to 
repair the aircraft after a bad landing in Miami, earlier on Earhart’s trip. 
Gillespie’s team managed to find a Miami Herald photo from 1937 which shows, 
over the place where a window should be, a particularly shiny piece of metal. 
In fact, a lab tested the metal back in 1996 and found it to be “essentially 
the same <https://tighar.org/smf/index.php?topic=300.5;wap2>” 24ST Alclad 
aluminum that was to cover most aircraft of the 30s, including Earhart’s 
Electra. Gillespie says that “the patch was as unique to her particular 
aircraft as a fingerprint is to an individual … [the aluminum] matches that 
fingerprint in many respects”.
 The aluminium fragment believed to be from Amelia Earhart’s aircraft. 
Photograph: Tighar/Reuters 
Under Gillespie’s theory, Earhart made it to the island, sent radio signals 
“for at least five nights before the Electra was washed into the ocean”, and 
eventually died there.

But Gillsepie’s been here before, and his critics are not quiet 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/community/miami-dade/article1973300.html>
, with one saying: “Everybody should have facts to back up [their] opinions, 
and Mr Gillespie, well, he doesn’t.” (A second, more concisely, says: “He’s 
very creative.”) After discovering the metal, Gillespie gave a 1992 press 
conference to say that “every possibility has been checked, every alternative 
eliminated … We found a piece of Amelia Earhart’s aircraft.”

Objectors immediately pointed out that he had not checked the fragment’s 
rivets, which did not match Earhart’s Electra. Now, 22 years later, the photo 
could indeed explain the discrepancy – but Gillespie still lacks a wreck to 
compare the pattern to. As a substitute, Gillespie’s team went to a Kansas 
facility that’s restoring an Electra and claims to have found – byholding the 
patch up alongside the restored plane 
<http://tighar.org/Projects/Earhart/Archives/Research/Bulletins/73_StepbyStep/73_StepbyStep_2.html>
– that the rivets seemed consistent with the pattern. No independent 
researchers have confirmed their findings.

To be fair, Tighar realizes they know less 
<http://tighar.org/Projects/Earhart/Archives/Research/Bulletins/73_StepbyStep/73_StepbyStep_2.html>
 about the scrap than they’d like: “If the artifact is not the scab patch from 
NR16020, then it is a random piece of aircraft wreckage from some unknown type 
involved in an unknown accident that just happens to match the dozens of 
material and dimensional requirements of the patch.”

Considering the vastness of the Pacific Ocean and the sheer amount of wreckage 
scattered across it over the past century, this actually seems pretty 
reasonable, but Tighar doubles down on its implication of certainty: “[That 
would mean] this incredibly specific, but random, piece of debris just happened 
to end up on Nikumaroro, the atoll where so much other evidence points to 
Earhart.”

What evidence does Tighar present? In 2011 they tested three bones found near 
a turtle shell, which could perhaps have been human or that of a turtle. DNA 
tests were inconclusive <http://www.cnn.com/2011/US/03/03/earhart.dna.research/>
. (Gillespie says “the door is still open for it to be a human finger bone.”)

Gillespie also told CNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/2011/US/03/03/earhart.dna.research/> he found a small 
“ointment pot” that he insists can only resemble Dr Berry’s Freckle Ointment, 
adding with great meaning: “Earhart had freckles and is known to have 
considered them unattractive.”

He told Discovery News this week that his team has also found “remains of 
small fires with birds and fish bones, giant clams that had been opened like a 
New England oyster, empty shells laid out as if to collect rain water, pieces 
of a pocket knife” and broken bottles – all of which could mean just about 
anything, considering the decades and decades since Earhart disappeared. 
Micronesians have lived on the island and the US navy has visited. Nikumaroro 
sits just south of a Pacific gyre current and near the route of the equatorial 
counter-current, and the Pacific Ocean is full of trash and lost things.

Gillespie told the Miami Herald earlier this year that “the key to it is her 
final message, where she says ‘line of position 157 dash 337’ … That’s a line 
that Noonan calculated from the sunrise, running 337 degrees to the north-west 
and 157 degrees to the south-east. And if you follow it far enough, there are 
two deserted islands on it, McKeon Island and Gardner Island.”

It’s a good story, just like the one ex-marine Floyd Kilts used to tell about 
how a tribesman told him about a partial human skeleton and a woman’s shoe, 
which ended up with a British official and disappeared afterward. (Micronesians 
settled on the island a year after Earhart vanished.) But despite all the story 
and circumstantial evidence, no expedition in the past 70 years has found the 
Electra on or near either island.

But Tighar of course thinks it might. It found a “sonar streak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/31/pacific-wreck-amelia-earharts-plane>
” 600ft below the surface “the right size, the right shape … in the right place 
to be part of the Electra”, which the group has so far had neither the time nor 
funding to investigate. Gillespie admits it could also be part of a reef, a 
geological formation or any number of things once lodged into the seabed and 
now drifted away. He intends to explore the site in a 2015 expedition. Whether 
he turns up with Earhart’s lost Electra or something else entirely, he will 
have a new story.
 