
"A cacophony of jangling, misheard and misused words … a sea of Stygian 
self-justification and stilted self-conscious prose … " AA Gill's caustic 
review of Morrissey's Autobiography has been named the Hatchet Job of the Year.

Gill was revealed as winner of the prize, set up by The Omnivore website 
<http://www.theomnivore.co.uk> and going to the writer "of the angriest, 
funniest, most trenchant book review" of the past year, on Tuesday evening. The 
Sunday Times journalist wasup against biting write-ups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/14/hatchet-job-of-the-year-shortlist>
 from the likes of David Sexton, Rachel Cooke and Peter Kemp, but was found to 
be easily the most scathing of reviewers by judges Rosie Boycott, Brian Sewell 
and John Sutherland.

"The 30 reviewers on the long list were easily reduced to eight, and then, as 
we knocked them off the list from bottom to the top, the winner emerged without 
argument. It was exactly like awarding the head boy a gold cup for expert 
caning," said Sewell.

Morrissey's Autobiography was published by Penguin, under its Classics imprint 
– a decision with which Gill takes great issue in his review, calling it the 
singer's "most Pooterishly embarrassing piece of intellectual social climbing". 
Gill concludes that putting the book, "a potential firelighter of vanity, 
self-pity and logorrhoeic dullness", in Penguin Classics "doesn't diminish 
Aristotle or Homer or Tolstoy; it just roundly mocksMorrissey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/morrissey>, and this is a humiliation 
constructed by the self-regard of its victim".

His review, which can be read in full on the Omnivore's website 
<http://www.theomnivore.com/a-a-gill-on-autobiography-by-morrissey-the-sunday-times/>
, also lays into Morrissey's take on his early life – "laughably overwrought 
and overwritten, a litany of retrospective hurt and score-settling that reads 
like a cross between Madonna and Catherine Cookson" – before dismissing the 
memoir as a book which should never have been written.

"This is a book that cries out like one of his maudlin ditties to be edited. 
But were an editor to start, there would be no stopping. It is a heavy tome, 
utterly devoid of insight, warmth, wisdom or likeability," writes Gill.

The Hatchet Job of the Year prize is intended to "raise the profile of 
professional critics and to promote integrity and wit in literary journalism". 
Tuesday's ceremony at the Coach and Horses pub in Soho, London, will see Gill 
presented with the "Golden Hatchet", and with a year's supply of potted shrimp.

He is the second Sunday Times journalist to win the award: Camilla Long took 
the prize last year, for herwrite-up of Rachel Cusk's memoir Aftermath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/12/hatchet-job-of-the-year-rachel-cusk>
, in which she dismissed Cusk as "a brittle little dominatrix and peerless 
narcissist who exploits her husband and her marriage with relish", and who 
"describes her grief in expert, whinnying detail". Adam Mars-Joneswon the 
inaugural Hatchet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/07/michael-cunningham-review-hatchet-job>
 for his review of Michael Cunningham's By Nightfall, in the Observer. "The 
book's pages are filled with thoughts about art, or (more ominously) Thoughts 
about Art," wrote Mars-Jones.
 