
 Miss Garnet's Angel
Salley Vickers 
(HarperCollins, £6.99)
Buy it at a discount at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,1001002000514649,00.html>


 Julia Garnet, all her life a teacher, is left stranded on retirement by the 
sudden death of Harriet (her companion, not lover). She has the shape, the air 
and the biography of a Brookner heroine as she sets tentatively off to Venice 
to live a little. Vickers is, however, unexpectedly generous to Miss Garnet, 
allowing her to step out of her rented flat in the Campo Angelo Raphaelo to 
embrace Venice and friendship, and to discover the Zoroastrian underpinnings of 
the Apocryphal story of Tobias and Raphael. Vickers writes plainly, effectively 
and warmly. Her heroine is a wonderful snub to publishing's current belief that 
the over-35s are not worth writing for or about.

 The Question Of Bruno
Aleksandar Hemon
 (Picador, £6.99)
Buy it at a discount at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,1001002000435081,00.html>


 Hemon was born in Bosnia, went to the US in 1991, and taught himself to write 
in English. When fiction crosses the Danube, critics scratching for a suitable 
adjective to describe Eastern European otherness go for "Nabokovian" or hint at 
kinship with Kundera. Hemon gets compared to both on the cover of his first 
collection of short stories. As he writes in artifice-rich prose about loss, 
exile, and the peculiar tangles of Balkan history (Tito, Stalin and Archduke 
Ferdinand), those comparisons make sense. He excels at that superficially 
unserious style that communism bred, but some may find his stylistic gymnastics 
and clotted prose unsettling.

 Caught
Henry Green
 (Harvill, £6.99)
Buy it at a discount at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,1001002000459569,00.html>


 One of a quartet of "London" novels republished by Harvill, Green's book is 
more curiosity than essential read. It is set during the Blitz and centres on 
Richard Roe, a diffident man who comes to London from a well-heeled country 
estate to volunteer for the Auxiliary Fire Service. Roe, the archetypal, 
tight-lipped English widower, who "wished that he had never made a point of not 
kissing Christopher", his five-year-old son, is contrasted with the 
professional fireman, Pye. Neither the war as whole, nor even the Blitz, 
impinges much on the narrative - both men are frighteningly at sea in personal 
emotional anguish - but fear hangs like a pall over this sombre novel.

 Gimme More
Liza Cody 
(Bloomsbury, £6.99)
Buy it at a discount at BOL 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,1001002000436244,00.html>


 Birdie is a composite of every real and mythical rock girlfriend - a little 
bit of Marianne meets Angie and Courtney - yet now widowed and wrinkled, she 
still knows how to take on the industry suits and hang on to her cut. When Dog 
Records come sniffing after a film and demo that her lover, Jack, supposedly 
made before his death, she plays it "like the cobra coiled round the treasure 
chest". Rock'n'roll doesn't usually transfer well to the page, but this 
thriller is carried by the ultra-cynical voice of Birdie and Cody's ability to 
create fictional lyrics, gigs and bands that won't make you wince.
 