
Like anyone else engaged in his peculiarly brutal trade, standup comedian John 
Williams is “used to dying on stage”. Over the years he has developed a thicker 
skin, but one gig – his worst ever – will never be forgotten. In fact the 
impact of an audience so utterly not amused inspired an entirely new show.

Four years ago John was booked for a corporate gig at a London comedy club. He 
decided to try some new material, inspired by family life. “The comedian before 
me talked about his family. Lots of standups talk about their kids. I wanted to 
talk about mine too.”

The audience stopped laughing when John mentioned that his son has autism. 
“The reaction was hideous,” he says. “One bloke came up at the end and asked if 
what I’d said was real. When I said it was he just shook his head and walked 
off. The attitude was, ‘We’ve come for a night out, we didn’t want this.’”

John concluded that he had perhaps been a bit naive, but also felt angry that 
his son’s disability seemed to render him unmentionable. There was no intention 
to shock. “I thought there must be a way to talk about my child without that 
response.”

The result was My Son’s Not Rainman, an hour-long show and accompanying blog, 
about his then 12-year-old son and their life together.

A success at the Edinburgh fringe 2013, My Son’s Not Rainman continues to tour 
Britain – “very slowly” as John, a single father, arranges his childcare. This 
month, John’s book of the same name, which is inspired by the success of the 
show and his blog, is published.

I had to lay the groundwork that all this comes from a place of love. People 
need to know that it's OK to laugh

Although John has a significant following among other parents of children with 
autism and those working in the field (he has spoken at events with theNational 
Autistic Society <http://www.autism.org.uk/>and in many special schools), he 
does not want to be portrayed as any sort of expert. “I can’t possibly be, 
given how the one condition affects so many people in such hugely different 
ways. All I can ever tell is our story.”

He hopes people will understand his son – and in turn others who are different 
– a little better, and he wants to dispel a few myths.

“The thing is that we only really celebrate disability when there’s a skill 
involved. Take the Paralympics, incredible as they are, they’re all about 
strength, courage and bravery. All I really wanted to do was to celebrate the 
smallness of it all, of just being in the world without justification. There’s 
joy in the little things … and humour and laughter.”

Clearly, life is not always easy, but John is not inviting pity. “Perhaps 
before they hear our story people assume our life is a misery. My point is that 
there is lots of joy. My son is brilliant. We make each other laugh, with or 
without his diagnosis. I want others to see that.

“I hate the idea that people will take what I’m saying as worthy or twee,” 
says John. Even more critical, though, is that it is never exploitative. “That 
is always in my mind, it’s my filter. What kind of dad would I be otherwise?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhave-you-heard-the-one-about-the-comedian-and-his-autistic-son%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff98378486b6dc298a2a8612e27e21f2e6ce5fd03%2F498_2757_1880_2351%2F1880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20you%20heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20comedian%20and%20his%20autistic%20son%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhave-you-heard-the-one-about-the-comedian-and-his-autistic-son%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20you%20heard%20the%20one%20about%20the%20comedian%20and%20his%20autistic%20son%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhave-you-heard-the-one-about-the-comedian-and-his-autistic-son%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff98378486b6dc298a2a8612e27e21f2e6ce5fd03%2F498_2757_1880_2351%2F1880.jpg>
 John Williams. Photograph: Andy Hollingworth/Andy Hollingworth Archive 
In writing the show and then the book, working out what to include and exclude 
was difficult. “It felt right, but terrifying. I don’t believe jokes need a 
target, but comedy seems to have gone a bit that way,” says John. (Frankie 
Boyle famously achieved both a sell-out tour and widespread disgust with his 
jokes about autism.) “I’m not interested in offending anyone.

“I had to lay the groundwork that all this comes from a place of love, to make 
clear that I care for this boy more than anything in the world. Without that it 
would just be picking on a kid. That wouldn’t be funny. People need to know 
that it’s OK to laugh.”

John creates this starting point by guarding his son’s privacy, naming him 
simply The Boy – “It’s what he wanted to be called” – and deeming certain 
aspects of his life off limits, puberty for instance, and by including him in 
putting the show together. There are graphics sequences and voiceovers that 
father and son produce together. “He likes the idea of being the star of the 
show.” John is introduced in a recording by his son: “Ladies and gentleman, 
please welcome to the stage, my funny dad.” (He insists the adjective was 
inserted unexpectedly by The Boy.) “I wanted the audience to connect with him, 
and I love hearing his voice when I’m on stage,” says John.

He is conscious that he must not become complacent in protecting The Boy’s 
privacy. “He is getting older. He knows what I am doing and I read him all the 
blog posts, we have a chat about what the audience were like after each show 
and his input has been hugely important to the book. But I have to be confident 
it won’t embarrass or hurt him later.

Using comedy lets people get as far as seeing the child inside without being 
distracted by behaviour

“He will always be more than any of it. If he wakes up one day and says he 
doesn’t like it then it will all go.”

The Boy has seen bits of the show and heard the whole thing on the radio, but 
when he was asked if he’d like to sit through a whole show, his only comment 
was, “One hour. Boring.”

“It has improved the wider family’s relationships with The Boy. Using comedy 
lets people get as far as seeing the child inside without being distracted by 
behaviour.”

Challenging behaviour is something that John doesn’t shy away from, but the 
humour never comes at The Boy’s expense. “We are actually laughing at people’s 
perceptions of disabilities.” John recounts the change he and The Boy – who 
also has cerebral palsy – encounter when he occasionally uses a wheelchair.

“Suddenly I’m pushing round Mother Teresa,” says John.

A trip to play crazy golf saw them insistently ushered to the front of the 
queue by other families. The reaction when The Boy then rose from his chair to 
take a shot verged on disgust. “It was excruciating. I knew how it was going to 
go. Basically, people want full paralysis or nothing at all.”

As well as challenging attitudes, John’s work also proclaims the value of 
children with disabilities “just being themselves”. We should be able to 
celebrate people’s quirks and differences, without having to define them by 
labels, he says.

In a favourite reminiscence, he shares his experience of taking The Boy to the 
disco at a special school he attended in the past.

There are stereotypes – the child with ADHD energetically DJing, another with 
OCD checking hand hygiene in the toilet, someone else counting the sprinkles on 
the cupcakes – and one Edinburgh fringe reviewer considered the material 
“dodgy”. Yet, says John, parents and teachers of children with disabilities 
always tell him how much they love this story. It was also featured on Radio 4 
as one of journalist Robert Peston’s Picks of the Year 2015. “It is all true. 
It was a room full of people who just didn’t give a shit what people thought. 
I’ve always been a bit of a try-hard people pleaser and for me to see these 
children simply doing precisely what they wanted at that precise moment was 
such an eye opener. If you have actually experienced that you see how magical 
it is.”

It is great to get letters saying I love your son. Having a child with a 
disability can be isolating

John considers himself a better father for doing the show and the blog. “It 
encourages me to let go a little, to see the funny side and also think more 
about why my son might do certain things.”

Naturally, says John, he also basks in the affection of audiences and blog 
followers – he’s had more than a million hits to date. “When you’ve spent your 
life with people constantly finding the negative and never looking past it to 
see just how brilliant he is inside, it is great to get letters saying I love 
your son. Having a child with a disability can be isolating. Having that 
recognition and understanding for both of us has been incredibly encouraging.”

His ultimate dream would be to perform together with his son. “He has a 
fantastic sense of humour. It’s my very favourite thing about him.”

A few years ago John was asked to play Father Christmas at the children’s 
respite centre where he used to work. He agreed – and then realised he would 
have to take The Boy along. An elf costume was cobbled together.

“He insisted on calling me daddy, giving his opinion on everyone’s Christmas 
wishlist and chucking a gift at them with the words, ‘It’s a selection box. 
They’re all the same.’

“We had a brilliant time.”

• My Son’s Not Rainman: One Man, One Autistic Boy, A Million Adventures by 
John Williams is published by Michael O’Mara, £7.99. To order a copy for £6.55, 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-son-s-not-rainman.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
or call 0330 333 6846.

mysonsnotrainman.com <http://www.mysonsnotrainman.com/>
 