 It is sobering to note that several hundred heart transplant patients attended 
last week's celebrations of the operation's 25th anniversary in Britain. Their 
presence gives a measure of the lives that have been saved since this surgery 
was first carried out by Terence English at Papworth Hospital in 1979. However, 
we should also remember those individuals who provided the organs that made 
transplants possible in the first place. Were it not for the deaths of 
thousands of others - often in road accidents - many UK citizens, now happily 
alive, would have expired long ago.
The trouble is that finding organ donors has now become a major concern for 
the health service. We currently need to carry out more than 5,000 kidney, 
heart and lung transplants a year, as our population ages and surgery 
techniques improve. Yet only around 1,500 organs are being made available. 
Scandals, like the events at Alder Hey hospital, where children's organs were 
removed and stored without parents' permission, have caused considerable 
problems for doctors.

The proposal, backed by transplant surgeons, that the UK should adopt an 
'opt-out' organ donation system, as opposed to the current 'opt-in' 
arrangement, is an attractive solution. Every member of the public would be 
deemed a potential donor, unless they had signed up to an exclusion register. 
At the same time, relatives, who can veto organ removals at present, would 
still be able to stop their loved ones from being used as donors. Such opt-out 
systems have already been introduced in Austria, Spain, and other countries, 
with noticeable increases in organ availability. MPs, who will decide on the 
issue through an amendment to the human tissue bill next week, should be 
allowed a free vote on the scheme. We encourage them to back a change in 
regulations, a move that will save hundreds of lives.
 