
Andy Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/business/andy-hornby>, the former 
boss of HBOS, who was ousted when the bank had to be rescued by Lloyds TSB in a 
government-backed takeover, has eschewed the millions bagged by some City 
bankers and pocketed enough to buy himself a new tailor-made suit as he goes 
job-hunting.

Some fellow board members, however, have walked away with large payoffs 
despite the bank racking up multibillion pound losses due to bad debts that 
have forced its new owner to call on the government for a taxpayer-funded 
bailout.

To try to avoid a repeat of the cash-for-failure furore that has greeted news 
of Sir Fred Goodwin's huge payout at rival RBS,HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> confirmed in its report and 
accounts that Hornby turned down the £1m payoff he could have received when he 
lost his job, alongside a further £645,000 the bank was planning to pump into 
his pension scheme.

Instead Hornby was granted £2,970 in basic statutory redundancy pay. 

He did, however, pick up £251,000 as a result of the company's takeover by 
Lloyds on top of the £1.075m he was paid in salary and benefits for 2008, the 
year in which HBOS lost £10bn as its bad debts pushed the bank close to 
collapse.

HBOS's former chairman Lord Stevenson, who told MPs in February he was 
"profoundly and unreservedly sorry" for what had happened to the bank, also 
gave up his payoff. Last year, however, he saw his salary as chairman rise from 
£707,500 to £795,000.

Unsurprisingly, none of the HBOS directors received any bonuses for 2008, as 
the bank plunged into the red, but several executives have taken big payoffs 
for losing their jobs as a result of the bank's collapse. The news is likely to 
infuriate MPs, and shareholders who saw their investments all but wiped out by 
the bank's failure and who had thought the entire board would forgo their 
payouts.

HBOS's head of corporate banking, Peter Cummings, who spent 37 years with the 
company, has walked away with £831,080, comprising £702,080 in compensation for 
the loss of his job and £129,000 as a result of the Lloyds takeover. He also 
pocketed £699,000 in salary and benefits for 2008 - though that is well down on 
the £2.3m he got in 2007 - and £168,833 in lieu of pension. His existing 
pension pot has been adjusted as if the 54-year-old was retiring at 60, at a 
cost of £700,000. He has, however, waived his right to claim a £1.32m bonus he 
earned in 2007, but deferred.

The report and accounts - whose plain cover and lack of pictures seem to echo 
the bank's demise - shows that fellow former directors Mike Ellis, Philip 
Gore-Randall and Colin Matthew received payoffs ranging from £570,000 to 
£670,000 for losing their jobs. They also got between £73,000 and £151,000 as a 
result of the Lloyds deal, which also led to a payoff of £139,000 for the 
bank's former head of risk, Jo Dawson, and £88,000 for the former head of its 
retail business, Dan Watkins.
 