
I'm a breastfeeding mother of a seven‑month-old and feel hungry most of the 
time. I find myself snacking on chocolate, which isn't very healthy! Can you 
suggest some healthy snacks that I could prepare in advance? Something I could 
share with my little one would be great.

Amy Stonier, Bristol

When I was feeding my daughter I was always hungry too, but with a little 
planning and some help you can make it work. Treat yourself to a rice pudding: 
nice and sweet, very comforting, and great for the baby. Buy a jar of apricot 
conserve to dollop on top or poach some fresh rhubarb in a little apple juice – 
not as good as chocolate, but a close second!

Avocado is another interesting idea. Babies love it! Try making up a pot of 
diced cucumber, diced avocado and some toasted pine nuts and drizzle with a 
little lemon oil. You can pick out some of the avocado to share with your baby 
and have a nice balanced snack for yourself.

For something more substantial, soup is good for keeping you well fed and it 
can be adapted to suit the baby. Try making cock-a-leekie, which is basically 
potato and leek with chicken. Keep it rustic for you, but liquidise some for 
the baby. Another good soup is minestrone with orzo pasta. You can boost your 
portion with some chorizo.

Sweet potatoes are also great for you and the baby. Cook them a little bit 
longer than normal for a very soft, tasty food packed goodness. Dice some sweet 
potato into about 1cm cubes and cook slowly in a little oil until soft. Allow 
to cool, and stir in some chopped spinach and finely diced cheese to snack on. 
Add chopped ham or bacon for yourself if you're super-hungry.

• This article was amended on 17 June 2013 to remove a reference to honey. 
According to the NHS website, honey can occasionally contain bacteria which can 
produce toxins in a baby's intestines, leading to infant botulism. It's best 
not to give your child honey until they're one year old.
 