
I've been lying on my back, staring at the peeling ceiling of my flat for a 
couple of hours. There was a leak. A numbing sense of lethargy overwhelms me 
when I come off tour. My languid veins miss the fizz of adrenaline that they're 
served as I walk onstage each night. So I lie on the floorboards. Staring at 
the peeling ceiling.

I jump up from torpor. I split open my overloaded suitcase. Trousers stiff 
with desert dust and shirts damp with stage sweat leap out. Among the jumble is 
a crumpled paper cup, sticky with traces of root beer. Red palm trees circle 
the lip of the cup: silhouettes of the real ones in the In N Out Burger parking 
lot on the freeway between Palm Springs and Los Angeles. I turn the cup over 
with my toe. There, under the base, is the secret message: John 3:16. Nothing 
indicates its presence or draws you to it. It's there for you to discover - 
"For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in 
him should not perish but have eternal life."

It's not exactly evangelical extremism, perhaps, but it is indicative of 
everyday Middle America: you don't have to look far to find a quote from the 
Bible. The reason could be on the bottom of the milkshake cups: Proverbs 3:5 - 
"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own 
understanding." Maybe it's easier to let the Bible think for you. Or maybe God 
so loves the world that he wants to eat burgers and fries with us. It seems 
that way in the burger and cheeseburger wrapper small print: Revelation 3:20 - 
"Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the 
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me."

If supping at In N Out is OK by Him, it's OK by Me. It is the best burger 
joint in California. Everything on the menu is very fresh and, since it pays 
its staff more than twice the minimum wage, there is none of the poisonous 
resentment among its workers that sees the staff at other fast food joints 
spitting in your onion rings. At In N Out there is a secret menu too. Ask for 
it "Animal Style" and your burger comes fried in mustard with extra tasty gunk 
on the top.

California seems unreal and distant. I stick my finger in the sticky syrup. 
It's still sweet. I lie back down. I stare at the peeling for another few hours.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 