
Heavy drinkers should be screened for early signs of liver disease, health 
officials have said.

Harmful drinkers – women who drink more than 35 units a week and men who drink 
more than 50 – should also be sent for scans to detect liver scarring, the 
National Institute forHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and 
Care Excellence (Nice) said.

A bottle of wine is estimated to contain 10 units of alcohol and a pint of 
beer is estimated to contain 2.3 units. Across England there are estimated to 
be 1.9 million “harmful drinkers”.


In a bid to identify early liver problems among these people, Nice said GPs 
should refer them for scans to detect liver cirrhosis, or scarring.

In its new draft quality standard, the health regulator said diagnosing 
cirrhosis would ensure patients received the treatment and support needed to 
manage their condition.

The document, which is out for consultation until February, also says people 
with cirrhosis should be sent for ultrasounds twice a year to check forliver 
cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/18/135000-will-die-from-alcohol-related-cancer-next-20-years-says-study>
.

Dr Andrew Fowell, consultant hepatologist at Portsmouth hospitals NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> trust who helped draft the document, 
said: “Identifying people who are at risk of liver disease and offering them 
non-invasive testing to diagnose cirrhosis is key to ensuring they are given 
the treatment and support they need early enough to prevent serious 
complications.

“Ten years ago diagnosis of cirrhosis would often require a liver biopsy, but 
now with advances in non-invasive testing, it is much easier for patients and 
health professionals to make a diagnosis.”

Prof Gillian Leng, deputy chief executive of Nice, said: “Many people with 
liver disease do not show symptoms until it is too late. If it is tackled at an 
early stage, simple lifestyle changes or treatments can be enough for the liver 
to recover.

“Early diagnosis is vital, as is action to both prevent and halt the damage 
that drinking too much alcohol can do.”

Liver disease is the fifth largest cause of death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/30/alcohol-related-deaths-up-4-per-cent-one-year>
 in England and Wales.
 