
In the week that A Nation’s Theatre 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40777/about/why_a_nations_theatre/why_a_nations_theatre>
 festival begins showcasing some of the most innovative theatre from all across 
the UK, it’s good to be reminded regional theatre really does compete with 
London’s best.


I’ve just come back from the Theatre by the Lake 
<http://www.theatrebythelake.com/> in Keswick, and straight up I must confess 
that although it’s been open for 17 years, I’ve never previously visited, 
although my colleagueAlfred Hickling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alfredhickling> has been on several 
occasions. More fool me. Not only is it situated in the most idyllic location
right on the edge 
<http://www.lakedistrict.gov.uk/visiting/placestogo/explorederwentwater> of 
Derwent Water, but the production ofA Shepherd’s Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/29/the-shepherds-life-review-theatre-by-lake-keswick-james-rebanks>
 that I saw was hugely entertaining, and a fine example of a theatre show being 
very cannily matched to a particular context and location.

Not cosy, not safe, no tractors: the plays redefining rural theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/mar/08/a-nations-theatre-rural-touring-forum-farnham-maltings>
Getting that kind of programming right is a real skill and art, a kind of 
alchemy that many regional theatres and arts centres around the country 
practise every single day, refusing to succumb to the idea that audiences 
outside London lack the sophistication to respond to either challenging ideas 
or form. One of the things A Shepherd’s Life touches on are the tensions 
between those of us who visit the Lake District for leisure, bringing money to 
the area via tourism,and those who live and work there all year round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/09/lake-district-homeowners-local-residents>
. It does so using simple but what any regular London theatre-goer would 
recognise as highly contemporary theatre techniques.

I’ll be making sure it’s not another 17 years before I return, but my and my 
fellow national theatre critics’ lack of attention toTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> by the Lake, or indeed other 
theatres that are remote, and not easily accessible by public transport, only 
contributes to the notion that little of real theatrical interest happens 
outside the M25.

Theatre is about relationships and this week I've started a new and long 
over​-​due one

Tighter budgets on arts desks, rising travel costs and the fact that over the 
last 20 years London’s subsidised stages, in particular studio spaces, are more 
tightly curated and now produce more in-house work every year, leaves theatre 
outsideLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> less rather than more 
likely to get critical attention. Even the most fearless and dedicated bloggers 
have time and financial constraints when it comes to covering a geographical 
spread of work.

As Megan Vaughan observed recently 
<http://synonymsforchurlish.tumblr.com/post/138849284348/crowdfunding-and-the-regions-what-have-i>
, pointing to the invisibility of small out-of-London companies: “If a tree 
falls in a forest and there’s noone there to hear it, does it make a sound? If 
a new company is stone cold amazing and there’s noone there to write about 
them, do they still get to have a career?” Well probably not, unless they can 
raise the cashto get themselves to Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/28/is-the-edinburgh-festival-really-a-level-playing-field>
, where they are more likely to be able to persuade programmers and producers 
to see them.

It’s why Battersea Arts Centre’s A Nation’s Theatrematters, offering 60 
companies and 350 artists who make work across the UK the opportunity to play 
dates in London venues. The opportunities for work created in the regions to 
tour into London are also far fewer than they were 20 or 30 years ago and for 
many the costs are prohibitive, sothe programme for A Nation’s Theatre 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/more-than-350-artists-to-take-part-in-bac-led-a-nations-theatre-festival/>
, which includes shows for all ages at venues across London fromArts Admin 
<http://www.artsadmin.co.uk/events/3867> to the Barbican, the Young Vic 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40859/whats_on/shows/cuttin_it> to 
Rich Mix 
<http://www.richmix.org.uk/whats-on/festival/a-nations-theatre-festival/>, 
operates as a corrective to the idea that most great theatre is made in London 
and then travels out to rest of the country, increasingly in the form ofa live 
stream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/may/06/effects-of-live-satellite-broadcasts-national-theatre-rsc>
.

The Shepherd's Life review – gentle farming wisdom and animal magic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/29/the-shepherds-life-review-theatre-by-lake-keswick-james-rebanks>
Of course some of this work might have been programmed in London venues in any 
case, but a lot of it would never have been seen.Talking to BAC’s David Jubb 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2016/david-jubb-lets-rethink-what-theatres-are-for/>
 a few months ago, he mentioned that looking for shows to programme had made 
him and BAC’s producers engage more proactively with work being made elsewhere 
and starting relationships with the arts organisations across the UK – from
Belfast 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40842/whats_on/shows/reassembled_slightly_askew>
 and Glasgow toDevon 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/40844/whats_on/shows/the_destroyed_room>
 andWales 
<http://www.anationstheatre.org.uk/content/41135/whats_on/shows/caitlin> – that 
are creating it.

Theatre is about relationships. This week, I’ve started a long overdue 
relationship with the Theatre by the Lake, one I hope will continue beyond my 
one-off visit to see The Shepherd’s Life. The test for A Nation’s Theatre will 
be not in the success of individual shows during their London showcase, but in 
whether the relationships formed endure beyond the end of the festival in May.
 