
Back in 2009 a Finnish company called Rovio launched its 52nd video game. Its 
premise was simple: players would use their smartphone touchscreen – still a 
relative novelty two years after the first iPhone came out – to control a 
catapult. Swine flu was in the news, so the enemies would be pigs. The 
missiles? A flock of angry birds.

That game reportedly cost less than £100,000 to make. The numbers involved in 
The Angry Birds Movie, which arrives in cinemas 13 May, are rather larger. 
There’s an estimated $80m production budget and $100m set aside for marketing. 
Sony has even splashed out on the ultimate status symbol: an A-list cameo. Sean 
Penn, we were informed in April,will play a bird called Terence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/07/dead-man-squawking-sean-penn-joining-angry-birds-movie>
 who communicates only through low, rumbling growls.

Yes, that Sean Penn. The Sean Penn who campaigns about the Falklands, played 
gay rights martyrHarvey Milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/25/milk-sean-penn-review> and 
directed a film about a man who hitch-hiked to Alaska tolive in the wilderness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/nov/11/actionandadventure.drama>. From 
Friday, he’s in a film based on a smartphone app about catapulting poultry.

He’s not the only one. The Angry Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/angry-birds> Movie cast includes 
credible comic actors such as Jason Sudeikis, Maya Rudolph and Bill Hader, and 
a cameo from Peter Dinklage, also known as Tyrion Lannister inGame of Thrones. 
(That might alarm gamers: Dinklage’s voiceover work forDestiny was notoriously 
underwhelming.)

In May, the game-to-film crossover continues with a World of Warcraft 
adaptation, directed by indie darling – and mini-Bowie – Duncan Jones. He will 
be hoping for better reviews than the17% score on Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/ratchet_and_clank/> awarded to Ratchet & Clank
, last month’s adaptation of the platformer game. And, in December, Michael 
Fassbender will try to knife people quietly before getting bored and just 
stabbing everyone in sight, then running away up a bell tower. Well, he will do 
if his approach toAssassin’s Creed is anything like mine.

Movie versions of video games are not a new phenomenon. I harbour a soft spot 
for both theTomb Raider series (remember when Angelina Jolie looked as if she 
ate carbs?) and Jean-Claude Van Damme muscling through 1994’sStreet Fighter. 
But in recent years Hollywood has shown itself willing to plunder even those 
video games with no obvious plot or characters in pursuit of success. Perhaps 
this shouldn’t be surprising, because there is widespread belief in the 
box-office magic of “existing IP” [intellectual property] – brands that have 
already demonstrated their commercial appeal. In 2012, Universal released
Battleship, a film “loosely inspired” by the Hasbro board game of the same 
name. It was terrible. It still made a profit.

Luckily, the Angry Birds screenwriter, Jon Vitti, appears to have embraced the 
thinness of his source material. The film’s protagonist is a bird called Red, 
and he is – you guessed it – angry. Other birds mock his eyebrows. He can’t 
impress the hottest girl birds. And he is the only one who thinks the arrival 
of pigs to his native island is anything other than a multicultural delight. 
Technically, this suggests Red is an instinctive racist, but my guess is that 
his suspicions will be vindicated. (Of course, that will make the moral of the 
story that it’s right to fear and mistrust strangers. Sounds problematic. 
Someone consult Twitter.)

The cultural exchange goes the other way. If you look carefully, half of 
Hollywood has popped up in a game over the last five years. In 2011L.A. Noire 
seemingly featured the entire cast ofMad Men; Mark Hamill was the Joker in 
Rocksteady’s Arkham series; Ellen Page ledBeyond: Two Souls in 2013; and Liam 
Neeson was your do-gooder dad inFallout 3. In Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare, 
Kevin Spacey’s motion-captured face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/03/kevin-spacey-call-of-duty-advanced-warfare>
 was almost enough to redeem a script that placed you at a military funeral and 
then urged you to “press X to pay your respects”.

Amid the geysers of cash, however, not everyone is celebrating these 
crossovers. Video games have always been too misty-eyed about the more 
established medium of film, and that has done little to help them develop as an 
artform in their own right. Films get taken seriously by “serious people”, and 
so the question “what is theCitizen Kane of video games?” has long since become 
a cliche among games journalists. Many of us feel as though we’ve been waiting 
for the messiah title we can thrust into the hands of our parents, our bookish 
friends, or the critical establishment at large, and say: this one. This one is 
art. This is the one that will stop you being snide about our hobby.

Our reverence for cinema has also led to the assumption that the most 
prestigious path for games is becoming interactive movies – likeSpeed, but you 
can drive the bus. Yet I can’t think of anyone, outside a few hardcoreMetal 
Gear Solid fans, who will admit to enjoying extended cut-scenes. They persist 
because they employ a narrative grammar critics are used to unpicking. It’s 
harder to explain the artistry of a game likeBraid, where the storyline is 
woven into the gameplay itself, or one likeProteus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/08/proteus-game-review>, which 
doesn’t have a storyline at all.

But wait – that’s me showing my bias again. Why should games aspire to be a 
storytelling medium anyway? What’s wrong with being … a game? There’s a story, 
of a kind, in every Hearthstone match, even though it’s “just” a card game. 
There’s the excitement of a good opening move; the tense wait to see if that 
big minion will stay down; the satisfaction of realising that – yes – you have 
enough mana to play a winning card. No one looks down on chess because it 
doesn’t have a narrator.

So even as more games get stripmined by scriptwriters, the industry should 
remember that it can dare to aspire to different standards. Video games are 
not, in the words of tech writer Leigh Alexander, “some kind of inadequate 
stepchild that needs a pat on the head from the film industry to be validated”. 
Or as Carolyn Petit, managing editor for feminist criticism siteFeminist 
Frequency <https://feministfrequency.com/>, puts it: “If games have some 
growing up to do – and they do – that growth isn’t going to be indicated by 
Kevin Spacey appearing in aCall of Duty game, or by the Ratchet & Clank 
franchise getting a big-screen movie. Games can’t expect the cultural 
legitimacy of other art forms to transfer on to them through association.”

Games certainly don’t need a critical stamp of approval to be commercially 
viable. Global revenues from console games – which make up only a third of the 
market – are set tohit $28bn this year 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/0d5f2e4a-0e0c-11e6-b41f-0beb7e589515.html#axzz47v08G7B8>
, according to PWC. Shares in both the biggest western and Japanese developers 
have risen since the start of 2015, against generally falling stock markets. 
The shooterCall of Duty: Black Ops 3 made $550m in its first three days.

The hope must be now that some of the vast profits from the giants trickle 
down to the rest of the industry, allowing creativity to flourish. As with 
films, many bestselling titles are sequels (likeFallout 4) or part of 
franchises (likeFIFA 16). It’s hard to innovate when tens of millions of 
dollars, and hundreds of jobs, are at stake.

That said, there are signs that games can still have the potential to be 
groundbreaking, not merely glossier and faster versions of their previous 
selves. The PC game portal Steam has launched aproject called Greenlight 
<https://steamcommunity.com/greenlight/> to crowdfund indie titles, and ID@Xbox 
<http://www.xbox.com/en-GB/Developers/id> allows smaller games to be 
self-published on the Microsoft console. One of my favourite releases of last 
year,Her Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/25/her-story-review-narrative-video-game>
, involved one writer, one actor, and zero special effects. It managed 100,000 
downloads.

Small successes like that make me feel more optimistic about the future of the 
medium than any number of box-office smashes based on an established brand. 
Sorry if that makes you angry, Red.
 