

Grey market iPad on sale in Nairobi. Photo by smagdali 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/smagdali/> on Flickr. Some rights reserved 
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/>

To those who reckoned that netbooks were going to be a feature of computing 
life for ever and ever: bad news. Acer, theworld's second-largest PC maker in 
2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/blog/2011/jan/13/netbook-sales-slump-gartner-pc-sales>
, is dumping them.

Instead it plans to start selling "two or three" tablet computers in the first 
half of this year,according to a company sales manager talking to Computerworld 
<http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9205358/Acer_to_launch_7_inch_10_inch_tablets_by_mid_year>
.

"The tablet launches will begin a gradual replacement of Acer's small 
laptop-style netbook computers, in line with market demands, Taiwan sales 
manager Lu Bing-hsian said.

"'They are aimed at phasing out netbooks,' he said. 'That's the direction of 
the market.'"

It will make fewer netbooks, because it sees tablets gaining in popularity. 
Interestingly, theAcer <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/acer> tablets, 
running Android, will not be based on ARM chips - as pretty much every other 
extant Andrdoid tablet is - but instead use Intel Sandy Bridge four-core CPUs. 
The biggest will have a 10-inch screen.

Acer tried before with tablets: remember its 12-inch product early last year? 
No, hardly anyone else does either - it sold around 250 per month and was 
quietly killed in July.

But now Apple has validated the market, selling 7.33m iPads in the past 
quarter alone - which means that in 2010 it sold a total of 14.8m of the 
devices. (Read about its record financial quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jan/18/apple-profits-increase-steve-jobs>
.) Many of the most recent ones sold seem to have been 3G versions, judging by 
details given out in the analyst call with Apple's earnings on Tuesday night 
which said that the average iPad selling price was $600.

Of course we've seen from CES that there are dozens of companies ready to leap 
into the tablet market, though there are only a few which look like they might 
do something dramatic. The 10-inch Motorola Xoom, which will run Android 
Honeycomb (3.0) looks good, but don't believe anyone who says they have had a 
hands-on: no journalist has yet tried a Xoom running Honeycomb, because it 
simply isn't ready. Asus also hopes to have a Honeycomb tablet, but it doesn't 
know when the software is ready.

All of which led Tim Cook, Apple's chief operating officer, and the man in 
charge of the house while Steve Jobs is on indefinite medical leave, to sniff 
that with the 7" tablets now flooding the market "you wind up having a size of 
tablet that's less than what we believe is reasonable or would provide a real 
tablet experience." Much as you've heard or read Steve Jobs say.

But Cook also took a swipe at the Honeycomb tablets, and HP and RIM, who have 
promised much but not allowed anything you'd call a hands-on: "the next 
generation of tablets - there's nothing shipping yet, so I don't know. They 
lack performance specs, pricing, timing - today, they're vapour. We will assess 
them when they come out."

So much, by the way, for RIM co-CEO Jim Balsillie's claim during RIM's 
earnings call that enterprise customers were putting off any deployment of 
iPads andwaiting instead for RIM's PlayBook 
<http://www.electronista.com/articles/10/12/16/rim.insists.companies.delaying.ipad.for.playbook/>
 to come out. Cook took some pleasure from listing Fortune 100 companies that 
are testing or deploying them, and noted that it is being "deployed or tested" 
in 80% of the US Fortune 100 companies (up from 65% at the last earnings 
calls), and 60% of FTSE 100 companies.

And if - if - you were to include iPads as computers (something that companies 
like Gartner and IDC decline to do),points out TechFlash 
<http://www.techflash.com/seattle/2011/01/stats-apple-now-worlds-no-2.html>, 
then Apple would have been the second-biggest computer maker in the world in 
the fourth quarter.

Think that sounds extreme? Things are changing in the computing world. The 
Wall Street Journal reckons that "the era of the personal computer is drawing 
to a close 
<http://online.wsj.com/article_email/SB10001424052970204527804576043803826627110-lMyQjAxMTAxMDEwMjExNDIyWj.html>
" - with Gartner calculating that by 2013 the number of smartphones will pass 
the number of PCs, by 1.82bn to 1.78bn. And that's leaving out the tablets. The 
article is definitely worth reading.

• IBM reported its quarterly results last night 
<http://money.cnn.com/2011/01/18/technology/IBM_earnings/> too. It had record 
revenues, of $29.02bn, and record profits - $5.3bn. And IBM is the world's 
largest IT company in terms of sales.

• For comparison: Apple's quarterly revenues were $26.74bn (a record; previous 
quarter $20.34bn), profits $6bn (a record; previous quarter $4.3bn).

• Microsoft will report its latest quarterly earnings on 27 January (8m 
Kinects sold! Make a date!). For each of the last three quarters its revenues 
have been smaller than Apple's (ranging from $14.5bn to $16.2bn) but its 
profits have been bigger ($5.1bn to $7.1bn). Take a bow, Windows and Office.

So expect that 2011 is going to be the year of the tablet. At one point Cook 
was asked if he didn't worry that computer sales were being cannibalised by 
tablet sales. "The other guys [PC makers] lose a lot more than us, and we have 
a lot more to win, because we're underrepresented in that [PC] market. 
Cannibalisation isn't something we are spending one minute on here."

It might be something for Acer - and all the other computer manufacturers - to 
think about though.
 