
This week, the final phase of the atheist bus campaign will appear in London, 
Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast – not on buses, but on billboards. Due to the 
amazing sums donated to the campaign fund by many Cif readers at the end of 
last year, we raised enough for a second wave of adverts – and the above 
posters will launch today.

When, in this Cif piece back in October 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/23/atheist-bus-campaign-ariane-sherine>
, we asked how the extra funds should be spent, one of the issues which came up 
repeatedly in the comments concerned the growth of of faith schools in the UK 
and the segregation of children according to their parents' beliefs. Many of 
you felt strongly that children should be given the freedom to decide which 
belief system they wanted to belong to, if any, and that they should not have a 
religion decided for them. CommenterFinite187 
<https://www.theguardian.com/users/Finite187> wrote, "A campaign against faith 
schools would be good as a next step,"ciderpower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/users/ciderpower> said "You could address faith 
schools – religions want schools for the few, not for all" and555555 
<https://www.theguardian.com/users/555555> asked, "How is this distortion of 
school education happening in this country?"

The atheist campaign team shared this point of view. However, rather than 
using adverts to try and campaign politically, we thought it would be more 
beneficial to try and change the current public perception that it is 
acceptable to label children with a religion. As Richard Dawkins states, 
"Nobody would seriously describe a tiny child as a 'Marxist child' or an 
'Anarchist child' or a 'Post-modernist child'. Yet children are routinely 
labelled with the religion of their parents. We need to encourage people to 
think carefully before labelling any child too young to know their own 
opinions, and our adverts will help to do that."

We have scheduled the launch of the billboards to take place during the same 
week asUniversal Children's Day <http://www.un.org/depts/dhl/children_day/> (20 
November), which is the United Nations' "day of worldwide fraternity and 
understanding between children". We hope the advert's message will encourage 
the government, media and general public to see children as individuals, free 
to make their own choices as soon as they are old enough to fully understand 
what these choices mean, and that they will think twice before describing 
children in terms of their parents' religion in the future.

Lastly, I'd like to take a final opportunity to thank everyone who donated to 
the campaign, supported it, commented on it or blogged about it – you really 
did make a difference to public discourse in this country and around the world. 
We hope you feel the new poster campaign is worthwhile and effective. After 
this phase, I will be taking a step back from atheist campaigning and returning 
to journalism. For those of you would like to continue to donate to campaigns 
on this issue, the BHA have launched a new pro-inclusive schools initiativehere 
<http://www.justgiving.com/nofaithschools>.
 