
Ben Ainslie’s £100m America’s Cup dream finally hit the water here on Saturday 
and a victory and a second place had an estimated crowd of more than 100,000 
dancing in the Solent sunshine.

Two years after the last competition, and 18 months after they started 
building the boat for the America’s Cup proper, the battle for the Auld Mug, in 
Bermuda in 2017, Ainslie and his all-British Land Rover BAR team finally gave 
some credence to the vast investment, both financial and emotional, that has 
gone into the project. Suddenly, all that hype and optimism looks well placed. 
The world’s greatest sailor has raised the BAR.

The 38-year-old Ainslie, who has won a gold medal in every Olympics since 
Sydney in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/aug/05/london-2012-ben-ainslie-gold>
, was leading his team against the holders, Oracle Team USA, the runners-up 
from 2013, Team New Zealand, and crews representing France, Sweden and Japan.

The first race was won at a watery canter, ahead of Oracle and Team New 
Zealand and then Ainslie led his boat from the back of the field to take second 
behind New Zealand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fben-ainslie-americas-cup-land-rover-bar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F25%2F1437844437975%2F339e8e14-0b6b-4e55-ac35-73e668eef779-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=High%20water%20marks%20for%20Ben%20Ainslie%20and%20his%20%C2%A3100m%20America%E2%80%99s%20Cup%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fben-ainslie-americas-cup-land-rover-bar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=High%20water%20marks%20for%20Ben%20Ainslie%20and%20his%20%C2%A3100m%20America%E2%80%99s%20Cup%20dream&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fben-ainslie-americas-cup-land-rover-bar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F25%2F1437844437975%2F339e8e14-0b6b-4e55-ac35-73e668eef779-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ben Ainslie’s Land Rover BAR and Emirates Team New Zealand compete in the 
first event of the 35th America’s Cup World Series in Portsmouth. Photograph: 
Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
But an even tougher challenge lies ahead. For Big Saturday will be followed by 
Super Sunday, when double points will be available and when the weather 
conditions will be more challenging. On Sunday, it seems, it will be raining 
cats and seadogs, with strong winds too.

After his vigorous statement of intent, Ainslie said: “It could hardly have 
gone better, but we’re certainly not getting carried away because there’s a 
long way to go. The next 12 months are critical in terms of the design and 
development phase but this will be a big boost for all our designers and 
engineers back at base.”

He seemed moved by the turnout, with an official attendance of 48,704 probably 
more than doubled by non-paying customers, including those watching from 2,200 
boats. It was mind-blowing, even though, according to a localWhat’s On guide, 
the biggest competition came from the Jerk Off Festival in Fareham. “It was 
amazing, almost emotional, leaving the harbour and seeing thousands of boats 
out there,” he said. “I’ve never seen anything like that in my sailing career.

“I can’t say a big enough thank you to everyone who made the effort and came 
out to support the home team, the America’s Cup World Series and Portsmouth.”

The teams were using identical 45-foot AC45 catamarans capable of speeds of up 
to 50mph. Cats may fly. They were so far above the water on their foils and 
daggerboards that they could almost have taken part in the aerobatic display 
that preceded the racing.

The Louis Vuitton America’s Cup World Series is a protracted qualifying in the 
buildup to the 35th America’s Cup itself. Points scored this weekend will help 
decide who will take on Oracle Team USA,the team Ainslie inspired to a 9-8 
victory over New Zealand in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/25/americas-cup-victory-team-usa-comeback>
 – they were 8-1 when he was parachuted in to rescue them.

There is about Ainslie the lustre of legend. As sailors go he is right up 
there, rubbing damp shoulders with Nelson and Noah. He has traversed many seas 
since, aged eight, he awoke one Christmas morning to find a second-hand dinghy 
in his bedroom; wearing a duffle coat and a pair of wellies he immediately 
sailed it alone, to a local pub to join his family who were enjoying a festive 
lunch.

His only disappointment on Saturday was failing to make it a win double. He 
said: “We had a really good start and were leading and then we had to make a 
split decision, left or right downwind.

“We made the call to go right but unfortunately the guys that went left got a 
really good piece of wind and made huge gains on us. But the lads dug deep to 
push us through to come second.”

Glowing like Mars after his mighty exertions, he added: “The guys did a very 
good job in difficult conditions. The wind was up and down a lot. We used [the 
big] Code Zero sail a lot today which meant the difficulty level of sailing 
these boats goes up another level, so the fitness and choreography of the team 
did well to get us round the course in good shape.”

The last Battle of the Solent was in 1545, and resulted in the sinking of the 
Tudor warship the Mary Rose. The America’s Cup, the world’s oldest continually 
held international sporting event, was first staged in 1851, and Britain has 
never won it. In that first race, around the Isle of Wight, Queen Victoria 
asked who was in second place as the American boat flew past. An attendant told 
her: “Your Majesty, there is no second place.”
 