
Man Booker prize-winning author Hilary Mantel delivered a spirited attack on 
her critics after the BBC was condemned over plans to broadcast her 
“mischievous” short story on the imagined assassination ofMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>.

Outraged Tory grandees had clamoured to denounce the announcement that the 
Wolf Hall author’s “twisted” fantasy, The Assassination ofMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, would feature in the 
coveted Book at Bedtime slot on Radio 4 in an article that appeared in the Mail 
on Sunday.

In a robust response, Mantel, who has twice won the Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>, claimed her work had been 
hijacked by BBC bashers. “I recognise that this latest nonsense from the Mail 
[on Sunday] is not about me or my work; it’s a skirmish in a war with the BBC,” 
she told the Guardian.

The BBC might have anticipated a brouhaha. There was vociferous criticism from 
Thatcher’s friends and supporters when the Guardian first publishedThe 
Assassination of Margaret Thatcher – August 6th 1983 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/19/hilary-mantel-short-story-assassination-margaret-thatcher>
, in September. The story imagines the killing of the prime minister in London 
by an IRA sniper, who uses the narrator’s window as a vantage point. It is set 
four years after Thatcher assumed office in 1979 – a few months before the 
real-life Brighton bombing that came close to ending her life.

Revealing the BBC’s decision, the Mail on Sunday condemned the work as an 
“insignificant catchpenny squib” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-2873041/THE-MAIL-SUNDAY-COMMENT-BBC-biased-just-foolish.html>
 and wondered if the corporation’s “massive bias to the left”, was responsible 
for it having been chosen for the prestigious slot.

Mantel responded: “A couple of days back I spoke in praise and support of the 
TV adaptation of Wolf Hall, which theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
 will show next year. Possibly this has triggered the bout of froth and bile.

“I do wonder about the journalists involved. The paper doesn’t write itself,” 
she said. “Sooner or later, surely, they must start to feel ashamed of their 
paper’s attempt to bully and censor?”

Both former cabinet minister Lord Tebbit, and Lord Bell, former adviser and 
friend to Thatcher, criticised the BBC decision in the Mail on Sunday  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2873006/Thatcher-murder-BBC-s-Book-Bedtime-Radio-4-ignores-protests-author-s-sick-perverted-fantasy-coveted-broadcast-slot.html>
, with Tebbit telling the paper: “It’s a sick book from a sick mind and it’s 
being promoted by a sick broadcasting corporation”. Bell added the BBC is 
“inevitably going to be accused of political bias”.

Mantel added: “As for ex-politicians who have weighed in: the same tetchy 
commentators who made fools of themselves when my stories were first published 
have been persuaded to do it again. You’d think they’d learn. I was bemused 
when Lord Bell suggested the police should interest themselves in the case of a 
fictional assassination of a person who was already dead. I wouldn’t like to be 
the lawyer who had to frame the charges.

“I am delighted the BBC has decided to broadcast a selection of stories from 
the book. My title story has the form of a debate. It demonstrates how very 
easily history could have worked out in a different way.

“There is no need for me or any writer to justify or explain herself to people 
who have no interest in fiction except when it feeds their dim sense of being 
injured in some way.

“The story speaks for itself, and I stand behind it.”

The Guardian published the story after the Daily Telegraph refused to for fear 
of offending its readers, even after the paper had paid a substantial sum to 
secure the exclusive rights.

At the time, Mantel explained her story was an examination of why Thatcher 
“aroused such visceral passion in so many people”. The author was criticised 
last year in similar sections of the press for describing the Duchess of 
Cambridge as a “plastic princess born to breed” in a lecture on “Royal Bodies”.

A BBC spokesperson said: “Book at Bedtime offers the best of modern and 
classic literature and, in doing so, presents a wide range of perspectives from 
around the world. The work ofHilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> – a double Booker 
prize-winning author – is of significant interest to the public and we will not 
shy away from the controversial subject matter that features in one of the four 
stories read across the week.”

The station’s commissioning editor, Caroline Raphael, pointed out in a 
blogpost that Charles Moore’s official biography of Margaret Thatcher was Book 
of the Week onRadio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> when it was 
published last year.

Raphael wrote: “We believe our audience is sophisticated enough to accept a 
broad range of viewpoints, and we are loth to censor or avoid significant works 
of literature because they might be controversial.”

BBC Radio 4 Publicity said online: “In Hilary Mantel’s mischievous story, a 
knock at the door announces an unexpected visitor who has plans to alter the 
course of history as people know it.

“The stories selected from Mantel’s collection The Assassination Of Margaret 
Thatcher are dark and sharply observed.

“From the middle-class woman with powerful feelings about a former prime 
minister to the woman trapped in her apartment in Jeddah to the two young girls 
who during the heat of the summer holidays venture into forbidden territory, … 
each of the stories deals with psychological unease, and at the same time is 
wickedly witty.”
 