
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> accused 
Donald Trump of “giving aid and comfort” to terrorist adversaries by seeking to 
exploit the manhunt gripping New York after a succession of weekend bombings.


New York bombings: Clinton criticizes Trump rhetoric – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/19/us-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates>
As police captured an Afghan-born suspect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
 they believe is linked toattacks in New York and New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-and-new-jersey-explosive-devices-what-we-know>
, the Democratic presidential nominee urged a targeted approach rather than 
Trump’s call for blanket immigration restrictions.

“We are going to have to go after the bad guys and we are going to get them, 
but we are not going to go after an entire religion and give Isis exactly what 
it is wanting,” Clinton told reporters at a press conference outsideNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City.

 “The kinds of rhetoric and language that Mr Trump has used is giving aid and 
comfort to our adversaries,” she added.

She insisted that Trump had no plan, while she was the only candidate with 
experience of being “part of the hard decisions to take terrorists off the 
battlefield”.

Clinton said she had long supported tougher vetting for people coming into the 
US, but the events in New York – which included abomb injuring 29 people on 
Saturday night in Manhattan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-both-devices-used-pressure-cooker-and-phone-reports>
 – could be seen as a boost to Trump’s agenda, which has included a ban on 
Muslims entering the US and surveillance of mosques.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Jersey%20and%20New%20York%20explosions%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Jersey%20and%20New%20York%20explosions%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fnew-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video&media=>
New Jersey and New York explosions: what we know so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/19/new-jersey-and-new-york-blasts-what-we-know-so-far-video>
Barack Obama was set to address the unfolding terrorism alert later on Monday 
in New York City, where he is attending the United Nations general assembly 
amid a huge police security exercise to combat what authorities fear may be an 
active terrorist cell.


Trump quickly responded to what he claimed was a “disgusting attempt” by 
Clinton to distract from US foreign policy failures by suggesting he was a 
traitor.

“Hillary Clinton’s comments today accusing Mr Trump of treason are not only 
beyond the pale, it’s also an attempt to distract from her horrible record on 
Isis,” said a campaign spokesman.

“If Clinton really wants to find the real cause of Isis, she needs to take a 
long, hard look in the mirror. The decision to remove all American troops from 
Iraq in 2011, which was vigorously supported by Clinton, created the vacuum 
that led to the founding of Isis.

“The only thing we can expect from a Hillary Clinton presidency is more 
attacks on our homeland and more innocent Americans being hurt and killed,” 
added the Trump statement.

Earlier, Trump was quick to link the unfolding crisis with a politically 
charged debate over US immigration policy and the resettlement of refugees from 
Syria that could prove a key factor in the presidential election.

“Clinton wants to allow hundreds of thousands of these same people,” Trump 
told Fox News on Monday. “They have such hatred and sickness in their heart.

“Diminishing the threat the Obama administration has allowed to materialise on 
its watch puts us all at risk and is another reminder that we need new 
leadership in the fight against radical Islamic terrorism,” added a Trump 
spokesman, Jason Miller, in a statement. “Hillary Clinton has backed President 
Obama’s failed Isis strategy to the hilt, and voters should know whether she 
too shares the White House’s troubling assessment of the situation.”

 “We chose resolve not fear,” responded Clinton in her press conference. “We 
will not turn on each other and undermine our values. We are stronger together.”

In his first public response to the attacks, Barack Obama called on Americans 
to show “the entire world that we do not and never will give into fear”.

“At moments like this it is important to remember what terrorist and violent 
extremists are trying to do,” the president said in a televised statement in 
New York. “They are trying to hurt innocent people but they also want to 
inspire fear in all of us and disrupt the way we live and undermine our values. 
So even as we have to be vigilant and aggressive in preventing acts of 
senseless violence, we all have a role to play as citizens to make sure we 
don’t succumb that fear.”

Although not referring to reports of an arrest and leaving details of the 
unfolding inquiry to the FBI, Obama hinted at a possible foreign terrorist link 
behind the weekend attacks.

“We will continue to lead the global coalition in the fight to destroy Isil, 
which is instigating a lot of people over the internet to carry out attacks,” 
he said, using an alternative name for Islamic State.

The president said that while a separate stabbing attack in Minnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/minnesota-stabbing-somali-americans-suspect-name>
 was not seen as directly linked to the New York and New Jersey explosions, it 
too was being investigated as a potential act of terrorism.
 