
One more rose-tinted victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 against Australia on Saturday will make this, statistically,the most 
impressive calendar year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/autumn-internationals-five-talking-points-england-win-argentina>
 in English rugby history. Not once in the professional era have the national 
side gone unbeaten from January to December and only one other England team, 
back in 1992, have done so since 1980. Given the class of 92 played a mere six 
games, Eddie Jones’s squad would have strong claims to be first among equals 
should it happen.

To continue to prosper with 13 men on the field for almost a quarter of the 
game on Saturday suggests Jones and his coaches have distilled a rare team 
spirit. Elliot Daly, the first England back to be sent off at Test level, will 
forever recall this game with a shudder but several of his team-mates will feel 
differently. In terms of revealing genuine character and uncovering answers to 
awkward defensive questions, this was as significant as any of England’s 13 
consecutive wins so far.

England and Owen Farrell dig deep to win 14-man battle with Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
Few teams would have absorbed the loss of Daly and the injured Billy Vunipola, 
key figures in terms of the way England are trying to play. With Plans A and B 
shredded, however, Jones’s on-field lieutenants reorganised shrewdly, slowed 
the game to a more calculated pace and, by the end, it was Argentina who were 
hanging on physically despite their previous numerical advantage. “We want to 
be the No1 team in the world and to achieve that we have to have the highest 
level of fitness,” Jones said, suggesting there may be another “5% or 6%” to 
come.

For George Kruis to last virtually the entire game on his return from ankle 
surgery was remarkable and Courtney Lawes, Chris Robshaw and Tom Wood put in a 
prodigious amount of work. Had Daly not been rightly banished for his mistimed 
aerial challenge on Leonardo Senatore – the French referee, Pascal Gaüzère, had 
a fine game – the probability is England would have won by a wider margin based 
on their superior conditioning and second-half bench impact alone.

It did no harm, either, that Argentina played straight into grateful English 
palms in the opening half-hour, when a little more tactical and territorial 
nous would have made life far harder for their hosts. Was the old maestro Juan 
Martín Hernández fully fit following an early knock? If so he did not look it, 
his erratic restarts making it harder for the Pumas – now outside the world’s 
top eight ranked sides and facing a tougher 2019 Rugby World Cup pool when the 
draw is made in May – to build momentum and pressure.

Only either side of half-time did England wobble, a prolonged scrum-athon 
eventually yielding a yellow card for Dan Cole and a try for Facundo Isa. When 
Santiago Cordero finished off a wonderful sweeping move within two minutes of 
the restart the Pumas were back within two points at 16-14 and the crowd’s now 
compulsory interval rendition of Sweet Caroline – there must be some other 
feel-good anthems lying in the RFU’s pile of old vinyl – had been replaced by 
nervous muttering.

Eddie Jones sets his sights on Australia after ‘outstanding performance’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
As the 13 of England stood behind their posts there were echoes of the famous 
Wellington Test of 2003 when a six-man England pack led by Martin Johnson 
defied the All Blacks. Jones was coach of the Wallaby side who shipped 50 
points at home to New Zealand shortly afterwards – “We got absolutely belted” – 
and understood from the moment Daly departed that he was about to learn more 
about his squad than in the previous two autumn Tests combined. “I was quite 
excited about it because it was an opportunity to do something we hadn’t done 
before. We adapted and were absolutely brilliant at executing the plan to win 
it from there. The credit has to go to the players. They worked it out.”

Paul Gustard, England’s defence coach, was similarly impressed: “It was 
incredible, a privilege to be part of.” Jones clearly hopes “this special piece 
of history” in adversity will now layer on even more confidence and deliver 
more lasting long-term value than simple statistics, even if England do 
ultimately overtake the national team’s all-time unbeaten run of 14 wins 
between 2002 and 2003. Once the outstanding Agustín Creevy had departed and Joe 
Marler and Jamie George joined forces, the set-piece pendulum swung 
encouragingly back towards England and the 68th-minute try scored by Jonny May, 
made simpler by the line straightening and deft passing of George Ford, Wood 
and Jonathan Joseph, put the outcome beyond doubt. The late sending-off of 
Enrique Pierreto for stamping after Marler had illegally held on to his ankle 
also ensured the number of cards – two reds and four yellows – broke the record 
for a Test match.

The most immediate concern for the England management will be how much it has 
drained the stamina reserves of some of their tight forwards. A lighter 
training load awaits this week but the physios look set to be busier. With Daly 
facing a ban, Semesa Rokoduguni or Marland Yarde will return on the right wing, 
with the state of Nathan Hughes’s injured foot also shaping the back-row 
permutations.

Autumn internationals: five talking points after England’s win over Argentina 
| Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/27/autumn-internationals-five-talking-points-england-win-argentina>
The enticing prospect of beating Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
 for the fourth time inside six months, though, should ensure one concerted 
final push. The Wallabies have been more than competitive in every match on 
their European tour and, following their 3-0 series defeat in June, revenge 
against the record-chasing Poms would be particularly sweet. “The 3-0 outcome 
in the summer will be a big incentive for them, I’d imagine,” said Wood. “It’s 
something they’ll want to put right.”

Jones preferred to lob in another of his cricket analogies – “It’s like when 
you score 100 … the next week when you go into bat you don’t get a head start” 
– but Australia can expect to find Twickenham rather noisier than Lord’s on 
Saturday. Aside from the home crowd’s mid-game mobile phone torch-shining 
craze, it increasingly feels just like old times.

England Brown (Slade, 75); May, Joseph, Farrell, Daly; Ford, B Youngs (Care, 
70); M Vunipola (Marler 59), Hartley (capt; George 59), Cole (Sinckler 74), 
Lawes, Kruis (Ewels, 78), Robshaw, Wood (Sinckler, 40-48), B Vunipola 
(Harrison, 39).

Tries Penalty try, May Con Farrell Pens Farrell 5.

Red card Daly 5. Sin-bin Cole 40, Marler 76.

Argentina Cordero; Orlando, Moroni, González, Iglesias (De La Fuente, 4), 
Estelles (Ascarate, 76); Hernández, Cubelli (Landajo, 68); Noguera (García 
Botta, 64), Creevy (capt; Montoya, 62), Herrara (Pieretto, 62), Petti, Alemanno 
(Lezana, 64), Matera, Ortega Desio, Senatore (Isa, 5).

Tries Isa, Cordero Cons Hernández 2.

Red card Pieretto, 76. Sin-bin Orlando 18, Matera 66.

Referee P Gaüzère (Fr) Attendance 81,586.
 