
English secondary schools are dumbing down history lessons or doing away with 
the subject altogether, a group of teachers has warned the education secretary,
Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>.

Representatives of the Better History campaign group met Gove this month to 
express "serious concerns about the steady decline of history's status in 
schools and the weakening quality of pupils' historical knowledge".

Sean Lang, a former history teacher who is now senior history lecturer at 
Anglia Ruskin University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/angliaruskinuniversity> and leader of 
the campaign group, warned Gove that history lessons were increasingly being 
replaced by general humanities classes.

The Historical Association <http://www.history.org.uk/> found in 2009 that as 
many as one in 10 secondary schools had adopted this practice.

Lang said the figure was growing and that he would "be very surprised if it 
were still as low as this" in a year. "This leads to a watered down version of 
all subjects in the humanities," he said.

The Better History group is calling for a radical shakeup of the history 
curriculum in primary and secondary schools. The teachers argue that, unlike a 
decade ago, pupils – even at A-level – have "seriously inadequate" knowledge of 
the topics they study.

The curriculum no longer gives A-level pupils a chance to study events over 
one century, but instead forces them to learn about unrelated topics taken from 
as many as three centuries.

There is no connecting narrative, the group argues. "Courses now not only 
cover much less history than they used to, but the history they do cover is 
often divided into a set of unconnected studies," Lang said.

In a report sent to Gove, the group states: "A-level students are increasingly 
coming through to university with incomplete, often rather superficial, 
knowledge of a range of periods, but without an identifiable period which they 
can claim to know in depth."

The group attacks the "Hitlerisation" of school history teaching, with some 
pupils taught about the dictator at the age of 14, 16 and again at A-level.

"Over-concentration on Nazi Germany and also on the Soviet Union under Stalin 
... remains a major inhibiting factor in trying to broaden students' historical 
horizons."

In October, Gove announced a major review of the history curriculum would take 
place this year, led by historian Simon Schama.

Gove said he wanted to ensure no pupil left school without learning narrative 
British history. He attacked the current approach to history teaching, which he 
said denied children the chance to learn "our island story" in favour of a mix 
of topics at primary school and a study of Henry VIII and Hitler at secondary.

Gove hopes to encourage more pupils to take history at GCSE by issuing a 
special certificates to teenagers who gain five C grades or more in a humanity, 
science, a foreign language, English and maths. This will be known as the 
English Bac.

But the Better History group said pupils should not have to choose between 
history and geography. It wants history to be a compulsory subject up to the 
age of 16, as it is in France.

"Children at 13 can drop major subjects, such as history or geography," Lang 
said. "There is something fundamentally wrong with that. We are one of very few 
countries in the world where we let this happen."

A study by the Historical Association from 2009 found that 31% of state school 
pupils take history GCSE.

The association also said the history curriculum was too focused on analysing 
sources. Often these sources are a single line from a newspaper, rather than a 
"real" source, such as the death warrant of Charles I, they said.

This meant history classes were barely different to English, psychology and 
religious studies lessons.

"The idea that every lesson should have some sort of source analysis means 
there is less time for actually studying a period of history so we have less 
and less to say about them," a spokesman said.

"Ultimately, we have a subject which is devalued in society. History is part 
of people's identity and if they discover parts of it that haven't been taught, 
they become angry. We have seen this with Black history."

In 2007, the school inspectorate Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> said history teaching placed 
"too great a focus on a relatively small number of issues" and that too few 
pupils gained an overview.

History teachers who were not part of the Better History group were also 
invited to attend the meeting with Gove.
 