
The 20th anniversary of the Opéra Bastille in Paris is marked by a spectacle 
of ruins: dust, more dust and the tottering towers of a city in a grey desert. 
In the Beginning, which premiered earlier this week, is directed and devised by 
the artistAnselm Kiefer <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/anselm-kiefer>
, working in collaboration with the composer and clarinetist Jörg Widmann.

The music rustles like dry leaves, rattles like a bag of bones. There are 
parched yelps, like jackals among the ruins, and crescendos and musical crises 
that seem to interrupt nothing at all. The atmosphere is restrained, yet full 
of portent. There is no singing, only declamatory recitations from the Bible, 
the occasional muffled wail, some low-key humming. Verses from Isaiah and 
Jeremiah are spoken by a disembodied voice, as if one were hearing in one's 
head. It is hard to tell if the recitations are being spoken by Lilith, the 
first wife of Adam, played by Geneviève Motard, or by Shekhinah, Geneviève 
Boivin, who Kiefer uses as a representation of the wandering holy people of the 
diaspora.

The words hang in the air, along with the dust. There is no plot, only 
lamentation after lamentation. "Even the carcasses of men shall fall as refuse 
on the open field, like cuttings after the harvester, and no one shall gather 
them," a voice says. There are images of broken vessels, of a world in ruins, 
of rivers turned foul, and of things that cannot be made whole again. These are 
desolate, homeless prophecies that might make men stop up their ears and drive 
them mad. As Kiefer wrote to Widmann when they were preparing this theatre of 
miseries, a letter that appears in the book accompanying the work, "everything 
has already occurred at the beginning, because the beginning is the end". In 
the Beginning feels like the end of the world.

"I am against the idea of the end, that everything culminates in paradise or 
judgement," Kiefer told me when we met in his studio in Le Marais the morning 
after the premiere. "The communists in East Germany also thought history would 
one day come to an end." History is cyclical, he suggests, "but we need some 
illusions to survive". He is planning a move to Portugal, where he can work 
with the sea on one side, a dying forest on the other. "It's the kind of 
situation that interests me," he says.

Born in 1945 and brought up a Catholic, Kiefer has never been afraid of big 
subjects or complex allusions. He has plenty of serious discussions when he's 
at work, he says, most of them with dead poets – many of whose words find their 
way into his paintings – Friedrich Hölderlin, Paul Celan, Goethe. "I ask them 
what they think of what I'm doing. Mostly it's not very complimentary," he 
laughs.

Outside in the courtyard, huge paintings hang in the open air, exposed to the 
weather. There are seas, rocks, wings, churned terrains, the kind of things the 
artist has been painting for more than 30 years. The courtyard is also 
populated by freestanding white plaster dresses. One has a stack of bricks for 
a head, another sprouts thorns from her décolletage, another is wrapped in 
rusting razor wire. One is called Katarina, another Phryne. The names are 
scribbled on the stone walls. There are never any figures in Kiefer's 
paintings, though names are frequently written on their heaving surfaces. His 
work is full of allusions.

The Bastille project has allowed Kiefer, for once, to work with the living. He 
was first invited to do something for the opera house three years ago, but 
things only got off the ground when he teamed up with Widmann. Kiefer built a 
scale model of his set, and Widman came and played his clarinet. "I told them, 
I can only do this if you give me the whole of the Bastille, not just the 
stage," Kiefer says. Parts of the set are only barely visible from some parts 
of the theatre.

It is hard to know what to call In the Beginning – installation, theatre, 
tableau vivant? It opens with a map of the fertile crescent on a drop curtain: 
Egypt and Palestine, Anatolia, the Euphrates and the Tigris, arcing from north 
Africa to Iran. This is the region where the three Abrahamic religions were 
formed and divided, the so-called cradle of civilisation. And as much as we are 
in Nineveh or Jericho, we are also among the ruins of Baghdad and the destroyed 
German cities at the end of the second world war, what Kiefer describes as the 
last nano-layer of an interminable heap of ruins.

As an installation, we can only see this huge set from the auditorium, but it 
goes on and on, receding into endless gloom. The rear wall of the stage has 
been removed, and Kiefer's desolate landscape of towers continues right through 
the rehearsal studio beyond. Far away, Shekhinah wanders between the buildings, 
picked out by scant light. She listens at windows, passes through doorways. She 
appears far too small and distant to even be inside the building, and is the 
most memorable image in the whole production. "The woman who is running between 
the ruins is a representation of the holy people going through the world in the 
diaspora. I wanted her to come from very far away," Kiefer explains. He sees 
the theatre, like his paintings, as a kind of threshold.

Also on stage is Lilith, first wife of Adam, and a group of women who spend 
most of the performance breaking stones and cleaning bricks in the rubble. This 
is Kiefer's depiction of the Trümmerfrauen, who cleared the stones of Germany's 
destroyed cities so that they might be used again. The noise of the group of 
women chipping awat is both dry and liquid, deathly and weirdly comforting. It 
is hard to know where the noise of their labours ends, and where Widmann's 
percussion begins. "Twelve millennia of bricks are piled up here," reads the 
libretto. The women belong to no time and all times, but they have an acute 
sense of history. "They remember Bomber Harris," he jokes.

But the scene is not intended to be as grey or empty as it appears, says 
Kiefer. He sees the desert as an image for fertility; even the ash that falls 
is fertile. His own upbringing in postwar Germany, with its petit-bourgeois 
Catholic values, was a desert of sorts, he says, and explains that when he had 
a studio in the south of France, he was also in a desert. Maybe Paris is a 
desert, too – a desert in his head. Kiefer has a fondness for metaphors, 
something that makes itself felt in the geological crusts of his paintings. 
"Sometimes", he announces, "I think people are like stones. When we look for 
life on Mars we might not recognise it when we find it." He discussed these 
ideas a lot with Joseph Beuys, he tells me. Beuys was Kiefer's teacher, someone 
whom Kiefer regards as the most important postwar German artist. But they 
disagreed on some things. "Beuys thought mankind was the crown of creation," he 
says. "I don't."

What is evident from the performance is that Kiefer is not used to directing. 
"Having live people is a big challenge, it's impossible," he says. "But then, 
everything is impossible." Kiefer is still working on the production. "I want 
to do more craziness," he says. "Prophets are crazy people." The presence of 
the living on Kiefer's set, it has to be said, is at times little more than 
picturesque. He tells me he wants Lilith to roll and squirm in the dust with 
greater abandon towards the end, when she smashes the few courses of bricks the 
Trümmerfrauen have managed to pile together. At present, however, this 
conclusion to the hour and half-long performance is too abrupt. Admittedly the 
actors have a lot to compete with: a rain of lead that plummets from the sky, 
clouds of ash, an autumnal drift of gold leaf, falling like manna from heaven. 
Ash falls through a doorway, covering Lilith where she rests. Maybe this is too 
much like Beckett in Happy Days, Kiefer wonders. Nevertheless, all these 
interruptions are astonishing, random acts that even the Bible can't explain.

Kiefer, who has a large show coming to White Cube this autumn, would like to 
bring In the Beginning to Britain. An admirer of Derek Jarman's films, he says 
he'd like to work with Tilda Swinton. Where could he possibly stage this huge 
production? He jokingly suggests Piccadilly Circus. I say the O2 might be just 
about big enough, though somehow it doesn't have the right atmosphere. I can't 
see it at Glyndebourne. In any case, it is not so much a question of what space 
In the Beginning could fill, as what fills In the Beginning: it brims over with 
desolation and the words of a vengeful god. It is assuaged by Widmann's 
ravishing music, which lingered with me as the greatest discovery of this 
complex, magnificently flawed work.
 