
A hogweed blooms in the violet breath of shadows on the lane. Where garden 
roses are bred to keep flowering compulsively in a desperate denial of the 
season, thehogweed <http://www.naturespot.org.uk/species/hogweed> (Heracleum 
sphondylium) opens in defiance. In a frosty corner of the hedge bank cut down 
at the end of summer, one flower makes a reappearance.

Late bloomers in the lee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/19/country-diary-hawthorn-dene-durham-late-flowering-rose-yellow-wort-elder-thomas-gray>
The plant will not become a drinking den for butterflies or a dance floor for 
coupling soldier beetles, it’s too cold for all that insect malarkey now. But 
there is sunshine and therefore an irrepressibly hogweedian urge to burst 
forth. Where there’s life …

Under the lane a culvert murmurs with rain that fell in the storm named Angus. 
The brook, whose name is now lost, carries water branded with the new 
anthropomorphising of weather. Suppose all rainfalls were named (not after 
people) and we read them like ingredients in the soil and streams crossing into 
rivers, would we think differently about the land?

The drains flow darkly underground, moles tunnel under wet fields, but above 
the hedges the sun shines with the last of November brilliance.

As autumn leaves fall, subversion is in the air
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/autumn-leaves-fall-subversion-air-country-diary>
This is a bright-as-a-berry day, as golden-as-the-last-field-maple-leaf day. 
It has a mucky kind of cleanliness: fallen leaves over frosted grass, a slight 
brewery scent of rot in air and, clear of misunderstandings, a big blue sky.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhogweed-magic-mocks-cold-snap-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eedee6e2b2f8a6ebfd53d4949c891c5640cdae7%2F0_133_2924_1754%2F2924.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hogweed%20magic%20mocks%20the%20cold%20snap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhogweed-magic-mocks-cold-snap-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hogweed%20magic%20mocks%20the%20cold%20snap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhogweed-magic-mocks-cold-snap-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eedee6e2b2f8a6ebfd53d4949c891c5640cdae7%2F0_133_2924_1754%2F2924.jpg>
 A blue tit on the hunt for food in winter. Photograph: Patrick Pleul/AP 
There are blue tits, great tits and tree creepers in the ash woods; a 
dissatisfaction of blackbirds clucking around brambles, a few leaves glowing 
ruby red with anthocyanins in the sunshine. There are jackdaws in the graveyard 
and, not too far away because I saw them yesterday, a deceit of lapwings a 100 
strong, flouncing with an energy that looked like joy.

Despite the ritual grumbling about winter, days like this are beautiful and 
uplifting; bonus days, gardeners call them. But is this winter? Most leaves are 
grounded but out in the fields great oaks have a brassy glow, their stubborn 
leaves, unstripped, holding out for the last illumination of the year. And 
there is still a hogweed flower, symbol of daft hope, until the flail comes.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 