 Suntan cream, shorts and a guide to Australia's biggest city proved redundant 
this week for a couple who bungled an internet booking for the three week 
holiday of a lifetime on the beaches and boardwalks of Sydney.
As their plane banked steeply before landing, London teenagers Emma Nunn and 
Raoul Christian looked in vain across a landscape of grass, rocks and factories 
for the famous shell-shaped opera house and the Sydney harbour bridge.

Instead, they found themselves skimming over the Dominion steel and coal plant 
of Nova Scotia and the only Ukrainian Orthodox church in Canada east of 
Montreal.

Minutes later, they were welcomed to Sydney, population 26,083, the steel 
making capital of Nova Scotia.

"We had got suspicious when we changed planes at Halifax," said Ms Nunn, who 
studies psychology at King's College, London, and rumbled the unlikelihood of 
their new, 25-seat island hopper taking them long haul across America and the 
Pacific. "I said to Raoul - I can't really see a small plane like this going 
all the way to Australia."

Instead, their Â£740 tickets turned out to be returns to the northern 
hemisphere's main Sydney, an industrial port on bleak terrain like the 
coastline made famous by Annie Proulx's novel The Shipping News. Keying in 
Sydney on their online booking form had brought up Canada's "steel city" first.

The couple were not concerned when the flight turned out to be run by Air 
Canada as the airline includes links with Sydney in its timetable. Flying via 
Halifax, Nova Scotia's capital, also seemed a credible option for the long 
journey to the other side of the world.

Ms Nunn, 19, who lives in Sidcup, Kent, said that the tickets had been a last 
minute buy, and she and Mr Christian, also 19 and from Charlton in south-east 
London, assumed that they had missed the direct route and "were having to go 
the long way".

Only after 45 bumpy minutes in the Nova Scotia commuter plane did the truth 
dawn.

The captain announced that the plane would be landing in Sydney in 20 minutes, 
ruling out the last chance that the couple might have been on some bucket shop 
mosaic of flights to down under. Stuck without any hope of reaching the bigger 
Sydney, the pair settled down to enjoy the different attractions of their 
surprise destination.

"Obviously it was a big disappointment," said Ms Nunn, "but after it sank in 
we both said, let's make the most of what we've got around us." This included 
Centre 200, built to celebrate the city's bicentennial in 1985, and "a 
versatile convention, exhibition, sports and entertainment facility," and 
Wentworth Park which, according to Sydney's lively website, "features a pond at 
its centre which is home to ducks, pigeons and swans".

Mr Christian said they had decided to spend at least a week in the unexpected 
Sydney. "We're having fun. People are being really nice."

Spot the difference, north and south

 Northern Sydney 

Nova Scotia's third largest city, founded by Col JFW DesBarres and other 
American loyalists from New York in 1785, population 28,083

 Top sights Six 18th century buildings,12 others built before 1885, plaques on 
esplanade

 Find out more  by going there or try www.sydney.capebretonisland.com 
<http://www.sydney.capebretonisland.com> 

 Southern Sydney 

Australia's largest city, host to last Olympic Games, population 4,000,000. 

 Top sights That bridge, That opera house, Harbour sunset dinner cruises, Four 
wheel drive tours of the Blue Mountains, including Jenolan limestone caves, 
Take the OzJet, Australia's most powerful jetboat, Chill out with kangaroos, 
duck-billed platypus, koalas at the zoo
 