
Angelina Jolie may not have charmed all the locals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/nov/19/angelina-jolie-bosnia-filming-protests>
 at her most recent filming location but the people of Cambodia, where she shot
Lara Croft: Tomb Raider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77566/lara.croft> in 2000, are said to 
have renamed a temple after her.

Rajan Zed <http://rajanzed.net/rajan/index.php>, the president of the 
Universal Society of Hinduism, told the WENN news agency that the star is so 
beloved in Cambodia aworld-famous Hindu religious site in Angkor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ta_Prohm> has been renamed the "Angelina Jolie 
Temple".

"It's a 12th-century site called Ta Prohm 
<http://www.flickriver.com/photos/tags/rajavihara/interesting/>; it is 
otherwise known as Old Brahma and was initially named Rajavihara or the royal 
monastery," he said. "Now it's popularly called the Angelina Jolie Temple."

The building was the setting for various scenes in Tomb Raider – in which 
Jolie, as Lara Croft, battled a secret society called the Illuminati for 
possession of an ancient talisman. Today, local restaurants sell a Tomb Raider 
cocktail (Cointreau, lime and soda – said to be Jolie's tipple of choice). 
Meanwhile, the actor's son Maddox was born in theSiem Reap province 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siem_Reap_Province> in which the temple complex 
is located.

Jolie's unofficial honour appeared to come with responsibilities, as Zed 
called on the actor to use her public profile and her status as "the patron 
saint of Cambodia" to help conserve the site. He added: "I'd urgeAngelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> to raise awareness about 
better preservation of this world heritage, as more needs to be done to 
safeguard the temple complex and its surroundings [and] save it from vandalism 
and looting."
 