
This weekend saw the news that Oscar winner Octavia Spencer will be taking on 
one of the most powerful roles in Hollywood: God. The star of The Help has been
attached to the adaptation of a best-selling Christian thriller called The Shack
 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/octavia-spencer-to-play-god-in-lionsgates-adaptation-of-the-shack-exclusive-1201447881/>
, about a man who receives a note from God concerning his missing daughter.

It’s a role that Spencer is already “daunted” by. The actress, next to be seen 
in this month’s dystopian sequel Insurgent,says she has “huge shoes to fill” 
and finds the opportunity “overwhelming” 
<http://entertainthis.usatoday.com/2015/03/08/octavia-spencer-the-shack-shoesto-fill-playing-god-onscreen/>
.

Physical godly manifestations have been thin on the ground in recent years, 
despite a huge uplift in the number of faith-based movies, such as Heaven Is 
for Real and Son of God, and even Ridley Scott’s big-budget epic Exodus: Gods 
and Kings used the voice of an 11-year-old boy rather than an on-screen actor.

Given the fervent fanbase for the book (it’s sold over 18 million copies 
worldwide) and the actors who have already inhabited the role (Morgan Freeman, 
John Huston, erm,will.i.am <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kKo0HZzW1u8>), she 
has reason to be nervous. But what can she learn from other movie portrayals of 
God?

The wisdom of Morgan Freeman
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425894238800%2Fb37dc99f-b6ef-44ca-abbc-7298dae0f9e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425894238800%2Fb37dc99f-b6ef-44ca-abbc-7298dae0f9e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An almighty act to follow 
In Bruce Almighty, and less memorably Evan Almighty, Morgan Freeman’s take on 
the omnipotent creator was as Morgan Freeman-y as you’d expect, and for all the 
very best reasons. His commanding yet soothing voice and bottomless pot of 
charisma served the part well, and he was easily the best part of two comedies 
that deserve to be remembered for approximately nothing else. But while his 
performance might have gone down well with the masses, some Christians were 
less impressed, thanks to the film’s“unscrubbed framework” 
<https://www.movieguide.org/reviews/Bruce-Almighty.html> and “questionable 
content” <http://www.cbn.com/entertainment/screen/Baehr_bruce_almighty.aspx>. 
This should serve as a reminder for Spencernot to make any chocolate pies 
during production <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DD9Ua7FuzyA>.

The helpfulness of Steve Coogan
 Religious ecstasy 
While the appearance of God in Michael Winterbottom’s 24 Hour Party People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91616/24.hour.party.people> might be 
another displeasing portrayal for many Christians, things could have been a lot 
worse, given what happens in the rest of the film. Steve Coogan takes on dual 
roles in the drug-fuelled Madchester biopic as Factory Records co-founder Tony 
Wilson and God, seen by Wilson on a rooftop after a particularly strong joint. 
He offers a stream of pragmatic business advice and musical opinion, including 
praise for Shaun Ryder and the Smiths. Given the tortured protagonist of 
Octavia Spencer’s upcoming thriller, let’s hope she can provide some equally 
useful input, especially if it involves her calling Mick Hucknall’s music 
“rubbish” all over again.

The subtlety of Alanis Morissette
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425898074394%2Fd006c3d8-7dd0-4ebc-87c3-1cc34c1134ee-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425898074394%2Fd006c3d8-7dd0-4ebc-87c3-1cc34c1134ee-1020x612.jpeg>
 She’s got the whole world in her pocket. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Channel 
Four Films 
When news hit that Kevin Smith’s Dogma would feature sweary female rocker 
Alanis Morissette in the role of God, there was an expectation, and an 
associated fear from Catholic groups, that the casting would result in offence. 
But the small role was surprisingly dialogue- and angst-free, and Morissette, 
after understandably killing Ben Affleck’s fallen angel, comes off as actually 
pretty charming. The decision to lose the booming voice so often seen in films 
such as The Ten Commandments made for a refreshing change, and although The 
Shack is mainly focused on the conversations with God, Spencer would be wise to 
avoid loud histrionics. Plus it never hurts to featurean exploding head 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tA3dzBrXYtc>.

The kindness of George Burns
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425900719013%2Fcebec7c0-cedb-40e4-bd84-b9654760ef40-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425900719013%2Fcebec7c0-cedb-40e4-bd84-b9654760ef40-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Burns in heaven. Photograph: The Ronald Grant Archive 
At the age of 80, George Burns was an unlikely choice to play the almighty in 
the comedy Oh God! but his portrayal of God as a sweet-natured grandparent was 
a big success. It played into what people wanted to see – benevolent rather 
than destructive – and the film was followed by two sequels and rumours of a 
remake, with both Betty White and Ellen Degeneres attached. While a 
compassionate grandmother might be a bit more of a stretch, Spencer could 
easily pull off a loving aunt.

The otherworldliness of Val Kilmer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901806447%2F35ab5f06-76f0-48c5-8d91-c5f1fff2457d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holy%20help%3A%20what%20Octavia%20Spencer%20can%20learn%20from%20other%20movie%20Gods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Foctavia-spencer-movie-gods-the-shack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901806447%2F35ab5f06-76f0-48c5-8d91-c5f1fff2457d-1020x612.jpeg>
 Talk like an Egyptian 
While last year’s underwhelming epic Exodus: Gods and Kings might have given 
us a glossy three-dimensional take on the classic story, the tale had already 
been told with far more skill on a much smaller budget in 1998’s animated 
musical The Prince of Egypt. In the burning bush scene, the voice of God 
appears to Moses as a more ethereal version of his own voice, both originating 
fromVal Kilmer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/val-kilmer>. It’s a smart 
idea, as it helps to make the advice seem like it comes from Moses’s 
conscience. Kilmer manages to be commanding and godly yet still mysterious. 
Spencer’s soothing voice could suit this style rather well, although a lack of 
musical numbers would be a most welcome diversion.

So in summary...

Thou shalt be wise like Morgan Freeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/morganfreeman>

Thou shalt not indulge in potty humour

Thou shalt provide helpful advice about how terrible Mick Hucknall’s music is

Thou shalt not be shy about exploding at least one head

Thou shalt act like a kind, older relative

Thou shalt not allow any musical numbers involving Mariah Carey
 