
In The Simpson’s epic self-parody episode The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show, 
Homer asks if the cartoon he has scored a role in is “going on the air live”. 
June Bellamy, the voice of Itchy and Scratchy, replies: “Very few cartoons are 
broadcast live. It’s a terrible strain on the animators’ wrists.”

Well, the makers of The Simpsons have just made their own gag redundant by 
announcing that anupcoming episode, to be broadcast on 15 May, will indeed go 
out live 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/simpsons-feature-live-segment-homer-866370>
 – or at least a short section of it. According to the show’s producers, they 
will make use of motion capture technology to allow actor Dan Castellanata, in 
character as Homer, to respond in real time to pre-submitted questions from 
fans using the hashtag #HomerLive.

Simpsons showrunner Al Jean says it’s “the first time that’s been done by any 
animated show”, and there’s no reason to suppose he’s wrong. The idea no doubt 
came about in response to a recent spate of live TV musicals, led by Grease 
Live which went out in January on US and UK TV. (To a lesser extent, it may 
also have been inspired by live broadcasts of theatre shows and operas that 
have saved many cinemas’ bacon in the last few years). It’s a fine way of 
trying to slow down the fragmentation of the TV audience – now heading over to 
box-set binge-watching and online on-demand viewing in a big way.

Of course, cynics may suggest that this is further shark-jumping by a show 
that long ago lost its cultural currency. Accused ofover-reliance on crossovers 
and gimmicks 
<http://www.denofgeek.us/tv/the-simpsons/239794/is-the-simpsons-relying-too-heavily-on-gimmicks>
, or simply ofbeing “craven” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2009/SHOWBIZ/TV/12/14/simpsons.anniversary.end/index.html>
, The Simpsons definitively left its high-quality benchmark behind decades ago. 
However, it’s just entered its 27th season and still gets decent ratings, 
hitting a season high of over 8m in January.

So who to believe? Whether The Simpsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-simpsons> – Live! will get more 
people watching is the name of the game, though I doubt it will stop the long, 
slow decline of the show’s fortunes. I, for one, would welcome a bit more 
messing about with time and space: how about a full-length episode based on 
Homer3, the one where the big man gets trapped in the non-flat world. That I 
would like to see.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnzDZfZ9nW4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnzDZfZ9nW4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnzDZfZ9nW4&media=> 