
The Home Office has revealed the existence of 30 secret files relating to the 
miners’ strike, a number of them relating to the “battle of Orgreave”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/01/what-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer>
 The disclosure has reopened the debate over what evidence home secretary Amber 
Rudd reviewed before rejecting an inquiry into the 1984 violence between police 
and miners.

Responding to questions from Yvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper>, chair of the home affairs 
select committee, Rudd confirmed the Home Office holds 30 non-disclosed paper 
files relating to the strike and brutal clashes between officers and miners at 
a coking plant in Orgreave, South Yorkshire.

Last month Rudd rejected the possibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
 of an inquiry into the violence at Orgreave, surprising and dismaying 
campaigners and thousands of former miners. Cooper had asked Rudd to clarify 
how she came to her decision, what paperwork had yet to be put into the public 
domain, and what documents the home secretary and Home Office officials had
examined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/amber-rudd-did-not-review-police-files-before-orgreave-inquiry-refusal>
 before reaching their decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhome-office-holds-30-secret-miners-strike-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb66dc8b6add328a9118d86679f4f2b81f3c3ac81%2F0_180_3449_2069%2F3449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Home%20Office%20admits%20to%20secret%20files%20on%20miners%E2%80%99%20strike%20and%20Orgreave%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhome-office-holds-30-secret-miners-strike-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Home%20Office%20admits%20to%20secret%20files%20on%20miners%E2%80%99%20strike%20and%20Orgreave%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhome-office-holds-30-secret-miners-strike-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb66dc8b6add328a9118d86679f4f2b81f3c3ac81%2F0_180_3449_2069%2F3449.jpg>
 Barbara Jackson, from the Orgreave Truth and Justice Campaign, said she had no 
idea about the strike files. Photograph: Danny Lawson/PA 
Barbara Jackson, secretary of the Orgreave Truth and Justice campaign, said: 
“We had no idea about these files; we thought they were all back with South 
Yorkshire police, had been sent to the National Archive or were with Margaret 
Thatcher’s papers.”

Cooper said: “We now know the Home Office holds 30 files relating to the 
strike and that [many] are relevant to events at Orgreave. But we still aren’t 
clear how many ... the home secretary looked at before taking her decision to 
rule out an inquiry and how many of the files will now be made public. We need 
answers to those questions.”

Cooper has asked for the subject heading of each file, along with queries over 
whether the home secretary or her officials requested or reviewed any files or 
evidence from the IndependentPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Complaints Commission or South Yorkshire police before making the controversial 
decision.

“I have written to both the IPCC and South Yorkshire police – so that we can 
find out how much information still hasn’t been made public about what happened 
at Orgreave,” said Cooper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhome-office-holds-30-secret-miners-strike-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F541cfc0f9b9146c9717d470064a7da206270f0a7%2F0_21_2199_1319%2F2199.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Home%20Office%20admits%20to%20secret%20files%20on%20miners%E2%80%99%20strike%20and%20Orgreave%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhome-office-holds-30-secret-miners-strike-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Home%20Office%20admits%20to%20secret%20files%20on%20miners%E2%80%99%20strike%20and%20Orgreave%20clashes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhome-office-holds-30-secret-miners-strike-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F541cfc0f9b9146c9717d470064a7da206270f0a7%2F0_21_2199_1319%2F2199.jpg>
 Home secretary Amber Rudd has been asked to reveal which strike documents she 
reviewed. Photograph: Will Oliver/EPA 
She has also asked Rudd what documents from the Cabinet Office she examined 
relating to the 1984-85 miners’ strike, as well as Orgreave. One known document 
concerns the minutes of a 1984 meeting between Thatcher and home secretary Leon 
Brittan, where she appears to press him to speed up the prosecution of miners 
arrested at Orgreave.

After the clashes outside the plant, 95 miners were prosecuted for riot and 
unlawful assembly, offences that carry a potential life sentence. Their trial 
collapsed and all were acquitted amid allegations that officers colluded to 
write court statements.

Arbout 6,000 officers were called in to bolster police ranks protecting the 
Orgreave coking works, with a running battle between officers and miners, 
prompting questions over whether the police used excessive force.

The police operation was led by South Yorkshire – the same force “whose 
culture of malpractice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/hillsborough-families-criticise-police-chief-over-witch-hunt-claim-in-book>
 with impunity” was exposed again five years later at the Hillsborough 
disaster, when 96 Liverpool football fans died.
 