
The BUAV <http://www.buav.org/about-us> (British Union for the Abolition of 
Vivisection) investigates animal suffering in laboratory experiments. There are 
two separate issues: the extent of suffering, and whether the Home Office rules 
have been broken. In her recent Guardian article “‘Shocking’ animal rights 
exposés by newspapers were nothing of the kind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/07/animal-rights-uk-newspapers-buav>
”, Fiona Fox appeared to suggest that, if the Home Office rules were followed, 
it is untrue to say that animals suffered and therefore the experiments must 
have been justified. That completely misses the point. In reality, if the 
suffering is significant but Home Office rules have not been broken, the 
position is more, not less, worrying, since it shows how weak the licensing 
system is.

Through its in-depth undercover investigations, the BUAV exposed the reality 
of life for animals atImperial College London <http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/> and 
MSD Animal Health <http://www.msd-animal-health.co.uk/>, as it has done at many 
other UK laboratories and recently in Germany. Neither Imperial College nor MSD 
challenged the many specific factual allegations, which are all documented or 
filmed. The newspaper stories were not “largely untrue”, as Fox alleges – you 
can be sure that a huge US multinational such as MSD would have sued had they 
been. Neither establishment sought an injunction to restrain publication.

So, for example, at Imperial College our investigation found several examples 
of animals left unattended overnight after invasive surgery; mice had to be 
killed because of the distressed state in which they were found one morning 
(staff comment: “we would have been screwed if [the Home Office] saw those 
mice”); procedures were classified only as “moderate” even though significant 
deaths were anticipated; rats were decapitated by guillotine; both kidneys were 
removed from rats who were left with just one transplanted kidney; and other 
animals were forced to undergo painful abdominal surgery.

Disturbingly, these were licensed procedures, meaning that the Home Office 
regards them as lawful.

However, even the Home Office admits that the culture of care at Imperial was 
poor, and both the inquiry set up by the college (the Brown Report 
<http://brownreport.info/>) and the government’s own advisory body, Animals in 
Science Committee 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/animals-in-science-committee>, 
were scathing in their criticism. The ASC acknowledged that Imperial College 
breached its licence and concluded: “The regime at [Imperial College] clearly 
fell short of the standard required by the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 
1986,” with “a systematic pattern of infringements … “ The establishment 
licence-holder, the Registrar, subsequently stepped down at the Home Office’s 
request.

We also shared our detailed report with MSD. The company did not challenge the 
BUAV’s findings that, for example, tests were carried out on extremely young 
animals, including puppies as young as four weeks and kittens aged eight weeks 
old; rabbits, calves and kittens were allowed to suffer the full extent of 
serious and deadly diseases and there was no overnight cover (we believe that 
deaths and additional suffering could have been avoided had there been).

What the Home Office has done in its reports is simply to say that, in its 
opinion, the researchers for the most part kept within the law. We strongly 
disagree, and will be pursuing this.Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> at Imperial College were, for 
example, often left to suffer even more than already allowed by the licences. 
But the point is that the law allows horrific things to be done to animals on a 
routine basis, and the public needs to know this.

Fox makes the point that 81 animal research organisations have committed 
themselves to greater openness. Unfortunately, the Concordat on Openness is 
vague and non-binding. Our long experience is that research establishments and 
Home Office officials will find any reason to resist freedom of information 
requests (Newcastle University spent an astonishing £250,000 doing so). This is 
why undercover investigations continue to be necessary. Newspapers are right to 
report them, fairly and accurately.

Fox represents the Science Media Centre, whose mission is to “provide, for the 
benefit of the public and policymakers, accurate and evidence-based information 
about science and engineering through the media, particularly on controversial 
and headline news stories when most confusion and misinformation occurs”. It is 
a shame that she has singularly failed to live up to those standards in her 
article. The BUAV was given no opportunity to comment before her article 
containing inaccurate and damaging assertions was published.

There is a crying need for proper openness around animal experiments, so that 
there can be an informed public debate about both the ethics and scientific 
efficacy. We are pleased that the ministerrecently confirmed 
<http://normanbaker.org.uk/category/animal-welfare/> that the hated section 24 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/section-24-of-the-animals-scientific-procedures-act-1986>
 of the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, which is a bar to 
governmental openness, is to go before the election. We trust that Fox welcomes 
that too.

Michelle Thew is the chief executive of BUAV
 