
The Manchester we know is a cheeky city. It’ll tell you exactly what it thinks 
of you. It’s punks, pavements, rain, and “don’t ask don’t get” – all with a dry 
sense of humour and a filthy laugh. It’s the sticky floor of an indie disco and 
a rat-headed band in Piccadilly Gardens. We’re not all from Manchester (spoiler 
alert), but it’s our home. We know it as a place that loves us and accepts us, 
but will always call us out on a pretentious hat.

Guardian and BAC present debate about nationhood at Home in Manchester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/12/guardian-bac-debate-nationhood-home-manchester-homewarming>
We’re definitely not big fish in any ponds yet, more like smallish shopping 
trolleys in a murky canal, but we’ve edged into the loop, what with touring 
about and making friends and connections in other cities. There have always, 
however, been those Manchester people and places that said yes to us when we 
didn’t know anyone, and when we presented them with just a weird art idea and a 
hopeful smile. Places likeIslington Mill <http://www.islingtonmill.com/> (which 
is actually in Salford),Word of Warning <http://www.wordofwarning.org/>, Contact
 <http://contactmcr.com/> and The Future <http://the-future.co.uk/>.

At an event recently at Waterside Arts Centre, theatre-makers and producers 
gathered to discuss the future of Greater Manchester fringe. The question of 
what fringe theatre actually is seemed to thread through the conversation, but 
what was most noticeable was the willingness of people to share what they had, 
be it rehearsal space, contacts or fund-raising skills. We’ve benefited 
enormously from the generosity of spirit in Manchester. Recently we began 
making our new show, Late Night Love, and invited a small clutch of friends and 
fellow artists to a tentative sharing. It was all new, weird and tender, but 
people were gentle with us and stayed afterwards to eat tangy cheese Doritos, 
drink the cheapest wine we could find in the Spar, and give us kind, thoughtful 
feedback.

We feel like we’re living in a divide-and-conquer world, now more than ever. 
The day we began making our first show,Eggs Collective Get a Round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/23/eggs-collective-get-a-round-review>
, was the day that Ukip won seats in the European parliament. God, we thought, 
how depressing. Maybe we can try and make a show that is just, sort of, 
anti-dickhead? Anti-cold-shoulder. Anti-“you’re-on-your-own”. Let’s try and 
make a show about throwing the underdog a bone.

Manchester is a city that is kind to the underdog. With its history steeped in 
agitation and protest, people standing up and standing together, it’s a good 
place for anyone who has ever felt on the outside looking in. For some, of 
course, Manchester falls under the catch-all, umbrella term “not London”. It 
seems strange to us that there is a sort of novelty attached to making 
performance outside of London. An attitude of “aw, bless the provinces”. 
Someone recently asked us why we think it’s important to make work in “the 
regions” – to which the answer is clearly: “Because people live in them.”

The Manchester we know isn’t always gentle. It can turn, and sometimes still 
shakes with the hangover of theGallagher swagger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/oasis>. But for all its hard truths and 
ginnels, Manchester will take you in and give you a chance – possibly with a 
whiskey chaser. For us, Manchester has been the backdrop to our friendship: a 
friendship that sails on love, jokes and house red; on shared joy and whispered 
anguish, and ultimately fuels the work we make.

• Eggs Collective are Sara Cocker, Lowri Evans and Léonie Higgins. 

• Eggs Collective Get a Round is at Battersea Arts Centre, London, from 14-16 
May 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/35905/see_whats_on/whats_on/shows/eggs_collective_get_a_round_>
 andon tour <http://www.eggscollective.com/#!dates/cfvg>. They present an 
interactive screening of the film Big 
<http://homemcr.org/film/eggs-collective-present-big/> at Home in Manchester on 
24 May.

• The Guardian and Battersea Arts Centre present A Nation’s Theatre debate 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/a-nations-theatre-nationhood-and-devolution-16713147474>
 about nationhood and devolution at Home in Manchester on 23 May
 