
Agree with Honeybe@r's choices? Can you suggest some other books she might 
like based on her faves on the list? Email your comments to 
childrens.books@theguardian.com and we'll add them at the end of the list.

Want to tell everyone all about your favourite books? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and email your list to us at childrens.books@theguardian.com

1. Permanent Rose by Hilary Mckay 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340989067>

I love this book because it is funny in a really subtle way, not really things 
that make you laugh out loud but just little things that make you smile! It 
portrays chaotic single parent(ish) family life in a great way. Other books in 
the series like Saffy's Angel, Indigo's Star and Caddy ever after are all about 
her brother and sisters. They are also really good!

2. Indigo Blue by Cathy Cassidy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141317847>

This is an amazing book! I love all Cathy Cassidy books but this one so far is 
my favourite. It really shows how the main character, Indie, is feeling 
throughout the book. It's all about friendships, families, and school plays! 
Indie's best friend Jo seems nice at the start, but once you get to know the 
story, she doesn't seem to be there for Indie when times are hard. I love this 
book and I read it over and over again!

3. Bright Girls by Clare Chambers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007307272>

When I first read this book I hadn't heard of author Clare Chambers before, 
and I would love to read more of her books. This book is fab because it is 
really exciting and funny at the same time. I love the character Robyn (who 
tells the story) and how you get to know her character a lot. Rachel is really 
crazy and so is Auntie Jackie, not to mention the lodger in the attic! This 
book is really exciting and unique, I haven't read anything like it!

4. My Worst Best Friend by Dyan Sheldon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781406304206>

I got this book in an amazing bookshop called Daunt Books on Marylebone High 
Street on a day trip to London. The cover appealed to me instantly, my copy has 
lines on it like a notebook and the title looks like it has been drawn in biro, 
which is cool. It also looks like it has been doodled on in pencil. It is a 
great book all about friendship, you can sort of tell from the title! Old 
friendship, new friendship, reluctant friendship and failing friendship; this 
books is a great read!

5. Kiss by Jacqueline Wilson 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552554411>

This book is told by Sylvie. She has been best friends with Carl forever and 
they always played girlfriend and boyfriend and played at getting married. 
Sylvie has to get to grips with the fact that Carl doesn't actually love her 
anymore. It's a thrilling book and once you've started you just have to finish 
it! It's such an interesting storyline, it pulls you along with it!

6. An Urgent Message of Wowness by Karen McCombie 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781407104645>

Heather thinks she is the "20% random imperfectness" in the family, with her 
collection of roadside-rescued soft toys and crazy hair, but all it takes is 
for her dad to drop a massive bombshell and suddenly her whole family (with two 
new additions - a friendly goth girl inhabiting her brother's room, apparently 
not his girlfriend though, and a new dog) has gone bats! This is a great book 
to bridge the gap between 8-12 fiction and teen books. I really enjoyed reading 
it and I like the cover too!

7. The Pirates of Pompeii by Caroline Lawrence 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781842550229>

This book is an adventure mystery, the third in the series. Although all the 
books in the Roman mysteries are great, this one stood out for me. I like when 
they have been kidnapped and Flavia and Jonathan have been kidnapped and they 
tell funny jokes to make all the other children feel better. This is a good 
book because it shows Roman life through a gripping storyline. I would 
recommend this book to anyone because it can fit into so many different 
categories. History, everyday life, murder (not specifically in this book but 
in other books in the series), mystery, thriller; it easily fits into all of 
those!

8. The Tulip Touch by Anne Fine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780582848894>

This is a spooky book and I felt really sorry for Natalie being friends with 
Tulip at some points. This book is about Natalie's friendship with a girl 
called Tulip, who gets Natalie into a lot of trouble, at school and at home. 
Natalie first spots Tulip when they move to a new place, and Tulip is in a 
field with a little kitten. Natalie thinks she is playing with it, but it turns 
out she is about to drown it. This book in a can't-put-it-down book, it is 
amazing and really exciting. At the end of the book, Tulip does something that 
could potentially be life-threatening to Natalie's family, and their friendship 
is definitely over...

9. Witch Week by Diana Wynne Jones 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007267699>

This book starts when someone in the class puts a note on the teacher's desk, 
saying "someone in this class is a witch". In the alternative world that this 
book is set in, witches are illegal, yet if you are a witch, you are born a 
witch and you can't hep but do magical things. It turns out that more than one 
person in the class is a witch, which is really unexpected. You can never tell 
what is going to happen next and i really enjoyed that. When there is a 
surprise waiting for you on the next page it makes the book really interesting, 
which is exactly what this book does. Another book by the same author which I 
really enjoyed is the Pinhoe Egg so try that too!

10. The Secret Garden by Frances Hodgson Burnett 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141321066>

This is a classic book, and very old. The story is set in the olden days, 
which is a nice change from the main setting of books that I read. Watching 
Mary's character change throughout the book is fun, from a selfish, cold, 
fun-hating girl to a friendly, helpful, countryside girl. Her two friends 
Dickon and Colin help her along the way. I absolutely LOVE the ending to this 
book, it is lovely and beautiful. I would recommend this book to people who 
don't like classics, as I think it would give them a new view of the style. 
Despite the old-fashioned wording, I found this book easy to read, as long as I 
don't read too much all in one go!
 