
Andy Hornby, who suddenly quit as chief executive of Alliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> in March, has been handed 
£450,000 to stop him joining a rival healthcare group.

The surprise payment – equivalent to six months' salary – has taken the final 
pay cheque for the formerHBOS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> chief 
executive to £2.4m.

When he resigned, the company said he would not receive a payoff, to 
demonstrate that the decision to leave was his alone. Hornby had taken on the 
role in June 2009, just months after leaving HBOS following its rescue by 
Lloyds, but subsequently saidhe was leaving to "take a few months' break" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/mar/25/andy-hornby-quits-alliance-boots>
.

Last week, the executive chairman of Alliance Boots, Stefano Pessina, provided 
his own explanation for the abrupt departure of Hornby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/16/boots-chemist-pessina-profits-alliance>
, who began his career in retail before joining HBOS a decade ago.

"Andy was stressed and decided to come back to a company where the workload is 
quite substantial, too early," Pessina said, insisting the two had not fallen 
out. "Every day there are managers who are stressed and decide to take some 
time off," he added.

Pessina created Alliance UniChem, which merged with Boots in 2006. He now 
co-owns Alliance Boots with KKR, the private equity firm.

According to the Alliance Boots annual report, Hornby's £2.4m also comprises 
£842,000 in salary, £750,000 of bonuses, £41,000 of benefits and £337,000 of 
supplements for the 44-year-old's pension.

He was the highest-paid member of the board. Pessina received £693,000 while 
Ornella Barra, chief executive of the pharmaceutical wholesale division, was 
paid £1.2m after bonuses topped up her salary of £463,000. She will receive a 
rise in her basic pay to £485,000 this year after the company reviewed her pay 
against FTSE 100 firms, excluding financial services and the oil sector.

Three other members of the board also received more than £1m – including 
George Fairweather, Alex Gourlay and Marco Pagni – when their salaries were 
topped up by bonuses. They are also receiving pay rises for 2011.

From June 2011, the non-executives on the board representing KKR – Dominic 
Murphy, Mattia Caprioli and Sergio D'Angelo – will receive £65,000 a year 
rather than the current £20,000.

Other non-executives are receiving a rise from £50,000 a year to £65,000. Nick 
Land, a former accountant, receives an extra £20,000 for chairing the audit 
committee. The non-executives are Land, Chris Britton, chief executive of 
Findus, Tony De Nunzio, the former Asda boss who now runs Maxeda in 
Netherlands, and Etienne Jornod, chief executive of Galenica, a Swiss 
healthcare company.
 