
Staff at the hospital where five-year-old Ashya King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ashya-king> was treated for brain cancer 
before he was taken abroad by his parents have spoken about the “outpouring of 
hatred” they received – but said they would act in the same way if the 
situation arose again.

Medical staff at Southampton general hospital told a BBC documentary how the 
torrent of abuse effectively shut down the hospital’s switchboard after it 
“became a story of a hospital [that] was chasing down a family”.

One doctor said he received hate mail from someone telling him they wished his 
own children would get cancer and die.

The hospital came under the glare of the world’s media last August after 
Ashya’s parents took him abroad for treatment, against the advice of theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> specialists who had been caring for 
him in Southampton.

A major manhunt for the family was launched after Brett and Naghemeh King took 
the boy from the hospital without consent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/29/parents-take-boy-brain-tumour-hospital-southampton>
, leading to fears he could die without the specialist care he had been 
receiving in hospital.

At the time, Ashya could not swallow and had to be fed through his nose, but 
the couple announced last month thathe has now made a “miracle” recovery after 
receiving proton beam therapy in Prague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/23/ashya-king-now-free-of-cancer-after-proton-therapy-say-parents>
.

Matron Kate Pye told the programme she would call the police again if put in 
the same situation.

“They put him at huge risk,” she said of Ashya’s parents. “And if you asked me 
again, ‘Would I phone the police?’, the answer would be yes every time.

“Because if something had happened to that little boy in that car, then we 
would have been accountable for that.”

Paediatric intensive care consultant Dr Peter Wilson said the family put him 
and his colleagues in a difficult position, as Ashya had not been deemed 
suitable forproton beam therapy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2014/09september/Pages/what-is-proton-beam-therapy.aspx>
.

“It does put clinicians in an impossible position, because we now have to try 
to explain to families why one child ... is getting a form of treatment, why 
they can’t and they’ve got the same tumour. That’s deeply unfair when the NHS 
is supposed to be about equal healthcare for all.”

 “As soon as the story broke, and it became a story of a hospital who was 
chasing down a family, we were inundated. At one stage, especially on the 
Monday, our switchboard was basically shut because of the number of phone calls 
we were receiving ... vitriolic messages for everybody.

“The overwhelming sentiment was one of just an absolute outpouring of hatred. 
One of the letters said they wished my children got cancer and died.”

Another nurse, Mandy Frisby, said she feared Ashya would die while he was not 
in hospital, as there was a risk that the feed going into his stomach could go 
into his lungs.

The Kings were arrested in Spain after fleeing the UK and spent several nights 
in prison away from their son before being released.

A high court judge subsequently approved the move to take Ashya to Prague for 
proton beam therapy, which was claimed to be more effective than the 
conventional radiotherapy offered on the NHS.

Because the treatment is so highly targeted, it can avoid healthy tissue, 
particularly tissue and organs behind tumours.

The NHS later agreed to fund Ashya’s treatment in Prague.

Ashya – The Untold Story will be broadcast on BBC1 in the South at 7.30pm on 
Friday 10 April, available nationally on BBC iPlayer thereafter.

• This article was amended on 10 April 2015 to update the broadcast 
information.

 