


Nearly 200 London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> hospital service 
workers will go out on strike on Monday, in a dispute which its organisers say 
highlights the increasingly difficult predicament of low-paid people in the 
capital, and problems particularly faced by women and migrant workers.


Those on strike work as cleaners and domestic staff at four mental health 
facilities run by the South London and Maudsley Trust: the Maudsley hospital in 
Camberwell, the Bethlem Royal hospital in Beckenham, the Lambeth hospital, and 
the Ladywell Unit at Lewisham hospital. But they are employed by Aramark, a 
multinational company based in the USA that also specialises in selling food 
and drink at American sports events.

Many of Aramark’s London hospital employees are paid £7.38 an hour, more than 
£2 below the London living wage set by the Greater London Authority. The 
workers on this pay rate also have restricted entitlements to sick pay and 
overtime.

The strikers are calling for changes to those conditions, and a new minimum 
hourly rate of £10. The GMB union has called the strike after weeks of 
negotiations with the company failed to result in a resolution. The stoppage 
will last 24 hours and end at 6am on Tuesday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52352f03e5571433984079c2d238f97c93232de6%2F0_308_5760_3453%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospital%20cleaners%20stage%20one-day%20strike%20for%20London%20living%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospital%20cleaners%20stage%20one-day%20strike%20for%20London%20living%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52352f03e5571433984079c2d238f97c93232de6%2F0_308_5760_3453%2F5760.jpg>
 Hospital cleaners demonstrating. Photograph: Michelle Gordon 
The Guardian has been following the dispute for the last month, as part of a 
new phase of its video seriesAnywhere But Westminster. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/anywhere-but-westminster>

Most of the Aramark employees who have spoken about the strike and their 
experiences at work have insisted on remaining anonymous. The full-time GMB 
organiser in charge of the stoppage is Nadine Houghton, 31. “There’s a small 
proportion of the people who are striking who have been union members for a 
number of years,” she said. “But the vast majority have not been in a union, 
and they’ve never been on strike before.”

Houghton put the proportion of strikers who are women at around 90%. “And 
they’re predominantly migrant workers, from various African countries, South 
American countries … and there’s a couple of Eastern European workers.”

Houghton said that the workers involved in the strike are effectively divided 
into two tiers. Those whose began their jobs under a previous contractor have 
seen their pay rate rise by £1.40 over the past nine years to £7.48 an hour 
plus £2.06 London weighting, but they still have more generous terms than 
workers who have joined since Aramark became the contractor.

Most of this latter group’s hourly rate is £7.38, there is no additional 
payment to reflect London living costs and they are entitled to 10 days sick 
pay a year, which only applies after the first three days of illness. “And they 
don’t get any enhancements for working nights, or weekends, or anything like 
that,” Houghton added. The Guardian has spoken to workers whose monthly travel 
costs alone are £120.

Aramark’s global profits in 2015  
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/aramark-reports-strong-fourth-quarter-and-full-year-2015-results-300180953.html>
totalled $387m (£267m), on turnover of $14.3bn.

The company has so far made the workers two offers. The first would award them 
an extra 5% of the company’s pay costs, to be distributed as the employees 
wanted. “We could have 1% for the higher-paid members and 4% for the lower-paid 
members, or split it evenly,” said Houghton. This proposal was rejected, as was 
an offer of improved sick pay terms, and a 2.5% pay rise for the higher-paid 
staff, with 5% for those on the lower-tier - which amounted to around an extra 
40p an hour.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc03b5c968eb094c05454d48abcd770cf3d4e28c0%2F0_273_5760_3453%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospital%20cleaners%20stage%20one-day%20strike%20for%20London%20living%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospital%20cleaners%20stage%20one-day%20strike%20for%20London%20living%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc03b5c968eb094c05454d48abcd770cf3d4e28c0%2F0_273_5760_3453%2F5760.jpg>
 Workers are calling for a new minimum hourly rate of £10. Photograph: Michelle 
Gordon 
The GMB’s strike ballot opened around four weeks ago. The turnout was 51%, and 
97% of respondents voted in favour of strike action, which means the action 
would clear new requirements for strike actions in the government’s 
controversial trade union bill, currently making its way through parliament.


As the strike date has approached, the GMB has made representations to Aramark 
about what it claims is victimisation of its members. Echoing claims the 
Guardian has heard from Aramark employees, the union has cited allegations that 
supervisors have told workers that overtime payments will be withdrawn if they 
go on strike, and made false claims about workers’ eligibility to participate.

The Guardian put these allegations to Aramark via its PR representatives, in 
addition to questions about the company’s unwillingness to meet its employees’ 
demands on pay and conditions.

A statement from the company, which is based in Philadelphia, did not address 
these points. It said: “Aramark is committed to treating all of its employees 
with respect and dignity. That includes offering competitive wages. It is 
disappointing that the GMB rejected our fair and comprehensive offer and that 
some members plan to exercise their right to action in the form of a strike. We 
remain intent on reaching a mutually agreed resolution … We regret in advance 
any inconvenience that may arise as a result of this action by the GMB.”

A spokesperson for the South London and Maudsley NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Trust said that “it is not for the 
trust to take a position” on the strike. They said that staff who were not 
taking part would “continue to provide essential services on Monday – such as 
meal services and the cleaning of patient bathrooms.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fac0205802b06e8716e0da9c835d80633fce414%2F0_374_5760_3453%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hospital%20cleaners%20stage%20one-day%20strike%20for%20London%20living%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hospital%20cleaners%20stage%20one-day%20strike%20for%20London%20living%20wage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fhospital-cleaners-stage-one-day-strike-for-london-living-wage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fac0205802b06e8716e0da9c835d80633fce414%2F0_374_5760_3453%2F5760.jpg>
 Nadine Houghton. Photograph: Michelle Gordon 
The GMB says it is prepared for more strikes if necessary. “If the company 
don’t come back with an improved offer than our members can accept, we’ll 
obviously look at escalating the action,” said Nadine Houghton. “And that’ll 
perhaps mean looking at a two or three-day strike in the near future. But a lot 
of that will rest on how much money we can raise for a strike fund.”

She went on: “Where there’s the will for union to organizers workers in these 
sorts of industries, it can be done. There’s something fundamentally righteous 
about this. We’re told that the working class is on its knees and apathetic. 
What this shows is that there’s a fightback still there. It gives you hope in 
our movement. We can still achieve things.”
 