
The suspended chief executive of organ scandal hospital Alder Hey has been 
formally sacked two days after an internalNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> disciplinary hearing found her guilty 
of misconduct.

Officials said "there was no alternative but regretfully to terminate the 
employment" of Hilary Rowland, who had been on "extended leave" since March in 
the wake of a critical report into the storage of children's organs at the 
hospital.

The move follows a three-day hearing which concluded the former hospital boss 
had brought both her employer, Royal Liverpool children's NHS trust, and 
herself into disrepute.

The decision was welcomed by parents whose dead children had had their organs 
stripped and stored without consent at the hospital by maverick consultant Dick 
Van Velzen. Pauline O'Hare, of parent support group Pity II, described the 
sacking as "the only possible, just, decision".

Ms Rowland was criticised in a 600-word inquiry report by Michael Redfern QC 
in January after she claimed to have had no knowledge of the full extent of the 
scandal when she should have.

She was also found to have failed to act upon a serious complaint from a 
parent.

 In a statement, a Royal Liverpool children's NHS trust spokesman said: "On 
Monday the non-executive members of the trust board met to discuss the 
implications of the panel's decision to find Hilary Rowland guilty of 
misconduct.

"It was resolved to accept the disciplinary panel's decision and that, in view 
of the panel's decision, there was no alternative but regretfully to terminate 
the employment of the chief executive summarily in accordance with the terms of 
her contract of employment.

"Ms Rowland has been advised of this decision," the spokesman added.
 