
How will you look in 2015? Big-browed, tight-faced and with a large butt, 
apparently, if you pay any attention to the fashion mags and the latest styles 
on the runway at New York fashion week.

Power brow

Big, bushy brows have the power to transform you – just look at Taylor Swift 
who was unrecognisable on the cover of the US magazine Wonderland this month.

The chart-topping pop star traded her pencil-thin brows for “full-on bold Cara 
Delevingne arches”, as US Weekly reported. Michelle Obama is also a fan of the 
bold, bushy look, and the power brow is starting to dominate the red carpet.

 For those who have spent decades plucking, don’t despair. You can simply fake 
it with the help of a good brow pencil and a steady hand. A well-groomed brow 
is like an instant eye lift.

The ponytail lift

 The world’s easiest hairstyle – and one that can disguise greasy hair – is 
also the secret to a younger-looking face. When you stretch your hair tight 
enough it provides an instant facelift (even if it’s only for an evening.) Kate 
Moss, Gwyneth Paltrow and Sandra Bullock are devotees of the sleek and simple 
updo. Butuniversity researchers in the US <http://www.aocd.org/?HairLoss> warn 
to go easy on the stretching and don’t overdo it because the style could lead 
to hair breakage and hair loss. You don’t want to end up shopping for a wig 
instead of scrunchies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhottest-beauty-trends-for-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416442999112%2F8d0e1d42-684f-43d1-a692-ab7c4e31584c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hottest%20beauty%20trends%20for%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhottest-beauty-trends-for-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hottest%20beauty%20trends%20for%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhottest-beauty-trends-for-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416442999112%2F8d0e1d42-684f-43d1-a692-ab7c4e31584c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Actor Gwyneth Paltrow wearing 2015’s tight ponytail Photograph: Mario 
Anzuoni/Reuters 
Brazilian butt lift

Blame the Kardashians for this one – big butts are in. Cosmetic surgeons are 
reporting that since Kim K oiled up and exposed her bare booty for Paper 
magazine, there has been a spike in requests for designer derrières. As part of 
the procedure, fat is sucked from a patient’s stomach, hips, thighs and back, 
then injected into their buttocks. Instead of a lifetime of lunges and squats, 
results can be achieved by going under the knife for a few hours. But be warned 
– it costs more than $10,000 and you can’t sit down for three weeks.
 Kim Kardashian in Paper magazine. Photograph: Jean-Paul Goude / Paper magazine
Cat-eye swoop

Sharpen up your pencil because bold and expressive graphic swoops around the 
eyes are back in fashion. Cleopatra, Marilyn Monroe and Brigitte Bardot were 
the veterans of the iconic cat eye but expect to see it used widely this 
season. For daywear, go heavy on the eyes with a simple flick or a heavy 60s 
influence, but leave the rest of the face bare. At night it is a different 
story – striking, dramatic eyes are perfect with a bright red pout.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhottest-beauty-trends-for-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416443355595%2Fc9662003-9c34-43d0-b71f-eae51161705b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hottest%20beauty%20trends%20for%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhottest-beauty-trends-for-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hottest%20beauty%20trends%20for%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fhottest-beauty-trends-for-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416443355595%2Fc9662003-9c34-43d0-b71f-eae51161705b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Brigitte Bardot was decades ahead of the trend for cat’s eye makeup. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Twiggy lashes

The legendary doll look of the 60s model Twiggy with her lush, black lashes is 
back, spotted on the autumn runways of Prada, YSL and Gucci at New York fashion 
week. For the most dramatic results, use minimalist or barely-there foundation, 
a neutral lipstick and then double or triple coat your lashes, on both the top 
and the bottom (à la Twiggy). The spidery piled-up spikes will give a bold, 
chic statement and stand out from afar. Be sure to have eye makeup remover and 
wipes at the ready for the end of the night.

Negative space nail art

Unlike a full manicure, the near-naked look does not require a base colour 
because graphic designs are painted on only part of the nail with the rest of 
it (the nail) left blank. The trend was spotted on the runways of the spring 
2015 New York fashion week and included cool, striped designs and a cute 
half-moon manicure.
 