
The average employer looks at your CV for eight seconds; they've probably 
received anywhere from 20 – 200CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> for 
the job you're applying to and are sick of reading covering letters and seeing 
the same structure in Times New Roman. This is your cue to give them something 
a little original and innovative.

By embracing tools and technology, it is possible to make our professional 
profiles stand out. Here are some tips on how you can do this cheaply but still 
get optimum results.

Create a hire me page or CV infographic and email it to a selection of 
companies

This would work for speculative applications as well as for designated roles. 
It grabs the employer's attention because you're giving them more than an 
average two-page print out. This particularly plays to your advantage if you're 
working in a competitive industry, such as television or journalism. But don't 
underestimate it's power elsewhere – it's a great way to be noticed for 
creative or marketing roles too.

Make sure it is well designed though – using the brush tool on paint won't cut 
it. If you're not creative, pay a creative designer friend or promise to buy 
their beer for a month. Here's anexample of what you can do 
<http://www.behance.net/gallery/Resume/482880>.

Create a hire me Facebook page and invite friends and contacts to spread the 
word

You might not know anyone who knows about a job vacancy, but friends of 
friends might. Don't be shy about inviting everyone and anyone on your friends 
list, you never know who might be the vital connection.

Create a YouTube covering letter and tweet the link

If you want to get really creative, this is a great option. But be warned: 
putting together an exciting video CV and covering letter can either go 
brilliantly well or completely wrong.

You'll want to make it impressive, but also modest. Sarah Wood of UnRuly Media 
<http://www.unrulymedia.com/> recalls one of the best applications they 
received: "One candidate for a campaign manager position did a spoof of the Old 
Spice 'Man Your Man Could Smell Like' ad – a campaign we worked on. He filmed 
it in the shower and it went something like: 'Look at your campaign manager. 
Now look back at me. I could be your campaign manager if you brought me in for 
an interview.' It made the whole team smile. And we all want to work with 
people who make us smile, right?'"

Here's another example of how you could do it: 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHRHFEDyHIsc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHRHFEDyHIsc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHRHFEDyHIsc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Interact with the brands you love on all social platforms

Anyone and everyone can do this, no matter what your industry. Interacting 
with brands and companies online means they'll get to know you as someone who 
contributes to discussions and is active in the community.

Facebook and Twitter are incredibly helpful here as the social aspect means 
you can show some personality. Be personal too – if you find out they've signed 
a new client, congratulate them. If they post a good blog, share it. Keep it 
professional and friendly and you'll soon be on their radar.

Also sign up to their Linkedin and network with them. Sarah Wood, a co-founder 
of Unruly Media says this is crucial: "Attend networking events, get active on 
LinkedIn and be always be tenacious about it."

Start a blog that is directly related to your field

A blog shows that you're active in the industry and enthusiastic about working 
and building your professional profile. Make the blog something relevant to the 
field you want to work in and keep it updated so that at any one time you look 
active and engaging.

Start pitching freelance work in the field

Do you work in an industry where your skills can convert into freelance 
prospects? If so, why not do some freelance work as you job hunt? Websites such 
asText Broker <http://www.textbroker.co.uk/>, 99 Designs 
<http://99designs.co.uk/> and People Per Hour <http://www.peopleperhour.com/> 
all offer freelancers opportunities for paid work. By keeping your skills 
active while job hunting you'll be building experience, your CV and your 
confidence.

Look in the right places

There are plenty of niche job sites out there that specialise in recruiting 
for certain industries; you'll often find those 'harder-to-hear-about-jobs' on 
these sites. Find a niche job site and keep your eye on their listings.

These are just a few examples of how you can boost your chances of employment 
by taking advantage of technology and the online world. Remember though, it's 
better to perfect one or two of these techniques than to try them all at once 
and spread yourself too thin. Not every idea will match your skillset or 
personality, so have a think about which suits you as a person, the industry 
you're in, and the role and company you'll be applying to.

Elle-Rose Williams is a freelance writer and social media manager working in 
online marketing. She currently works with a London based company called
Electric Dialogue <http://www.electricdialogue.com/> — and got her interview 
with them by sending a rather honest and unusual email

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 