
As much as we’re living in an age of anything, and not just floating 
pointlessly through the unpunctuated infinity of time, we’re living in an age 
of nostalgia. In the last six months alone, Craig David has released two Top 40 
singles, pre-production has begun on a trilogy of Tetris movies, Drake has 
boasted on his double platinum-selling album Views that he’s “made a career off 
reminiscing”, and Absolutely Fabulous has proven a runaway success at the UK 
box office.

Scores of articles have been written to bemoan this upsurge of nostalgia, and 
even they seem built on a nostalgic premise: “Remember when our culture wasn’t 
hamstrung by a tendency towards wistful self-reflection? Man, those were the 
days.”

Is Ghostbusters the unfortunate victim of Hollywood hitting peak reboot?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/10/ghostbusters-reboot-hollywood-paul-feig-bill-murray>
It’s not hard to imagine why ours might be a uniquely nostalgic era. The 
internet has concentrated our perception of what’s new, but it’s also given us 
countless ways to revisit the old. No longer is nostalgia something that 
catches us by surprise. Now it’s something we consciously seek out. Next time 
you’re out with a group of friends, try vaguely describing a cartoon from your 
childhood featuring a girl in a beret and her magic pencil. I guarantee you 
someone will be playing the Penny Crayon theme tune out of their phone before 
the evening’s up. Our pop-cultural past is now just a Google search away, and 
that immediacy has turned nostalgia into the dominant cultural force.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw3ugHP-yZXw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw3ugHP-yZXw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw3ugHP-yZXw&media=>
As all but the most devout of Carthusian monks will by now be aware, a certain 
section of the internet has been up in arms lately because the forthcoming 
reboot ofGhostbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters>, though 
directed by a man, stars four women who are not men. It therefore represents 
not just a flagrant act of reverse sexism but an existential threat to the 
original movie, copies of which are set to disappear in a puff of misandrist 
smoke once the new film is released next week.

YouTuber James Rolfe made waves by declaring he wouldn’t be seeing the reboot, 
not because of its female cast you understand but because “it is piggy-backing 
on the name” of the 1984 original. This is a patently ridiculous argument. If 
there was ever a time when Ghostbusters — one of the most heavily merchandised 
films ever made — could be said to be untarnished by so-called piggy-backing, 
that period lasted for all of two years until 1986 saw the release of not one 
but two animated shows keen to cash in on the film’s success. Three years after 
that, a borderline unwatchable sequel bulldozed any remaining notion of 
franchise infallibility. And yet Rolfe’s argument resonated with tens of 
thousands of viewers, such is the cultural cachet of nostalgia.

Having recently rewatched the original film, I can vouch for the fuzzy feeling 
it generates among those who first saw it as children. I can also vouch for its 
imperfections. Two elements in particular have not aged well: a needle-drop 
soundtrack that blusters throughout like a kazoo at the orchestra, and Ernie 
Hudson’s absent-from-the-all-white-marketing-materials fourth ghostbuster 
Winston Zeddemore, who’s given so little screen time that the film’s end 
credits can be forgiven for misspelling his name. There’s also the infamous 
scene in which a “sexy” ghost gives Dan Aykroyd a blowjob. I can’t bring myself 
to describe it in detail, but suffice to say it might explain how a generation 
of straight men got it into their heads that the franchise was made for them 
and them alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F912ab1f4da2eae79c4a7f29c51ec5f541df60270%2F14_121_2610_1566%2F2610.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20nostalgia%20took%20over%20the%20world%20(and%20why%20that's%20no%20bad%20thing)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20nostalgia%20took%20over%20the%20world%20%28and%20why%20that%27s%20no%20bad%20thing%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F912ab1f4da2eae79c4a7f29c51ec5f541df60270%2F14_121_2610_1566%2F2610.jpg>
 Craig David: still out there. Photograph: REX 
The net result is a film that gratifies with one hand and unnerves with the 
other. In other words, it’s the archetypal nostalgic object, offering a portal 
to a cherished realm that’s not quite how you remember it. Last year, a writer 
for the pop-culture site Den Of Geek revisited an old episode of Thomas The 
Tank Engine And Friends, and was horrified to discover a grotesque morality 
play in which vainglorious loco Henry is bricked into a tunnel by the Fat 
Controller for the mortal sin of mild self-importance. An article detailing 
this bizarre narrative arc was widely shared by those old enough to remember 
the show, but not old enough to have fully digested its psychological 
monstrousness first time around.

Beneath the absurdity of its subject matter, the piece distilled a simple 
truth: nostalgia is bittersweet. For some, it’s tempting to overlook the Fat 
Controller’s cruelty and declare that the golden era of children’s television 
really is the one that happens to coincide with your own childhood. One of my 
all-time favourite YouTube videos, for example, sees a self-proclaimed 
rationalist named Paul Joseph Watson arguing (and you may want to sit down for 
this) that popular music was better in his day. “This isn’t a matter of taste 
or subjective opinion”, he explains, “it’s an objectively provable fact”. Going 
on to cite a number of scientific studies, he makes a supposedly empirical case 
against Beyoncé, Lady Gaga and a range of other modern artists he happens not 
to like.

That’s the simple approach.It’s a lot more difficult, but infinitely more 
rewarding, to embrace the dichotomous nature of nostalgia, and learn from its 
contradictions. Video game critic Anita Sarkeesian is just one example. She 
routinely enrages a certain subset of gamers with straightforward feminist 
analyses of beloved classics such as Ms Pac-Man and The Legend Of Zelda, while 
reminding deaf ears that “it is possible, and even necessary, to simultaneously 
enjoy media while also being critical of its more problematic or pernicious 
aspects”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6b3dc599b6eab01bba88da0222f78474f034949%2F65_166_4978_2986%2F4978.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20nostalgia%20took%20over%20the%20world%20(and%20why%20that's%20no%20bad%20thing)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20nostalgia%20took%20over%20the%20world%20%28and%20why%20that%27s%20no%20bad%20thing%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6b3dc599b6eab01bba88da0222f78474f034949%2F65_166_4978_2986%2F4978.jpg>
 Absolutely Fabulous – The Movie: positively 90s. Photograph: REX 
Necessary indeed. If re-examining the movies and music we grew up with can 
sometimes feel like looking back at embarrassing photos of our teenage selves, 
then the process at least forces us to reckon with our own fallibility, and 
that of others. If you once considered Duckie from Pretty In Pink a viable love 
interest, as opposed to a psychopathic timebomb, then who knows what you’re 
wrong about now. And who knows what the #NotMyGhostbusters crowd may one day 
come to realise about their own firmly held beliefs.

Stylewatch: Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/18/stylewatch-absolutely-fabulous-the-movie>
Nostalgia is, in a literal sense, backward-looking, but it can be a force for 
positive change. The standout episode of Aziz Ansari’s Netflix show Master Of 
None opened with a fast-cut montage of beloved movies and TV shows, and more 
precisely, the worryingly commonplace moments within them in which white actors 
took it upon themselves to play Indians. This was nostalgia on overdrive, a 
turbo-boost of queasy familiarity that powered the show through one of last 
year’s best half hours of TV, a forthright but nuanced treatise on the racial 
politics of the entertainment industry.

Ansari was inspired to write it after rewatching the 1988 comedy Short Circuit 
2, a film he admired for casting an Indian guy in the lead role. Except, as he 
soon discovered, “the Indian guy was a white guy”, Fisher Stevens. Others might 
have written off the film at that point, or else defended Stevens’s casting as 
a symptom of a less enlightened era. Ansari instead embraced his mixed 
feelings, and channelled them into constructive criticism. I can’t imagine a 
more effective way to move pop culture forward. After all, those who cannot 
remember the flaws of the last two Spider-Man reboots are doomed to repeat 
them. And those who turn a blind eye to Dan Akyroyd’s spectral seduction may 
never see the need for a female-fronted Ghostbusters.

Every generation produces a handful of singular voices whose work seems 
immaculately conceived, owing little or nothing to those artists who came 
before them. But all comedians can’t be Andy Kaufman, all pop stars can’t be 
Kate Bush, and nor should they be. Culture is a collective effort, as together 
we take one step back into nostalgia, then two steps forward into something 
new. If that means finding common ground with the Ms Pac-Man apologists, then 
so be it. The world of nostalgia is full of uneasy bedfellows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e2b707f809b988dee417fa73dde696d0fb17318%2F0_187_3136_1882%2F3136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20nostalgia%20took%20over%20the%20world%20(and%20why%20that's%20no%20bad%20thing)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20nostalgia%20took%20over%20the%20world%20%28and%20why%20that%27s%20no%20bad%20thing%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fthe-ghostbusters-reboot-and-nostalgia-in-pop-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e2b707f809b988dee417fa73dde696d0fb17318%2F0_187_3136_1882%2F3136.jpg>
 The original Ghostbusters. Photograph: REX 
Just ask the bright sparks behind PC Music, the London label specialising in a 
strain of pop that sounds to my ears like Daphne & Celeste played at double 
speed, only good. The label’s acts all have names like Hannah Diamond and 
easyFun, and insist on doing interviews in character, maintaining the demeanour 
of empty-headed industry sock puppets. Rather than critique the vacuity of 90s 
chart pop from a position of contempt though, they thread their criticisms 
through an honest, affectionate tribute.

It’s a difficult balance to strike, but get it right and the effect is 
uniquely potent. Take last year’s hit slasher movie It Follows, which brought 
suburban dread into the 21st century despite paying direct homage to Carpenter 
and Craven, or the Avalanches’ new album Wildflower, which resurrects 
everything from Queens Of The Stone Age to The Sound Of Music but still sounds 
unlike anything else. Or even last year’s Star Wars reboot, which stoked and 
subverted the expectations of its audience in equal measure. These creations 
all recognise what so many others fail to understand: that nostalgia is an 
exercise in cognitive dissonance, a burst of pleasure that’s all the more 
intoxicating for the unease that comes with it. Like a blowjob from a ghost, 
perhaps.

Ghostbusters is in selected cinemas from Monday 11 July.
 