
Sixty years after William S Burroughs journeyed into the South American 
rainforests and took the hallucinogenic infusionyagé 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ayahuasca>, the respected neuroscientist Andrew 
Lees has written a memoir telling of how the Beat legend inspired his own trip 
to the Amazon, where he experimented on himself with the potion to further his 
medical research into Parkinson’s disease.

Burroughs’s autobiographical first novel Junky concludes that “maybe I will 
find in yage what I was looking for in junk and weed and coke. Yage may be the 
final fix.” He writes of his time investigatingyagé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/shortcuts/2014/apr/28/ayahuasca-celebrities-usage-hallucinogenic-substance-death-british-teenager-colombia>
, also known as ayahuasca and the “vine of the soul”, in The Yage Letters, his 
collection of letters to Allen Ginsberg.

“This is not the chemical lift of C, the sexless horribly sane stasis of junk, 
the vegetable nightmare of peyote, or the humorous silliness of weed. This is 
an instant overwhelming rape of the senses,” Burroughs would write to Ginsberg 
on 8 July 1953. Two days later, he would write from Lima: “Yage is space-time 
travel. The room seems to shake and vibrate with motion … You make migrations, 
incredible journeys through deserts and jungles and mountains.”
 Professor Andrew Lees. Photograph: PR 
In Mentored By a Madman: The William Burroughs Experiment 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mentored-by-a-madman.html>, Lees, a professor 
at UCL’s Institute of Neurology, writes of how in 2013 he followed Burroughs to 
the rainforest. In his mid-60s, he experimented with yagé himself and gained 
new insights that encouraged him to pursue new lines of research.

“Hallucinogenic molecules could open up frightening new vistas of exploration 
and if Burroughs was right, my trip to the Amazon would lead me to unimagined 
cures. I wanted to see whether yagé could infuse my monochromatic research 
canvas and open up vivid new scientific perspectives,” he writes in the memoir, 
which has just been published by Notting Hill Editions.

Lees takes the narcotic, which is made with a mix of the vine Banisteriopsis 
caapi and other plants. “Yellow and green iridescent zigzag spectra and indigo 
and argent helices are under my eyes, ultramarine charges come out of my arms. 
Jungles glide past and I see vast rivers of land accelerating past locked 
shorelines,” he writes.

He decided, on his return to the UK, to reinvestigate Banisteriopsis caapi as 
a medicine. “I had been chasing my tail, stuck in a rut and missing the way 
forward. I was now determined to force Nature to unveil herself in response to 
my questions,” he writes, going on to reveal how, with colleagues at King’s 
College, London, he began to examine whether yagé could reverse the signs of 
Parkinson’s disease in artificially afflicted marmosets, and to plan a possible 
clinical trial.

I suppose taking yagé for the first time in your mid-60s is a bit more 
interesting than when you’re 18
Andrew Lees 
“Perhaps yagé would one day take its place alongside the other treatments for 
Parkinson’s disease, and the stunning magnificence of its phosphenes would 
increase inner space exploration,” he writes. “It might also aid the human 
spirit to comprehend its true transcendent nature and eliminate all fear. I 
felt sure, after my own experience, that there was something in it.”

Lees, who is the most cited researcher in Parkinson’s disease studies 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/slms/slms-news/neuroscience/11061501> and in 2006 
won the American Academy of Neurology’s Movement Disorders research award for 
his outstanding work in the field, credits Burroughs with keeping him to his 
medical studies in the 1960s.

He picked up a copy of Naked Lunch in 1969, feeling disillusioned with the 
conformity of medicine, and found, he writes, that “Burroughs had opened a 
crystal door that led to the moon”.

“Towards the end of my studies, I was becoming quite disenchanted with 
medicine, partly because of the paternalistic attitudes which were prevalent at 
the time. I’d almost dispensed with medicine, but I made – it sounds 
fantastical – but I feel I made a Mephistophelian pact with Burroughs. He 
wanted to be a doctor, but dropped out. The friends of his who are still alive 
that I’ve spoken to said he probably would have killed hundreds of people if he 
had ever qualified. We agreed that he’d let me complete my medical studies, 
provided I continued to listen to him, and not consider all his ideas just as 
wacky,” Lees told the Guardian.

“Burroughs started by going into the rainforest and experimenting with drugs. 
He wanted to be a doctor and ended up a great writer. I went into medicine, and 
in the twilight of my career finally got to the rainforest. I’d had the chance 
to take LSD in the 1960s and I’d been pretty scared to do it. I suppose taking 
yagé for the first time in your mid-60s is a bit more interesting than when 
you’re 18. It gave me courage and broke down certain rigid structures that were 
blocking innovations in Parkinson’s disease research.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fhow-william-burroughss-drug-experiments-helped-neurology-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d78c4056c723b15d1153c26b4f4a63850dc8ffa%2F0_205_2161_1296%2F2161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20William%20Burroughs's%20drug%20experiments%20helped%20neurology%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fhow-william-burroughss-drug-experiments-helped-neurology-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20William%20Burroughs%27s%20drug%20experiments%20helped%20neurology%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fhow-william-burroughss-drug-experiments-helped-neurology-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d78c4056c723b15d1153c26b4f4a63850dc8ffa%2F0_205_2161_1296%2F2161.jpg>
 Author William S. Burroughs, pictured with his typewriter in 1959. Photograph: 
Loomis Dean/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
Lees said that Burroughs “offered his brain up as a petri dish for brain 
research”. “His scientific explorations with mind-altering drugs madeTimothy 
Leary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jun/18/timothy-leary-papers-sale-lsd>
 look like a pussycat and also exposed him as a most unscientific individual. 
Burroughs was very opposed to Leary’s call to people to ‘turn on, tune in and 
drop out’. Burroughs had tried every single psychedelic drug before Leary came 
on the scene and he had a very honest, detailed approach to the experiments he 
was doing on himself.”

The author’s investigations, he said, “encouraged me to self-experiment with 
the drugs that I planned to try in patients with Parkinson’s disease”.

“This approach is now denigrated as subjective, meaningless, biased, n=1 
research, despite its very noble tradition in experimental medicine and the 
success of maverick physicians,” said Lees, pointing to “the latest example” of 
its importance: “Barry Marshall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2005/oct/03/research.highereducation>’s 
discovery of Helicobacter pylori as a cause for peptic ulcers by drinking a 
potion rich in H. pylori himself”.

I suspect Burroughs would have been pleased that a medical scientist took his 
views seriously
Andrew Lees 
In his memoir, Lees writes that Burroughs “encouraged me to get away from 
concrete thinking, float in outer space and to run alongside a beam of light … 
He also reminded me that research should not be limited to institutions and 
that scientists must find new ways to regain the power to explore. He had added 
a strange grace to my research that had helped me to fly crookedly in my 
curiosity for cures.”

If Parkinson’s disease is to be cured, Lees said, “we do need more freedom 
from red tape, [and] bean-counting control … The problems we are having doing 
research, which are partly societal, and to do with risk aversion, have 
impacted on our ability to think freely and come up with unusual ideas. They 
are part of my reason for writing [the memoir].

The neurologist never met his mentor Burroughs, and wishes he had. “Despite 
his sinister appearance and spooky voice, he was a very open and courteous 
person in his later years. I spoke before I wrote the book with a lot of people 
who knew him. And I think he would have approved of the sentiments I have 
expressed. Although he was a total outsider, I think Burroughs did want 
approval from the establishment in a sense. His writing got him there and 
eventually he was considered to be one of the greatest American writers of the 
20th century. His relationship with the medical profession was complicated and 
I suspect he would have been pleased that a medical scientist took his views 
seriously and built some into his research programme,” he said.

The forward to the book is written by James Grauerholz, executor of the 
Burroughs estate, who calls Lees “the consummate Watson to Burroughs’ Holmes”, 
adding that “my only reservation about Mentored by a Madman is that Andrew 
attributes so very much of his own medical insight to the effects on him of 
Burroughs’ ideas”.

In a review of the book just published in neurology journal Brain, the 
philosopher and physician Raymond Tallis writes that “it is to be hoped that 
Lees’s fantasia, his ‘plea for open-mindedness and freedom’ will inspire a 
coming generation of clinicians to think as deeply and as widely as he has”.
 