
Following my blogs on how to find a professional mentor 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/find-professional-mentor> and how to become a 
mentor <http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/become-professional-mentor>, 
I've noticed a new trend: reverse mentoring. This involves a less experienced 
or younger person guiding a colleague.

Organisations are increasingly taking note of reverse mentoring. I've also 
been approached more and more by chief executives and board members asking for 
my advice about how to use social media and blogging. Of course, reverse 
mentoring doesn't always have to involve new technologies, although given the 
nature of the relationship, it often does.

Kevin Baughen, director of the charity marketing and communications consultancy
Bottom Line Ideas <http://www.bottomlineideas.com/>, has been both a reverse 
mentor and mentee. He thinks there are many benefits for participants, both 
organisations and individuals, from increased skills to the fresh view gained 
by senior people. According to Baughen, reverse mentors can gain, "an 
appreciation for what the senior roles are accountable for and the challenges 
they face, which helps their career development."

Here's how to become a great reverse mentor:

1. Look out for reverse mentoring opportunities. Many of these relationships 
evolve naturally. Is there someone in your organisation or wider network that 
you often help? Consider how you can develop the relationship further. For 
example, if they often ask you about social media, you could offer to provide 
more in-depth advice over a coffee.

You can also be proactive about finding a mentee. If you've just come back 
from a course and want to share what you've learned, why not offer to talk a 
colleague through it? Chemistry is key, so finding a mentee who you click with 
will make it a more productive experience for you both.

2. Keep the relationship informal. Unlike traditional mentor-mentee 
relationships, which can be structured affairs with clear objectives and 
regular meetings, reverse mentoring flourishes best when it grows organically. 
As Baughen says: "Being able to talk when an individual's need drives the 
conversation seems to result in a more useful relationship." Wouldn't it be 
great to be your chief executive's go-to person for queries about your area of 
expertise?

3. Ensure your organisation recognises the benefits. Whether you are mentoring 
a colleague internally or someone outside your organisation, keep your line 
manager informed about what you're doing and how it contributes to your 
development. If they're external, it would be good to show benefits such as new 
contacts who can help the organisation.

This demonstrates that you're proactive about building relationships with 
influential stakeholders and that you're committed to growing with your 
organisation. Luis Suarez, lead social business enabler atIBM 
<http://www.ibm.com/us/en/>, says that reverse mentoring can "certainly help 
advance businesses in terms of driving results and revenues". If you can 
measure success by demonstrating specific examples where the relationship 
helped, so much the better.

4. Nurture the relationship. Although reverse mentoring is best when it 
develops naturally, the relationship can be gently developed. For example, if 
you haven't spoken to your mentee for a while and you come across a useful 
article that covers the area you've been advising them on, send it to them. It 
keeps the relationship alive and shows that you're still thinking about how you 
can help them.

5. Ask for something in return. While the relationship isn't necessarily 
transactional, don't be afraid to request something that might help you. 
Whether it's insights into how senior people operate or their career advice, 
time with someone so senior is valuable so make the most of what you can get 
out of it. Stuart McRae, a social business evangelist with IBM, agrees: "For 
the reverse mentor, there is the opportunity to get visibility â€“ and 
potentially cultivate a relationship that can provide sponsorship in the 
future."

Reverse mentoring is a fantastic way for cash-stretched organisations to make 
use of in-house expertise and for individuals to broaden their horizons. Are 
you in?

Zoe Amar is a charity marketing and digital communications expert. You can 
check out her bloghere <http://zoeamar.wordpress.com/>. She tweets @zoeamar 
<https://twitter.com/zoeamar>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 