
To create the perfect celebrity couple, all of the following ingredients must 
be included:

Two unbelievably gorgeous people who are each globally famous in their own 
right;

Children with unusual names who are regularly photographed;

Frequent attendance of glitzy events;

Occasional photos of them doing “normal people” things (such as taking the 
kids out for pizza, jogging in Malibu);

Some kind of scandal in the background they have “overcome”;

A constant buzz of tabloid rumours about them;

Publicly released wedding and new baby photos.

Most of all, they must represent something to the public that is far greater 
than the sum of their parts.

Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/29/tom-cruise-katie-holmes-divorce>, 
followed, to a lesser extent, byTom Cruise and Katie Holmes, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jul/02/tom-cruise-katie-holmes-divorce>
 were perfect celebrity couples. Chris Martin and Gwyneth Paltrow certainly 
ticked most of the boxes. At a stretch,Madonna and Guy Ritchie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/21/judge-urges-madonna-guy-ritchie-resolve-dispute-son>
 filled that brief in their time. But Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie were the 
biggest and glitziest of all, with their supersized family and affected 
normality (photos of them eating fast food with his inlaws in Missouri! Her 
lack of a publicist!) contrasted with their actually unimaginable inner lives. 
They were the rare celebrity couple who seemed genuinely into each other; after 
all, such was their initial attraction that it led to a divorce that has now 
been discussed longer than the marriages that both preceded and followed it. 
There was an air of old Hollywood glamour coupled with high-minded cerebralism 
about them that is hard to imagine any other celebrity couple pulling off now. 
Kim Kardashian, for example, tweets photos of her breasts for giggles;Jolie 
wrote a New York Times article 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/24/opinion/angelina-jolie-pitt-diary-of-a-surgery.html?_r=0>
 about her preventative double mastectomy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cceb212f83e4ba1aadd58c5db56d69a6e95c6f%2F0_77_1998_1998%2F1998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cceb212f83e4ba1aadd58c5db56d69a6e95c6f%2F0_77_1998_1998%2F1998.jpg>
 Pitt and Jolie arrive at the Oscars, 2009. Photograph: Kevork Djansezian/Getty 
Images 
The truth is, Jolie’s personal life has long been a lot more memorable than 
her acting (her last truly seminal film wasGirl, Interrupted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/mar/24/culture.reviews1>, and that was 
made so long ago she was second billing to Winona Ryder, for heaven’s sake). 
But the reason they as a couple seemed so interesting, andwhy the announcement 
of their divorce this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
 got so much attention it knocked everything else off the news agenda, was 
because they weren’t just the perfect celebrity couple. Their relationship 
helped to define the 21st-century fame machine. In this sense, it felt 
absolutely right that the announcement of its end should come, not via a 
conventional press release, but through a leak ontmz.com 
<http://www.tmz.com/2016/09/20/brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce-kids-danger/?adid=hero1>
, precisely the kind of sensationalist tabloid blog that didn’t exist when Pitt 
and Jolie first got together but has thrived in the sunshine of their ongoing 
soap opera.

Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie: a marriage that started – and ended – on screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-brad-pitt-marriage-hollywood-screen-by-the-sea>
For all their affected privacy, theirs was a relationship played out entirely 
in the shifting media landscape. When they were first photographed on a beach 
in 2005 playing with Jolie’s adopted son Maddox (“12 pages of new pics that 
prove the romance is real!” screamed the cover of a US tabloid), celebrity 
gossip blogs were in the ascendence while tabloid magazines, especially Hello! 
and OK! in the UK, and Us Weekly and People in the US, were expensively 
battling one another and the web to get the most sensationalist photos first. 
Few were more sought after than anything to do with the Jennifer Aniston–Brad 
Pitt–Angelina Jolie love triangle, such as pictures of Aniston doing yoga on 
the beach on her own (“Poor Jen!” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/jennifer-anniston-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-feud-rivalry-sexist>
) and Pitt and Jolie on (presumably) a different beach looking in one another’s 
eyes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7d2f1f299b071a6aaaecd1cc436a80b04ec0727%2F0_67_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7d2f1f299b071a6aaaecd1cc436a80b04ec0727%2F0_67_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Serious about the planet … Jolie and Pitt at the World Economic Forum, 2006. 
Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty Images 
Between 2004 and 2005 the number of paparazzi in the US almost doubled because 
the nature of celebrity gossip was changing. Instead of knowing-but-cosy 
articles written by columnists – from Walter Winchell, Louella Parsons and 
Hedda Hopper in the 1930s to Nigel Dempster in the 70s and 80s – gossip shifted 
from being about words to being entirely about photos, and no one encouraged 
this shift more than the Brangelina behemoth. They rarely spoke about their 
family life except in the blandest of terms: tell-all exposés would have been 
seen as far too tacky and self-exploitative for them. They were also too risky 
for Jolie, whose iron-clad image control became public knowledge when her 
stipulations about what journalists could and couldn’t ask herwere leaked online
 <http://www.bloggernews.net/17900> (“Interviewer will not ask Ms Jolie any 
questions regarding her personal life ... This interview will not be used in a 
manner that is disparaging to Ms Jolie ...”).

Instead, from the beginning, she and Pitt preferred to make their points 
through carefully controlled photo shoots and notably flattering paparazzi 
shots. Just three months after Aniston filed for divorce from Pitt in March 
2005, he and Jolie ostensibly confirmed the increasingly hysterical rumours 
about their relationship when they posed fora 60-page fashion shoot 
<http://www.wmagazine.com/gallery/brad-pitt-angelina-jolie/all> depicting them 
in domestic bliss while flanked by five little boys who bore a striking 
resemblance to Pitt. The shoot was nominally pegged to the release of their film
Mr and Mrs Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/jun/10/1>, but, 
as Pitt and Jolie knew perfectly well, it was the frisson of the 
are-they-yes-they-totally-are rumours that made a glossy magazine hand them 60 
pages. They happily exploited the public interest while still maintaining a 
semblance of the moral high ground by not actually saying anything. After all, 
next toTom Cruise’s sofa-jumping 
<http://www.posh24.com/photo/1636012/tom_cruise_couch_jump_oprah>, which 
happened that same summer, a 60-page (did I mention it was 60 pages?) fashion 
shoot looked downright self-restrained.

In classic Brangelina style, they didn’t confirm they were in a relationship 
until the following year when Jolie was pregnant, and this made them seem 
loftily above the overexposed antics of Paris Hilton, Lindsay Lohan and the 
rest of the celebrity landscape back then. (Not everyone was wowed by the 
Jolie-Pitts’ decision to communicate by glamorous photo semiotics as opposed to 
boring press conferences: Aniston later said that the fashion shoot proved to 
her that her ex-husband lacked “a sensitivity chip”.)

The truth is, of course, few exploited the world of modern fame more 
thoroughly than the Jolie-Pitts. When Jolie decided to give birth to their 
daughter,Shiloh, in Namibia in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/may/29/filmnews.film>, the Namibian 
government, in a move straight out of Team America, enforced a no-fly zone over 
the coast where the family was staying. Pitt and Jolie invariably arrived last 
at red carpet events, such as the Oscars, thus ensuring maximum photo op, and, 
of course, there was the fascination with their multicultural children, which, 
again, the Jolie-Pitts did little to quell, with their strictly managed 
magazine shoots that sold for record-breaking millions. (If you think the 
Jolie-Pitts didn’t use their family in their publicity, that they were merely 
compromising with the public’s curiosity, ask yourself how many of their six 
children you can name. Three at least, probably. Now, how many of, say, Matt 
Damon’s four children can you name? Even I had to Google that, and I write 
about this stuff for a living. This does not happen by accident.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F436c07d1f7165280498c514cfaa6be74a8cdc21f%2F0_0_3000_2440%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F436c07d1f7165280498c514cfaa6be74a8cdc21f%2F0_0_3000_2440%2F3000.jpg>
 Pitt and Jolie with two of their adopted children, Maddox and Pax. Photograph: 
Dave M. Benett/Getty Images 
This double game – affecting to maintain privacy while actually being entirely 
in the public eye but only under their own terms – is what made them the 
perfect celebrity couple. They conjured up a form of “intimacy at a distance”, 
a term coined by Donald Horton and R Richard Wohl in their famous 1956 paper,
Mass Communication and Para-social Interaction 
<http://visual-memory.co.uk/daniel/Documents/short/horton_and_wohl_1956.html>. 
Most of all, they pulled it off by understanding the world of modern media 
better than the media understood itself. When the two of them needed to get the 
public back on side after Pitt’s divorce from Aniston, and “Team Aniston” 
sweatshirts were outselling “Team Jolie” ones from LA boutiques by three to 
one, they didn’t do it via the traditional means of fawning press interviews. 
As usual, they opted for photos. The two of them were pictured touring various 
developing world countries, with Pitt hugging children in orphanages and Jolie 
meeting victims of the 2002 civil war in Sierra Leone. Suddenly, they weren’t 
the sex temptress and helpless hunk who broke the heart of America’s 
sweetheart: they were the high-minded celebrity couple who were using their 
fame for good and, gosh, who has time for yoga and me-time on the beach when 
you’re busy saving the world?

Jolie, in particular, carved her own narrative for female celebrities in the 
21st century: as opposed to being the lonely singleton followed by dated frump, 
which is the trajectory still accorded to every other famous woman, she was the 
sexual adventuress followed by idealised but still sexy mother figure and world 
saviour. Not even Madonna could pull off that combination successfully. It was 
genuinely interesting to watch her determinedly overturn the cliches, and while 
Pitt may have had the more successful career,Jolie was always the more 
interesting one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/29/angelina-jolie-pit-i-am-on-fire-on-the-inside>
, the brightly coloured bird of prey to his blond mouseburger. Until, that is, 
news broke this week that her family was about to endure the biggest Hollywood 
cliche of all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc89cd761baf9d91c553455f5ffc2abb1b3c112d1%2F0_137_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Angelina%20Jolie%20and%20Brad%20Pitt%20defined%20the%2021st-century%20fame%20machine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fhow-angelina-jolie-and-brad-pitt-defined-21st-century-fame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc89cd761baf9d91c553455f5ffc2abb1b3c112d1%2F0_137_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Redefining female celebrity … Jolie talking at a Syrian refugee camp, 
September 2016. Photograph: Ahmad Alameen/AP 
Celebrities get divorced all the time, but only a few celebrity divorces can 
be described as seminal. The BBC was not sending out alerts aboutGavin Rossdale 
and Gwen Stefani’s divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/04/gwen-stefani-gavin-rossdale-file-for-divorce>
 last year. This is because, like the perfect celebrity couple, the perfect 
celebrity divorce has to represent something bigger to the public, either 
through a media-constructed narrative or through the scale of celebrities’ 
cultural significance. There was Eddie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds’ divorce back 
in 1959, when the housewives’ favourite left America’s darling for Elizabeth 
Taylor, the temptress of her era. (As Carrie Fisher, Reynolds and Fisher’s 
daughter, has rightly pointed out since, her parents were the original Aniston 
and Pitt, with Taylor as Jolie’s antecedent.) Taylor then left Fisher for 
Burton, which led to the next big celebrity divorce times two, as they married 
and divorced twice, while a fascinated public watched two highly public figures 
drive each other mad through their mutual sexual attraction and 
self-destruction. The next one was Cruise and Kidman, followed by Cruise and 
Holmes, both of which were only interesting, really, because of Cruise’s 
weirdness, which became more apparent with each divorce. Some might include 
Paltrow and Martin in this list, with their all too memorable“conscious 
uncoupling” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2014/mar/26/conscious-uncoupling-gwyneth-paltrow-chris-martin-separation>
. But, really, next to the brightness of Taylor and Burton and even Jolie and 
Pitt (well, Jolie, mainly), they are too basic and beige in my eyes to make the 
cut.

The narrative on Jolie-Pitt’s split has yet to be decided, although Jolie is 
already showing her characteristically firm hand on that. Just as adopting a 
child on her own helped to change her image from – and I’m paraphrasing here – 
kinky vampiric crazy lady to benevolent world saviour, so she is at least 
partly relying on her children to control the story. When news of the divorce 
broke this week, her attorney, presumably under Jolie’s instruction, said that 
she had filed for divorce for “the health of the family”. Her manager later 
reiterated the point, telling the media:“Angelina will always do what’s in the 
best interest of taking care of her family.” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-37427605> The inference being, of 
course, that Pitt’s presence was somehow detrimental to their children. If 
being a perfect celebrity couple requires superhuman self-control, coming 
through a perfect celebrity divorce demands an unimaginable amount of personal 
drive.

Rumours about the reasons for their divorce will run for decades, continuing 
to fuel the celebrity machine that they helped to shape and endure. Of course, 
the public will never know the full story, but that is always besides the point 
when it comes to celebrity gossip, where story matters more than truth and a 
person’s symbolism is more significant than the actual person. Jolie and Pitt 
represented to the public, first, a passionate, forbidden love story, followed 
by a heightened version of an intimate, idealised family. In other words, 
theirs were stories more generally played behind closed doors, which is why so 
many people felt so personally invested in them. The end of their relationship 
clearly doesn’t represent the death of love, as many of their fans have claimed 
online. But it does suggest the end of a kind of celebrity that managed to be 
conducted wholly on its own terms, with its own sort of dignity, which is 
already being destroyed in the divorce. The end of Brangelina is news in the 
way that the end of Burton and Taylor was news, not because of what they meant 
to themselves, but what they meant to the public. They knew how to play us 
better, it turned out, than they knew how to play themselves. That, perhaps, is 
the real definition of the perfect celebrity couple, and it’s also why so many 
of them end up as the perfect celebrity divorce.
 