
The British are back! That was one inescapable conclusion of the Venice film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, which 
foregrounded English-speaking cinema in a big way. The Cannes line-up, earlier 
in the year, had a good selection of what we are forced to call "world cinema", 
withBlue Is the Warmest Colour, The Past, Heli and La Grande Bellezza taking on 
the anglophone behemoths (and Nicolas Winding Refn, in his own special 
category). But at Venice, it was a different story: whether it was a quirk of 
the screening schedules, or the programmers' own priority, English-speaking 
cinema was virtually inescapable.

After the hi-tech thrills of the opening film, Gravity, and the pulp-trash 
stylings ofThe Canyons, the collective palate was cleansed by Philomena, the 
affecting tale of an elderly Irish woman and the initially sceptical journalist 
who helps her track down the identity of the child who was taken away from her 
by nuns many decades earlier. That the journalist involved is former Downing 
Street spin doctor Martin Sixsmith adds an odd frisson to proceedings, as does 
the fact that Sixsmith is played by Steve Coogan (who also co-wrote and 
produced the film); Coogan is in dialled-down Partridge mode, but still very 
funny, while Judi Dench simply hits the ball out of the ground in the title 
role. DirectorStephen Frears <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears> 
is never one to blind the audience with flair, but he focuses ruthlessly on the 
audience's tear ducts; with Harvey Weinstein's patronage behind it, it is 
certain to mount aKing's Speech-sized challenge to the box office and Academy 
Awards.

If Philomena exemplified traditional film-making virtues, another British film 
suggested that taking a risk or two could also be worth it.Locke spends its 
entire 85-minute runtime with its camera fixed unwaveringly on its lead actor, 
Tom Hardy: he plays a construction engineer driving south on the M6 and M1 
whose rapidly mounting stress levels are relayed via a string of mobile phone 
calls he makes on his journey. It's not quite a "real time" film, but feels 
fairly close; Hardy, adorned with a furry beard and a stolid Welsh accent, 
switches rather brilliantly between discussions of concrete consistency and 
arguing with his nearest and dearest, and creates a proper tour de force. 
Directed by Steven Knight (best known, perhaps, for the scripts forDirty Pretty 
Thingsand Eastern Promises), Locke is intensely watchable (especially for such 
an obviously constricted mise en scene) and Knight must be as baffled as 
everyone else as to why his film was not competing for the top prize.

That's not the case for The Zero Theorem from adopted Brit Terry Gilliam; the 
cheers that greeted Gilliam as he bounded into his press conference were 
testament to the high regard in which he is held in these parts. I have to 
confess though that, as likable as Gilliam is, I wasn't a massive fan of the 
film: a putatively Borgesian fable about a future-world data-processor (played 
by Christoph Waltz) who is diverted by a beautiful internet siren while waiting 
for a mysterious phone call that might inform him of the meaning of life, its 
points were a little obvious and its ideas undercooked. Gilliam himself 
bracketed it with his earlier dystopian satiresBrazil and Twelve Monkeys, but 
The Zero Theoremis thin stuff by comparison.
 Scarlett Johansson and director Jonathan Glazer at the Venice premiere of 
Under the Skin. Photograph: Elisabetta A. Villa/WireImage 
Jonathan Glazer's first film for nine years, Under the Skin, adapted from 
Michael Faber's novel about a hitch hiker-munching alien loose in the Scottish 
Highlands, has been a long time coming â€“ Glazer's last feature was the elegant, 
mysteriousBirth from 2004. Scarlett Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson> plays the lead role in 
black wig, pixie boots and stretch jeans: how you see it will no doubt depend 
on your perspective. Critical reaction divided along party lines, with 
mainstream industry voices damning ("torpid and silly",Variety) and left-field 
types rather more adoring ("an extraordinary piece of outsider art",Guardian).
 Scarlett Johansson in Under the Skin. Photograph: Jon Mcgowan/Corbis 
Kill Your Darlings contained a fine performance by Daniel Radcliffe as Allen 
Ginsberg, in the latest dissection of the early years of the beat generation. 
Kerouac, Burroughs, Ginsberg and their acolytes have become familiar cinematic 
figures of late, butDarlings does a much better job at summoning up the era 
than the self-involved adaptation ofOn the Road that emerged in 2012. All beat 
films require a spot of afflatus-fuelled frenzy, and this is no different as it 
dissects a still-mysterious real-life killing (by promising writerLucien Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/09/guardianobituaries.pressandpublishing>
, father of Caleb, of his older friend/stalker David Kammerer); but it's 
anchored by Radcliffe's nicely nuanced acting, serving up Ginsberg as a 
diffident, troubled kid straining to break free.

Radcliffe uses an explicit gay sex scene to make the point he's no longer 
Harry Potter. He has some way to go, though, to match Scott Haze, the lead of 
the James Franco-directedChild of God, in shedding his actorly demeanour. In 
the first few seconds we see Haze, as Cormac McCarthy's backwoods outcast 
Lester Ballard, literally shitting in the woods, like a bear. Later in the 
film, in the middle of a howling fit of rage, a foot-long trail of snot emerges 
from his nose. Impressive method acting, for sure; it was bit of a shock to see 
Haze suited and booted, with nicely combed hair, at theVanity Fair party the 
next night. Despite its grubby realism, and the increasingly gruesome acts of 
murder and necrophilia that McCarthy's original novel calls for,Child of God 
may mark a turning point in Franco's directorial career. This, his third 
feature, may be the substantial film his multi-hyphenated reputation has 
promised, though not so far delivered.Child of God has a real down-and-dirty 
style about it, even if parts of it are pretty unwatchable for sheer nastiness.

There was, of course, much more to Venice this year than this small sample; it 
is having a hard time fending off the surge in influence of the upstart Toronto 
film festival, which overlaps it and has pinched many of what would have been 
Venice's big films. Atmosphere, though, counts for a lot in my book, and Venice 
wins, hands down.
 