
In the second part of the series, we'll learn three ways to work sustainably 
in theAmazon rainforest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/amazon-rainforest> and three ways to 
develop ecotourism enterprise in the central-west region.

How to work sustainably in the Amazon

How do farming social enterprises in this region run sustainable, organic, 
fair-trade operations?

1. Connect supply and demand
100% Amazonia <http://www.100amazonia.com/> has found a way to work 
sustainably with the fair-trade farmers of the Amazon. They co-ordinate with 
individual farmers, collect their produce, freeze it and ship it to 
manufacturers around the world that want large amounts of fair-trade products. 
They've recently supplied the ingredients for a specialty beer for the UK 
market.

Owner Fernanda Stefani said: "We are a solution provider. If you want to use 
anything from the Amazon in a sustainable, fair-trade way, you'll be happy to 
contact us."

2. Repurpose Existing Technology
What do you get if you cross Nasa food storage technology with the açaí berry? 
Bio EcoBrazil <http://bioecobrazil.com.br/> has the answer. They are shipping 
freeze-dried, certified organic and biodynamic açaí berry powder to 
health-conscious consumers around the world, and they are seeing the market 
grow.

Leonilda Fagundes, chief executive of Bio EcoBrazil, said: "The international 
market and consumer understand organic and fair trade, and they are willing to 
pay extra for it. Until we started freeze-drying açaí, we couldn't get it to 
them. Now we can."

3. Solve multiple problems
Preserva Mundi <http://www.preservamundi.com.br/portal/> sustainably and 
organically grows products not just for the health-conscious market, but also 
for the agricultural market. Preserva Mundi has two specialities: neem and 
noni. Noni is their organically grown superfood. Neem has much wider repertoire 
of uses.

Director Romina Lindemann said: "With cattle livestock, adding neem to the 
food supply improves digestion and stops the reproduction of pest insects in 
the cow dung. With vegetables, it helps their roots grow stronger and thicker. 
And it has a real effect on reducing the need for chemical insecticides … It's 
amazing to work with neem. You can have better milk, better vegetables, and 
eliminate the insects with a natural product."

Running an ecotourism enterprise in Brazil

"In Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, ecotourism usually 
means tourism in nature," says land owner and business director Roberto Coelho.

Roberto has come to ecotourism through an unusual route: farming. His farm, 
Fazenda San Francisco <http://www.fazendasanfrancisco.tur.br/> is in an area 
called the Pantanal, and it now contains several lodges and a nature reserve.

"My business is agro-ecotourism. My family started this farm in 1975, but in 
1989 we opened it for tourism too. We have 4,000 hectares for rice farming, 
3,000 for cattle and 8,000 for a nature reserve. More than half is completely 
natural, and will remain that way forever."

1. Integrate with farming
Why does Roberto add ecotourism to farming? "Of course, it brings in extra 
income, and I like the integration of the businesses. The men of the local 
families work on the farm, and their wives, who are not trained in farming 
skills, are still able to work with the tourists. For example, in the kitchen, 
providing the delicious food."

2. Incentivise environmental care
Is there a clear environmental benefit? "Because of the mixture with 
ecotourism, farmers have an added incentive to preserve the natural beauty and 
wildlife. If the farmers stick to intensive, monoculture farming, it harms the 
environment, the wildlife moves away, and the tourists stop coming too."

3. Activate unique ecosystems
Ecotourism entrepreneur Modesto Sampaio used to be a cattle farmer, but in 
1986 he acquired an unusual piece ofland <http://buracodasararas.com.br/en/>. 
Part of the land included a giant sinkhole, a natural sandstone crater with a 
very rare ecosystem. He was advised to cover or fill it somehow, so that he 
could use the land for farming. However Modesto had heard that this area used 
to be home to wild green-winged macaws, and realised it's unique potential.

Sampaio said: "The hole had been used as a local dumping ground for years, and 
the macaws had moved on. I convinced the fire brigade, the local university and 
the army to help remove three truckloads of waste from the hole, and a dumped 
car. Soon after, the macaws came back, and so did the tourists."

Now he and his sons have stopped farming and are able to rely entirely on the 
income that the sustainably managed tourists bring into the area. Brazilian 
federal and state laws now permanently protect this site.

Richard Brownsdon runs Inspiring Adventures 
<http://www.InspiringAdventures.co.uk/>. He is a writer, blogger and freelance 
social enterprise marketing and events specialist.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To join the Guardian Social 
Enterprise Network <http://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/>, click here. 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>
 