
It was a Tuesday lunchtime in Druid Heights, a struggling central Baltimore 
neighbourhood, all boarded-up houses and abandoned backlots. We were following 
a team from non-partisan localchurch organisation BUILD 
<http://www.buildiaf.org/> as they knocked on doors and tried to get people to 
vote in theMaryland state primaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/apr/26/acela-primary-live-results-election-democrats-republicans-maryland-connecticut-pennsylvania-delaware-rhode-island>
.

The presidential candidates and their political machines felt as if they were 
light years away: here, a lot of people talked about politics in the context of 
where they lived. The outcomes of national elections seemed to amount to a kind 
of abstract drama. Most people we met supportedHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, but they had no 
illusions about a win for her entailing change in this part of the city. “I’ve 
seen so many great presidents come through,” one woman told us. “I’ve seen 
Obama come through. And our community hasn’t changed yet.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbernie-sanders-baltimore-maryland-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Sanders%20effect%3A%20talking%20about%20a%20revolution%20in%20Baltimore%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbernie-sanders-baltimore-maryland-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Sanders%20effect%3A%20talking%20about%20a%20revolution%20in%20Baltimore%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbernie-sanders-baltimore-maryland-video&media=>
The Sanders effect: talking about a revolution in Baltimore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/may/10/bernie-sanders-baltimore-maryland-video>
This is how the Guardian’s Anywhere But Westminster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/anywhere-but-westminster> 
video series reports on elections, and politics in general. We started making 
political films about seven years ago, just as the UK began to be shaken up by 
a series of interruptions to politics as usual: the rise of Eurosceptic party 
Ukip, the serial triumphs of the Scottish National party and New Labour’s fall 
from grace. We had an instinctive sense that covering those developments 
required some kind of new approach and we shared a dislike of the boring 
conventions of TV current affairs coverage. But having settled on the idea of 
making short films about overlooked political stories, we learned how to do 
things differently in fits and starts.


We really started to get a clear sense of what we were doing when we covered 
theScottish independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2014/sep/17/scottish-independence-political-reformation-video>
 in 2014 and the2015 UK general election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/09/electoral-reform-society-result-nail-in-coffin-first-past-the-post>
. By that time, we had our own set of rules: go anywhere but Westminster, don’t 
follow the media herd, prioritise speaking – and listening – to members of the 
public, don’t script out your story before you start filming, and always 
visually and narratively break away from the conventions of TV news.

Not that we don’t get things wrong: for example, like all the media, we got 
far too carried away with Ukip’s manouvres during theOldham East byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/shock-all-round-as-labour-strolls-to-oldham-byelection-victory>
 in December and failed to see that Labour was going tosecurely romp home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/labour-sweep-to-conclusive-victory-in-oldham-byelection>
. But that experience led to another rule:don’t call elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/07/the-general-election-result-no-one-expected>
. It’s a mug’s game.

This much we definitely know. Across the world, the political moment is 
defined by a handful of key themes.Popular mistrust is rampant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/29/support-europes-mainstream-political-parties-parliaments>
. Particularly on the left, the old monolithic parties are seemingly locked 
into decline. New forces rise up at speed:sometimes they endure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/podemos-revolution-radical-academics-changed-european-politics>
 (see the SNP and Spain’s Podemos) and sometimes they fail to make a decisive 
breakthrough, as with theso-called Green surge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/21/green-surge-party-that-will-decide-election>
 around the 2015 UK general election. At the same time, the insurgent forces 
that power new parties and movements sometimes bubble up through existing party 
structures, as withJeremy Corbyn in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/revealed-how-jeremy-corbyn-has-reshaped-the-labour-party>
, andDonald Trump and Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/28/bernie-sanders-donald-trump-populist-moment-in-american-politics>
 in the US.

All this tumult reflects deep changes in the economy: chiefly, the rise of 
insecurity and precariousness, which endlessly unsettle any sense of political 
stability. To put it another way, if your job might only last for a couple of 
months, why should your support for a political candidate be any different?

The position of the traditional media in all this is telling. Whenever we go 
to places marginalised by politicians and where new kinds of politics are on 
the rise, scepticism about the press and broadcast media runs as deep as 
hostility to orthodox politics.

A lot of political journalists, after all, dress and look like politicians. 
They regularly get in a lather about stuff that can seem absurdly arcane: 
reshuffles, who did what at PMQs and this or that interview on the Andrew Marr 
Show. And when great political sea changes have happened, from the rise of Ukip 
to thetriumph of Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/03/ted-cruz-suspend-campaign-president-indiana-primary>
, too many of them have apparently been taken completely by surprise.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fnuneaton-election-2015-scottish-get-in-with-labour-were-done-for&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430916194235%2FKP_217932_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20view%20from%20Middle%20England%3A%20'If%20the%20Scottish%20get%20in%20with%20Labour%20...%20we're%20done%20for'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fnuneaton-election-2015-scottish-get-in-with-labour-were-done-for>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20view%20from%20Middle%20England%3A%20%27If%20the%20Scottish%20get%20in%20with%20Labour%20...%20we%27re%20done%20for%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F06%2Fnuneaton-election-2015-scottish-get-in-with-labour-were-done-for&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430916194235%2FKP_217932_crop_640x480.jpg>
The view from Middle England: ‘If the Scottish get in with Labour ... we’re 
done for’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/may/06/nuneaton-election-2015-scottish-get-in-with-labour-were-done-for>
It’s worth pointing out that because of a fixation with opinion polls, 95% of 
the traditional media thought that Labour was going to win the election last 
year. At the risk of sounding smug, we didn’t. Thanks to a tipoff from a 
Guardian reader, we were in the bellwether seat of Nuneaton, largely ignoring 
the two main parties in favour of talking to voters. Through those 
conversations, it became pretty obvious that this was not what politicians call 
a “change moment”, and that Ed Miliband wason to a loser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/03/undoing-of-ed-miliband-and-how-labour-lost-election>
. When we spoke to people, we didn’t begin by asking who they were going to 
vote for. We said “How’s Nuneaton doing?” and took it from there.

In March, the New York Times journalist David Brooks reflected on the Trump 
phenomenon 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/18/opinion/no-not-trump-not-ever.html?_r=0>. 
“Trump voters are a coalition of the dispossessed,” he wrote. “They have 
suffered lost jobs, lost wages, lost dreams … Moreover, many in the media, 
especially me, did not understand how they would express their alienation. We 
expected Trump to fizzle [out] because we were not socially intermingled with 
his supporters and did not listen carefully enough. For me, it’s a lesson that 
I have to change the way I do my job if I’m going to report accurately on this 
country.”

The key to the change may be simpler than he thinks. Not so long ago, someone 
on Twitter greeted one of our films with the outraged question: “Speak to 
random people on the street, call that journalism?” To which our answer is yes. 
If an important part of politics is understanding and connecting with the 
public, then that should also be the case for political journalism.

This the basic realisation at which we have arrived. Too many political 
stories, particularly TV news “packages”, don’t feel like voyages of discovery 
and have the same sterility as political campaigns. Add to this an 
over-reliance on polling data and electoral maths, and you end up with a media 
narrative that is as distant from the people as the politicians appear to be.

In its small way, this is what Anywhere But Westminster is trying to change. 
Some of this is down to an underlying, almost unconscious approach: one of us 
doesn’t live in London, which definitely helps. But it’s also a matter of 
knowing that the public are more important than most politicians, and doing 
your journalism accordingly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fapr%2F12%2Fsouth-shields-david-miliband-labour&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Shields%3A%20A%20tale%20of%20two%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fapr%2F12%2Fsouth-shields-david-miliband-labour>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Shields%3A%20A%20tale%20of%20two%20towns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fapr%2F12%2Fsouth-shields-david-miliband-labour&media=>
South Shields: a tale of two towns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2010/apr/12/south-shields-david-miliband-labour>
It also means regularly taking soundings from people who watch the films, and 
appealing for their help. We’ve given a voice to disillusioned Labour voters in 
South Shields, who we found on Twitter. We have been toldthe story of austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2011/jul/21/morecambe-cuts-video>
 in Morecambe after being alerted to the topic by a post on a comment thread. 
We have explored everything fromfan-owned football clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2011/aug/30/fan-owned-football-clubs-chester-fc-video>
 to thecutting edge of trade unionism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/video/2016/mar/21/hospital-cleaners-strike-if-doctors-can-do-it-why-cant-we-video>
 thanks to tweets, Facebook posts and chance encounters on the street.

Now, it’s time for us to turn our attention to the upcoming EU referendum and 
the tangle of issues that will influence which way people vote: jobs, 
immigration, inequality, local and national identity – you name it. Not for the 
first time, we could do with some help, so our two questions toGuardian members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership> are pretty simple: where should we go 
next? Who should we talk to?
 