
I knew a lawyer once who had a reputation in his local pub for regaling the 
regulars with lurid stories about the "scum" and "trash" he had to deal with on 
a daily basis during the course of his work. The fact that he was paid to 
defend many of the wretched characters he despised and enjoyed an enviable 
lifestyle on the back of their misery and dysfunction did little to lessen the 
contempt in which he held them. We, the inhabitants of his local high security 
prison, learned about his opprobrious views in the newspapers after he was 
convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment. He joined us a few 
months later. I remember he cut a lonely figure in the exercise yard.

Ex-Metropolitan police commander Ali Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ali-dizaei>, currently in the early days of his 
four-year sentence for corruption in Wandsworth prison, will experience the 
same kind of isolation if he ever ventures out on to the yard. It is always the 
same for those who set themselves up as judges and jurors of their fellow men, 
but who are then found out to be charlatans and no better than the people at 
whom they direct their scorn. As a former policeman, once graced with a Â£90,000 
salary and a chauffeur, the hostility he will encounter in prison is likely to 
be a little more discomforting than merely being "sent to Coventry", however. 
The lawyer was a pathetic character. He was ridiculed more than he was 
threatened. But Dizaei wielded real power over the type of people he now 
resides among. The way he abused that power in falsely accusing an innocent man 
of assault, and attempting to have the man imprisoned for personal and 
vindictive reasons, gives an indication of his probable attitude towards 
accused people who ended up in his custody by conventional means. This is an 
element of his case that will weigh heavily against him on the landings.

Dizaei's situation is reminiscent of that of a high-ranking prison officer I 
knew of years ago. The prison officer ran the reception of a high security jail 
in the south of England for 10 years with a proverbial rod of iron. He was a 
known bully who hid behind his uniform to abuse and humiliate vulnerable 
prisoners who he was responsible for "processing". Then he was arrested and 
convicted of sex offences against a member of his family. His sentence was half 
that handed down to Dizaei, and he spent all of it on the protection wing with 
informers and other sex-offenders, relatively safe from any serving up of 
"prison justice". But cons still rejoiced. Good to see one of theirs "get 
theirs".

People in prison feel the weight of society's disdain greatly. But the glee 
expressed on wings and landings when mighty personages fall is more than just a 
result of a particular brand of schadenfreude. More reassuringly, it is a 
satisfying reminder that few among us are perfect.
 