
In all conversations about pay and conditions in theatre there is an 
uncomfortable truth: the vast majority of people in full-time employment are 
better paid, and enjoy better working conditions and ancillary benefits, than 
those who work freelance. This truth is exacerbated by the fact that the 
majority of freelance workers are the actors, the directors, the designers and 
the stage managers, without whom nothing could function.

This tension frames an argument that puts the funding of buildings into a 
position contrary to the funding of artists. For me, this way of viewing our 
undeniable and complex challenges creates a counter-productive sense of “them” 
and “us”.


 But then, I would say that.

 I have been the artistic director and joint chief executive of Northern Stage 
<https://www.northernstage.co.uk/> for two years. It’s a great job, it’s the 
hardest thing I have ever tried to do, it’s rife with paradox and I love it.

 This is the first time I have done this sort of job. Prior to taking up this 
role, I have variously been a freelance director, run my own company and been a 
full-time employee of building-based theatres. Northern Stage is an 
organisation with a turnover of £2.85m and a full-time staff of over 30. We 
work with a complex web of stakeholders, partners, audiences, participants and 
artists. We receive £1.6m in investment from Arts Council England annually. We 
spend £1.79m pounds a year on artistic activity, participation and talent 
development.

Beyond this cash figure, we invest substantial further resources – time, 
space, equipment and expertise – to support smaller companies freelance artists 
and community groups. In this way we seek to enable the profound contribution 
these groups and individuals make to the cultural and social life of our 
communities. A lot of our activity generates income, a lot of it does not. 
Those things we do that lose money do not do so because we are bad at business 
but because they are driven by social, cultural and political imperatives that 
don’t score well on a the bottom line.

 As has been the case since I started at Northern Stage, we are looking into 
an uncertain financial future. The autumn spending review will almost certainly 
bring further cuts to the Arts Council. The scale of these could be anywhere 
between a further painful tightening of resources to a cut of sufficient size 
that our current business models and modes of operation will have to be 
radically reimagined.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Ftheatre-wages-lorne-campbell-cuts-edinburgh-festival-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F15%2F1439638016704%2Fc65f7860-40ee-41ef-bb8a-f2b845b120b0-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20we%20keep%20theatre%20wages%20fair%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Ftheatre-wages-lorne-campbell-cuts-edinburgh-festival-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20we%20keep%20theatre%20wages%20fair%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Ftheatre-wages-lorne-campbell-cuts-edinburgh-festival-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F15%2F1439638016704%2Fc65f7860-40ee-41ef-bb8a-f2b845b120b0-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Hashing it out … Third Angel and mala voadora’s The Paradise Project, also at 
Edinburgh this year. Photograph: José Carlos Duarte 
 As the financial realities of our operation become more constrained, the 
pressure on the pay and working conditions for those people we employ 
increases, and any attempts to narrow the gap between how we pay our 
freelancers and our full-time staff become yet more challenging.

 This is, of course, not a black and white issue.

 I am completely convinced that every member of full-time staff at Northern 
Stage is entitled to their level of salary, their holiday pay, their pension 
contributions, their sick pay, their maternity/paternity benefits and the other 
statutory rights that they receive. I believe that full-time salary levels 
within theatre are disproportionately low compared to many sectors.

 As an employer we abide with collective bargaining agreements, encourage 
Union membership and work closely with organisations such as theBroadcasting 
Entertainment Cinematograph and Theatre Union <https://www.bectu.org.uk/home>, 
Stage Directors UK <http://www.stagedirectorsuk.com/> and Equity 
<https://www.equity.org.uk/home/>. Yet it remains true that even our 
lowest-paid staff are better paid than the majority of freelance actors, 
directors, writers and designers. Benefits such as maternity pay, sick pay or 
realistic levels of private pension contribution are vain hopes for the 
majority of freelance artists.

 It has been greatly heartening in the face of the sustained and repeated cuts 
of recent years to see that the theatre sector has responded by becoming more 
collaborative; that building-based theatres are being more transparent; that 
many buildings are genuinely trying to work better as partners with small 
companies and solo artists. The thought that the resources we husband are not 
ours, but exist for a diverse community of users and must be accessible to as 
many as possible, is increasingly an accepted norm rather than a bold outlier.

 If – or more realistically when – the next axe falls on government investment 
into the culture sector (an investment which, let us not forget, is repaid many 
times over in the tax revenues we produce), one of the great challenges will be 
to continue to improve the deal offered to those most underpaid.

 Whatever the future financial landscape looks like, there will be pressure to 
freeze, squeeze and degrade the financial deals we offer to our freelance and 
full-time employees alike. In this reality, one of the key responsibilities of 
buildings will be to accept a role as a champion for the employment rights and 
conditions of all. There is no “them” – there is only a complex and shifting 
“us”.

 In order to find better ways forward, I believe our conversations about the 
questions of investment, pay and conditions are not ones of buildings or 
institutions v artists. Buildings need to explain better how they multiply the 
cash investment they receive; we need to invite and fully participate in a 
continued collective effort to make more, make better and pay fairly for all.

 * Lorne Campbell is taking part in a Guardian Live event chaired by Lyn 
Gardner at the Edinburgh festival on 26 August.Tickets for the event, which 
looks at the impact of the Edinburgh fringe on UK theatre and beyond, cost £3. 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-nations-theatre-edinburgh-the-impact-of-the-edinburgh-fringe-on-uk-theatre-and-beyond-17673564106>
 The other panellists are Charlie Wood, director at Underbelly; Jo Crowley, an 
independent producer; and Ahmed El Attar, artistic director at D-CAF, Cairo.  