
An hour away from the picture-perfect Sydney known all around the world for 
its Harbour Bridge, Opera House and Bondi Beach, you’ll find a very different 
Sydney. Home to 2.1m people, many of whom come from a variety of different 
backgrounds, Western Sydney has earned a reputation as one of Australia’s most 
culturally diverse areas.

Following the second world war there was an influx of European immigrants who 
settled in West Sydney and formed football clubs around the area. Football was 
used to build and anchor communities – way to soften the blow of migration.

These clubs were successful in the National Soccer League and produced a lot 
of players who went on to represent the national team, so it was no surprise 
that Western Sydney came to be known as a heartland of football. However, when 
the NSL was replaced by theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> in 2005, the city was only 
represented by one club, Sydney FC, who are based in the inner city.

Football is thriving again in Juárez, the former murder capital of the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/copa90/2016/apr/01/football-ciudad-juarez-mexico-murder-drugs>
In 2012, Football Federation Australia made the decision to finally tap into 
the football market in the west and set up what would eventually be known as the
Western Sydney Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/western-sydney-wanderers>. With only six 
months to put the club together from scratch before the first game of the 
season, the FFA asked the community of Western Sydney for their input – this 
was going to be the club the people wanted.

The size of the club’s support was not that surprising but their immediate 
success on the pitch was was something else entirely. They finishedtop of the 
10-team league 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2012%E2%80%9313_A-League#Regular_season> in 
their inaugural season – they wouldlose the Grand Final 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2013_A-League_Grand_Final> to the Central Coast 
Mariners – but that Premiers title earned the Wanderers a spot in the Asian 
Champions League and a whole new challenge.

Just as they did with the A-League, they approached the ACL with a plan and 
gave it everything they had. Despite being up against some of the continent’s 
biggest and richest clubs, the Wanderers continued to defy the odds all the way 
to the final. They beat Saudi Arabian club Al-Hilal 1-0 over two legs that were 
played in front of hostile crowds in Riyadh.

Walking around Western Sydney today, every few minutes you spot someone in a 
Wanderers jersey, stickers on cars, and local businesses with flags and scarves 
decorating their shopfronts. The club are so ingrained in everyday life now 
that it’s hard to believe that they didn’t exist a little over four years ago. 
They’ve gone from being a football club to representing Western Sydney on a 
global scale and the community couldn’t be prouder.

Follow Copa90 on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/user/Copa90football>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/copa90> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Copa90>
 