
The clock had just struck four when Al From made his way up to the second 
floor of the Arkansas state capitol building in Little Rock. He walked into the 
office of GovernorBill Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton> 
and, after a few pleasantries, cut to the chase: “I’ve got a deal for you.”

On 6 April 1989, From charged Clinton 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2013/12/recruiting-bill-clinton/281946/>
 with transforming the fortunes of a party that, after three historic election 
defeats, was facing oblivion. Three years later Clinton beat the incumbent 
president, George HW Bush, and ushered in a new era for the party: one in which 
Democrats won the White House more often than they lost it.

The story of the party’s dramatic rise from the ashes is told in a new 
documentary, Crashing the Party, based on From’sown book 
<https://www.clintonfoundation.org/get-involved/take-action/attend-an-event/new-democrats-and-return-power-author-al>
. It could make compelling viewing for Britain’s Labour party and Clinton’s 
wife, Hillary, as she makes her own bid for power. But perhaps the biggest 
lesson will be for another party on the verge of implosion: the Republicans.

The rise of Donald Trump is a battle for the soul of the Republican party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/02/donald-trump-battle-for-the-soul-republican-party>
Donald Trump’s hostile takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/05/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-gereral-election-battle-american-future>
 of the party in this year’s primary has left itat war with itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/02/donald-trump-battle-for-the-soul-republican-party>
. Opinion polls suggest that Trump, who has alienated female, black and Latino 
voters, will be trounced in a general election. Last week an editor of the Wall 
Street Journalargued 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/obamas-greatest-triumph-1459379804> that “in a 
response so bizarre [to a weak economy] that future historians will gape, the 
Republicans decided to destroy each other”.

A third consecutive defeat in November will leave the party near the place that
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> found themselves in 
1988, after Michael Dukakis was beaten by George HW Bush and suffered heavy 
congressional losses. There will be inquests, soul searching and calls to 
reinvent. They could do worse than study the From playbook.

“If they have another big presidential loss, what they’re going to have to do 
is look at how you rebuild the party,” From, now 72, said. “The thing that was 
different about what we did was Clinton was the leader, but we did it with a 
group of Democratic leaders.

“It wasn’t just one candidate saying, ‘Here are my policies, I’m going to go 
in this direction’. There was an organised effort how to redefine the party, 
and then Clinton took leadership of it and ran with ideas we developed.”

Watching Obama hold court at the White House, or crowds cheering for Hillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Bernie 
Sanders, it seems hard to believe that the Democrats were once down and near 
out. In the 1980s their party suffered the three worst defeats in electoral 
college votes of any party in the history of the country. The American map was 
swathed in red, with blue clinging to the margins.

“I think the Democratic party after the 1988 election really reached bedrock,” 
From reflected. “A lot of people thought that the Republicans had a lock and 
the Democrats would never win the White House again, so we really were at a 
historic low.”

He founded the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC) in 1985, after Walter 
Mondale’s 49-state annihilation by Ronald Reagan, and was determined to 
modernise the party and make it electable again. The “New Democrats” shifted to 
the centre, and trod on the toes of the established party leaders.Chuck Robb 
<http://bioguide.congress.gov/scripts/biodisplay.pl?index=R000295>, former 
Virginia governor and senator, told the film-makers: “We had to actually bruise 
a few sacred cows, and then of course some of the herd starts to turn on you, 
but that’s natural.”

One of their critics was Jesse Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/21/bernie-sanders-learn-jesse-jackson-joy-reid>
, who says in the documentary that he regarded the group’s commitment to equal 
opportunity but not equal outcomes as a “back-handed slap at affirmative 
action”. He was not invited to speak at the DLC convention.

Hillary Clinton v Donald Trump: the looming battle for the soul of America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/05/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-gereral-election-battle-american-future>
But Clinton himself plays down the tension and defends the 
revolution-from-within. “You didn’t want to stand around waiting for something 
bad to happen to the other guys to be able to make a case that you had a better 
set of ideas,” he said. “They took a party that was seen as a party of the past 
and turned it into a party of the future.”

The movement needed a messenger, and in the young, magnetic governor of 
Arkansas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> fit From’s needs. ”The 
problem was that we not only needed a good, charismatic and smart leader,” From 
said, “but we also needed set of ideas, a different message, because we’d been 
trying to sell a product that the voters just didn’t buy.”

In a natural next step from chairman of the council, Clinton announced a run 
for the presidency. Recovering from a faltering start in the Democratic 
primaries he dubbed himself “the comeback kid 
<https://archives.nbclearn.com/portal/site/k-12/flatview?cuecard=4931>” and 
went on to clinch the nomination.

The general election proved to be about “the economy, stupid 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1992/10/31/us/1992-campaign-democrats-clinton-bush-compete-be-champion-change-democrat-fights.html>
”, in the words of a top Clinton adviser. Bush was seen as out of touch, and 
Clinton won back the so-called “Reagan Democrats” in the white working class. 
He dumped liberal shibboleths to cast himself as pro-business and -trade, tough 
on crime and welfare.

“Tony Blair told me the third way is not a compromise between liberalism and 
conservativism. It’s the modernisation of liberalism,” From said. “In other 
words, you don’t sacrifice your principles: you just have ideas for furthering 
them and have them work in the new world.

“What happened was a turning point for the Democratic party because we were on 
a projection that would have, in my view, maybe had us cease to be a national 
presidential party, even though we did still own a lot of congressional seats. 
We turned that around and now we dominate.”

Clinton won again in 1996 then his vice-president, Al Gore, nearly kept the 
Democrats’ grip in 2000. George W Bush held the White House for eight years but 
then the Democrats regained it with America’s first black president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/05/uselections20084>. 

Now Clinton’s wife is looking to extend the blue line, though much has changed 
since 1992, an age when social media did not exist, 90% of voters were white 
and few Latino people had their voices heard.

“She’s going to do it her own way as well,” From said. “It’s different when 
you’re bursting on the scene as an insurgent, because your party has had the 
worst three elections that any party’s had in history.”

He contrasted that with succeeding a two-term Democrat with increasingly 
nonwhite voters. “It’s a different ball game.”

But Clinton’s themes, he suggested, mirror those of her husband’s in 1992: 
“Grow the economy, get incomes up, create jobs. She’s a big advocate of the 
sense of community and asking people to do their part. The specific policies 
are going to differ because circumstances are different.”

From remains loyal to the Clintons. “I think Bernie Sanders’ ideas are 
unrealistic, and if they were ever implemented they’d probably do great damage 
to the economy,” he said. “In my view there’s never going to be something for 
nothing. But he’s run an interesting campaign.

“The truth is when you’ve been on the scene for a quarter of a century or more 
as Hillary has you build up natural enemies, but I think she’s going to be just 
fine.”

First she may well have to overcome the one-man wrecking ball on the 
Republican side.Trump, the brash billionaire from New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/donald-trump-why-americans-support>
, is a far cry from Bush, Bob Dole or anyone else From faced in his long 
career. “I’ve never seen a candidate quite like Trump, who has no regard for 
the truth or what he said 10 minutes ago, but has the ability to use celebrity 
on the mass media, on social media like no other candidate I’ve ever seen.

“I expect it will come to an end before he’s elected. I hope so, but it is 
different.”

That meeting in Little Rock, 27 years ago this week, continues to resonate in 
America and beyond. Clinton’s New Democrats were emulated by Tony Blair’s New 
Labour in the UK, with no less success at the ballot box. From said he feels 
disappointed by the party’sloss of power and shift to the left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/13/revealed-how-jeremy-corbyn-has-reshaped-the-labour-party>
.

“I’m sure I would have liked to have seen the Labour party continue their New 
Labour ways,” he observer wryly, “but they’ll get back to them if they want to 
be in power again.”
 