
Student life is busy. It’s stressful to keep up with looming deadlines and 
maintain a social life, without thinking about the community that surrounds you.

But look around, and you will soon become aware that a town versus gown divide 
persists in many university towns.

Universities are always looking for ways to combat tension between the 
academic and non-academic communities. And many students are also intent on 
bridging the gap, by volunteering or even setting up their own charities, to 
create sustainable networks.

Charity begins at your home away from home.

If it’s broke, fix it

Hannah Gillespie, a fourth-year medical student at Queen’s University Belfast, 
founded the charitySwotUp <http://swotup.org/#/about> with three other medics. 
They had noticed that although Northern Irish students excel at GCSE and 
A-level, that potential doesn’t correlate with successful medical school 
applications.

“We had experienced this problem ourselves and recognised that we could make a 
real difference for the students coming after us,” says Gillespie.

Why students should volunteer while at university
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/04/why-students-should-volunteer-while-at-university>
They devised a course to help with applications, which included mock 
interviews. Running the course costs money, so it’s ticketed, but students who 
receive the Educational Maintenance Allowance, which still exists in Northern 
Ireland, pay a discounted price of £30.

Gillespie lists the charity’s multiple beneficiaries: the applicants who take 
the course, the medical students who deliver the course and gain experience, 
and the two other charities to whom SwotUp donate all profit. Last year, that 
was over £3500. It’s a win-win-win situation.

Global outlook, local needs

Another medical student, Wigs Bateman from Sheffield University, set up Medsin 
<http://medsin.org/> in 1995. The now-well-established charity has a wide 
reach: its motto is “global health, local issue”.

Despite its international scope, it has also done its bit to bring academic 
and non-academic communities together. One of its branches at Sheffield is the
Teddy Bear Doctors <https://www.facebook.com/TeddyBearHospitalSheffield/>, 
through which students help young patients feel more comfortable about hospital 
visits.

The university seeks to “increase awareness of local community issues among 
students” though charity work 
<https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/communityrelations/studentcontribution>, and 
Medsin helps it to fulfil that aim. The secretary of the Teddy Bear Doctors, 
Ellie Lee, enthuses: “We’ve had really good feedback from parents, children and 
doctors.” Projects like these, she says, improve the image of university 
students, and break down stereotypes of young people being thoughtless. And the 
experience also helps students to stand out in competitive fields of employment.



Networking

While SwotUp battled to raise funds initially, it has never had any problem 
attracting volunteers.

There are networks that exist to help students looking to volunteer. Student 
Hubs <http://www.studenthubs.org/> is a charity founded in 2007 by students for 
students and brings local volunteer projects and university societies together.

Charity challenge for speedy students: how to ace jailbreak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/22/charity-challenge-students-how-to-ace-jailbreak>
Starting in Oxford, it has spread nationwide but remains community-based. 
Graham Read, its spokesperson, says it has a “double benefit model”, which 
means all programmes have to be beneficial for both the student volunteers and 
the community.

Last year, it put on over 600 events, involving 93 universities. Right now, it 
is teaching kids to code in Bristol and setting up reading classes for homeless 
people in Oxford.

Slow progress

Giving back takes time. Ceri Davies is a development manager at the University 
of Brighton and has worked withOn Our Doorsteps 
<http://about.brighton.ac.uk/cupp/whatwedo/community-knowledge-exchange/on-our-doorsteps.html>
, which supports charitable projects in the university’s community. She 
stresses that it “takes time to invest in relationships” and “to develop a 
presence in community life”.

Putting the right infrastructure in place isn’t glamorous. During SwotUp’s 
creation, Gillespie recalls a lot of “tedious behind the scenes work”. It’s a 
good time time to put those organisational skills gleaned at university to use.

Davies says it’s crucial that students go to local meetings, meet new people 
and explain the project. There are no short cuts to building relationships.

Starting a charity isn’t a piece of cake – though it helps if cake is actually 
included. Beth Thomas-Hancock, the manager of the University of Brighton’s 
volunteering service, says food “sets the tone on welcoming different people, 
it can remove barriers and everyone can contribute”.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 