
Imagine standing by a window at night, on the sixth or 17th or 43rd floor of a 
building. The city reveals itself as a set of cells, a hundred thousand 
windows, some darkened and some flooded with green or white or golden light. 
Inside, strangers swim to and fro, attending to the business of their private 
hours. You can see them, but you can’t reach them, and so this commonplace 
urban phenomenon, available in any city of the world on any night, conveys to 
even the most social a tremor of loneliness, its uneasy combination of 
separation and exposure.

You can be lonely anywhere, but there is a particular flavour to the 
loneliness that comes from living in a city, surrounded by millions of people. 
One might think this state was antithetical to urban living, to the massed 
presence of other human beings, and yet mere physical proximity is not enough 
to dispel a sense of internal isolation. It’s possible – easy, even – to feel 
desolate and unfrequented in oneself while living cheek by jowl with others.

Cities can be lonely places, and in admitting this we see that loneliness 
doesn’t necessarily require physical solitude, but rather an absence or paucity 
of connection, closeness, kinship: an inability to find as much intimacy as is 
desired.

I know what that feels like. I’ve been a citizen of loneliness. I’ve done my 
time in empty rooms. A few years back I moved to New York, drifting through a 
succession of sublet apartments. A new relationship had abruptly turned to dust 
and though I had friends in the city I was paralysed by loneliness. The 
feelings I had were so raw and overwhelming I often wished I could find a way 
of losing myself altogether until the intensity diminished.

The revelation of loneliness, the omnipresent, unanswerable feeling that I was 
in a state of lack, that I didn’t have what people were supposed to, and that 
this was down to some grave and no doubt externally unmistakable failing in my 
person: all this had quickened lately, the unwelcome consequence of being so 
summarily dismissed.

I don’t suppose it was unrelated, either, to the fact that I was keeling 
towards the midpoint of my 30s, an age at which female aloneness is no longer 
socially sanctioned and carries with it a persistent whiff of strangeness, 
deviance and failure.

The experience was acutely painful, and yet as the months wore by I became 
weirdly fascinated by it. Loneliness,Dennis Wilson once sang,  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v7aqULVOrlQ>is a very special place, and I 
started to wonder if he might be right, if there wasn’t more to it than meets 
the eye – if, in fact, loneliness didn’t drive one to consider some of the 
larger questions of what it is to be alive.

There were things that burned away at me, not only as a private individual, 
but also as a citizen of our century, our pixellated age. What does it mean to 
be lonely? How do we live, if we’re not intimately engaged with another human 
being? How do we connect with other people? Is sex a cure for loneliness, and 
if it is, what happens if our body or sexuality is considered deviant or 
damaged, if we are ill or unblessed with beauty?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F630736c33a0d7022ecef090af9d2da2e032f78c9%2F0_0_3000_1428%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F630736c33a0d7022ecef090af9d2da2e032f78c9%2F0_0_3000_1428%2F3000.jpg>
 An untitled detail from In the Realms of the Unreal by Henry Darger, an 
outsider artist whose life and work have been debated by historians since his 
death in 1973. Photograph: Mongrel Media 
I was by no means the only person who’d puzzled over these questions. All 
kinds of writers, artists, film-makers and songwriters have explored the 
subject of loneliness, attempting to gain purchase on it, to tackle the issues 
that it provokes. But I was at the time beginning to fall in love with images, 
to find a solace in them I didn’t find elsewhere, and so I conducted the 
majority of my investigations within the visual realm. I sought out artists who 
seemed to articulate or be troubled by loneliness, particularly as it manifests 
in cities.

The obvious place to start was with Edward Hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2004/may/30/art3>, that rangy, 
taciturn man. Born at the tail end of the 19th century, he spent his working 
life documenting life in the electrically uneasy metropolis. Though he was 
often resistant to the notion that loneliness was his metier, his central 
theme, his scenes of men and women in deserted cafes, offices and hotel lobbies 
remain signature images of urban isolation.

Hopper’s people are often alone, or in fraught, uncommunicative groupings of 
twos and threes, fastened into poses that seem indicative of distress. But this 
isn’t the only reason his work is so deeply associated with loneliness. He also 
succeeds in capturing something of how it feels, by way of the strange 
construction of his city layouts.

Take Nighthawks <http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/artwork/111628>, which 
the novelist Joyce Carol Oates once described as “our most poignant, 
ceaselessly replicated romantic image of American loneliness”. It shows a diner 
at night: an urban aquarium, a glass cell. Inside, in their livid yellow 
prison, are four figures. A spivvy couple, a counter-boy in a white uniform, 
and a man sitting with his back to the window, the open crescent of his jacket 
pocket the darkest point on the canvas. No one is talking. No one is looking at 
anyone else. Is the diner a refuge for the isolated, a place of succour, or 
does it serve to illustrate the disconnection that proliferates in cities? The 
painting’s brilliance derives from its instability, its refusal to commit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7de1a6ee8d7973a1a4f170157a46d6b731c6995%2F0_0_2744_4123%2F2744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7de1a6ee8d7973a1a4f170157a46d6b731c6995%2F0_0_2744_4123%2F2744.jpg>
 Olivia Laing photographed by Mike Sim. 
I’d been looking at it on laptop screens for years before I finally saw it in 
person,at the Whitney <http://whitney.org/Exhibitions/HopperDrawing/Explore> 
one sweltering October afternoon. The colour hit me first. Green walls, green 
shadows falling in spikes and diamonds on the green sidewalk. There is no shade 
in existence that more powerfully communicates urban alienation than this 
noxious pallid green, which only came into being with the advent of 
electricity, and which is inextricably associated with the nocturnal city of 
glass towers, empty illuminated offices and neon signs.

But it was the window that really stopped me in my tracks: a bubble of glass 
that separated the diner from the street, curving sinuously back against 
itself. It was impossible to gaze through into the luminous interior without 
experiencing a swift apprehension of loneliness, of how it might feel to be 
shut out, standing alone in the cooling air.

Glass is a persistent symbol of loneliness, and for good reason. Almost as 
soon as I arrived in the city, I had the sense that I was trapped behind glass. 
I couldn’t reach out or make contact, and at the same time I felt dangerously 
exposed, vulnerable to judgment, particularly in situations where being alone 
felt awkward or wrong, where I was surrounded by couples or groups.

This is what Hopper replicates with his strange architectural configurations: 
the way a feeling of separation, of being walled off or penned in, combines 
with near-unbearable exposure. “I probably am a lonely one,” he once told an 
interviewer, and his paintings radiate an empathic understanding of what that’s 
like. You might think this would make his work distressing, but on the contrary 
I found it eased the burden of my own feelings. Someone else had grappled with 
loneliness, and had found beauty, even value in it.

Loneliness doesn’t only affect the solitary. It can also prey on people who 
have what seem like highly populated lives. This is the case withAndy Warhol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/andywarhol>, who was almost never 
without a glittering entourage and yet whose work is surprisingly eloquent on 
isolation and problems of attachment, issues he struggled with lifelong.

Warhol’s art patrols the space between people, conducting a grand 
philosophical investigation into closeness and distance, intimacy and 
estrangement. Like many lonely people, he was an inveterate hoarder, making and 
surrounding himself with objects, barriers against the demands of human 
intimacy. Terrified of physical contact, he rarely left the house without an 
armoury of cameras and tape recorders, using them to broker and buffer 
interactions: behaviour that has light to shed on how we deploy technology in 
our own century of so-called connectivity.

Even as a little boy, Warhol was notable for his skill at drawing and his 
painful shyness: a pale, slightly otherworldly child, who fantasised about 
renaming himself Andy Morningstar. His parents were Ruthenian immigrants, and 
he was passionately close to his mother, particularly when at the age of seven 
he contracted rheumatic fever, followed by St Vitus’s Dance, an alarming 
disorder characterised by involuntary movements of the limbs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb72bcd40b0423249d27df27e44931bed352d66b5%2F0_0_1420_1774%2F1420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb72bcd40b0423249d27df27e44931bed352d66b5%2F0_0_1420_1774%2F1420.jpg>
 Andy Warhol with Polaroid camera in1973. ‘Filming, taping and photographing 
meant he could possess people without risk.’ Photograph: Alamy 
This spell of social withdrawal left its mark, as did the experience of being 
betrayed by his own body. As an adult, Warhol was hampered by an absolute 
belief in his own physical abhorrence: his bulbous nose and receding hair; his 
strikingly white skin, covered in liver-coloured blotches. What he most wanted 
was to be desired by one of the beautiful boys on whom he developed serial 
crushes, a breed exemplified by the poised and wickedly glamorous Truman Capote 
– who described his suitor cruelly as “a hopeless born loser, the loneliest, 
most friendless person I’d ever met in my life”.

In the 1960s, just as he was making a name for himself as a Pop artist, Warhol 
found a novel way of handling his problems with intimacy. He bought a 
television at Macy’s: an RCA 19-inch black-and-white set. Able to conjure or 
dismiss company at the touch of a button, he found he cared much less about 
getting close to other people, a process he’d found so hurtful in the past.

It was the beginning of a passionate affair with machines. Over the years, he 
fell for a range of devices, from the stationary 16mm Bolex on which he recorded
theScreen Tests of the 1960s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/aug/21/artsfeatures.warhol> to the 
Polaroid camera that was his permanent companion at parties in the 1980s. Part 
of the appeal was undoubtedly having something to hide behind in public. Acting 
as servant or companion to the machine was another route to invisibility, a 
mask-cum-prop like his wig and glasses.

But Warhol also used machines to buffer his interactions with other people. 
Filming, taping and photographing meant he could possess people without risk: a 
strategy of enormous appeal to the lonely, who fear rejection almost as 
intensely as they desire intimacy.

The lonely disappear in plain sight, retreating into their apartments because 
of sickness, bereavement or shyness

In this, as in so many things, he was the herald of our own era. His 
attachment prefigures our rapturous, narcissistic fixation with phones and 
computers; the enormous devolution of our emotional and practical lives to 
technological apparatuses of one kind or another. I understood exactly why he 
called his tape recorder his wife. I would have been lost without my MacBook, 
which promised to bring connection and in the meantime filled the vacuum left 
by love.

Loneliness can wed people to machines, and it can also drive them away from 
the world. The lonely disappear in plain sight, retreating into their 
apartments because of sickness or bereavement, mental illness or the 
persistent, unbearable burden of shyness, of not knowing how to impress 
themselves into society.

If anyone can be said to have worked from this place, it’s the outsider artist 
and hospital janitorHenry Darger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2005/jan/12/art>, who was born in 
Chicago in 1892. Darger’s life illuminates the social forces that produce 
isolation – and the way the imagination can work to resist it.

For decades Darger lived alone in a boarding house room crammed with hoarded 
rubbish. In 1972 he became ill and was moved unwillingly to a Catholic mission. 
When his room was cleared, it was discovered to contain hundreds of paintings, 
of almost supernatural radiance.

These baffling, beautiful collages were populated by soldiers and naked little 
girls with penises. Some had charming, fairytale elements: clouds with faces 
and winged creatures sporting in the sky. Others showed exquisitely staged and 
coloured scenes of mass torture, complete with delicately painted pools of 
scarlet blood. Together, they described a coherent otherworld: theRealms of the 
Unreal, site of a devastating civil war between forces of good and evil.

Since his death, theories about Darger have proliferated, put forward by an 
impassioned chorus of art historians, academics and psychologists. These voices 
are by no means convergent, but speaking they have established Darger as an 
outsider artist nonpareil: untutored, compulsive and almost certainly mentally 
ill. Over the years, he’s been posthumously diagnosed with autism and 
schizophrenia and declared a paedophile or serial killer, an accusation that 
has proved enduring despite an absolute lack of evidence.

It seemed to me that this second act of Darger’s life compounded the isolation 
of the first. The things he made have served as lightning rods for other 
people’s fears and fantasies about isolation. But what this pathologising 
elides is the damage wreaked on individuals like Darger by society: the role 
that structures such as families, schools and jobs play in any person’s 
experience of isolation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6725c44f2609b3c66b8f6091d5ddd80464d059cd%2F0_0_2992_2248%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6725c44f2609b3c66b8f6091d5ddd80464d059cd%2F0_0_2992_2248%2F2992.jpg>
 David Wojnarowicz’s Arthur Rimbaud in New York (Times Square). Wojnarowicz was 
a New York artist whose brutal childhood and years on the streets left him with 
feelings of shame and isolation. Photograph: David Wojnarowicz Estate/Ppow 
Gallery NYC 
Like many lonely people, Darger’s childhood was full of shattered attachments 
and broken ties. His mother died when he was four. His father was too ill to 
care for him, and so he was sent to the Illinois Asylum for Feeble-Minded 
Children, where extreme violence was common. After escaping, he worked in the 
city’s hospitals, where he spent nearly six decades rolling bandages and 
sweeping floors. Intelligent and talented, he was deprived of both love and an 
education, and in his entire life had only one friend.

He built the world of the Realms out of almost nothing, against extraordinary 
odds. I realised this most forcibly when I visited therecreation of his room 
<http://www.art.org/collection/henry-darger/> in a Chicago museum. It was 
packed with art materials: pencil stubs made usable by being jammed into 
syringes; piles of children’s paints and crayons; broken elastic bands mended 
with tape. In all his life, Darger’s income never exceeded $3,000 a year, and 
yet he had accumulated these resources, painstakingly gathered from among the 
discards, the leavings of the city.

Why did he spend his life creating a universe of such violence and beauty? 
There is a theory that loneliness stems from a profound sense of 
disintegration, caused by just the kind of broken childhood Darger suffered. 
It’s a longing not just for love, but for integration, for wholeness. Now look 
again at Darger’s pictures: the unleashed forces of good and evil brought 
painstakingly together, into a single field, a single frame. Insane? I don’t 
think so. It’s the work of someone absolutely alone, struggling with all their 
might to make sense of suffering and disorder.

You can show what loneliness looks like, and you can also take up arms against 
it, making things that serve explicitly as communication devices against 
censorship and alienation. This was the driving motivation of David 
Wojnarowicz, a still under-known American artist and writer, whose courageous, 
extraordinary body of work did more than anything to release me from the 
feeling that in my solitude I was shamefully alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe19db74323a32ce201abc20b0af0ae94f1c392a7%2F0_0_1438_1800%2F1438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe19db74323a32ce201abc20b0af0ae94f1c392a7%2F0_0_1438_1800%2F1438.jpg>
 David Wojnarowicz’s 1989 self-portrait, silence = death. Photograph: David 
Wojnarowicz Estate/Ppow Gallery NYC 
Like Darger, Wojnarowicz had a brutal childhood. As a small boy in the 1950s, 
he and his two siblings were kidnapped by their father, an abusive alcoholic 
who took them to live in the suburbs of New Jersey. The Universe of the Neatly 
Clipped Lawn, David called it – a place where physical and psychic violence 
against women and children could be carried out without repercussions.

By 15, he was turning $10 tricks in Times Square, and by 17 had left home 
entirely. He almost starved during his homeless years. Sometimes he was raped 
or drugged by the men who offered him money; sometimes he stayed in welfare 
hotels and derelict buildings, or with a group of transvestites by the Hudson 
River.

In 1973, he prised himself off the streets, though the legacy of shame and 
isolation never fully dispersed. He came out as gay, and felt immediately 
lighter, albeit acutely aware of the weight of antagonism stacked against him, 
the hatred lurking everywhere for a man who loved men and was not ashamed of 
the fact.

It was in this period that he began to make art. Photographs of a man in a 
paper mask of Arthur Rimbaud, wandering the meat markets and bus stations of 
New York. Lurid, intricate paintings that look like maps of some mythic realm. 
A film of a drag queen walking slowly into a lake; graffiti of burning houses 
and choking cows. Within a handful of years he became one of the stars of the 
1980s East Village art scene, alongside Jean-Michel Basquiat, Keith Haring and 
Nan Goldin.

What happened to him? Aids happened. In 1988 he was diagnosed with Aids, then 
a death sentence. His first reaction was intense loneliness, combined with 
absolute rage against the bigoted politicians who blocked funding and 
education, the public figures who called for people with Aids to be tattooed 
with their infection status or quarantined on islands. Stigmatisation: the 
cruel process by which society works to exclude people considered undesirable, 
whether because of race or poverty or illness or a thousand other factors.

Stigmatisation is yet another driver of loneliness, reducing a person from a 
human being to the bearer of something polluting or repulsive. Wojnarowicz’s 
response was to fight back, to resist the silencing and shaming he’d suffered 
from lifelong; and to do it not alone but in the company of others. In the 
plague years, he became involved withAct Up, a direct action group that fused 
art and resistance <http://www.actupny.org/> into an astonishingly potent 
force. There isn’t much to find inspiring about the Aids crisis, except the way 
that it was combated not by people contracting into couples or family 
groupings, but by communal direct action.

These artists helped me not just to understand loneliness, but also to see the 
potential beauty in it

Wojnarowicz’s work had always been political. Even before Aids, he’d dealt 
with sexuality and difference: with what it’s like to live in a world that 
despises you, to be subject every single day to hatred and contempt, enacted 
not just by individuals but by the supposedly protective structures of society 
itself. Aids confirmed his suspicions. As he put it in his searing memoir,Close 
to the Knives: “My rage is really about the fact that when I was told that I’d 
contracted this virus it didn’t take me long to realise that I’d contracted a 
diseased society as well.”

Act Up’s work undoubtedly drove improved treatment for people with Aids, but 
combination therapy came too late for Wojnarowicz. He died in 1992, at the age 
of 37, leaving behind a body of work of radical honesty. “I want to make 
somebody feel less alienated – that’s the most meaningful thing to me,” he once 
said. “We can all affect each other, by being open enough to make each other 
feel less alienated.”

That statement summed up precisely what his art meant to me. Nothing in my 
years of loneliness touched me as deeply as Wojnarowicz’s openness: his 
willingness to admit to failure or grief; to acknowledge desire, anger, pain; 
to be emotionally alive. His honesty was in itself a cure for loneliness, 
dissolving the sense of difference that comes when one believes one’s feelings 
or desires to be uniquely shameful. How had he responded to the sources of 
isolation in his own life? By speaking the truth, by making art, by building 
community, by engaging in political action, by refusing to be invisible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb99c7aec75427e3b67d1ae2c4ae614311403f3f6%2F311_86_2224_3348%2F2224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20art%20helped%20me%20see%20the%20beauty%20in%20loneliness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthe-lonely-city-olivia-laing-edward-hopper-andy-warhol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb99c7aec75427e3b67d1ae2c4ae614311403f3f6%2F311_86_2224_3348%2F2224.jpg>
 Artist Henry Darger. Photograph: David Berglund 
The artists I encountered in the lonely city helped me not just to understand 
loneliness, but also to see the potential beauty in it, the way it drives 
creativity of all kinds. These days, I don’t think the cure for loneliness is 
meeting someone, not necessarily. I think it’s about two things: learning how 
to befriend yourself and understanding that many of the things that seem to 
afflict us as individuals are in fact a result of larger forces of stigma and 
exclusion, which can and should be resisted.

There is a gentrification that’s happening to cities, and there’s a 
gentrification that’s happening to the emotions too, with a similarly 
homogenising, whitening, deadening effect. Amid the glossiness of late 
capitalism, we are fed the notion that all difficult feelings – depression, 
anxiety, loneliness, rage – are simply a consequence of unsettled chemistry, a 
problem to be fixed, rather than a response to structural injustice or, on the 
other hand, to the native texture of embodiment, of doing time, as David 
Wojnarowicz memorably put it, in a rented body, with all the attendant grief 
and frustration that entails.

So much of the pain of loneliness is to do with concealment, with being 
compelled to hide vulnerability, to tuck ugliness away, to cover up wounds as 
if they are literally repulsive. But why hide? What’s so shameful about 
wanting, about desire, about having failed to achieve satisfaction, about 
experiencing unhappiness? Why this need constantly to inhabit peak states, or 
to be comfortably sealed inside a unit of two, turned inward from the world at 
large?

I have been lonely, and no doubt I will be lonely again. There isn’t any shame 
in that. Loneliness is a special place, I’m certain of it: adrift from the 
larger continent of human experience, but intrinsic to the very act of being 
alive.

© Olivia Laing. This is an edited extract from The Lonely City: Adventures in 
the Art of Being Alone 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377447/s/the-lonely-city/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Olivia Laing (Canongate Books, £16.99). To order a copy for £12.99, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/377447/s/the-lonely-city/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.

 * Does city life make us more or less lonely? Share your stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/29/city-life-more-less-lonely-loneliness-cities-share-stories>
 