
The brain is often described as being “like a muscle”. It’s a comparison that 
props up the brain training industry and keeps school children hunched over 
desks. We judge literacy and numeracy exercises as more beneficial for your 
brain than running, playing and learning on the move.

But the brain-as-muscle analogy doesn’t quite work. To build up your biceps 
you can’t avoid flexing them. When it comes to your brain, an oblique approach 
can be surprisingly effective. In particular, working your body’s muscles can 
actually benefit your grey matter.

Brain training: should you believe the hype?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/19/brain-training-should-you-believe-the-hype>
Scientists are showing that the runner’s high and the yogi’s tranquility have 
profound effects on your brain. Moreover, specific physical activities can 
markedly alter its structure in precise ways.

A wave of studies exploring the unexpected links between mental and bodily 
fitness is emerging from labs. This research might give you the impetus to get 
more active. It can also help you choose the best ways to prepare physically 
for mental challenges such as exams, interviews and creative projects.

Boost your memory

The part of the brain that responds strongly to aerobic exercise is the 
hippocampus. Well-controlled experiments inchildren 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0006899310018317>, adults 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1053811915010721> and the 
elderly <http://www.pnas.org/content/108/7/3017> show that this brain structure 
grows as people get fitter. Since the hippocampus is at the core of the brain’s 
learning and memory systems, this finding partly explains thememory-boosting 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24029446> effects of improved 
cardiovascular fitness.

As well as slowly improving your memory hardware, exercise can have a more 
immediate impact on memory formation. German researchers showed thatwalking 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25015595> or cycling 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23700461> during, but not before, learning 
helped new foreign language vocabulary to stick. So exercise while you revise. 
Don’t push it too hard, though: vigorous workouts can raise your stress levels, 
which canscupper your memory circuits 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Effects_of_stress_on_memory>.

Improve your concentration

Besides making memories stickier, exercise can help you focus and stay on 
task. The best scientific evidence comes from testing school children, but the 
same most likely applies to us all. Interspersing lessons with 20-minute bouts 
of aerobics-style exerciseimproved the attention spans of Dutch school pupils 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26724833>. Meanwhile, a large randomised 
controlled trial in the US looked at the effects of daily after-school sports 
classes over a school year. The children, of course, got fitter. Less 
predictably, theirexecutive control improved 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25266425>. They became more adept at 
ignoring distractions, multitasking, and holding and manipulating information 
in their minds.

And if that all sounds like hard work, you may not have to get out of breath 
to reap the attention-honing effects of exercise. Just 10 minutes of playful 
coordination skills, like bouncing two balls at the same time,improved the 
attention of a large group of German teenagers 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18602754>.

Improve your mental health

Love it or hate it, bouts of physical activity can have potent effects on your 
mood. The runner’s high – that feeling of elation that follows intense exercise 
– is real.Even mice get it <http://www.pnas.org/content/112/42/13105.full>. It 
may not be due to an “endorphin rush”, though. Levels of the body’s homemade 
opiate do rise in the bloodstream, but it’s not clear how much endorphin 
actually gets into the brain. Instead, recent evidence points to a pleasurable 
and pain-killingfiring of the endocannabinoid system 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/112/42/13105.full>: the psychoactive receptor of 
cannabis.

How anxiety scrambles your brain and makes it hard to learn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/21/how-anxiety-scrambles-your-brain-and-makes-it-hard-to-learn>
What about yoga? Does it really help with stress? When anxiety levels rise, 
you tense up, your heart races and your attention narrows to a slit. This shift 
to “fight or flight” mode is automatic, but that doesn’t mean it’s wholly out 
of your control. Yoga teaches the deliberate command of movement and breathing, 
with the aim of turning on the body’s“relaxation response” 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23650531>. Science increasingly backs this 
claim. For example, a 2010 study put participants through eight weeks of daily 
yoga and meditation practice. In parallel with self-reported stress-reduction,
brain scans showed shrinkage of part of their amygdala 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19776221>, a deep-brain structure strongly 
implicated in processing stress, fear and anxiety.

Exercise is also emerging as a promising way to overcome depression. A 2013 
meta-analysis cautiously reported thatexercise – both aerobic and resistance – 
was “moderately effective” in treating depressive symptoms 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24026850>. Strikingly, exercise seemed as 
effective as antidepressant drugs and psychological treatments. The study’s 
authors identified it as an area crying out for more rigorous investigation.

Enhance your creativity

Thoreau, Nietzsche and many other creative types have claimed that walking 
gives wings to the imagination. Last year, psychologists gave this empirical 
support.Walking, either on a treadmill or around Stanford’s leafy campus, 
bolstered divergent thinking <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24749966>: the 
free-roaming, idea-generating component of creative thought. It didn’t help 
convergent thinking, though. So if you’re struggling to home in on a single 
solution, an idle stroll may not be what you need.

Slowing cognitive decline

The evidence that staying physically fit keeps your brain healthy into old age 
is especially compelling. Most concrete is the link between aerobic fitness and 
cognitive preservation. Workouts needn’t be extreme either: 30-45 minutes of 
brisk walking, three times a week, can help fend off the mental wear and tear 
anddelay the onset of dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/17/brain-walk-delaying-dementia-memory>
. It pays to get used to regular exercise early, though.The protective effects 
are clearest before the cognitive signs of old age kick in 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27009261>. 

Nor is it all about your heart and lungs. Exercises to improve balance, 
coordination and agility made a clear impact on the brain structure and 
cognitive function <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25255932> of a large 
group of German elderly people. Twice weekly sessions ofweightlifting can have 
a visible neurological impact <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21741129>. 
Dancing may also be restorative for ageing brains. Just an hour of dance a 
week, for six months, did little for elderly participants’ aerobic capacity, but
the physical and social stimulation bolstered their cognitive wellbeing 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3581819/>.

Researchers are still teasing out the critical factors that make exercise such 
a potent brain tonic. Prime suspects include increased blood flow to the brain, 
surges of growth hormones and expansion of the brain’s network of blood 
vessels. It’s also possible that exercise stimulates the birth of new neurons. 
Until recently, few believed this could happen in adult human brains.

Don’t sit still

The cognitive spillover from exercise reminds us that our brains don’t operate 
in isolation. What you do with your body impinges on your mental faculties.
Sitting still all day, every day, is dangerous 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/fitness/Pages/sitting-and-sedentary-behaviour-are-bad-for-your-health.aspx>
. So don’t dither about what form of exercise you do. Find something you enjoy, 
then get up and do it. Right, I’m off for a jog.

Ben Martynoga is a neuroscientist and science writer. He’s currently a 
visiting researcher at the Francis Crick Institute in London. He tweets at
@mountainogre <https://twitter.com/mountainogre>.

Get involved with the Use your head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/series/use-your-head> series by joining 
the discussion on #useyourhead
 