
If there is one thing that Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/burkina-faso> has proved, it is that the 
country has an almost unlimited capacity to confound the predictions of even 
the most seasoned observers.

When citizens protested against then president Blaise Compaoré last year, no 
one expected the mass movement to work – or to see the much-feared Compaoré, 
who had clung to power for 27 years,retreat into exile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/31/burkina-faso-president-blaise-compaore-ousted-says-army>
. And last week, when the head of the presidential guard arrested the interim 
leadership anddeclared himself in charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/burkina-faso-military-confirms-coup-and-dissolves-transitional-government>
 just three weeks before planned elections, few thought that General Gilbert 
Diendéré would be forced out within the week.

Yet this is exactly what happened. 

The rise and fall of Burkina Faso's coup: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/burkina-faso-coup-rise-and-fall-of-what-you-need-to-know>
The major reason for the coup’s defeat was that it was instantly unpopular. 
When themilitary takeover was announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/18/burkina-faso-military-installs-general-as-new-head-of-state-after-coup>
 on 18 September, there were spontaneous demonstrations in the capital 
Ouagadougou. In October 2014, it was protests just like these – organised under 
the banner of theBalai Citoyen <https://www.facebook.com/CitoyenBalayeur> 
(Citizen’s Broom) movement – that forced Compaoré out of office.

Emboldened by this success, the Burkinabé were not afraid to challenge the 
latest threat to democracy.

“The [popular protests against the coup] demonstrated that the Régiment de 
sécurité présidentielle [the presidential guard] did not have control over the 
vast majority of the country and would not be able to rule for long,” said 
Eloise Bertrand, a researcher from the University of Warwick and expert on 
Burkinabé opposition movements.

The second major factor was the resistance from the regular army, who made it 
clear that they were willing to act against the elite presidential guard. By
ordering that Ouagadougou be surrounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/22/burkina-fasos-army-enters-capital-to-disarm-coup-leaders-in-lead-up-to-poll>
, army chiefs told General Diendéré – in a language that the long-time military 
man would understand – that he would have to fight to maintain his grip on 
power.

The third reason was that Diendéré and his loyalists – who have strong ties to 
the Compaoré regime – were surprised by the vehemence of the continental 
response. The coup was instantly condemned in the strongest possible terms by 
theAfrican Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> (AU), while 
regional body the Economic Community for West African States (Ecowas) scrambled 
together a high-level mediation team.

“The AU considers the announcement by the military of the ‘dismissal’ of 
President Michel Kafando and the attempt of substituting him with ‘new 
authorities’ as null and void,” said the AU chairperson Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma 
in a statement.

This is unusually strong language for an institution that has a reputation for 
hedging its bets.

Ecowas played a more direct role. It was only after talks with the Ecowas 
mediation team that interim president Michel Kafando was returned to office, 
with the mediators instrumental in persuading Diendéré to accept the deal.

“Ecowas played a highly significant role that demonstrates the potential for 
effective regional intervention,” said Frank Charnas, CEO of risk analysis firm 
Afrique Consulting. Charnas said that the Senegalese president, Macky Sall, had 
initially led the efforts to resolve the situation. But when civil society 
groups questioned his apparent willingness to grant immunity to the coup 
leaders, the Nigerian president,Muhammadu Buhari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muhammadu-buhari>, took the lead.

This high-profile involvement has helped burnish Buhari’s credentials as an 
African statesman. “Certainly, this may aid his image with regard to foreign 
diplomacy … in the silent war for continental diplomatic influence between
Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> and Ecowas, and South 
Africa and Sadc [the Southern African Diplomatic Community], the Burkina 
situation as it currently stands could be chalked up as a victory for the west 
Africans,” said Charnas.

David Zounmenou, a senior researcher at the Institute for Security Studies 
<https://www.issafrica.org/>, agrees that Buhari’s role was pivotal. “Given his 
status as a former coup leader and now democratically elected president, 
[Buhari] might have been decisive in calling for the return of the interim 
president, and that message was directly conveyed to the coup-makers,” he said.

For Zounmenou, the peaceful resolution of the Burkina Faso situation reflects 
improving governance in the region as a whole. “Burkina Faso will be a reminder 
that coups or military intrusion can no longer be tolerated in west Africa. It 
is a strong signal to send coup-makers home empty handed. This is the third 
leader removed from power in disgrace, includingDadis Camara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/16/guinea-aide-shoot-camara> 
[Guinea],Amadou Sanogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/27/mali-coup-leader-arrested-sanogo>
 [Mali] and now Gilbert Diendéré. Democracy has promising days ahead in the 
region,” he said.

In a further sign of progress in the region, Ecowas leaders narrowly failed to 
pass a resolution in May outlawing all third terms for presidents in the region 
(the move was blocked by Togo and Gambia).

Attention turns now to what happens next in Burkina Faso, where elections are 
tentatively planned for November.

Before they can go ahead, the country must tackle the issues which led to the 
short-lived coup in the first place: the outsized role of the presidential 
guard in government, the candidacy of members of Compaoré’s former ruling party 
in the upcoming poll, and impunity for officials implicated in crimes committed 
during Compaoré’s rule – including the death of the legendary former president 
Thomas Sankara, with which Diendéré has repeatedly been linked.

“It is a step in the right direction in the sense that the transition has been 
preserved … it shows that the Burkinabé people are still ready to defend what 
they fought for in 2014 and to prevent anyone from confiscating their 
revolution,” said Bertrand.
 