
Trends need not be fickle engines of pure consumerism. We have them in ethical 
living, too you know. 2015 is all about self-reliance. More dynamic than the 
downshifting trend (work fewer hours, move to the countryside, keep bees), 
self-reliance is about actively claiming ownership of our lives and wresting 
supply chains from global corporations. So from food to finance, watch out for 
local organisations which offer alternative ways of doing things and systems 
that are not reliant on the whims of big business or local government.

In 2015 there are no extra points for recycling, saving energy or using the 
bus, not the car – these are settled behaviours that you should be doing 
automatically. The kitchen and garden (or community garden or allotment), where 
we carry out transformative processes like composting, are at the heart of 
self-reliance. Take your lead from foodie trends that aim to localise parts of 
the food chain, wrestling them back from food corporations and their impactful 
supply chains.

One way to do this is by processing your own food. Get acquainted with 
archaic-sounding kitchen verbs: brewing, fermenting, brazing, curing. For the 
philosophy, see Michael Pollan’sCooked: a Natural History of Transformation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/22/cooked-natural-history-pollan-review>
. For the practical, check out the abundance of courses out there:
livingfood.co.uk <https://www.livingfood.co.uk/> offers fermentation and 
oosha.co.uk <http://ooosha.co.uk/> offers raw chocolate-making, or seek out 
kits and accessories like fermentation pots (peppermintheath.co.uk 
<http://www.pepperminthealth.co.uk/>).

Growing your own food remains fundamental to ethical living, but things are 
getting aspirational here. Self-confessed “plant geek”James Wong’s Homegrown 
Revolution <http://www.jameswong.co.uk/homegrown-revolution/4572077593> will 
have you growing saffron and goji berries on a UK allotment. Also try the UK’s 
biggest seed-swapping event,Seedy Sunday <http://www.seedysunday.org.uk/>, in 
Brighton on 1 February. Presenter Kate Humble has a brilliant range of courses 
on everything from lambing (March/April) to growing your own wedding flowers 
(May) on her working farm in Wales (humblebynature.com 
<http://www.humblebynature.com/>).

Greening your money gives you a buffer from the vagaries and injustices of the 
global financial structure. Good Money Week is in October, but the principles 
last all year around (goodmoneyweek.com <http://goodmoneyweek.com/>).

Over the last decade I’ve watched – and occasionally tried to intervene – as 
clothes lovers become captive customers. Super-cheap fast fashion means 
disposability. Don’t buy for landfill. Fight back. DIY fashion needn’t mean 
knitting worthy jumpers, asSecrets of Sewing Lingerie (Kyle Books, £15.99) 
makes clear. The bourgeoning craft handmade movement is important for local 
economic relationships and capitalises on the ethical benefits of shorter 
supply chains.

So in 2015 avoid a monocultural existence where you devolve responsibility to 
a few corporate brands for your food, entertainment and technology. Instead 
look for the biodiversity of local organisations and alternative ways of living.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-can-i-go-green-in-2015-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418906967634%2Ffff47cd4-2cb9-4225-b38d-e412308c81a9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20I%20go%20green%20in%202015%3F%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-can-i-go-green-in-2015-lucy-siegle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20I%20go%20green%20in%202015%3F%20%7C%20Lucy%20Siegle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Fhow-can-i-go-green-in-2015-lucy-siegle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418906967634%2Ffff47cd4-2cb9-4225-b38d-e412308c81a9-1020x612.jpeg>
 Donna Fenn surrounded by Remade in Britain designs 
Green crush: upcycling and vintage marketplace Remade in Britain


There is no such thing as rubbish, just a paucity of imagination. That’s how 
businesswoman Donna Fenn from Harrogate sees it. She set upRemadeinbritain.com 
<http://www.remadeinbritain.com/> as a hub for the growing upcycling community 
to unite customers with makers who add value to discarded materials through 
design and ingenuity. So far there are 300 retailers selling furniture, 
interiors, lighting, clothing, jewellery and accessories, including products by 
this column’s favourite neo-Womble, designer Max McMurdo. Fenn is partly driven 
by opportunity (280m tonnes of waste are produced here each year, so imagine 
the repurposing possibilities) and a bit of shame – based on recycling figures, 
the UK is only just inside the top 10 countries in Europe, and way behind 
Austria and Germany (remadeinbritain.com <http://www.remadeinbritain.com/>)

Greenspeak: Cli-fi {klaī faī} noun

The film-going audience is well used to apocalyptic scenarios. But in this 
sub-genre, climate change gets central billing as sci-fi films (and books) move 
on. The latest cli-fi flick out there isInterstellar

If you have an ethical dilemma, email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk>
 