
Near the beginning of the new documentary Life, Animated 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4n7fosK9UyY>, there is a home movie filmed by 
Cornelia Suskind in November 1993. Her husband, Ron, is playing in the garden 
of their old house with their son Owen, a little boy with dark curly hair and a 
winning smile. He is waving a toy sword, and Ron asks him, “Owen, who are you?” 
Owen grins up at his dad and replies, “I’m Peter Pan and you’re Captain Hook.” 
Together they tumble and play fight in the autumn leaves.

Shortly after that day, Owen stopped talking, became very unhappy and 
also began to lose his motor skills; Ron describes seeing him “weaving around 
like someone walking with his eyes closed”. They knew something was badly wrong 
– after all, as Ron puts it, “Children don’t grow backwards.” The first 
paediatrician they saw was puzzled, and referred them to a specialist, who in 
January 1994 diagnosed Owen with autism.

His parents describe those first few months, filled with confusion and fear, 
as the worst time in their lives. “Owen had so many alarming behaviours – 
although luckily he was never violent or aggressive,” says Cornelia. “I feared 
that he would never speak, that we would be taking care of him for his entire 
life.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4n7fosK9UyY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4n7fosK9UyY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4n7fosK9UyY&media=>
The Suskinds have never found out what caused Owen to lose so many skills, but 
rather than dwell on possible causes they devoted themselves to exploring every 
therapy on offer. Ron’s new position on the Wall Street Journal meant that 
Cornelia, also a journalist, could just about afford not to work. Instead, she 
organised and took part in a range of therapies for Owen. She also home 
educated him for a couple of years when the right school proved elusive. The 
family assembled a team of specialists to support them and give advice. 
Progress was painfully slow.

Owen was just shy of seven and we realised that he was using movies to 
interpret our world

Many children with autism have favourite interests or activities that they 
never tire of repeating and which can appear to get in the way of them learning 
new skills or engaging with others. In Owen’s case, his obsession was Disney. 
Despite his motor problems, he mastered the remote control for the family’s 
video recorder and loved to watch the same films over and over again, 
particularly The Little Mermaid and Peter Pan. He often rewound the same scene 
repeatedly. Uncomfortable in noisy, unpredictable social situations, watching a 
video together was one of the few activities that the whole family could share 
and enjoy. They sat through Dumbo so many times that Cornelia once joked, “If I 
have to watch it one more time, I’m going to run away and join the circus!”

But their professional advisers were not happy about Owen’s repetitive viewing 
habit, believing it restricted his development and contributed to his 
isolation. His parents were advised to limit his screen time and Cornelia put 
padlocks on the TV and video and rationed his viewing time and worked hard at 
speech therapy. By six, Owen could put together a simple three-word sentence to 
make a request, with a lot of prompts. But he still mainly spoke in gibberish 
with the occasional movie phrase and seemed disengaged from the world around 
him. His parents constantly wondered what was going on in his head and worried 
about his future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhow-disney-gave-voice-to-a-boy-with-autism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0baa004ff4c8178033948cd817117d40aeae78%2F0_262_4125_2475%2F4125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Disney%20gave%20voice%20to%20a%20boy%20with%20autism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhow-disney-gave-voice-to-a-boy-with-autism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Disney%20gave%20voice%20to%20a%20boy%20with%20autism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhow-disney-gave-voice-to-a-boy-with-autism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0baa004ff4c8178033948cd817117d40aeae78%2F0_262_4125_2475%2F4125.jpg>
 Cornelia and Ron with Owen and his brother Walter. Photograph: Courtesy of the 
Suskind family 
It was the evening of his older brother Walter’s ninth birthday that a 
breakthrough came. Walter was a bit tearful and Owen suddenly said, “Walter 
doesn’t want to grow up – like Peter Pan and Mowgli.” It was the most complex, 
insightful sentence he had ever spoken. Ron grabbed the puppet of Jafar, one of 
Owen’s favourite characters from Aladdin and mimicking Jafar’s voice, asked 
him, “How does it feel to be you?” Owen answered in his own voice, “I’m not 
happy. I don’t have friends. I can’t understand what people say.” From then on, 
it was as if a door had opened into Owen’s world. Ron says, “He was just shy of 
seven, and we realised that he was using these movies to interpret our world, 
the world we are all living in.”

From then on, his family stepped into the movie world with him. They would all 
watch a movie together and impersonate the Disney characters; they would use 
familiar film dialogue to help Owen navigate tricky situations or understand 
social challenges. School and the professionals supporting them were very 
sceptical, worrying that they were indulging Owen’s repetitive behaviours, but 
the Suskinds found an ally in a psychologist, Dan Griffin.

Griffin saw the powerful emotional engagement and energy that came out in 
sessions where the family re-enacted movies. He ended up incorporating Owen’s 
passion for movies into social and role-playing therapy sessions, and he and 
the Suskinds now believe that intensive, heartfelt immersion into the special 
interest or “affinity” of a child with autism can be a way to help them connect.

The jury is out on whether “affinity therapy” could work in all cases. It 
may rely too much on the child having typical cognitive abilities in the first 
place and may not work with those who have severe learning difficulties as well 
as autism. It also requires a willingness to become as genuinely expert in the 
special interest as the child and to provide intensive one-to-one input.

But Ron says, “Maybe we’ll also find more autistic children who struggle with 
the physical aspects of speech or motivation and therefore have been hard to 
assess for cognitive capacity, but in those cases, maybe we can find ways for 
them to communicate using digital devices, like Stephen Hawking. My feeling, 
and some of this is born of exposure to other autistic kids, was that the thing 
that makes the difference is seeing the ‘affinity’ as a map, a code-breaker, 
almost like a vessel that you need to board with them.”

The Suskinds know that not every family who has a child with autism can afford 
to devote the intense time they gave Owen, or assemble a team of supportive 
therapists. Cornelia says: “It is a luxury that most people don’t have and I am 
continually trying to advocate and push for legislation in the US that makes 
insurance more fair so that other families are able to get access to therapy.” 
She and Ron are also working with a software team and neuroscientists at 
Harvard developing an online programme called Sidekicks (named after Owen’s 
favourite type of film characters), which can be tailored to an individual 
child’s special interest and give them support and guidance through a phone app.

Interest in “affinity therapy” has grown since Ron’s book about Owen – Life, 
Animated – was published in 2014. For Cornelia, it wasn’t an easy decision to 
go public: “I am a very private person, and Ron as a journalist who appears on 
TV is a very public person. Years before, he thought about writing something, 
and I said, ‘No way, we are too in the trenches, we are too involved. And there 
is no chance that I would allow you to write something about Owen without his 
full participation, I just think it would be exploitative.’ But then Owen came 
to us when he was about 19 and said, ‘Mom, I wish people understood who I was. 
They don’t know who I am. They don’t understand people like me.’ Ron said, 
‘Would you like me to describe to people who you are?’ And he said, ‘Yes, I 
want people to know people like me. I am more than I appear. I am an unpolished 
gem, a diamond in the rough.’ That’s from Aladdin, of course.”

Cornelia felt their story would be helpful to parents who found themselves as 
baffled by autism as they had been. “It was so important to us that the book 
was completely honest and there was tons of stuff in there that I really 
blanched at. But then I thought if we don’t put the real stuff in, if we were 
not completely honest, it wouldn’t ring true to anyone who has a kid with 
autism. You can totally tell when someone is sugar-coating something, and that 
in my opinion is the worst possible thing.”

The result is a heart-warming and fascinating portrait of a ‘proud autistic 
man’

The book’s publication led the filmmaker Roger Ross Williams, who had won an 
Oscar in 2010 for his short documentary about a group of young disabled 
musicians in Zimbabwe, to approach them about making a film. Owen’s parents 
were fiercely protective of Owen, but, as journalists, they knew they could not 
have editorial control of the film as they had had with the book. But they 
trusted Williams and laid down some ground rules. Cornelia says, “I knew if 
there was something difficult he wanted to film, Roger would discuss it with 
us. He is a very open, kind, intelligent man and I knew he wouldn’t manipulate 
Owen. And Owen could always say if he didn’t want him there, but he never did.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhow-disney-gave-voice-to-a-boy-with-autism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe759dcce603f8b48bac9a829c15f887a2418b80%2F0_0_3732_2883%2F3732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Disney%20gave%20voice%20to%20a%20boy%20with%20autism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhow-disney-gave-voice-to-a-boy-with-autism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Disney%20gave%20voice%20to%20a%20boy%20with%20autism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhow-disney-gave-voice-to-a-boy-with-autism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe759dcce603f8b48bac9a829c15f887a2418b80%2F0_0_3732_2883%2F3732.jpg>
 Owen with his parents this year. Photograph: Nicholas Hunt 
The documentary weaves together a mixture of interviews, home-movie footage, 
Disney clips and specially commissioned animation to tell the book’s story. But 
Williams wanted to take Owen’s story further, and filmed with him over a 
critical year. He was 23, and moving into his own apartment, looking for work 
and going through his first romantic relationship. The result is a 
heart-warming and fascinating portrait of “a proud autistic man”, as Owen 
describes himself in a scene where he addresses a research conference. Owen 
dreams of being a Disney animator one day and we see the character animations 
he has drawn, and a glimpse of his 2,000-word screenplay, The Land of the Lost 
Sidekicks. He holds down three part-time jobs and runs a Disney club for his 
friends, andposts on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCF74XCoI2FKKb4x6LGMWzXA>. It is an amazing 
journey from the child who couldn’t speak or hold a pencil.

Looking back, Cornelia wishes she had known then what she knows now. “While 
there’s no substitute for early intervention therapy, maturation is an 
underrated friend for people on the spectrum. I never expected to see him 
continue to develop so much. He’s now in his mid-20s and it’s just been 
astonishing. His fluidity of speech, his ability to grasp things, his ability 
to connect with his feelings and to express them, that exponential progress has 
come about in the last few years.

“When he was a child, I lived with this burden that every moment counts. I had 
to be doing something productive to encourage language at every moment or 
everything was lost – the panic that I lived with for years was not good 
and not healthy. If there’s one thing I regret, it’s not feeling that I could 
allow myself to enjoy Owen. Finding the joy in your child and experiencing that 
with him is the most important therapy there is.”

Since Life, Animated won best documentary at the Sundance festival, it has 
played extensively in the US. Owen has been to many screenings and is looking 
forward to doing Q&As in the UK this month when he comes here with his family. 
On the telephone from his new home, he told me what it was like to watch the 
film for the first time: “I loved it! It was a little bit difficult to see my 
mom and dad talk about how worried they were about me when I was a boy – that 
made me sad. Back then, I couldn’t understand anyone when they talked to me. It 
was very weird. But I loved making the movie and I love doing the questions 
afterwards. People always ask me what my favourite Disney movie is, but I 
always say I love them all.”

• Life, Animated is on tour <http://dogwoof.com/lifeanimated> with Q&As 
featuring the Suskind family and director Roger Ross Williams before general 
release on 9 December. The book of the same title by Ron Suskind is published 
by Turnaround, £11.99. To order a copy for £9.83, go to bookshop.theguardian.com
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/life-animated.html> or call the Guardian 
Bookshop on 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone 
orders min. p&p of £1.99.
 