
Arts professionals face unique CV writing challenges. Few earn a living 
exclusively from the arts, and the lack of defined career structure often leads 
to a range of work and projects, with no consistent pattern of employment or 
employer. In a live Q&A  
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/career-options-drama-degree?commentpage=all#start-of-comments>
on performing arts and drama, Tom Maguire, chair of theStanding Conference of 
University Drama Departments <http://www.scudd.org.uk/> refers to this as a "
mosaic career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/11007191>", where 
staying in the sector means "developing new skills and turning the skills you 
have in new directions."

General guidelines

Develop more than one CV

You'll probably need different CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> to 
target different roles or industries, with one CV for arts and another for 
non-arts work. Remember, though, skills or experience gained in one sector may 
be appropriate for another. Don't underestimate the usefulness of admin or 
business skills in the arts, for example.

You may also need different CVs for different purposes. In the Quiz the film 
executives Q&A 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/film-industry-careers?commentpage=all#start-of-commentshttp://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/jul/08/film-studies-degree>
,Michael Berliner says: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12418202> "Many 
cinematographers will have a film CV and a commercials CV."

Be selective and concise

Aim to emphasise your overall career path, rather than documenting every 
single job or project. Rob Young, of the London Academy of Music and Dramatic 
Art,suggests that a one page CV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12833698> is 
appropriate for people starting out in theatre.

Be careful how you project yourself. Too many unpaid jobs can signal a lack of 
experience or confidence in your abilities. Kate Elliott, of BECTU,says: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/12834568> "I'd prefer 
to see other unrelated paid work alongside a couple of unpaid positions in 
theatre roles."

Highlight the practical value of qualifications and training

Make the value of your skills or education clear. For example, an MA is useful 
especially in management roles where you'll need an understanding of government 
policy or business development. Marion de Mello Catlin, an independent cultural 
development and communications professional,writes: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/10384397> "Arts 
people are (now) being required to understand research, data, statistics, PIs 
(performance indicators), social and economic impacts, finance, etc."

Suggested CV format

Name, contact details (Include your website or LinkedIn URL – an online 
presence can help establish you as a professional and increase your connections 
in the sector).

Profile/skills

Understand and clarify your niche. Writer and artist Alistair Gentry says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13222778>: "You have 
to be the only person who can do what you do in the way you do it. I have (a 
niche) and I definitely carved that niche. It wasn't sitting there waiting for 
me to just slot in... "

In your profile you can also include specific, vocational skills gained 
through experience or training; and professional affiliation membership if 
required for the role. Alternatively, you can create an Education / 
Professional Affiliations section.

Professional experience

Include self-employment and freelance work, voluntary activities, funded work 
and opportunities you've created yourself, such as where you've partnered with 
other individuals or organisations.

Where possible, focus on tangible results to quantify your achievements. For 
example,practising artist, writer, lecturer and curator Rosalind Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13223029> suggests 
quantifying how many people came to events, or how much money was raised.

You don't need to organise this section chronologically. You can have 
different sub-headings, organising your work history to reflect different types 
of activity, such as festivals, community projects and so on.

Consider an "Additional experience" section for non-arts work, emphasising any 
useful crossover skills, experience or achievements.

Education history

If you have little professional experience, you can make your education 
section more prominent by moving it to under your profile / skills section. 
Keep it brief, spotlighting your most relevant education and training. Add 
details of practical placements, mentoring or work shadowing.

Include a covering letter

This helps make sense of a diverse work history – especially if you can 
highlight relevant projects and skills, and your commitment to the industry.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for our weeklyCareers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 