
Roughly every other week a one-metre-wide asteroid impacts on Earth’s 
atmosphere and creates a spectacular fireball. Meanwhile, every few decades a 
lump of rock the size of a double-decker bus comes our way, creating a small 
crater on the ground like theRussian Chelyabinsk event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/nov/06/chelyabinsk-meteor-russia> on 
15 February 2013.

Asteroids that cause significant damage (football-field-sized rocks) slam into 
us every 5,000 years or so,and the real biggies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/mar/24/evidence-of-largest-asteroid-impact-zone-on-earth-found-in-australian-outback>
 – capable of causing global disaster – arrive every few million years.

So what can we do when Earth ends up in the crosshairs of the next big one? 
One idea is to bump it off its course. And in 2022 scientists plan to test this 
idea, when the Didymos asteroid and its mini-satellite known as “Didymoon” will 
be passing relatively close to Earth.

Asteroids and how to deflect them | Stuart Clark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2013/feb/18/asteroids-how-deflect-dangerous>
The European Space Agency’s Asteroid Impact Mission (Aim), launching in 2020, 
intends tomeasure how much Didymoon is nudged out of line 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Space_Engineering_Technology/Asteroid_Impact_Mission/Asteroid_Impact_Mission2>
 when a micro-lander touches down on its surface.

Preparations for the mission are in full swing, and last month scientists met 
at theEuropean Geosciences Union general assembly in Vienna 
<http://egu2016.eu/home.html> to discuss the plans. Björn Grieger and Michael 
Küppers from the European Space Astronomy Centre in Spain have been working out 
how tomeasure the mass of the 163m-wide Didymoon 
<http://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU2016/EGU2016-12296.pdf>, by watching 
how it wobbles.

Meanwhile, Olivier Barnouin and colleagues at the John Hopkins University in 
Baltimore have been investigating what anasteroid’s shape 
<http://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU2016/EGU2016-17584.pdf> can tell you 
about its history, with their models indicating that collisions tend to produce 
“potato-shaped” asteroids, but that more spherical “top-shaped” asteroids are 
possible too.




 