
How can I make pasta more healthy? Robin Lancaster, Ilkley 

Pasta <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pasta> is often viewed as 
unhealthy, but a few tweaks to serving sizes and sauces will allow you to 
continue enjoying this store-cupboard saviour.

First, we nearly always cook too much pasta, which usually means we're also 
slathering on too much of the rich sauces we love. So check the amount 
suggested as a serving size, then reduce it: 50g dry weight is ample.

When serving meat with pasta, try using meats that are big on flavour, such as 
pancetta or chorizo, but in smaller quantities. Cook these beforehand without 
the addition of fat and drain on kitchen paper before tossing through pasta. If 
making a meat ragu, similarly avoid frying the meat in extra oil. Instead, 
dry-fry it in a non-stick pan, then discard the fat and make the sauce as you 
normally would. Vegetables such as mushrooms can also be dry-fried: just chop, 
put in a hot pan and cover.

If you're making (or buying) a tomato-based sauce, cram in some of your 
five-a-day: add lots of carrots, celery and onion and refine the sauce with 
fresh thyme and a little sage.

Instead of serving the usual bolognese or lasagne, try some lighter ideas, 
such as open ravioli. Blanch a sheet of pasta and top with fresh mint, pureed 
butternut squash, roasted fennel, crisp parma ham (baked in the oven) and a few 
shavings of parmesan.

To avoid overly creamy sauces, always save a little of the cooking liquor you 
drain off from the pasta, as it can be used to make a superb sauce. Add a 
splash of vermouth or white wine and reduce, before whisking in a small amount 
of reduced-fat creme fraiche and some gremolata (chopped parsley, lemon zest 
and garlic). This light sauce is perfect for linguini or pappardelle with a 
handful of fresh crab meat or juicy prawns.

• Sonya Kidney is a chef and the owner of Soda delicatessen, Oxfordshire
 