
Finding a new job in the art world is tough so here are a few points to help 
you stay ahead, progress to more senior roles or change to other sectors of the 
market.

Research

Any job, whether in contemporary art or working with old master paintings, 
requires a great deal of research. The ability to research works of art, or the 
market itself, is very useful and will make you a more desirable candidate.

Taking on your own projects for fun can be a great way to learn about new 
areas of the art world. Putting together small reports on the market is as 
important as researching specific works of art or artists.

Online resources, such as Artnet <http://www.artnet.com/>, Art Info 
<http://www.artinfo.com/> and Art Tactic <http://www.arttactic.com/>, can keep 
you informed about new sectors of the industry. Likewise, if you visit an 
exhibition you enjoy, conduct reports on the artist, their market position or 
the gallery or museum they are showing in. Keep a record of all the exhibitions 
you have worked on, by holding onto a catalogue, press release or exhibition 
announcement so you can refer back to them and discuss them at interview.

Gaining an insight into what is showing where, what is being sold to whom and 
which shows are doing well will prove very beneficial at interview. Don't 
forget to take your portfolio of exhibitions and market research to any 
interviews as this will impress a potential employer.

Appraisals

To get into a specialist role, learn about valuations. You must be able to 
appraise and value works of art in order to move up in an auction house or 
become an adviser. Shadow colleagues, study art market reports, get auction 
results and catalogues and know your figures. You will need to recognise, 
clarify provenance and value works of art at interview so get as much 
experience as you can.

Archiving

Take on archiving projects or manage a project for an artist or gallery. For 
example, you could transfer all the works from an artist's estate onto a 
database. Take ownership of a project like this so you can demonstrate your 
archiving experience; this will help you secure a position as an artist 
liaison, for instance.

Social media

Being able to navigate social media platforms is an increasingly desired 
skill. Start a blog and publish your research projects, talk about trips to 
galleries with photographs of your favourite pieces, post links to other 
interesting sites and publicise your Twitter. Showing you can be creative 
online will really help you move ahead.

Calendar

Know the seasonal art world inside out. Make sure you are aware of all the 
important monthly auctions, fairs and exhibitions â€“ and try and get to as many 
of them as you can. AttendingAsian Art Week <http://www.asianartinlondon.com/> 
in London in November,Old Master Picture Week 
<http://www.christies.com/sales/old-masters-week-london-july-2012/explore.aspx> 
in London in June, the auctions of impressionist art in New York in May,
Maastricht for the TEFAF art fair <https://www.tefaf.com/> in March and the 
contemporary auctions andFrieze art fair <http://friezelondon.com/> in London 
in October. These are must-sees and should be followed from afar if you cannot 
attend them all.

Languages

This is increasingly important as the art market grows and diversifies. If you 
have the option of taking an extra course to perfect any basic language skills 
you have, then do.

Reading

This sounds obvious but there is so much that you are not taught about the art 
market and it is important that you educate yourself. Reading arts newspapers, 
publications, magazines, blogs and forums is highly recommended so you 
understand all about every aspect of the market. Publications, such asThe Art 
Newspaper <http://www.theartnewspaper.com/>, Apollo 
<http://www.apollo-magazine.com/>, the Antiques Trade Gazette 
<http://www.antiquestradegazette.com/> and the collecting section of the FT 
Weekend are all useful, as are online articles, such as inBloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/> and The New York Times <http://www.nytimes.com/>. 
Find a journalist you like, such asCarol Vogel 
<http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/people/v/carol_vogel/index.html>
, and sign up to receive their posts.

Networking

It is an old adage that who you know in the art world really matters. While it 
is not the only way to get ahead, it certainly helps. Attending private views, 
fairs, talks and events and meeting as many people as you can will help you 
gain further reach when looking for a job. The more people that know you are 
looking, the better. Regularly meet with groups of professionals or friends and 
go to exhibitions and shows.

Creating partnerships

Every exhibition or event needs support. If you could secure this through your 
own connections, or by brokering a sponsorship deal for a single or series of 
exhibitions, it will prove invaluable. This could be a financial arrangement or 
support with the event, publication or press.

Throughout your career in art, however, you must be realistic. If you decide 
on a change of path within the art world, such as moving to exhibitions from 
sales, then be prepared to take a step back in order to get there. If you are 
passionate about the change you will soon move ahead and bring the experience 
you do have to this new realm.

Sophie Macpherson is the founder of Sophie Macpherson Ltd 
<http://www.sophiemacpherson.com/>. You can find her on Twitter at @ArtWorldJobs
 <https://twitter.com/ArtWorldJobs>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 