
Another mass murder, another shooting spree, leaving bodies bullet-riddled by 
a legally obtained weapon.

This time, it was Oak Creek, Wisconsin, at a Sikh temple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/wisconsin-shooting>, as people gathered for 
their weekly worship. President Barack Obama said Monday:

"I think all of us recognize that these kinds of terrible, tragic events are 
happening with too much regularity for us not to do some soul-searching."

Amidst the carnage, platitudes. With an average of 32 people killed by guns in 
this country every day – the equivalent offive Wisconsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/wisconsin> massacres per day – both major 
parties refuse to deal with gun control. It's the consensus, not the gridlock, 
that's the problem.

The president's press secretary, Jay Carney, said:

"We need to take common-sense measures that protect second amendment rights 
and make it harder for those who should not have weapons under existing law 
from obtaining weapons."

It's important to note where Jay Carney made that point, reiterating the 
phrase "common sense" five times in relation to the president's intransigence 
against strengthening gun laws, and invoking "second amendment" a stunning 
eight times. He spoke from theJames S Brady press briefing room 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_S._Brady_Press_Briefing_Room> in the White 
House, named after one of Carney's predecessors, shot in the head by John 
Hinckley during the attempted assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981. 
Brady survived and co-founded, with his wife, theBrady Campaign to Prevent Gun 
Violence <http://www.bradycampaign.org/>. After each of these massacres, the 
Brady Campaign has called for strengthened gun control.

This latest mass killing was very likely a hate crime, perpetrated by Wade 
Michael Page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/08/wade-michael-page-violent-far-right>
, a white, 40-year-old US army veteran with links to white supremacist groups 
and membership in skinhead rock bands. Page grew up in Littleton, Colorado, the 
same town where, in 1999, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold plotted and executed 
their mass-murder plan at Columbine High School.

Page was in the US army from 1992 to 1998. He did missile-system repairs and 
later was a "psychological operations" specialist, although it is not clear in 
what capacity, based first at Fort Bliss, Texas, then at Fort Bragg, North 
Carolina. Page received a "general discharge" from the army, lower than an 
honorable discharge, but not as bad as a dishonorable one. Reports suggest he 
had a problem with alcohol, with several arrests for drunken driving.

He recently lost a truck-driving job for the same reason, which may have 
precipitated the loss of his home to foreclosure. Page may have been troubled, 
but he was by no means unknown. After the shooting, FBI Special Agent Teresa 
Carlson of Milwaukee told the press:

"There may be references to him in various files, and those are things that 
are being analyzed right now, but, we had no reason to believe, and as far as 
we know, no law-enforcement agency had any reason to believe that he was 
planning or plotting or capable of such violence."

Page was a prominent member of the neo-Nazi skinhead music scene, was known to 
the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks rightwing hate groups, and was 
also personally interviewed, between 2001 and 2003, by Pete Simi, associate 
professor of criminology at the University of Nebraska at Omaha. Despite the 
arrests, despite the history of membership in hate groups, Page was able to 
walk into a gun shop and buy the 9mm pistol legally, according to the shop 
owner.

The fact that it was legal is the problem.

As if on cue, two days after Page's murderous rampage in Wisconsin, Jared 
Loughner appeared in court to plead guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/07/jared-loughner-pleads-guilty-arizona>
 to the shooting spree in Tucson, Arizona, that left six dead and many injured, 
including former member of Congress Gabrielle Giffords. Loughner has been 
diagnosed with schizophrenia, and will spend the rest of his life behind bars.

Patricia Maisch survived the shooting. As Loughner was tackled that day in 
January 2011, Maisch grabbed the high-capacity magazine that Loughner was using 
to reload his gun. Maisch and two other survivors of that shooting have 
launched an advertisement with the groupMayors Against Illegal Guns 
<http://www.mayorsagainstillegalguns.org/html/home/home.shtml>, demanding that 
both President Obama and Governor Mitt Romney come up with a plan to deal with 
guns in this country.

The day after the Wisconsin shooting, I spoke with Gurcharan Grewal, president 
of the Sikh Religious Society of Wisconsin. He told me:

"Ultimately, the problem comes to gun control. I don't know when we're going 
to get serious about all this, and I don't know how many more lives it will 
take before something will be done."

Neither Obama nor Romney agrees that gun control is the answer. It will take a 
movement to make it happen.

• Denis Moynihan contributed research to this column.

© 2012 Amy Goodman; distributed by King Features Syndicate
 