
Laura Robson

Was 15 years and 9 days old on 30 January 2009

At her age, Robson has already achieved a remarkable amount, winning the 
Wimbledon girls' championship last year and now reaching the final of junior 
girls' singles at theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Robson, a wildcard on her 
WTA main tour debut, managed to take a set off the top-50 player Iveta Benesova 
in the opening round. Now ranked 514, her record compares favourably with many 
others at the same age ...

Jelena Jankovic

Was 15 years and nine days old on ... 9 March 2000

By Robson's age, Jankovic was enjoying mixed success in junior tournaments in 
Europe, North America and South America. Her most promising result came at 
Chile's Milo Cup, where she reached the semi-finals in 2000, but her career did 
not properly take off until later.

Serena Williams

... on 5 October 1996

Though she turned professional in September 1995, Serena's only tournament 
appearance in that year was at Quebec City, where she lost to Ann Miller in the 
qualifiers. She did not participate in any tournaments in 1996.

Dinara Safina

... on 6 May 2001

Safina had been a winner and finalist in several tournaments at junior level – 
success which she managed to carry over to senior level, winning the $10,000 
Rome in 2001. By the end of 2001 she was ranked at 392.

Elena Dementieva

... on 24 October 1996

Made it to the finals of the Indonesia Astra International Junior 
Championships and the Nike Junior Challenge in 1996, then won at the $10,000 
Jurmala in Latvia having entered as a qualifier. By the end of the year her 
ranking was 624.

Ana Ivanovic

... on 15 November 2002

At the Junior Championships at Roland Garros in 2002, Ivanovic progressed as 
far as the quarter-finals, her greatest success to date. Later that year she 
was knocked out in first round of the Junior Championships at Wimbledon and the 
US Open.

Venus Williams

... on June 26 1995

By this time, Venus had already been playing professionally for nine months. 
Her talent was evident in the one senior tournament she had played, at Oakland, 
where she lost to the top seed Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in the second round 
after being up a set and a break.

Vera Zvonareva

... on 16 September 1999

A regular player in junior events in Russia and eastern Europe, Zvonareva had 
won tournaments, as well as beating Britain's Anne Keothavong and Elena 
Baltacha on the way to the finals at Vasteras in Sweden.

Svetlana Kuznetsova

... on 6 July 2000

Kuznetsova had by this stage enjoyed moderate success in her junior career. 
Her best results were reaching the quarter-finals in the $10,000 Mallorca and – 
in junior competition – the finals of the French Riviera International. By the 
end of 2000 her ranking was 889.

Maria Sharapova

... on 28 April 2002

A regular finalist in junior tournaments, in 2002 Sharapova was runner-up in 
the Australian Open girls' event to Barbora Strycova, as well as winning the 
$10,000 Gunma in Japan. By the end of the year her ranking had risen to 186.
 