
George Hardwick 1946-48

England’s first post-second world war captain, the left-sided Middlesbrough 
defender from Saltburn-by-the-sea played in only 12 internationals before a 
knee injury ended his career. Hardwick, who died in 2004, also captained a 
Great Britain team in a showpiece game against the rest of Europe in 1947.

Billy Wright 1948-59

The first player to win 100 international caps, the Wolves stalwart and 
centre-half captainedEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 90 
times – a record he shares with Bobby Moore – and led the team into World Cup 
adventures in 1950, 1954 and 1958. Wright, who died in 1994, married Joy 
Beverley of the Beverley Sisters.

Johnny Haynes 1960-1962

The first player to be paid £100 a week following the abolition of the £20 
maximum wage in 1961, Haynes, a prolific inside-forward, won most of his 
England caps while playing in the old second division for Fulham. Pelé 
described him as the “best passer of a ball” he had ever seen. Haynes died in 
2005.

Jimmy Armfield 1962-64

Another one club man, Armfield devoted his career to Blackpool. He captained 
England 15 times, enjoying the distinction of being voted the world’s best 
right-back during the 1962 World Cup in Chile. Now 78, he was selected for the 
1966 tournament but missed out through injury. Became a journalist and still 
analyses matches for Radio 5 Live.

Bobby Moore 1964-1973

The immaculate West Ham central defender – acknowledged as among the world’s 
very best – captained England a joint-record 90 times, leading them to World 
Cup winning glory in 1966. Aged 51 when he died of cancer in 1993. Pelé said 
Moore was the most difficult defender he ever faced.

Kevin Keegan 1976-1982

The Liverpool, Hamburg, Southampton and Newcastle United forward was, in many 
ways, football’s first superstar. Now 63, Keegan imbued the national side with 
verve and glamour until his international retirement in 1982. He later returned 
as national coach from 1999-2000, famously resigning in the Wembley toilets.

Bryan Robson 1982-91

Captain Marvel, Captain Fantastic, take your pick but Robson led England 65 
times. Very much the complete, and fearless, central midfielder, the Manchester 
United icon was a particular favourite of Sir Bobby Robson. Indeed Sir Bobby 
said that, along withAlan Shearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer>, Robson was one of the two 
best British players he had worked with. Now 57, he enjoyed a successful stint 
managing Middlesbrough during the 1990s.

Gary Lineker 1990-92

The only English player to have won the Golden Boot at the World Cup _ 
Lineker’s six goals in five games in 1986 secured it – he was famously never 
booked or sent off during a prolific career for Leicester, Everton, Barcelona, 
Spurs and his country. Helped England – who he captained 18 times – reach the 
semi-finals of Italia 90 and is, at 53, BBC’s consummate Match of the Day 
anchor.

Alan Shearer 1996-2000

At 44 Shearer sits alongside Gary Lineker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-lineker> in a BBC television studio 
but when Glenn Hoddle made the former Southampton, Blackburn and Newcastle 
striker the England captain he was the complete centre-forward. Leading from 
the front, he wore the armband 34 times, unnerving the best defences along the 
way.

David Beckham 2000-2006

Some thought there would be no way back for Beckham following that retaliatory 
foul on Diego Simeone and red card during France 98 but, partly due to a 
wonderful free-kick against Greece in 2001 to earn 2002 World Cup 
qualification, he became a national treasure. Now 39 he was made captain by 
Peter Taylor in 2000 and wore the armband 58 times.

John Terry 2006-10 and 2011-12

One of the best centre-halves of his generation Terry is 33 and still going 
strong for Chelsea. On appointing him England captain in 2006 Steve McClaren 
predicted he would be one of England’s finest but instead Terry ended up twice 
being stripped of the armband. First by Fabio Capello in the wake of 
allegations concerning his private life and then by the FA following 
accusations that he had racially abused Anton Ferdinand.

Steven Gerrard 2012-14

Offered the captaincy on a permanent basis by Roy Hodgson, Gerrard proved a 
fine ambassador until his retirement from international football this summer 
following England’s World Cup disappointment in Brazil. At 34 and still 
excellent for Liverpool there is a sense of frustration that one of the most 
talented midfielders and natural leaders of his era never quite fulfilled his 
potential on the global stage.
 