
With the UK's largest publishing companies reporting falling profits 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/oct/29/penguin-revenues-decline-2-percent-pearson>
, it's easy to assume that the future is gloomy for professional writers. But 
technology and market forces have conspired to create a perfect storm of 
opportunity and possibility for self-publishing.

Being a self-published author has never been easier and, if done effectively, 
it's an increasingly viable career path. But turning a hobby into a profession 
requires perseverance and planning.

Practice makes perfect

It's only through continual writing that you will be able to develop your 
style and improve the ongoing quality of your work. It's very easy to be 
forgotten in the fast-moving world of publishing, so continuing to bring out 
new work will not only enhance your skills but help to keep the revenue flowing 
and raise your profile.

Perseverance is key – although incredibly rewarding, writing can also be one 
of the most frustrating and indeed difficult careers. It isn't easy conjuring 
up plots, never mind getting them down onto a page or a screen. The best way of 
overcoming any struggle is perseverance, and this is no exception. Keep your 
goals and hopes at the forefront of your mind and keep at it. Putting that 
final word on that final page is worth it.

Being confident in your writing will benefit your work, but remember to stay 
objective. I call it swagger – it's the same principal as appearing confident 
in social situations. Readers can tell when an author is writing with 
confidence and boldness and they respond to it. At the same time, don't be 
afraid to have others that you respect critique your work; be prepared to take 
their criticism and tips.

Keep publishing professional

Because of the ease of self-publishing, sloppy editing and amateur-looking 
covers have become commonplace. But it's crucial to always strive for the 
best-quality work. There are plenty of affordable freelance editors out there 
who can nip any silly mistakes in the bud. If you are looking for help with 
covers or design, you can also use crowd-sourcing websites likecrowdSpring 
<http://www.crowdspring.com/index/4/>, which are convenient, affordable, and 
open to huge communities of designers who will bid for your project.

Take advantage free technology

One of the best things about self-publishing is the software and technology 
available for free. One of my personal favourite providers is theKindle Direct 
Publishing <https://kdp.amazon.com/self-publishing/signin> (KDP) platform. It's 
an easy-to-use online portal for authors that lets you self-publish your ebook 
for free – and can give you up to 70% in royalties.

Don't ignore paperbacks

Many people wrongly associate self-publishing as exclusively e-publishing. In 
fact, by restricting yourself you can miss out on an important revenue stream 
and a raft of other marketing techniques including those all-important book 
signings. There are a range of print-on-demand companies out there, such as 
Amazon'sCreateSpace <https://www.createspace.com/> and Lightning Source 
<http://www1.lightningsource.com/>. Through these, you can print as many books 
as you like, when you like and, unlike traditional publishers, you don't have 
to make a huge initial investment.

But keep your wits about you – unfortunately there are some companies out 
there that prey on the fact people know little about self-publishing. They 
offer publishing packages that are over-priced and packed with hidden costs and 
grandiose jargon.

Build an online presence

A website is the first step as it's generally the first port of call for 
people looking to find out more about you. Websites likeWix 
<http://www.wix.com/> allow you to build your own site quickly and easily.

Develop an online network to promote your work by engaging with people on a 
personal level – and treat your readers like royalty. Remember, by engaging 
with your readers, they are far more likely to keep an interest in your work 
and spread the word.

Get people talking

Authors thrive off their readers' reviews. People like to know what other 
people think before committing fully to a purchase, so reviews and star ratings 
are essential. By garnering ratings from as many of your readers as you can, 
you turn each of them into an ambassador for your book. Review sites and blogs 
can also get you great exposure.

Above all, give it time and effort. Success doesn't happen overnight, no 
matter what they say. Sometimes it may seem that you're not getting anywhere 
fast but, like your writing skills, marketing also takes time and effort to 
develop. Keep that in mind and keep persevering.

Ben Galley is a self-published author and founder of SHELF HELP 
<http://www.bengalley.com/BenGalley.com/Shelf-Help.html>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct To your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 