
An invisible border cuts through British soil. Not the north-south divide, nor 
the Anglo-Scottish border, but a mysterious meridian running through Bathgate 
and Bo’ness.

You might call it the real West Lothian question: somewhere in this area of 
Scotland people stop eating their chips with salt and vinegar, as they do to 
the west, and instead prefer it with “salt’n’soss”, Edinburgh-style, doused in 
brown sauce mixed with malt vinegar, poured out of an old glass Irn Bru bottle.

Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is full of these 
strange culinary ley lines, and nothing is a more accurate divining rod than 
the humble fried potato: a dish whose sole ingredient may have arrived on the 
continent from central America, but whose global reputation was fostered in the 
kitchens of fashionable French and Belgian restaurants in the 19th century.

In Holland, “they fuckin’ drown” their French fries in mayonnaise, as the 
whole world knows afterwatching Pulp Fiction <https://youtu.be/uYSt8K8VP6k> – 
but that is only half the story. In some parts of the Netherlands,fritessaus – 
a sweeter form of mayonnaise – is more popular.Joppiesaus – mayo with onion and 
curry powder – hails from Neede and Glanerbrug near the German border.

And in parts of the country, mayonnaise makes way altogether for 
Indonesian-style satay sauce, known aspindasaus or satésaus. (patatje oorlog or 
“war chips” combines the two traditions, and throws in chopped onions for good 
measure). In 2003, a Cape Verdian hairdresser in Rotterdam collaborated with a 
neighbouring stylist onpatat kapsalon 
<http://i1.wp.com/www.stoerejongenzzz.nl/wp-content/uploads/Kapsalon.jpg>: 
chips with shawarma (similar to a kebab) and salad, covered in cheese. The dish 
can now be found across the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-do-you-like-your-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07d6e12301bc7ba09239ffc228fe620c3b35613%2F285_726_3302_1981%2F3302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20you%20like%20your%20chips%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-do-you-like-your-chips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20you%20like%20your%20chips%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-do-you-like-your-chips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07d6e12301bc7ba09239ffc228fe620c3b35613%2F285_726_3302_1981%2F3302.jpg>
 Chips and mayonnaise, the Dutch favourite. Photograph: Image 
Source/Shutterstock 
Moving across the border into Germany’s Ruhr valley, another compromise has 
become a chippy standard: fries with mayonnaise and ketchup, known as Pommes 
rot-weiss, or Pommes Schranke, named after the colour scheme on level-crossing 
barriers. Further east, in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, anything deep-fried 
will be garnished withtatárska omáčka or tartar sauce: mayonnaise mixed with 
chopped pickled gherkins and onions. Bulgarians layer their chips with agrated 
white brine cheese 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/martincroonenbroeck/7164009855> called sirene. 

Spain has patatas aioli (featuring mayonnaise with garlic), or patatas bravas 
with a spicy sauce whose ingredients vary from region to region. Usually made 
of flour, onion and red pepper,bravas sauce also includes tomato, vinegar and 
spices in the old foodie capital of Burgos. In Catalonia, some tapas bars 
differentiate betweenbravas de aquí 
<http://www.platosbarcelona.com/2013/11/Patatas-Bravas-en-la-Fabrica-Moritz.html>
 andbravas de allá – bravas “from here” and bravas from elsewhere, the former 
being served withaioli and cayenne pepper, the latter with the usual mix of 
spicy tomato and mayonnaise.

None of these strange condiment equators appear in your ordinary Ordnance 
Survey map – which is why we are starting this new regular series. Let us know 
in the form below this article whether we’ve missed any significant regional 
food trends on this week’s subject. Are chips with tzatziki really a thing in 
Greece? Is salt really as far as chip shops in Italy and France are willing to 
push the boat out? Why do Brummies prefer curry sauce over ketchup, vinegar or 
tartare sauce on their fish and chips – as a2014 survey 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/whats-on/food-drink-news/brummies-just-cant-enough-curry-7727774>
 found?

Tell us your region’s chip preferences (and try to go beyond tomato ketchup). 
Over the course of the week, we will harvest the information – by Friday, we’ll 
produce an illustrated map.
 