
A comic can take many forms – from self-published zines, hand-stapled fresh 
from the photocopier, to the slickly produced work of major publishers, to 
webcomics. There are also many ways of creating comics, from pencil and ink, to 
digital pens and pads, to embroidery. Equipment and format aside, the genesis 
of a comic and the way it all comes together is also hugely varied.

As one of the curators of the forthcoming Comics Unmasked: Art And Anarchy In 
The UK <http://www.bl.uk/comics-unmasked> show at the British Library (opening 
2 May), it was a natural fit to work with the Guardian to create new 
collaborations between important contemporary authors and top comic artists. We 
knew to expect the unexpected, but even so, the exciting hybrids that grew from 
these collaborations surprised us with their ingenuity and diversity.Roger 
Langridge <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Langridge> (Fred The Clown 
<http://hotelfred.blogspot.co.uk>) and Michel Faber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michelfaber> (The Crimson Petal And The 
White, Under The Skin) created a political satire, Art And Anarchy.Audrey 
Niffenegger <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/audreyniffenegger> (The Time 
Traveler's Wife) andEddie Campbell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eddie_Campbell>
 (From Hell) penned a modern tale of love and paranoia, called Thursdays, 
6-8pm. Masks, byGillian Flynn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gillian-flynn> 
(Gone Girl) andDave Gibbons <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dave_Gibbons> (
Watchmen <http://www.dccomics.com/graphic-novels/watchmen>), is a chillingly 
dark tale of maternal vigilantism, while up-and-coming talentChristian Ward 
<http://www.cwardillustration.com> (Infinite Vacation, Young Avengers) adapted 
Margaret Atwood <https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>'s short 
story Freeforall, a typically dystopian vision of love and marriage.AM Homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/am-homes>' short story Do You Hear What I 
Hear?, a chilling tale of an unwelcome phone call, was transformed into a 
stunning comic byFrazer Irving <http://frazerirving.tumblr.com> (Batman), and 
Dave Eggers <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dave-eggers> wrote and drew his 
own comic, a tale of a lonely but impassioned bison, called Having Renewed My 
Fire. They will be appearing in a special issue of Weekend magazine tomorrow, 
and will be going online from today and into next week.

A few words may be helpful in bringing to life the process of creating these 
stories. Even with a visual medium such as comics, everything starts with the 
written word. Some of the great comics creators –Dan Clowes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/daniel-clowes> (Ghost World), Robert Crumb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-crumb> (Fritz the Cat) and Chris Ware 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chris-ware> (Jimmy Corrigan: The Smartest 
Kid On Earth) – write and draw their comics, allowing for a meticulously 
faithful rendering of their visions. But that can be a lonely path to walk, and 
part of the magic of comics can come from the collaboration of a writer and 
artist engaged to tell the same story. If the partnership works, it creates 
something that is greater than the sum of its parts. Different perspectives add 
layers of meaning that ultimately enrich the experience for the reader. Of 
course, an unsuccessful collaboration can have the opposite effect, muddying 
the waters creatively, in much the the same way that a bad music video can have 
a negative impact on a song.

A writer such as Alan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> 
(Watchmen, V For Vendetta) is known for his dense scripts, carefully building 
up the world he is creating for his collaborators. Far from being prescriptive, 
this detail allows the artist a solid bedrock from which to operate, confident 
that he is achieving – or, better yet, sharing – the writer's vision. Novelist 
and comics writerNeil Gaiman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> 
(Sandman, American Gods) also clearly relishes this stage of the creative 
process, and writes engaging, almost conversational scripts that lead the 
artist into his world. In Gaiman's case, he's even been known to sketch out a 
rough miniature copy of an issue to guide the artist through its layout.

In early Marvel comics, writer Stan Lee <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stan_Lee>
 would provide a brief written story outline to artist collaborators such as
Steve Ditko <http://www.steveditko.com> and Jack Kirby <http://kirbymuseum.org>
, requiring them visually to plot out the comics. He would then add captions 
and dialogue to the artwork to complete it. The latter process is far more 
appropriate for action-based storytelling than for a complex narrative. This 
led to much controversy decades later when their creations became 
multimillion-dollar behemoths – who had been the creator? The truth was, they 
all had.

Comics fans and people new to the form alike will enjoy these great stories 
that illustrate the potential of this extraordinary storytelling form, a form 
that is becoming increasingly influential internationally.

• Comics Unmasked: Art And Anarchy In The UK <http://www.bl.uk/comics-unmasked>
 opens at the British Library, London NW1, on 2 May, and is curated by John 
Harris Dunning, Paul Gravett and Adrian Edwards.
 