
Sometimes you can't help but be bowled over when the music comes in over the 
pictures. When the boom boom-boom spash! of Be My Babyexplodes over the start 
of Mean Streets <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0KMxLvsvLI> after Harvey 
Keitel's warning about where you pay for your sins. Or when Jesse Eisenberg 
warns "Fasten your seatbelts, it's going to be a bumpy ride," beforethe credits 
of Zombieland <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NVYP46ecl4Y>, followed 
immediately by Metallica launching into For Whom the Bell Tolls.

What you don't expect, maybe, is for a couple of middle-aged men trundling 
around Italy in a Mini, sometimes talking over the top of the music, sometimes 
singing along, in a semi-improvised BBC comedy travelogue, to lead to the chart 
resurrection ofAlanis Morissette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alanis-morissette>.

Well, chart resurrection might be pitching it a little bit high. But one of 
the more surprising new entries in the UK albums chart on Sunday was 
Morissette's debut album, Jagged Little Pill, which appeared at No 40. Given 
that there hasn't been an awful lot of Morissette activity recently – the 
curious case of her missing dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/apr/03/alanis-morissette-circus-of-the-absurd-dog-kidnap>
 aside – it seems reasonable to assume this is the result of her music 
appearing inThe Trip to Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/apr/25/the-trip-steve-coogan-rob-brydon-michael-winterbottom>
, playing on the car stereo as Rob Brydon and Steve Coogan drive from nice 
restaurant to nice restaurant.

The reason they are listening to Morissette is that it is – ostensibly – 
Brydon's wife's favourite album, and the only one they have with them. The 
obvious thing to do, probably, would have been to have Coogan moan incessantly 
about it; for the pair tomock the misuse of "ironic" 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nT1TVSTkAXg>; for them to add Morissette to 
their list of impressions (Michael Caine, Roger Moore 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Av1kCIdz0wk>, Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, Hugh 
Grant, Alan Bennett and so on).

But they don't. They sing along wholeheartedly, and the music becomes as one 
with the mood of the show – sometimes sad, but usually warm, funny and often 
tender. Watching it, I didn't find myself thinking – as I did when the videos 
from Jagged Little Pill were all over TV in the mid-90s – that it was whiny and 
dreary. I kept feeling surprised by how good it sounded. And, clearly, others 
felt the same (though given that, according to the Official Charts Company, it 
took a little under 2,000 sales to reach No 40, we're not talking about enough 
people for Morissette to be planning a stadium tour anytime soon).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Falanis-morissette%2Fyou-oughta-know-video-music-video%2F219066%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Falanis-morissette%2Fyou-oughta-know-video-music-video%2F219066%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Falanis-morissette%2Fyou-oughta-know-video-music-video%2F219066%2F&media=>
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch video of You Oughta Know 
<http://www.muzu.tv/alanis-morissette/you-oughta-know-video-music-video/219066/>
Matching music to TV programming has become very big business. The major 
labels have "synch" departments, charged with licensing out music for TV shows, 
adverts and films. The people who choose the music for big TV shows become 
musical hitmakers in their own right.Alexandra Patsavas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/mar/09/popandrock4>, for example, 
selected the music for the Twilight movies, The OC, Gossip Girl and Grey's 
Anatomy, among others, and now has her own label, Chop Shop. She'sa staple of 
lists of the most powerful people in the music industry 
<http://www.billboard.com/biz/5876708/alexandra-patsavas-the-2014-billboard-power-100>
.

But what the music supervisors and synch departments do is a different kind of 
dance to what we've seen in The Trip to Italy. The music supervisors want the 
perfect emotional moment to soundtrack some defining event, hence there is more 
or less a genre now we might call "montage music", encompassing all those 
melancholy ballads that still contain a spark of hope (anyone remember Liam 
Gallagher asserting that Oasis'sStop Crying Your Heart Out 
<http://www.muzu.tv/oasis/stop-crying-your-heart-out-music-video/2210991/> 
would soundtrack England's exit from the 2002 World Cup?). The latter want to 
get the biggest possible exposure for their highest priority acts and bring in 
as much cash as possible. It's never music for music's sake.
 Rob Brydon, left, and Steve Coogan sing along to Alanis as they drive in The 
Trip to Italy. 
That is what's different about hearing Alanis Morissette on The Trip to Italy. 
No one in their right mind would think You Oughta Know is the perfect artistic 
(or commercial) accompaniment to a comedy about two middle-aged men driving 
round Italy. It's not there to summon an emotion, or create a mood of 
foreboding, or signify how cool our heroes are. It's played for the same reason 
so much of our car music is played: that's the disc that's in the car, so 
that's what we're listening to. And freed from the burden of having to mean 
anything more than being something for two blokes to sing along to, it sounds 
kind of great.

So, what songs have you heard popping up in unexpected contexts on TV or in 
film and thought: I never knew I liked that? Let us know.
 