
Many teachers greet A-level results day with very mixed feelings. While there 
are always plenty of successes to celebrate, there are also always disappointed 
pupils who didn’t get the grades they expected. What can teachers do to make 
sure pupils feel supported through the highs and lows of the day?

We asked our teaching community to share their tips, which we’ve gathered 
below. If you have some advice you’d like to share, head to the comments 
section or tweet us @GuardianTeach.


Be the voice of calm

With emotions running high, a lot of the teachers told us that their job is to 
be a calming presence on results day.


Deputy head of media and English at Chew Valley School 
<http://www.chewvalleyschool.co.uk/>, Chris Hildrew, says: “This is a high 
pressure day for young people and their families. Schools get the results the 
day before, so senior staff can prepare advice for those whose results are not 
what they had hoped for. We assign specific staff who know the young people 
well to look out for particular students coming in. Once envelopes are open, we 
can take them aside and work through the options with them.”

Rachel Jones, e-learning coordinator at King Edward VI School 
<http://www.kes.hants.sch.uk/> in Southampton, says that as well as being 
reassuring, you also need to be realistic with students and not promise a grade 
will go up if remarked.

Use your experience and the facts

As teachers we have seen it all before and we know the system, says Hildrew.

Clearing is an effective process and university admissions offices make every 
effort to help, he adds. “We can usually find a place for a student who wants 
to go to university, even if they’ve missed their offer. However, for the young 
people and their anxious families this is often their first encounter with Ucas 
and, even if the parents have been through university themselves, the system is 
very different now.”

Hildrew says that it is for this reason that teachers should use all of their 
knowledge and experience to calm situations down, address any misconceptions or 
prejudices about clearing and come up with appropriate options.

Another useful tip offered by Hildrew is to use facts because this can take 
the sting out of stressful results experiences. “What did the student actually 
get? What has the university actually said? It’s the unknowns that increase 
stress, so get the facts straight before making any decisions.”

Talk to pupils away from parents


Kendal Mills, who works for Stamford School in Lincolnshire 
<http://www.ses.lincs.sch.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>, says: “Over 
the past five years or so I’ve noticed a considerable increase in the number of 
parents accompanying their children and standing with them as they open the 
envelope. I believe it makes an already stressful situation far worse and I 
feel very sorry for those students. It’s a lot to take in, and having mum or 
dad (or in some cases both) looking over their shoulder is dreadful. It’s 
better for students to open results, talk to their friends, talk to their 
teachers and then face parents when they feel prepared.”


Be prepared



Teachers will need to respond to any questions students might have and any 
clearing queries. It’s good to explore what students might be dealing with the 
night before so you can ease any worries they might have.

There will be tears


Tissues are an essential on results day, whether for tears of joy or sorrow. 
Rachel Jones says: “Take in milk. Clearing is tough on everyone. You deserve 
tea.” She adds that, because clearing goes into action immediately and at a 
frenzied pace, teachers also need to be there to support students in the days 
that follow results day.

Teacher Julia Knight from a secondary school in Thailand says: “Just listen 
[to students], don’t interrupt. Let them experience the emotions and come to 
their own conclusions. University places, re-sits can be discussed at another 
time.”

Teachers shouldn’t be afraid to show a bit of emotion themselves. Sally 
Macdougal, English teacher atTownley Grammar School 
<http://www.townleygrammar.org.uk/> in Bexleyheath, says: “It doesn’t matter 
whether it’s a hug, a pep talk or a joke – if it comes from the heart it’ll 
mean the world to your students because it shows you care.”
Jane Simons (@Jane010879) 
@GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach> Accept that there will be 
tears - and try to embrace them - both good & bad. Oh and the students might 
cry as well as you!
 <https://twitter.com/Jane010879/statuses/498829768318783488> August 11, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Jane010879/statuses/498829768318783488> 
Think about what this means for your students


Joanne Grace, a special educational needs consultant, says: “On results day in 
special schools many teachers face families who once again have cause to 
realise ttudents walk a road less travelled it is still a mighty good journey.”

Bring a phone charger

There are some useful practical tips for the day too, especially around the 
necessary technologies. Jones says: “Take your phone charger. Students always 
seem to forget to charge their phones.” She adds that students may need access 
to IT rooms to use a computer if necessary.

Have confidence in yourself

Teacher Matt Britland says that when dealing with results day, teachers should 
have confidence that they’ve done their best to help students: “There are many 
things that happen in students’ lives that can affect results, so as long as we 
are happy with the support we have given them, we should be happy. That 
certainly helps me to alleviate some of the stress.”

Use senior management to deal with difficult pupils


“No individual teacher should have to deal with difficult students,” says 
Amanda Salt fromGrosvenor Grammar School 
<http://www.grosvenorgrammarschool.org.uk/> in Belfast. “That’s what senior 
management teams are there for. If anyone approaches them and are verbally 
abusive, they should terminate the conversation and redirect them.”

Use your life experience

“While helping pupils to decide on the next move, teachers should use their 
longer experience of life to explain how fallible exams are as a test of true 
academic ability. They should explain that there are many alternative routes to 
a particular goal, and results are not a definitive judgement on the student,” 
says teacher Katherine Edwards.

Follow us on Twitter via GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx?CMP=dis_42> for lesson 
resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/schools?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to your inbox.

 