
Rio Ferdinand <>, player and fan

England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> fans have got to keep 
their expectations low. High expectations heap pressure on the players and I've 
felt that before. Being knocked out of tournaments rips your heart out because 
you know you've let down everyone back in the pubs at home. We've got a young 
team, so don't expect them to win the tournament outright. Just hope they work 
hard for their country. I will be happy with anything past the quarter-finals.

I've been an England fan since I was seven. The first kit I owned was the red 
England away kit; I used to wear it all the time. I remember watchingArgentina 
beat England in 1986 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2002/may/19/worldcupfootball2002.football2> 
when Maradona scored that amazing goal. That's when I fell in love with playing 
football. One of my favourite moments as an England fan was as a player,beating 
Argentina 1-0 in the 2002 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/jun/07/minutebyminute.worldcupfootball20022>
. But the best moment for England has to bewhen we lifted the Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/jul/30/englandfootballteam> back in 
1966.
 Rio Ferdinand: 'I've been an England fan since I was seven.' Photograph: Mike 
Hewitt/Getty Images 
This is the first time in years that I'm just a fan again. If England get 
knocked out, I will be gutted, but it will also mean I can enjoy the rest of 
the tournament a little more. This year I'm watching as a pundit. If the BBC 
puts a camera on me during the games, the audience will see a different side 
to me. I go totally crazy. How would I celebrate if England win? You just wait 
and see.

• Rio Ferdinand is part of the BBC's World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> lineup.

Alan Shearer, former player
 Alan Shearer, right, and David Beckham. 'The emotional rollercoaster is all 
part of being an England fan.' Photograph: Ross Kinnaird/Allsport 
I wouldn't wish penalties on my worst enemy. It's difficult watching them as a 
fan, but as a player they are so tough. That walk from the halfway line to the 
penalty spot in 1998 was the longest of my life. Fortunately, I scored. Once 
that ball goes into the back of the net, the relief you feel is out of this 
world. God knows what you do if you miss one. It's not about letting down the 
80,000 in the stadium or the millions watching at home. It's actually about 
letting down the 10 men stood behind you.

The emotional rollercoaster is all part of being an England fan. This year, we 
should prepare for a rough and bumpy ride. Prepare to be entertained, but 
disappointed. I think at best we'll get to the semi-finals. If our players give 
everything but get knocked out for some bizarre reason like penalties or a 
referee decision, we will understand and accept that. No one goes out there to 
make a mistake. If a player gives their all, then no one can complain.

A good fan is one that turns up. The cost of getting to Brazil and the games 
must be horrendous, so for anyone to do so is commendable. Other nations see 
England fans as being very passionate, noisy and patriotic. TheThree Lions song 
for Euro 96 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RJqimlFcJsM> was the best. We used 
to play it on the bus and in the dressing room. It got us going and reminded us 
what we were playing for.

• Alan Shearer <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alan-shearer> is part of 
the BBC's World Cup lineup.

Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>, shadow chancellor
 Ed Balls: 'This World Cup I'm expecting pain, despair, tears and heartache – 
the usual.' Photograph: Jeff Mitchell/The FA via Getty Images 
It's time to do what any proper World Cup fan always does: buy a Panini album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/apr/11/panini-stickers-my-obsession> 
(for you or the kids) and start collecting stickers.

This World Cup I'm expecting pain, despair, tears and heartache – the usual. 
My worst memory as an England fan? Flying out to Toulouse to see England lose 
to Romania in the first round in 1998. It was so depressing, and the only 
accommodation we could get was 50 miles outside the city. I got to the room at 
3am and left again at 5am to get a flight. Miserable.

I was born in 1967, and 47 years later I'm still waiting to witness England 
win the World Cup. Of course I've dreamed about playing for England in a World 
Cup-winning team, beating Brazil. I was in our area team at primary school and 
I had a trial for Wolves as an 11-year-old. But I didn't get a call back. The 
writing was on the wall.

As an England fan, you have to believe we are going to win. With the finals 
just weeks away, I will allow a slight 1% to 5% probability we won't win. The 
pundits say our chances are well below 50%, but who wants objectivity? And if 
we get knocked out of the World Cup, you do the usual: you go to the park and 
practise penalties.

Casey Stoney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/29/casey-stoney-interview-england-captain-homosexuality>
, former England women's captain
 Casey Stoney: 'Other nations think we're yobs who go over there to drink and 
fight.' Photograph: A/ Antonio Olmos 
Prepare to get to the quarter-finals. Anything more than that will be a huge 
bonus. We've got players going who have never played tournament football 
before, but for me that makes it the most exciting World Cup. Hopefully 
the young players such asRoss Barkley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ross-barkley> and Luke Shaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/14/luke-shaw-manchester-united-southampton-new-bid>
 will get a chance to play and showcase their talent.

If I'm honest, England fans don't have the greatest reputation. Other nations 
think we are yobs who go over there to drink and fight, but that's only the few 
who spoil it for the rest.

They also think we are a little deluded, because every four years we think we 
are going to win and we don't. England fans are very loyal. They go everywhere 
to support the nation, and they bring spirit and atmosphere. They bring a lot 
to the party.
The key is to be really positive, but not with too much expectation. We do 
try, as England fans, not to expect too much, but the minute it starts we go 
mad. I am massively guilty of it, too. I get all excited and expect them to do 
much better than they ever will. But we are real outsiders. Support the team, 
be the 12th man, but don't be too quick to jump on mistakes. No footballer goes 
out there to make errors. My advice is to enjoy it, see it as a celebration of 
our football and our nation – and don't put too much pressure on the team.

Gabby Logan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/23/gabby-logan-bbc-high-heels>, 
presenter
 Gabby Logan and Roy Hodgson, then Fulham manager, in 2010. 'I think England 
will surprise people this year.' Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters 
Here's what you need to do this summer. Look at the match times and plan your 
sleep properly. Do not fall into the trap of thinking that a game is only 90 
minutes. Watch the whole buildup and get excited. Either the hype will be 
deserved or you will be deflated after five minutes, but at least you'll have 
had fun.

If you know anyone of the nationality we're playing, get them over as they're 
always good value. Grab an Italian or a Uruguayan friend; short of that, grab a 
Scot because they will make you feel rubbish when England lose. I can lend you
my husband <http://www.espn.co.uk/scotland/rugby/player/11239.html> if you like.

You can enjoy sport without losing your head. Football can lift the nation's 
spirits, so it is important to be an England fan in this World Cup.Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/27/world-cup-2014-qualifiers> 
aren't there, neither areWales  
<http://www.uefa.com/worldcup/news/newsid=2011407.html>or Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/10/republic-of-ireland-austria-world-cup-qualifier>
, so let's get behind England and give them our support. They need it. They've 
got two tough teams in their group, Uruguay and Italy, and tough conditions.

My worst memory as a fan has to be the nine-hour drive back to our camp from 
Bloemfontein afterour 4-1 defeat by Germany in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jun/27/germany-england-world-cup-2010>
. At least it wasn't a penalty shoot-out, but the manner of the defeat was so 
depressing. The team looked as if they were walking in lead boots.

I think England will surprise people this year. If they get through one 
knockout round, that's as well as they've done since 1990. But choose a second 
team to support when England go out. I'll go for Argentina, because we 
traditionally don't get on, and I'm going to make the peace.

Other nations see England fans as perennial optimists. We've won it, so we're 
in the elite band that commands a bit of respect, but at the same time they 
don't envy us. They feel sorry for our constant hope that is always dashed. 
There are countries who go without that weight of expectation who seem to enjoy 
themselves much more. I think most England fans going to Brazil will have 
a great time. It's a very expensive trip, halfway around the world. They are 
not going to let a silly thing like not winning spoil their fun.

• Gabby Logan is part of the BBC's World Cup lineup.

Katy B <https://www.theguardian.com/music/katy-b>, singer
 Katy B: 'You should definitely watch the World Cup in a communal setting. I 
love watching in the pub.' Photograph: Chris Jepson/Wenn 
We are going to win, of course. Why not? We've got as much chance as anyone 
else. You have to think positively. I'm quite a competitive person, so I think 
if you are going to enter something, you've got to believe that you are going 
to win it. Otherwise you've got no chance. Someone else who wants to win, will.

You should definitely watch the World Cup in a communal setting. Watching 
it at home is good if you have a few people over, but I love watching the game 
in the pub. I remember watchingEuro 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2008> with my family in a pub in 
Peckham, talking to people I had never met before.

I love getting into the spirit of it. We had the Baddiel and Skinner song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RJqimlFcJsM> on tape for Euro 96 and my mum 
playing it in her crusty white Peugeot, and we'd all sing along. She had those 
annoying flags on the car, too. I was seven and I loved it.

If England get knocked out, I will be a bit disappointed, but I am a tough 
cookie now because of all the times we haven't. I've gotIrish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/10/republic-of-ireland-austria-world-cup-qualifier>
 andJamaican <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/11/usa-jamaica-live>
 heritage – but as neither of their teams is in it, I won't support a second 
team. I will be like my dad, a football diplomat. He loves the game, but 
doesn't support a team. He just likes watching it.

• Katy B's album Little Red 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/06/katy-b-little-red-review> is out 
now.

James Corden <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden>, actor and 
writer
 James Corden: 'With England, prepare for disappointment and you might just be 
pleasantly surprised.' Photograph: Ian Walton/Getty Images 
Don't prepare for the World Cup. Don't think about it. It's the hope that 
kills you. In life, I believe you should prepare for victory. With England, 
prepare for disappointment and you might just be pleasantly surprised.

I think for many people my age, the best moment as an England fan was Italia 
90. I'm pretty sure that's when I fell in love with football.David Platt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jun/18/world-cup-2010-david-platt-itlaia-90-volley-belgium>
 andPaul Gascoigne <https://www.theguardian.com/football/paul-gascoigne?page=5> 
were my heroes that summer.

My worst World Cup memory was all of 2010. I was hosting a live television show
 <http://www.comedy.co.uk/guide/tv/james_corden_world_cup_live/press/> that was 
broadcast after every game, and it's quite tough trying to be enthusiastic when 
England have just drawn with the USA in a really dull 1-1. The tournament 
didn't get much better after that. Nor did the show, really.

I don't fancy our chances this time, but I like this realistic approach we 
seem to have now. It's better than the overconfidence of previous tournaments. 
I'm not sure what I'm expecting from England. I hope we just try to attack a 
bit more. I don't think we're strong enough defensively to shut up shop. 
So I think if we're going to lose, let's lose 4-3. Let's play to our strengths 
and just go for it. Let's be a team that other nations enjoy watching.

If we get knocked out of the World Cup, I'll head straight to bed. If we win, 
I'll probably just stay up an extra half an hour.

• James Corden stars in Begin Again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/09/can-a-song-save-your-life-toronto-2013-review>
, released on 11 July.

Helen Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/01/football-sports-minister-helen-grant-investigate-high-costs-grassroots>
, sports minister
 Helen Grant: 'You never know what can happen if we get a bit of luck.' 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Maradona's "hand of God" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2014/may/19/maradona-hand-god-1986-brick-world-cup-video>
 in Mexico 86 made me feel sick. I can't believe to this day that the referee 
and linesmen didn't spot it.

My earliest England memory was against Brazil in the 1970 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/jun/16/worldcupfootball2002.sport3>. 
Although we lost, it was a great battle, and that image ofPelé and Bobby Moore 
exchanging shirts 
<http://www.sportphotogallery.com/photos/football/bobby-moore/-ofsfl0005.aspx> 
at the end is iconic.

I have fond memories of the 1990 World Cup and Euro 96 campaigns. I know we 
went out on penalties at both, but England were touching distance from glory. 
Who can forget Gazza's performances and tears at Italia 90, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/27/retro-mbm-england-v-west-germany-sort-of-live>
 andhis goal against Scotland in Euro 96 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/aug/13/vault-paul-gascoigne-wondergoal-scotland-euro-96>
? That summer we had friends round to our house for all the games and after 
they'd finished, everyone had a kick-around in the back garden.

This time, our team will be giving it their absolute all, and you never know 
what can happen if we get a bit of luck. There are other teams who've won big 
international tournaments before who haven't been favourites at the start. I'll 
be going in an official capacity to support the team and to watch England's 
second group game against Uruguay – I can't wait.
 