
Lush likes to cause a stink. As well as its smelly shops and package-free 
produce, a large chunk of the handmade cosmetics company’s time and money is 
spent on political activism.

Far from carefully choosing a few business-friendly good causes, Lush has 
backed a plethora of controversial causes fromGuantanamo prisoners 
<https://uk.lush.com/article/reprieve-guantanamo-bay>, to hunt saboteurs and the
anti-fracking campaign <https://uk.lush.com/article/ground-frack-free-somerset>
. It does this throughfinancial donations 
<https://uk.lush.com/article/charity-support> – totalling £5m a year in 2015 - 
and in-store products such as the May Day bath bombs, which supported activists 
opposed to the badger cull. It alsosupports groups 
<https://uk.lush.com/article/growing-peace-through-almond-oil> in favour of 
peaceful resistance to the Israeli occupation of Palestine.

Such blatant politicisation is a tactic few other businesses in the UK seem 
willing to replicate. The renewable energy firm Ecotricity has produced
anti-fracking films <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WgMWp3PsnsI>, but this 
makes sense for a company that benefits from consumers switching away from 
fossil fuels. Lush admits a lot of the campaigning it does has nothing to do 
with its own business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbadger-bombs-politics-lush-sales-500m%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff52f1bd36c13fa69b6799872b0163e187ac896f1%2F0_299_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20badger%20bombs%20and%20politics%20brought%20Lush%20sales%20of%20%C2%A3500m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbadger-bombs-politics-lush-sales-500m%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20badger%20bombs%20and%20politics%20brought%20Lush%20sales%20of%20%C2%A3500m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbadger-bombs-politics-lush-sales-500m%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff52f1bd36c13fa69b6799872b0163e187ac896f1%2F0_299_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Lush’s May Day bath bomb. Photograph: Lush 
“Right from the inception Lush has been political. We’ve always employed 
people, because of our principles on animal testing, who were politically 
aware, including animal rights activists,” says Simon Constantine, head of 
buying at Lush and son of co-founder and boss Mark Constantine. “Yes, it’s 
risky but these are issues we feel strongly on and that we understand,” he adds.

Its willingness to mix politics with perfume has grown in the two decades 
since it opened its first store in Poole, Dorset, in 1994. It now has more than 
900 stores in 48 countries and freely admits to using its growing business 
strength to push its campaigning. Constantine says customers “appreciate that 
we want to talk about these things” and like the fact that they can learn about 
a subject like the badger cull while shopping.

But it has not come without a backlash. Pro-hunting groups have attacked and 
disrupted 
<http://www.bournemouthecho.co.uk/news/4698792.Lush_under_attack_by_pro_hunt_campaigners/>
 Lush stores and its anti-hunting ads have beenbanned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/16/lush-anti-hunting-ads> by the 
advertising watchdog. It alsoprovoked outrage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/apr/27/lush-animal-cruelty-performance-art>
 for a video of a male doctor subjecting a woman to animal testing-type 
experiments in the window of its Regent Street shop in London.

Don't brand your business with the label 'ethical'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/mar/26/brand-business-ethical-lush>
 Lush’s shark fin soap. Photograph: Lush 
None of this appears to be harming sales, which reached a record £574m 
<https://insideretail.asia/2016/02/02/lush-ends-exceptional-year/> in 2015, 
with profits of £31.3m. “Over recent years especially, people are looking for 
authenticity in a brand and more transparency. Most brands are political in 
some way but keep it hidden,” says Constantine, who adds that staff are heavily 
involved in the choices. The anti-hunt campaigning, for example, came from an “
Apprentice <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/apprentice>-style” meeting 
in which store managers were invited to invent products and campaigns they 
wanted to associate with.

“People don’t just want to buy something, they want to belong to something. 
We’re not a cult but we certainly have strong ethos and personality that’s 
difficult to describe. It doesn’t come directly from the founders, it comes 
from the organisation and it is something that you belong to. It is a company 
in the true sense of the word, as in a group of individuals,” says Constantine.

Being outspoken on ethical issues – the company won an Observer Ethical Award 
Award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/12/observer-ethical-awards-2014-winners-lush>
 in 2014 – has brought more focus on Lush’s decision-making. Simon Constantine 
admits it was “caught out” when Lush promised to remove themineral mica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/india-child-labour-mica-mineral-cosmetics>
 from its supply chain overchild labour fears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/lush-removes-mica-child-labour>
. He says the company has not yet made certain it is being sold the right 
ingredients by suppliers – it has around 300 suppliers, 2,500 products and uses 
3,000 different materials. In the future, he says Lush needs to avoid a 
“saviour complex” and stick to being more pragmatic and “making sure we deliver 
what we say we’re doing”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbadger-bombs-politics-lush-sales-500m%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f6faf928bed25b7dc86c87e0d5feea8d34850cf%2F256_133_2737_1642%2F2737.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20badger%20bombs%20and%20politics%20brought%20Lush%20sales%20of%20%C2%A3500m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbadger-bombs-politics-lush-sales-500m%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20badger%20bombs%20and%20politics%20brought%20Lush%20sales%20of%20%C2%A3500m&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbadger-bombs-politics-lush-sales-500m%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f6faf928bed25b7dc86c87e0d5feea8d34850cf%2F256_133_2737_1642%2F2737.jpg>
 Suspension artist and Lush cosmetics employee Alice Newstead hangs from a 
scaffold by shark hooks as part of its campaign against shark finning. 
Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty 
Lush has also been accused of hypocrisy for refusing to open stores in China 
because of animal testing regulations, but ignoring concerns abouthuman rights 
abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/minister-defends-uks-approach-to-saudi-human-rights-record>
 to operate in Saudi Arabia. “I don’t know that I’m 100% comfortable with it 
myself,” says Constantine. “You don’t find many countries where you do believe 
in their stance on human rights entirely so it makes it a bit tricky. If we can 
be in a market and then campaign and talk on issues then we’d rather be there 
even if it means some compromise on some things. I know in Saudi Arabia they 
were really proud to have fully female shop staff in one of the stores.”

While its politics may not interest other companies, Constantine says Lush’s 
approach works better than government rules and regulations. “There’s plenty of 
forestry rules out there, but it doesn’t seem to stop deforestation. What you 
really want is companies where people have that conscious shift and actually 
believe in what they’re doing.”
 