
The latest release of the labour force figures by the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs%40.nsf/mediareleasesbyCatalogue/46DFE12FCDB783D9CA256B740082AA6C?OpenDocument>
 brings to the fore that while the unemployment rate is falling, the employment 
sector is fragile, with full-time employment falling and hours worked barely 
growing at all.

Last Thursday’s labour force figures showed that the unemployment rate had 
fallen to 5.6% – the best result since May 2013. But the big news item was that 
full-time employment fell by 53,000 in seasonally adjusted terms, the biggest 
one month fall for more than five years.

Of course, we should always be a little wary of seasonally adjusted changes – 
the figures do always seems to have their finger stuck in the electrical socket:

But the annual growth picture is a lot clearer, and it shows that full-time 
employment is now lower than it was 12 months ago:

It reinforces what I have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/22/why-unemployment-is-no-longer-the-best-indicator-of-the-economys-health>
been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/20/sure-unemployment-is-down-but-plenty-of-people-would-like-to-work-more>
saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/17/jobless-rate-offers-coalition-a-chance-to-brag-so-why-has-it-barely-had-a-mention>
 for a while now – the unemployment rate is hiding much of what is happening in 
the economy. The main reason the unemployment rate has fallen this year is that 
the level of people within the labour force has also fallen.

Need a full-time job? Move to Victoria | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/18/need-a-full-time-job-move-to-victoria>
In November last year, the participation rate (the percentage of people in the 
labour force) was 65.1%, now it is 64.7%. The difference is the equivalent of 
90,000 people, and if we still had November’s participation rate, the 
unemployment rate would be 6.3% instead of 5.6%.

This month adults employed fell to 61.0%. It was last at that level in August 
last year but then the unemployment rate was 6.1%.

The figures highlight that the employment story of the past year has been one 
of part-time work growing, while full-time work is shrinking:

The strong growth of part-time employment means that the growth of hours 
worked is dropping sharply and the growth of total employment is now beginning 
to follow:

But there is more going on in the picture than just the full-time/part-time 
mix – it is a story about gender and age.

As I have noted in the past, since the GFC, youth employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/australia-didnt-have-a-great-recession-tell-that-to-young-people>
 has fallen sharply, and yet in 2015 there was a nice improvement for youth 
employed. But that nice improvement is all gone now. In the past 12 months, 
full-time employment for those aged 15 to 24 fell by 4.8%, whereas for those in 
the prime working age of 25 to 64, it grew 0.5%:

Now this might suggest that the issue of full-time employment is just one 
about youth. And certainly the lack of youth in full-time work is dragging down 
the overall figures, but the picture for those prime-aged workers is not real 
flash either.

Over the past 30 years, annual full-time employment growth for prime-aged 
workers has averaged 1.7%. But in the past five years, growth has only been 
above that level for five months. The reality is we are in a historically low 
full-time employment period:

And the big cause has been the lack of full-time employment for men – both 
youth and prime-aged.

In the past 12 months, male employment for those aged 25 to 64 has fallen by 
7,300 whereas for the same aged women it has increased by 41,600.

For male youth, full-time employment fell 30,800, while for female youth, 
after a good period in 2015 and the start of this year, the situation has 
turned sharply and full-time work has also fallen – down 11,200:

There is now a record low number of men aged 25 to 64 working full time – just 
72.2% down from a peak of 75.8% in 2008:

By contrast more prime-aged women are now working full time than ever before. 
But at just 39.9% it remains well below the level of men. It’s why when 
full-time employment is weak we are mostly talking about weak employment growth 
for men.

It has reached a point where despite men making up nearly two-thirds of all 
full-time workers, in the past five years there have actually been more 
full-time jobs created for women than men – a situation not seen since the 
1990s recession:

There is usually a quite strong link between the unemployment rate and 
full-time employment. In the past 12 months the unemployment rate has fallen by 
0.4% points. Usually such a fall would be associated with full-time employment 
growing by nearly 2%; instead it shrunk.

Sure, unemployment is down but plenty of people would like to work more | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/20/sure-unemployment-is-down-but-plenty-of-people-would-like-to-work-more>
Partly this fall can be explained by the lack of full-time work for youth, but 
it is clear that the issue is deeper than that. In the past five years the 
number of men in the labour force has increased by 5.5%, and yet full-time 
employment for men has gone up by just 1.5%.

While the unemployment rate continues to fall due to a falling participation 
rate, the government will mostly seek to focus on the big number.

But there has never been a time when falling full-time employment has been 
associated with a strong economy. And right now, when looking for a good 
indicator of the state of the economy, you are better off looking at full-time 
employment than at the unemployment rate.
 