
His swearing fiancee Kim Sears may have attracted most of the headlines the 
following day, but in the seconds after Andy Murray served an ace on Thursday 
to win a place in theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> final it was to another 
woman that he instantly turned.

After dispatching Tomas Berdych 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/29/andy-murray-tomas-berdych-australian-open>
, Murray spun towards the players’ box andpointed to his coach, Amélie 
Mauresmo, with a long, unsmiling glare of satisfaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/29/andy-murray-praises-amelie-mauresmo-australian-open>
. Seven months after becoming the first elite male player in history to appoint 
a female coach who is not a family member, it was clear who Murray thanked for 
reaching his first grand slam final since winning Wimbledon in 2013, a long and 
bruising 19 months ago.

He had been widely criticised for appointing the 35-year-old, the player noted 
in an on-court interview moments later, but “I think so far this week we’ve 
shown that women can be very good coaches as well”. It had been a “brave” 
decision, he agreed, “so hopefully I can repay her in a few days”. The bravery, 
you will note, had been all hers.

If Murray can win Sunday’s final against Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, it will establish the 
Murray-Mauresmo partnership as one of the most remarkable in modern sporting 
history. But even if he fails to beat the world No 1, it is clear that Mauresmo 
has already changed the tennis landscape – and not for the first time.

Aside from the complete absence of female coaches in men’s tennis, when Murray 
hired Mauresmo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/08/andy-murray-amelie-mauresmo-coach>
 in June 2014 there was only one top 50 player on the women’s tour who was 
coached by a woman. In the months since, the world No 6, Agnieszka Radwanska, 
has appointed Martina Navratilova as her coach and the promising American 
teenager Madison Keys has hired three-times grand slam winner (and mother of 
four) Lindsay Davenport.

“It seems like the door needed to be opened for it to become OK,” Davenport 
has said, “and obviously Murray was the one who kind of broke that down.” She 
had “got goosebumps”, she said, when she read that Murray had hired Mauresmo. 
Davenport’s delight is all the more notable as she and Mauresmo have a history.

Sixteen years ago, almost to the day, the then world No 1 Davenport was 
expected to cruise through the semi-final at Melbourne when an unseeded and 
largely unknown 19-year-old Frenchwoman brought her progress to a abrupt halt, 
with a display of aggressive physicality that stunned observers.

“She hits the ball so hard that it’s not like facing any other girl,” said 
Davenport of the teenage Amélie Mauresmo. “You just see this massive pair of 
shoulders bearing down on you.”

It had felt, she said, as if she was playing a man.

Though Mauresmo claimed to take the remark as a compliment, many felt it was 
not entirely intended to flatter. Mauresmo had arrived in Melbourne with her 
female partner, Sylvie Bourdon, and made a public statement during the 
tournament that she was gay, becoming the first French major sports personality 
to come out, and one of the first tennis players to do so at the start of her 
career. “She’s here with her girlfriend. She’s half a man,” sniffed the 
eventual winner Martina Hingis. Davenport later apologised for her comments.

It led to a period when, for all her prodigious talent, discussion of 
Mauresmo’s achievements was inevitably filtered through the lens of her private 
life and muscular physique. “Mighty Mauresmo hits form,” read the headlines, 
“Mauresmo has to shoulder all the pressure”. Or as one memorable Daily 
Telegraph article put it, “Muscular lesbian is a very nice girl, says world No 
1”.

Though she posed proudly with her partner on the cover of Paris Match, 
Mauresmo was not impervious to her critics, a sensitivity that was also 
reflected in her play. According to Rémi Bourrieres of the French magazineTennis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis>, speaking to the Guardian at the 
time of her appointment: “She’s very sensitive. When she played she had a lot 
of emotion on court, and she needed to win [to gain confidence]. For some 
players things come very easily, but for some like Amélie you need to build the 
confidence, like a puzzle.”

The player developed a reputation for catastrophic collapses in confidence 
(“if there were a sizeable crowd watching she might choke on a teaspoonful of 
cod liver oil”, remarked one tennis writer) and for seven years the tennis 
press speculated over whether Mauresmo would be the most talented tennis player 
never to win a grand slam. Finally, in 2006, she triumphed in theAustralian Open
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/jan/28/tennis.australianopen2007>, and 
later, atWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/jul/08/wimbledon2006.wimbledon10>. To 
prepare for the latter victory, she had spent some time training on the only 
grass court in Paris – in the garden of the British Embassy.

Mauresmo claims to recall very clearly the moment when she fell in love with 
tennis when, as a three-year-old, she watched her compatriot Yannick Noah 
triumph in the 1983French Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frenchopen>. 
“I was impressed by the emotion he had on the court,” she has said. “I wanted 
to feel the same. I went out to the garden and was doing all the movements that 
he was doing.” Her parents bought her a racket and by the time she was seven 
she had been spotted by the French Tennis Federation.

She moved as a young teenager to a residential tennis school, but though she 
became world junior champion at 17, it was not a happy time. Two years later 
Mauresmo was quite clear in attributing her dramatic breakthrough at Melbourne 
to her new romantic partner – she was playing well, she said, because she was 
“so in love”. But the relationship with Bourdon led to an acrimonious rift with 
her parents which was only repaired some years later when the couple separated.

If Murray’s decision to appoint Mauresmo as his coach caused an impact “like a 
meteor [landing] on Planet Tennis”, in the words of the Guardian’s tennis 
writer Kevin Mitchell, it was not only because of her gender. Though she was 
(and remains) captain of the French Federation Cup squad and helped coach 
Marion Bartoli toWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> 
victory in 2013, the Frenchwoman has always been clear that there was more to 
her life than tennis – she is a keen collector of fine wines, for instance – 
and she was initially resistant to the amount of travel from her Geneva home 
that the role involved.

But that sense of healthy distance from the game, along with the former 
player’s composed demeanour, may explain why the partnership is evidently 
working for Murray, according to the former British No 1Anne Keothavong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong>. “For whatever reason, I 
like to think Andy has been able to open up to Amélie. He is a strong 
character, and as a coach you have got to be able to understand what causes 
tension in your player, and how you can help relax them and keep them calm in 
the right moments.”

While there is no particular reason why a woman should be better at that than 
a man, in Murray’s case, notes Keothavong, “the two people who have the biggest 
influence on his life and whom he trusts the most have been hisfiancee, Kim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/29/andy-murray-kim-sears-swearing-australian-open>
, and his mother, Judy. And maybe Amélie, being anothercalm, strong woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/09/andy-murray-amelie-mauresmo-quota>
 can add to that.”

Annabel Croft, the tennis commentator and former British No 1, says: ‘He 
definitely likes the way she works. I’ve watched her and she’s quite soft on 
the practice court, she puts the information across in a more feminine way. 
She’s not a hard taskmaster and I think he seems to like that.” Mauresmo has 
worked hard on Murray’s self-belief, and was instrumental in his decision to 
play a punishing schedule of tournaments during the autumn to haul his world 
ranking, which had sunk following back surgery a little over a year ago, back 
into the top 10 (“I wanted him to feel what it was like to win tournaments 
again,” she said).

But regardless of the Frenchwoman’s qualities, Croft says, “[Andy] loves to 
prove people wrong, and I feel like no matter what she’s telling him, he wants 
to prove to everybody that he made the right decision to hire her.”

As for the player himself, his comments this week about Mauresmo hint at an 
approach that is in welcome contrast to his previous coach,Ivan Lendl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ivan-lendl>. “She’s very calm, that’s 
something that’s important for me. She listens well and she asks a lot of 
questions. Especially when you’ve been an ex-player, it’s easy to see things 
only through your eyes, but it’s important to learn what the player’s thinking.

“So far she’s been very good for me. It’s now down to me to produce the 
results on the court.”

On Sunday the pair have their opportunity to make history, but regardless of 
that result, Murray is clear on one consequence he’d like to see from their 
partnership. Taking to Twitter after his late-night semi-final win on Thursday, 
Murray wrote: “#MoreWomenInSport”, with a thumbs up emoticon. “Goodnight.”

Amélie Mauresmo – a potted profile

Born 5 July, 1979, in St Germain-en-Laye, near Paris.

Age 35.

Career Former world junior champion who after a dazzling breakthrough at the 
Australian Open in 1999 struggled to achieve at the highest level until she 
finally won two grand slams in 2006.

High point Claiming the title in Melbourne in January 2006, after being 
dismissed for many years as a “choker”.

Low point Catastrophic defeat in the first round of the 2001 French Open when, 
despite being the local favourite, her confidence collapsed and she froze on 
court.

What she says “Personally I wouldn’t be able to work with a man or a woman 
player without having a good connection. It doesn’t happen immediately. I’m not 
the type of person who opens up that easily. Andy is the same. It took a bit of 
time, but the relationship is good.”

What they say “If Andy’s looking for someone who can help him deal with the 
pressure, he hired the perfect person. Amélie is able to take all the stress 
away and make a player feel comfortable” – Marion Bartoli, who Mauresmo helped 
coach to Wimbledon victory in 2013.
 