
By replacing an ailing Foo Fighters on the Pyramid stage at this year’s 
festival,Florence + the Machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/florence-and-the-machine> continue a grand 
Glastonbury tradition: the late call up from the Glasto subs bench to become a 
festival headliner. But will their performance find its way into the scrapbook 
of big Glasto moments, or be reduced to a mere footnote? Here’s how some of the 
festival’s other last-minute headliners fared, from T Rex to Lenny Kravitz.

Glastonbury 2015: early weather forecast looks cloudy and damp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/18/glastonbury-2015-early-weather-forecast-cloudy-wet>
T Rex – 1970

Replaced: The Kinks, who officially pulled out due to Ray Davies having a sore 
throat (though Michael Eavis claims they were put off by Melody Maker calling 
the event a “mini festival”).

How did they fare? As disappointed as Eavis must have been to lose the Kinks 
at the time, in retrospect it probably was a good thing. Marc Bolan and T Rex 
were on the cusp of proper massiveness, lending some added credibility to the 
nascent festival:Eavis claims that their late booking encouraged people to 
bring their friends along 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/12/the-first-glastonbury-rocks-backpages>
, swelling the crowd. It certainly had the desired effect of attracting names 
to Worthy Farm: 1971’s lineup included Fairport Convention, Joan Baez and David 
Bowie.

Lenny Kravitz – 1993

Replaced: Red Hot Chili Peppers, who pulled out due to Flea suffering from 
chronic fatigue syndrome <http://thechilisource.com/kerrang-june-1993-447/>.

How did he fare? Er, good question. Kravitz’s last-minute inclusion can’t have 
pulled up many trees, as he barely warrants a mention in any of the official 
write-ups of Glasto 1993. The Guardian decided instead to focus onthe 60s feel 
of the festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/1993/jun/28/glastonbury2003.glastonbury> – 
the Kinks actually bothered to show up this time, along with a reunited Velvet 
Underground (who also made the cover of the NME) – while Suede proved to be the 
weekend’s most buzzed-about band. Poor Lenny was asked back in 1999, but only 
as support to the Pyramid’s Sunday headliners ... Skunk Anansie.

Pulp – 1995
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4I_9Cp8TcIg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4I_9Cp8TcIg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4I_9Cp8TcIg&media=>
Replaced: The Stone Roses, after John Squire broke his collarbone while 
mountain biking.

How did they fare? Triumphantly. Pulp’s headline turn at the 1995 festival is 
widely regarded as one of the greatest Glasto performances ever, nudging the 
band on to Britpop’s top table. Featuring Jarvis at his most puckish and 
engrossing, it concluded with a communal sing-along to Common People that 
everyone – everyone – joined in with. All things considered, probably better 
than a disinterested Roses chugging through Second Coming.

Ash – 1997
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzvdfY3VrqNE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzvdfY3VrqNE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzvdfY3VrqNE&media=>
 Ash 
Replaced: Steve Winwood

How did they fare? Ash had already topped the Friday bill on the Other Stage 
when they were asked to stand in for Winwood on the Sunday night, making them 
the youngest ever band to headline the Pyramid, and the first act to headline 
the festival twice in one year. All very impressive, but that year’s festival 
really belonged tothe mud 
<http://www.glastonburyfestivals.co.uk/history/history-1997/>, and Radiohead’s 
brilliant breakthrough set <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ATvonKDt6jQ>.

Basement Jaxx – 2005

Replaced: Kylie Minogue, who had to withdraw after contracting breast cancer.

How did they fare? Basement Jaxx were widely considered a bit of an 
underwhelming replacement for Kylie – but then again, who wouldn’t be? In the 
event the Jaxx went down better than expected, with the assembled suddenly 
remembering en masse that Felix Buxton and Simon Ratcliffe have written a fair 
few tunes themselves: “No other dance act has so many great pop songs and such 
a diverse remit,” wrote Dorian Lynskey in his round-up of the weekend. Bonus 
points awarded for currying favour with the crowd by covering Kylie’s Can’t Get 
You Out of My Head.

Gorillaz – 2010

Replaced: U2, who pulled out when Bono got a back injury.

Gorillaz at Glastonbury 2010 | Review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/26/gorillaz-glastonbury-2010-review>
How did they fare? A giant audio-visual show with appearances from Bobby 
Womack, Snoop Dogg and Lou Reed certainly hit all the Glasto headliner buttons, 
but Damon Albarn and co rather ruined things by including too many 
introspective songs. “Both Blur and U2 have a sackful of famous hits to snare 
the passerby. It quickly becomes apparent that Gorillaz, for all their charms, 
do not,” wrote Lynskey in one of many withering reviews of the show. U2 rocked 
up with said famous hits the very next year, andwere received a little more 
warmly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/25/u2-glastonbury-2011-review>.
 