
This book is about a boy called Tom who wants to join the army when he grows 
up. It is quite a funny book because Tom does some quite surprising things.

One day when Tom is at nursery he picks up a toy doll which belongs to a 
little girl called Safira and pretends it is a gun, shouting 'ta ta ta ta ta'. 
Safira is so scared that she starts crying and the teacher makes him give it 
back and say sorry. On his first day at school Mrs Dell, the teacher, gives out 
wooden rulers, which Tom blacks out with a marker to make it into a gun. The 
teacher is not very happy with him and tells him that if he wants to join the 
army he needs to be brave, and brave people always tell the truth. After that 
Tom never tells a lie.

While Tom is at secondary school his mum has triplets, which they call Gilly, 
Milly and Tilly. They are quite cheeky and make his clothes disappear so that 
Tom has to go to school in the wrong trousers, shirt and shoes. When this 
happens on exam day, the head teacher tells him that he cannot do his exams 
because he's in the wrong uniform and that he must go home and change. He ends 
up having to borrow clothes from a girl called Lucy and even has to wear a 
skirt. His friend tells him that if he's brave enough to join the army, then he 
must be brave enough to wear a skirt! Everyone laughed at him but Tom doesn't 
say anything, and he passes his exams. His mother thanks Lucy with a big box of 
chocolates.

I really enjoyed this book a lot. I think mostly boys and maybe some tomboys 
would like it. It has ten chapters, with very good pictures. My favourite one 
is of Tom pretending his ruler is a gun in the playground.

Want to tell the world about a book you've read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 