
In August, 80,000 people piled into London's Olympic stadium for the 
spectacular opening ceremony for the 2012 Paralympic Games. But for one of 
them, it was the 10 minutes before the ceremony began that were extra special.

Deaf film-maker Ted Evans' <http://tedevans.tumblr.com/> 10-minute film, Look 
Up, which he co-directed withBim Ajadi <http://vimeo.com/bimajadi>, kicked off 
the live show and was the culmination of months of hard work. "Seeing it on the 
screens, with thousands of people watching, was like reaching the top of a 
mountain," he says. "I keep saying to myself, 'did that actually happen?'"

For Evans, who is profoundly deaf in one ear and severely deaf in the other, 
making the film was just one stage in a bigger journey. Four years ago, he was 
unemployed, and by his own admission, "a bit lost".

He had developed a passion for music, spending hours in a shed in his parents' 
garden composing songs. But after attracting fans on MySpace and gaining 
interest from a record company, he hit a brick wall.

"I went to meet this guy who was interested in signing me up in Denmark 
Street, but as soon as he found out I was deaf, his encouragement and 
enthusiasm just went. I knew instantly he was never going to contact me again 
and he didn't. That was a little heartbreaking."

Evans found himself at a crossroads. "I knew that it was going to be very 
difficult to pursue a career in songwriting, but I had no idea what I else I 
could do." He had made short films at home from a young age, but didn't think 
he could make a career out of it. "I thought it wouldn't be possible for people 
like me," he says.

Then, out of the blue, Evans was offered a job as a runner on a new website 
for deaf people. He'd previously worked with Bim Ajadi composing music for the 
website's short films. Now, as part of an all-deaf team, Evans quickly 
progressed to become a director, with support from Ajadi. "We all learned a lot 
from Bim," he says. "He trained everyone on the team and he's a great role 
model."

But on New Year's Eve 2009, came another blow. The website was closing, and 
the entire team were made redundant. Fortunately for Evans, he had just gained 
a place on theBritish Sign Language Broadcasting Trust's (BSLBT) 
<http://www.bslzone.co.uk/> short film scheme, Zoom. His resulting film, Go 
Ahead <http://www.bslzone.co.uk/bsl-zone/zoom-2010-go-ahead/>, helped him get a 
job as a researcher at the BBC's long-running magazine series for deaf people,
See Hear <http://www.bbc.co.uk/seehear>. Again, within a year, he worked his 
way up to being a director.

It was while he was working on the show, commuting from his home in Hackney to 
Birmingham every day, that Evans wrote and directed his second short film,The 
End <http://www.bslzone.co.uk/bsl-zone/zoom-focus-the-end/>, which was 
commissioned by the next stage of the BSLBT's film scheme, Zoom Focus. The 
half-hour film was made for just Â£4,000. It is told in a documentary style and 
looks at the loss of deaf culture in a world where deafness has been cured.

"Originally the idea was simply a question I put to my partner who is a deaf 
sign language user," he tells me. "If you died and we met again in the 
afterlife, would you sign to me or speak to me? What if you had a choice? That 
question became the basis of the film."

For Evans, who attended deaf schools, The End was also a chance to highlight 
the deaf culture that he'd grown up in, but was hidden from wider view. "Most 
people don't know deaf culture exists and the reality is that deaf people have 
a lot to offer to society. People have the right to be different." The film won 
awards at film festivals across the world.

With each job, Evans has worked hard and tried to impress. This ethos paid 
dividends when it came to directing Look Up. He first worked with Jenny Sealey 
when he and Ajadi made short documentaries for Sealey's Graeae Theatre Company. 
Three years on, when Sealey became the co-director of the Paralympics opening 
ceremony, and was looking to commission a film to get the night started, she 
thought of them. "That was down to us making films for them for the past three 
years. If we had done a bad job, we wouldn't have been approached," he says.

Making Look Up meant working with a higher budget than he'd ever had before, 
and reliable communication on set was crucial. "I use very good sign language 
interpreters, because communication and understanding what is going on around 
you is crucial as a director."

Evans has also learned how important sound is in making a film, and although 
he "relies on professionals when it comes to audio", working closely with sound 
editors, he also says: "It doesn't mean I can't have an opinion on [music] and 
it doesn't mean I should not be involved in that aspect of film-making."

Evans feels he has a strong understanding of the role of music in film, which 
is helped by his background as a musician. "People often say that sound and 
music is half the film. The key is having respect for it, even if you can't 
access it in its entirety. As a film-maker you want to reach as many people as 
possible, and sound provides the audience with information which plays an 
important part in telling your story."

Does he have any advice for aspiring deaf and disabled film-makers? "My main 
piece of advice would be to pick up a camera, any movie camera, and simply make 
films. You will instantly find yourself faced with obstacles and through 
experiencing them, you will learn how to improve."

After months of hard work, Evans was surrounded by family and friends who were 
there to see Look Up being shown on the night of the Paralympics opening 
ceremony. "It was like nothing I've ever experienced in my life," he says. "It 
was so emotional for many reasons. I worked with so many amazing people and it 
has done nothing but inspire me."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 