
Under-representation of women in key creative and production roles in the film 
industry has been well-documented for many years. The latest figures from the 
British Film Institute (BFI), looking at female screenwriters and directors of 
UK independent films, provide a varied set of results.

According to the BFI, there has been something of a "breakthrough" over the 
past three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/26/female-writers-directors-film-bfi>
 with the representation of female screenwriters in the top 20 UK independent 
films reaching 37%.

The BFI also break this figure down by profitable films, with profitability 
estimated from an indicator developed by theBFI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bfi> research and statistics unit. Of the 
profitable UK independent films over the same period, 30% had a female 
screenwriter.

So what do the BFI mean by "breakthrough," exactly? Well, their statement is 
linked to the wider findings of all UK independent films released in the UK 
territory over the three-year period. Of the 441 writers who worked on the 372 
UK independent films released over that period, only 16% were women - a level 
that the BFI state is similar to the levels observed over the past 15 years. 
But if you look at the top 20 UK independent films for 2010-12 there is a 
significant jump - of the 27 screenwriters associated with these films, 10% 
were female.

The BFI claim that the difference from the average for the whole dataset 
"suggests the possibility of a breakthrough by female writers into the top 
ranks of UK feature film screenwriting".

Some of the female writers associated with the top 20 UK independent films 
hitting the box office in 2010-12 areJane Goldman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-goldman> (The Woman in Black), Deborah 
Moggach (The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel), Bridget O'Connor (Tinker, Tailor, 
Soldier, Spy) and Jane English (StreetDance 3D).

The Imposter, placed second in the BFI's profability ranking of the UK indie 
films over the same period, also had a female screenwriter (Poppy Dixon).

The report also found that although women remained particularly 
under-represented as writers in UK-USA studio titles in 2010-12, those who did 
manage to work on UK-USA titles achieved significant success. Sarah Smith, Emma 
Thompson and Jane Goldman are examples of female writers working on top UK-USA 
studio releases.

The BFI research highlights continued under-representation of women among 
directors of UK independent films - only 11% of the 413 directors associated 
with the UK indie films over the three year period were female.

Female representation was slightly higher in the top 20 at 18% but drops to 
9.4% when assessed by the top 20 profitable UK indie films over the three year 
period. Notable female directors that made the list are Dania Pasquini 
(StreetDance 3D), Phyllida Lloyd (The Iron Lady) and Debbie Isitt (Nativity 2).

Of the 45 directors of UK-USA studio titles in 2010-12 that were assessed by 
the BFI, only three had female directors. The three female directors were Sarah 
Smith (Arthur Christmas), Susanna White (Nanny McPhee and the Big Bang) and 
Lone Scherfig (One Day). As the BFI sum it up; "clearly, this remains a 
difficult segment of the market for women to break into".

The BFI report also analyses the genre pattern of films with female writers or 
directors compared with those with exclusively male writers and directors. The 
findings show that in terms of the number of UK films released, women are best 
represented in the genres of biopic, drama, romance and music/dance.

Data from the BFI report can be found in our downloadable spreadsheet. Can you 
do anything interesting with the data?



 <>Download the data

• DATA: download the full spreadsheet 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AonYZs4MzlZbdEUyRU5Ta1IxU0ppd1RTV2hMQTJkQXc&usp=sharing>

More open data

Data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data>

Development and aid data

• Search the world's global development data with our gateway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/data-store/global-development-data/search?q=>

Can you do more with this data?

• Contact us at data@guardian.co.uk <mailto:data@guardian.co.uk>

• Follow us on Twitter <http://twitter.com/guardiandata>
• Like us on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guardian-data/155291341187950>
 