
A friend had warned me to expect repeated disappointment when seeking work 
experience as a journalist. I was determined to secure some short-term 
placements, though. I realised that in such a busy and competitive industry, 
employers simply do not have the time to read through piles of long, written 
applications all begging for a placement. I needed to stand out, but didn't 
want to try anything too imaginative and come across as immature, so played to 
my strengths anddesigned an infographic resume 
<http://media.photobucket.com/image/recent/frostie_13/frostapplication-2.jpg>.

The purpose of an infographic is to consolidate a large amount of information 
and present it in an appealing and insightful way, making it easy and 
interesting to digest. I took the principles and applied them to my resume, 
creating a tailored infographic for each publication to which I submitted.

It was effective – far more so than I had expected. I sent it via email to 
four publications, including a reporter for the Guardian's Technology section. 
Usingbitly <https://bitly.com/>, I monitored the links that I placed in the 
emails to see which applications had been viewed and which hadn't. The two 
applications that registered clicks quickly replied, offering me placements.

I think the reason this worked for me is because the resume showed I had good 
design skills. More importantly it demonstrated that I'm willing to try 
something different. Others have had greater success: US graduate Chris 
Spurlock posted hisinfographic resume online 
<http://cjspurlock.squarespace.com/resume-cv/>, only to have it go viral when 
the Huffington Post got their hands on it. Since its posting, it has accrued 
thousands of views, and Spurlock was then hired by the Huffington Post as 
infographics editor.

How to create your own infographic resume

Planning

As with any graphic work, the first thing you should do is plan. Planning your 
content should be fairly easy – you just need to look back over your text-based 
resume. Try to choose the most important features to display visually and 
consider cutting back on less essential details. In my case, I chose not to 
talk about my graphic design experience as I felt that it wasn't relevant, but 
you can always include additional information in some accompanying text.

I chose to dedicate a lot of space to talking about my experience working on 
student newspapers. I placed it near the top of my graphic and thought about 
where I was placing other elements, where someone's eyes were going to look 
first and arranged my content accordingly. Anything I was particularly proud of 
I made big, bright, and central. Don't hide important stuff away in an obscure 
position.

Colour

Colour can be a hurdle for those unfamiliar with infographic design, and it 
took me several attempts to settle on my own choice. Complementary colours are 
a must – I used blue and orange to add vibrancy. Try playing withkuler 
<https://kuler.adobe.com/>, a colour scheme tool with plenty of existing 
combinations, or seeking advice from a more artistic pair of eyes if you're 
struggling.

Consider the medium

If you plan to print your infographic, design it to fill the space available. 
If you're keeping things digital, think about the space on the screen, and make 
sure it's easy to view it all, even if the person has a smaller screen than 
you. I opted for a scrolling infographic, but have seen lots of good landscape 
options that fill the screen and look very impressive as a result. The beauty 
of designing on a computer is that you can tweak and edit as you go along, but 
ensure you set out knowing what you're trying to achieve. Try looking at this 
blog,25 Examples of Super Creative Resume Design 
<http://workawesome.com/your-job/25-examples-of-super-creative-resume-design/>, 
for inspiration.

My own design drew inspiration from other designs. My personal style has 
developed over my graphic career, and I enjoy playing with a range of styles, 
but felt keeping the resume clean was the best choice. I wanted it to appear 
ordered and simple to take in, and was eager to avoid cluttering things up. I 
think using a white background and not too many colours is a good way to 
achieve this.

Picking the right programme

I used Adobe Photoshop CS5 when putting my applications together and would 
recommend using it. Adobe Illustrator would also be suitable, but both are very 
expensive and require a level of skill and experience to use.

There are other free alternatives online. Wordle <http://www.wordle.net/> and 
Tagxedo <http://www.tagxedo.com/> both allow you to play with text in visual 
ways, and may be a good starting point for some who don't have design skills. 
They are easy to use and could easily be put to good use as part of an 
application. For those seeking a more comprehensive free tool for building an 
infographic resume, I would recommend playing withGliffy 
<http://www.gliffy.com/>, an online diagram package, which could be used for 
building an infographic resume. It is intuitive to use with its drag and drop 
functionality.

For the more computer literate, I would try downloading Gimp 
<http://www.gimp.org/>, a much simplified version of something like Photoshop. 
It is more complex, but yields far more visually interesting results and gives 
you free reign over your design, where the other tools may restrict you.

Design tips

Striking the right balance between text and visuals can be hard. My own design 
has been criticised for high amounts of text in places. Try to let your images 
do the talking. Images and graphics should be varied, colourful and large, 
while focusing on the important stuff.

Get it out there

I've shown my infographic off. I think it's important to get as many people to 
look over it as possible, just as you'd ask for a critiquing of any written 
resume. A quick and easy way to do this is to push it out on social networks, 
and see what people have to say. I posted mine to Twitter and mentioned
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers>, as I'd made it 
following some advice in one of theirlive Q&A sessions 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/live-q-a>. As previously seen with Spurlock, 
these kinds of applications do have a tendency to get passed around the web, so 
embrace that.

When I next come to apply for something, I'll be responding to any criticism 
I've received so I can improve. On top of my text/visuals balance, it has been 
commented that my ordering may be slightly wrong and that I should have my 
photo and profile at the top. Other suggestions have included toning down my 
use of humour if I was applying for a job, and to try including some references 
from employers. There really isn't a rule book to follow for infographic 
resumes, so think of it as an ongoing project, and be willing to learn.

An infographic resume may not be appropriate for every person or every job, 
and those that do choose to try one should think carefully about the role they 
are applying for and what's appropriate. For me, it complements my skills, 
highlighting them to an employer, and I feel it makes me a more appealing 
choice.

Follow Jonathan's job seeking and infographic adventures on Twitter, he's 
@Frost_J <https://twitter.com/Frost_J>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>.
 