
A network of Republican lawmakers and their rightwing corporate funders are 
battling behind closed doors to block minimum wage increases in cities across 
the US, in a step-by-step counter-attack that could cut back the incomes of 
millions of Americans despite an economic upswing.

According to strategic details obtained by the Guardian, the American 
Legislative Exchange Council (Alec) – along with its localised sister 
organization, ACCE – is trying to prevent elected city representatives from 
raising the minimum wage to levels above those set by their states. The group 
has launched an aggressive dual-track mission that combines legislation and 
litigation in what Alec calls a “new battleground” over worker compensation.

Obama talks up US recovery and urges Republicans to back higher wages
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/20/obama-us-reovery-republicans-minimum-wage>
The anti-wage increase moves come as Walmart, a former corporate member of the 
Alec network and the largest private employer in the US, responded to a barrage 
of criticism over the company’s low wages this week byagreeing to raise its 
base rate to at least $9 an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/19/walmart-to-raise-wages-half-a-million-workers>
 for about 40% of its employees. The hike will marginally improve the earnings 
of about 500,000 Walmart workers, though it falls far short of the $15 per hour 
that staff – and labor advocates in cities across the country – have been 
demanding.

Alec’s plan to oppose minimum wage increases at the local level was set out in 
a recent meeting in Washington DC that brought together Republican legislators 
with several large corporate backers. The meeting was closed to journalists, 
but the Guardian has obtained details of the discussion from participants.

Cara Sullivan, who heads Alec’s commerce, insurance and economic development 
taskforce, told the meeting that corporate America was facing an “onslaught” of 
bids to raise the minimum wage at all levels of government. “Perhaps the 
biggest threat comes from the local level. We are seeing a number of localities 
that have increased their minimum wage,” she said, according to the accounts.

With an increasingly national and political focus on the inequality chasm 
between the so-called “1%” and a middle class that continues to struggle 
against wage stagnation, individual US cities have been forcing the pace of 
change by setting their own progressive standards.In a historic ballot 
initiative last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/02/seattle-plan-minimum-wage-hike-workers>
, Seattle voters approved a $15 per hour minimum. As other cities follow close 
behind – San Francisco approved a similar rise, Chicago has introduced a target 
of $13 an hour, and other cities including Los Angeles and San Diego have 
pressed phased increases – the trend is now even touching the likes of Walmart.

Alec’s response, Sullivan went on to explain at the meeting, is to frame and 
then lobby for model legislation in state assemblies across the country. She 
said that so far 12 states, most recently Oklahoma, have submitted 
anti-increase legislation based on the rightwing lobbyists’ language. “Our 
solution that Alec has passed is state legislation that pre-empts the polities 
from within the state from raising the minimum wage higher than state level,” 
she told the meeting.
 Walmart has agreed to raise its base rate to at least $9 an hour. Photograph: 
Scott Olson/Getty Images 
A copy of a model bill 
<http://www.alec.org/model-legislation/living-wage-mandate-preemption-act/>, 
called the “living wage mandate preemption act”, is posted on Alec’s website. 
Most recently approved by the Alec board in 2013, it provides for the repeal of 
any minimum wage provisions introduced by local elected bodies within a state, 
claiming that increases “threaten many businesses with a loss of employees”.

Since it was formed in the 1970s, Alec has grown into one of the most 
influential lobbying bodies in the US. It acts as a form of dating service, 
bringing together large corporations – such as the oil empire of the rightwing 
tycoons the Koch brothers – with state legislators who can introduce new 
legislation, sometimes copied whole-cloth, that is favorable to such 
businesses. Alec’s local branch, ACCE, seeks to play the same role with 
blanketing laws at the city and county level.

The tone of the discussion at the Alec/ACCE meeting in December suggests 
growing alarm on the part of big businesses and their Republican allies over 
recent wage hikes in several major American cities.

Heightening the concern among rightwing groups is the sense that they are 
losing the argument:in several states 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/11/05/360463798/thumbs-up-for-higher-minimum-wages-and-for-marijuana-industry>
, including in conservative parts of the country such as South Dakota and 
Arkansas, voters backed minimum wage initiatives by large margins last November.
In a speech on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/20/obama-us-reovery-republicans-minimum-wage>
, Barack Obama said the hikes represented “perhaps the single most hopeful sign 
for middle-class families in a very long time”, and an Associated Press-GfK 
poll released this week 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/233183-poll-finds-support-for-minimum-wage-increase-paid-leave>
 found that six out of 10 Americans want a higher minimum wage.

“This is a policy that is very popular,” Sullivan conceded in her address to 
the Alec/ACCE meeting.

At the meeting, speakers described bringing lawsuits to try and stop cities 
from introducing pay increases. Dean Heyl, a lobbyist with the International 
Franchise Association – which represents 1,400 franchises, including some of 
America’s biggest such as Dunkin’ Donuts and Subway – said his organization had 
filed a legal challenge to Seattle’s hike.

Heyl presented the battle as a partisan political struggle pitting unions 
against employers: “I’m a Republican. We’re seeing the unions looking at the 
cities as their next target – we beat them on the federal level, we beat them 
on the state level. But the cities are much tougher, because there are more of 
them.”

Brian Crawford, a senior executive at the American Hotel and Lodging 
Association, told participants that his group was preparing litigation in Los 
Angeles and other cities to block wage increases. “Hopefully there’s no press 
in here,” he said.

Crawford also urged conservatives to launch populist campaigns against wage 
increases by adopting the mantra that higher pay hurts ordinary Americans. It 
was crucial, he said at the meeting, to have “the right face, and that’s one of 
the things we’re focusing on… Not the Hyatts, not the Hiltons, not the 
Marriotts, but the small business people, telling their story about the 
American Dream – the independently owned Holiday Inn, owned by an 
Asian-American who came to this country, put all their life-savings into it, 
and now they’re going to lose this business because they can’t afford a $15 
wage.”

The lobbying executive added: “We have a lot of resources; we have the 
studies, the economic data. And we have the real-life stories that we can put 
out there. The key component is the PR.”

Crawford likened the conservative battle against city wage increases to a game 
of Whack-a-Mole: “We’re trying to beat them down when they pop up.”

The meeting was attended by Steve Arnold, a progressive elected representative 
from Fitchburg in Wisconsin. Arnold said the strategy presented to the room by 
Alec aimed to “make sure that corporate profits go to the management and the 
shareholders while the workers, who are the profit creators, lose out”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Falec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424462291721%2Fd1c3519a-ad56-4b89-b38c-f7fbfe15ab77-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20powerful%20rightwing%20lobby%20is%20plotting%20to%20stop%20minimum%20wage%20hikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Falec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20powerful%20rightwing%20lobby%20is%20plotting%20to%20stop%20minimum%20wage%20hikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Falec-rightwing-lobby-group-minimum-wage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424462291721%2Fd1c3519a-ad56-4b89-b38c-f7fbfe15ab77-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jeb Bush speaks at the American Legislative Exchange Council’s 40th annual 
meeting in August 2013. Photograph: M Spencer Green/AP 
Brendan Fischer, general counsel for the Center for Media and Democracy, which 
monitors the activities of Alec, said the discussion exposed that the 
conservative commitment to local decision-making was serving as cover for 
lobbyists who invented legislation for businesses.

“They are prepared to eliminate local control to support the interests of 
their corporate funders,” Fischer said. “Minimum wage increases in cities like 
Seattle are starting to force companies like Walmart to respond with their own 
higher wages – and that’s precisely what Alec is trying to stop.”

Alec’s overarching message, as outlined in policy papers 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/212049436/Raising-the-Minimum-Wage-The-Effects-on-Employment-Businesses-and-Consumers>
, is that minimum wage increases are bad for the economy. Sullivan told the 
December gathering that “the minimum wage favors those who already have jobs at 
the expense of the unemployed.”

But a large body of economic research 
<http://www.dol.gov/minwage/mythbuster.htm> has discredited such assumptions. 
Multiple studies have over many years, comparing cross-border jurisdictions 
with and without minimum wage provisions, have found that employment expands in 
line with wages.

“This is probably the most studied topic in labor economics,” said David 
Cooper, an economic analyst at the Economic Policy Institute. “The notion that 
a higher minimum wage will lead to job losses just isn’t borne out by the 
research.”

Walmart was a leading and high-paying member of Alec for many years until May 
2012, when the company withdrew afterthe network came under fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/alec-funding-crisis-big-donors-trayvon-martin>
 for having propagated “stand-your-ground” gun laws around the country. The 
legislation became controversial in the wake of the shooting in Florida of the 
unarmed black teenager Trayvon Martin – Walmart had chaired Alec’s criminal 
justice taskforce that conceived the “stand-your-ground” model bill.

An Alec spokesperson, Wilhelm Meierling, told the Guardian on Friday that 
Walmart’s decision to improve its remuneration vindicated the network’s belief 
that the market – and not the government – should drive wage increases.

“Walmart acknowledged they needed to do more to compete in the employee 
marketplace and retain top talent,” he said. “Its actions are exactly what Alec 
would call for.”

 * This article was amended on 23 February 2015. An earlier version described 
the American Hotel and Lodging Association as “a prominent funder of Alec”. 
There is no direct evidence that the association has funded the network 
currently or in the past.
 