
I enjoyed your article about buying a Dell Vostro as a good, no-nonsense option
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2013/may/23/desktop-pc-dell>, 
and I am thinking of doing that to replace an old Dell Dimension E520. The 
Vostro that I have my eye on has Windows 7 whereas my current desktop has 
Vista. My concern, as an elderly duffer, is the potential cost of renewing 
expensive programs. Will my Microsoft Office 2007 and Adobe Elements 6 discs 
still be compatible with the new machine?

Will I also be able to transfer my documents and my email addresses and 
emails, and tools such asAdobe <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/adobe> 
Reader and Flash? What are the possible expenses/pitfalls in upgrading to a new 
computer from an old one?
Richard Lynas


Microsoft Office 2007 will work well on your new Windows 7 PC. Adobe Elements 
6 came out before Windows 7, so it may not be fully compatible. The Windows 
compatibility centre allows users to vote on whether a program is compatible or 
not, and the current score forElements 6 
<http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/compatibility/CompatCenter/ProductDetailsViewer?Name=Adobe%20Photoshop%20Elements&vendor=Adobe&ModelOrVersion=6&Type=Software&tempOsid=Windows+7>
 is 3-3.

Microsoft recommends a paid upgrade, but buying the current Adobe Elements 12 
<http://www.adobe.com/uk/products/photoshop-elements.html> will cost you £54.71 
from Adobe (until January 9) or about £60 fromAmazon.co.uk 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Adobe-Photoshop-Elements-12-Mac/dp/B00EWH8ATA/> (and 
personally, I'd go for the boxed DVD). There have been lots of improvements 
since Photoshop Elements 6 came out in 2007, so it may well be worth upgrading.

Commercial programs sometimes have problems because software companies now 
track licences online. A second installation may be seen as a pirate copy. For 
this reason, it's a good idea to uninstall programs from your old PC before you 
install them on the new one. If Photoshop Elements 6 doesn't load in Windows 7, 
or says "Licensing for this product has stopped working," then you will need to
Apply the Licensing Service Update 
<http://helpx.adobe.com/creative-suite/kb/error-licensing-stopped-windows.html#main_Solution_1__Apply_the_Licensing_Service_Update_>
.

To move your emails and data -- but not your installed programs -- download 
the free Microsoft program Windows Easy Transfer. You'll probably need the 
version from here:Windows Easy Transfer for transferring from Windows Vista (32 
bit) to Windows 7 
<http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=14179>. Download it to 
your Vista PC and run it there. Windows 7 already has a copy built in.

Make a fresh start

When you get your new Vostro, you will need to go through an automated setup 
process that sets the time, date and location, and creates user accounts with 
names and passwords. After that, go to Windows Update and install the latest 
patches. To do this, click the Orb in the bottom left, typeup into the search 
box, and select Windows Update. With luck there will not be many. However, 
Windows Update installs files in batches, so it's important to go back several 
times. IfWindows 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-7> installs 
12 updates, that doesn't mean there are only 12 updates to install. There could 
well be hundreds.

Once Windows 7 is up to date, you can think about removing any potentially 
unwanted programs or PUPs, whichI wrote about recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2013/oct/31/windows-pups-potentially-unwanted-programs-pc-uninstall>
. The only ones you are likely to get with a Dell Vostro are Dell's backup 
software, which you should keep, and a free trial anti-virus program, which you 
can remove if you want. This may involve going to the AV supplier's website and 
downloading a "removal tool". I'd certainly look for one as modern anti-virus 
programs are plumbed in very deeply, to try to prevent malware from disabling 
them.

If you want a free anti-virus program, Avast! 
<http://www.avast.com/en-au/free-antivirus-download> and AVG Anti-Virus Free 
2014 <http://free.avg.com/gb-en/free-antivirus-download> are good options. Many 
people use the lightweight but less thorough Microsoft Security Essentials, in 
which case it's a good idea to run periodic scans withMalwarebytes Anti-Malware 
<http://www.malwarebytes.org/>. In fact, that's never a bad idea.

Install free utilities

Most of us use some of the thousands of free Windows utilities such as, in 
your case, Adobe Reader and Flash. In general, you should not transfer these 
from one PC to another: download the latest versions instead. You can do this 
by visiting a lot of different websites, or you can get them all from an app 
store,All My Apps <http://allmyapps.com/>. It can also remind you of upgrades, 
but if you find that annoying, you can uninstall the All My Apps program or 
turn it off.Tucows <http://www.tucows.com/windows> and MajorGeeks 
<http://www.majorgeeks.com/> are also good sources.

For Windows 7, I use and recommend the Firefox browser, Secunia's Personal 
Software Inspector, Slimware's SlimCleaner, Piriform's CCleaner, Paint.net, 
FreeFileSync, DoubleKiller, Dropbox, the Windows Live suite (if not already 
installed) and theK-Lite Codec Mega Pack 
<http://www.codecguide.com/download_k-lite_codec_pack_mega.htm>. I also use 
Media Player Classic instead of Windows Media Player, and Cubic Reality's
CubicExplorer <http://www.cubicreality.com/ce/download/> instead of Windows 
File Explorer, though these may not be to everyone's taste.

Don't install Oracle's Java at this stage, as it's a security risk. You can 
install it later if you find you can't do without it.

Other useful free programs include Auto Hotkey, Ditto (a clipboard manager), 
Evernote, Process Explorer and Skype.

When downloading utilities, either use All My Apps (or a similar trustworthy 
site) or links from the supplier's website. Avoid using links from Google 
adverts. Also, be extra careful when installing free programs, because some 
software suppliers earn money by foisting unwanted programs on you. These PUPs 
include toolbars from Ask or Google, or Google's Chrome browser. Be extra extra 
careful when installing things from Adobe and Apple.

In a few cases, you may want to copy a utility from your old PC because you 
don't like the latest version. I have a couple of these, such as Wisdomsoft's 
ScreenHunter Free version 4 (a screen capture program) and Microsoft's FreeCell 
and Cards.dll from 2004. There are several websites that stock old versions of 
programs includingoldversion.com <http://www.oldversion.com/> and Old Apps 
<http://www.oldapps.com/>.

Backing things up

Setting up a Windows PC just the way you want it takes time, and you don't 
want to do it more than once. To avoid this, I use Windows 7's Backup and 
Restore program to take a snapshot of the hard drive and store it somewhere 
safe. The Vostro hard drive includes a hidden Recovery Partition, but this may 
take you back to the beginning, with no updates etc. When fully set up with 
programs and data, runWindows <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> 
7's Backup and Restore or Dell's DataSafe Local Backup program to back up your 
PC to an external hard drive, and keep it backed up on your chosen schedule.

I also keep separate backups of important folders such as My Photographs and 
My Work. I use FreeFileSync to copy these to another external hard drive. The 
routines are saved so I just have to click the BatchRun.ffs_batch file and then 
hit the Synchronise button. Current work files, created in Microsoft Office, 
are backed up to my 25GBMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> SkyDrive so I can get at 
them from anywhere. Everybody has different requirements: just figure out what 
works for you.

Finally, a small confession. I think I have given you appropriate advice, but 
there are lots of ways to do things. When I switched from a Dell Dimension 
running Windows XP to a Vostro running Windows 7, I did it slightly 
differently. I took the hard drive out of the old PC, slotted it into anIT-735 
USB2 / e-SATA combo 3.5" SATA Hard Drive Enclosure 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Allcam-IT-735-Enclosure-Drives-Black/dp/B000V8KQE6> 
bought from Amazon, and plugged it into a USB port on the new PC. This made 
copying files much easier. I've forgotten which registry hack I used to take 
ownership of the old drive, butOwnership Changer 
<http://helpdeskgeek.com/windows-7/easily-take-ownership-of-files-and-folders-in-windows-7/>
 should do the job.

Either way, a good new PC should be dramatically faster and much smoother 
running than your seven-year-old Dell Dimension. I reckon you'll be sorry you 
didn't upgrade earlier.
 