
Key employment trends reported by xperthr 
<http://www.xperthr.co.uk/blogs/pay-intelligence/2013/01/xperthr-economic-commentary-january-2013-prospects-for-the-coming-year.html>
 show a "no or not enough work economy" characterised by an increase in 
part-time and temporary work and in underemployment.

The recruitment industry is responding to employers' specific briefs by using 
new technologies, such asAudience Match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/recruiters/audience-match>, and social media to 
find applicants. Niche recruiters are also being engaged to find "rare" talent,
reports the Recruitment and Employment Confederation 
<http://www.rec.uk.com/press/news/2240>. These techniques are helping to guard 
against theshortage of skilled candidates 
<http://www.cipd.co.uk/binaries/6039%20LMO%20Autumn%202012%20%28WEB%29.pdf>, 
which has also been noted in a job market where temporary placements are up and 
permanent placements are down.

But what do these trends mean for job seekers?

Before you apply

For many recent and new graduates, relying on skills will be crucial for 
navigating a jobs market where fixed-term projects and collaborative 
team-working are becoming more prevalent. The key is to understand your skills, 
says Mervyn Dinnen, content and community manager atJobsite UK 
<http://www.jobsite.co.uk/>. Know what you're good at and enjoy doing, then 
think creatively about how you can apply your skills to a range of roles. Seize 
opportunities to develop a portfolio of experience, and build contacts.

Make sure you fulfill the criteria where recruitment briefs specify particular 
areas of expertise or experience. You'll also need to keep your skills updated 
so you can hit the ground running.

Zena Everett, director of career coaching company Second Careers 
<http://www.second-careers.co.uk/> and founder of the recruitment business 
Perriam and Everett <http://www.perriam-everett.co.uk/>, says you need to be 
clear on what you offer. "No recruiter wants to hear something like, 'I'm a 
marketing director – I can do anything.' They want: 'I am a marketing director, 
specialising in product development within the bio-pharmaceutical sector,' for 
example."

How to work with recruiters

Your application materials must be up-to-date – and perfect. Roseanne 
Stockton, director ofNu Recruit <http://www.nu-recruit.co.uk/>, says recruiters 
don't have time to take up spelling mistakes with candidates: they'll just move 
on.

Consider a recruiter as a key partner in your job hunt: a recruiter needs to 
find the best person for their client. But if you're right for the job, your 
relationship should be one of equals, says Julia Briggs at the HR and 
recruitment communityInterimity <http://interimity.com/>. Recruiters can give 
you great insider information on company culture or your interviewer, so take 
their advice.

Be visible and contactable to recruiters. Some are active on Twitter and 
Facebook, and many use Google to find out more about candidates. Being easy to 
reach can make all the difference. "Good candidates are red hot on their 
mobiles," advises Roseanne Stockton.

Optimise your CV for job boards

Include relevant keywords and quantifiable achievements as hooks. Rowena 
Simpson, manager ofRenewables Careers <http://www.renewablescareers.com/>, a 
niche online job board for the renewables sector, says recruiters will use 
search techniques based on keywords to find candidates. "Research your sector 
and use the keywords that describe very specific skills and expertise," she 
says.

A two-page CV is generally sufficient. Avoid empty statements such as 
"innovative team-player", but include information on previous companies 
(sector, number of employees, turnover, scope of your role, etc) and give 
context to your achievements. "Numbers back up words," says Mervyn Dinnen.

Don't blast your CV out indiscriminately. Three job boards at a time is 
probably the maximum, says Zena Everett, while Mervyn Dinnen says exclusivity 
is important if you're dealing with a sector specialist.

Attract the attention of industry insiders

Be good at what you do to attract recruiters' attention, says Zena Everett: 
"Establish a really strong reputation as a highly talented individual: 
headhunters will find you if you are." Mervyn Dinnen says that specialist 
recruiters are often part of the community in which they recruit, and one of 
the go-to people for information on opportunities and market moves.

Evenbase's Quarterly Recruitment Review 
<http://www.evenbase.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/08/QuarterlyRecruitmentReview_Summer12.pdf>
 shows that while job boards are the top resource, corporate clients and 
certain industries favour recruitment agencies, while smaller companies rely on 
their networks. Ensure you explore all the opportunities to find vacancies.

Dealing with multiple part-time roles or projects on your CV

Straightforward, linear career paths may become rarer if the current 
employment trends continue. Instead, jobs worked concurrently or multiple 
part-time and project work will become more commonplace.

Be prepared to develop more than one CV for different sectors or roles. If 
necessary, break down your work history into sub-sections with different 
headings or themes, such as type of project, role or sector, rather than 
sticking to a strict, chronological order. A covering letter also helps draw 
out career themes and supporting details for a hiring manager or recruiter.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 