
Gain an understanding of the industry and the range of opportunities available

The music industry is forever evolving. Ensure you are well read and up to 
date on what's happening and be aware of the changing trends that affect our 
business. There are many specialist music websites where you can learn more 
about the industry, and find ads for placements and jobs. Along with the main 
industry trade magazineMusic Week <http://www.musicweek.com/>, for a daily 
digest that gives news and insight into the industry tryRecord of the Day 
<http://www.recordoftheday.com/> and CMU Daily <http://www.thecmuwebsite.com/>. 
These sites all post job opportunities. The music industry is highly 
competitive, so it's important to regularly look at the careers sections 
featured on company websites as well as keeping an eye on all their social 
media channels. For example, while Universal Music advertises vacancies on its
Working For Us <http://www.umusic.co.uk/who-we-are/working-for-us> section, our 
labels <http://www.umusic.co.uk/our-labels> often also tweet new internships 
and job opportunities. So follow us,@umusicuk <https://twitter.com/#!/umusicuk> 
, as well as the individual labels on Twitter. It's also worth using sites such 
as LinkedIn to build your network of industry contacts.

Have a memorable CV

Don't try too hard but remember we are a creative business. Your CV needs to 
make an instant impression â€“ it's what's going to get you in the door for an 
interview. You ideally need to demonstrate your passion, an active interest, or 
projects you've pursued in your own time relating to music. This will give you 
a much greater chance of being invited in for a face-to-face meeting.

Your CV should detail not only your paid work history, but any relevant work 
experience, paid or unpaid, either with a business or projects you have 
undertaken yourself. You need to show the person looking at your CV that you 
are proactive, keen and have used your own initiative. Internships are often 
heavily admin-focused, so don't forget to include this particular experience 
you have gained. A solid understanding of the digital landscape is obviously 
something we look for in all our potential employees, because it has changed 
what is possible so radically in all content industries, particularly music.

Regardless of any role you do within the music industry, whether it's in one 
of the labels or within the central digital team, you should have a sound 
all-round general digital knowledge to reflect the way our business has evolved.

Gain voluntary and paid experience

There are plenty of examples of those at the very top of the industry who made 
it having started their career doing work experience.In this video 
<http://www.umusic.co.uk/who-we-are/day-in-the-life/darcus-beese>, Darcus Beese 
<http://www.umusic.co.uk/who-we-are/day-in-the-life/darcus-beese>, the 
co-president of Island Records, explains how he started out as a "general 
dogsbody" and "teaboy" before eventually going on to sign Amy Winehouse and the 
Sugababes among others. Also, don't narrow your chances by being too specific 
about which part of the business you are looking to get into. Your aim should 
be to get a foot in the door and gain experience, so don't limit yourself.

Try and get as much relevant work and voluntary experience as possible. 
Internships are often a good stepping stone to a permanent job. Universal Music 
UK runs a scheme that takes 20 interns a year and gives them year-long 
placement across the company, paying the London living wage.

Any music-related experience is valuable, whether you've volunteered at a 
festival, done work experience for a small label, or worked on a blog or 
website in your own time. It's always good to see work experience on 
candidates' CVs. Volunteering to work shows not only that they are dedicated 
and proactive, but will also mean they have a better understanding of how 
things work in a practical sense. This will give you the edge over candidates 
who purely have theoretical knowledge.

Attend as many conferences, networking events and tech talks as you can

Getting out and about, meeting people at gigs, events and general networking 
is important. You never know who you might meet.

Universal Music UK also looks to help anyone interested in a career in the 
industry with itsUtalks <http://www.umusic.co.uk/utalks>. These are a series of 
informal sessions around the UK to give people interested in working in and 
around music the chance to speak to people working on the frontline, from A&R 
to marketing and, of course, digital.

Don't forget the "back room" jobs

It's also worth pointing out there are opportunities to move into a profession 
within the music industry. The creative industries also need accountants, 
lawyers and HR professionals. These can be highly fulfilling careers for those 
who want to marry their passion with their chosen profession.

Morna Cook is head of human resources at Universal Music UK. She has worked at 
Universal Music for 10 years, initially in international HR before moving 
across to the UK company

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 