
How can digital music services win praise from musicians, rather than the kind 
of attacks recently aimed at Spotify byThom Yorke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/07/spotify-thom-yorke-dying-corpse>
 andDavid Byrne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/11/david-byrne-internet-content-world>
?

For cellist Zoe Keating, its simple. "Just include us," she said last night 
during a debate organised by Virgin that brought musicians, managers and 
technology firms together fora discussion of music/tech disruption 
<http://musically.com/2013/10/28/amanda-palmer-will-i-am-imogen-heap-zoe-keating-disrupters/>
.

Keating was joined by fellow artists Amanda Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amanda-palmer>, Imogen Heap and will.i.am, 
Justin Bieber's manager Scooter Braun, Songkick chief executive Ian Hogarth, 
Spotify's Trevor Skeet (also a musician in his own right) and Vevo's senior 
vice-president of international Nic Jones.

Heap, Skeet, Hogarth and Jones were in a London venue for the debate, while 
Palmer, Keating, Braun andwill.i.am 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/will-i-am> joined the conversation via 
video-chat.

"An artist like me couldn’t exist without technology: I can just record music 
in my basement and release it on the internet. And it’s levelled the playing 
field: an obscure artist like myself who makes instrumental cello music can 
just get it all out there," said Keating.

"But this is not just an excuse for services to replicate the payment 
landscapes of the past. It’s not an excuse to take advantage of those without 
power … Corporations do have a responsibility not just to their shareholders 
but to the world at large, and to artists."

Keating renewed her previous call for streaming services to share more data 
with musicians 
<http://gigaom.com/2012/11/20/data-isnt-just-the-new-oil-its-the-new-money-ask-zoe-keating/>
, as well as forging more links to other startups that help artists to connect 
directly with fans.

"Half of my income is from sales, but I don’t feel like streaming is the evil 
enemy," she said. "I think it’s a good positive thing to get music out there. 
All I’m asking is make a direct deal with me, let me choose my terms."

She was backed up by Palmer, who questioned whether technology companies like 
Apple, Google andSpotify <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> 
should be investing more to fund the creation of music.

"As bad and clunky as the major label system was, you still had a constant 
influx of capital back from those giant, sometimes soul-sucking systems, back 
into content creation," said Palmer, who famously raised $1.2m on Kickstarter 
to fund her last album, book and tour.

"One weird thing is that iTunes, Apple, Spotify, Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, whatever … all of the people 
who are profiting off the artists from the small level to the huge levels 
aren’t really feeding very much back into the creation of new content. And 
that’s actually one of the largest problems."
 Amanda Palmer: 'iTunes, Apple, Spotify, Google, whatever … all of the people 
who are profiting off the artists from the small level to the huge levels 
aren’t really feeding very much back into the creation of new content.' 
Screenshot: Stuart Dredge 
Scooter Braun suggested that it's partly the responsibility of artists and 
managers to demand more of a role in guiding the strategy of digital music 
services, but also said that they shouldn't forget that it's fans who are 
driving new music consumption models, not artists or technologists.

"Here’s the deal: we can say we want things to be better, we want things to 
change, and we’ll get there. But we have to realise that the consumer and the 
listener dictates what happens," said Braun.

"You get what you negotiate, and the only way you have innovation in the 
industry is if you demand it... The last time things changed dramatically, 
which was iTunes, the labels had a voice at the table and the artists did not 
... As Spotify comes out and Beats comes out,iTunes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/itunes> Radio and all those things, the 
most important thing is that all artists have a voice."

Several of the artists in the Virgin Disruptors debate found a voice to 
criticiseVevo <https://www.theguardian.com/media/vevo>, with Heap, Keating and 
will.i.am all attacking the fact that artists don't have a say in which brands 
their music videos are associated with on the ad-supported service.

"It’s very disheartening to go onto my Vevo channel and find some awful advert 
I have to sit through," said Heap. "I don’t know exactly the deal that you have 
with the label that I license to, Sony, but I would like to. But it’s not easy 
to get that information."

will.i.am went further, pointing out that artists foot the bill to make their 
music videos, but are powerless to control the ads shown around them.

"At what point in time does Vevo pay for the content that gives you the 
ability to put commercials that we don’t want before our content?" he asked. 
"And if we did want it, can we choose what brands come before or after our 
content when I’m the one paying for the video? It’s a very very very very 
touchy subject which is not being talked about."

Tech companies may be justified in pushing back against some of this 
criticism. Vevo said in November 2012 that it hadpaid $200m out to music 
industry rightsholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/may/19/vevo-nic-jones> since its launch 
in 2009, whileSpotify paid out $500m between 2008 and 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/06/spotify-pays-500m-dollars-royalties>
, andexpects to pay another $500m in 2013 alone 
<http://www.musicweek.com/news/read/spotify-will-pay-500m-to-rights-holders-in-2013-says-ek/053462>
.

Apple, meanwhile, is estimated to be generating $6.9bn of annual music sales 
through its iTunes Store 
<http://www.billboard.com/biz/articles/news/digital-and-mobile/1567869/business-matters-average-itunes-account-generates-just>
. All of this is money that in theory is "feeding very much back into the 
creation of new content" in Palmer's words.

The key caveat: it's being paid to labels and publishers, not directly to 
artists and songwriters. How big a share they see depends on their contracts, 
which was a theme addressed by will.i.am. "Our contract is all based on old 
technology. An album is 12 songs, because that’s how much information fit on a 
record … If you’re complaining about this music industry, let’s go back down to 
the contract," he said.
 Imogen Heap: 'It’s very disheartening to go onto my Vevo channel and find 
some awful advert I have to sit through' Screenshot: Stuart Dredge 
The Black Eyed Peas star also suggested that musicians should be collaborating 
more with coders and hardware engineers. "I Gotta Feeling is still the number 
one downloaded song of all time in iTunes, but I made more money from the 
equity I own in [headphones maker] Beats. That tells you hardware is the 
place," he said.

"If you're going to complain about somebody else's system, you need to sit 
down with somebody who can create your own system. It's not hard to create 
systems nowadays."

Palmer later pointed out that this isn't a strategy that can suit all 
musicians. "There are a lot of artists out there that don’t wanna be 
technological warriors … they don’t want to create a whole new fucking 
platform, they just want to make music," she said. "For the many, many, many 
artists who don’t necessarily want to delve into the tech business and engage 
in this way, my question is what about them?"

Will.i.am suggested that those artists should ensure they have people around 
them who do want to get to grips with new technology and services. But the 
overall theme was of collaboration between musicians and technologists, which 
is where Keating made her point about inclusion. "I’d like to work with music 
services to try to make the ecosystem of the future, so call me up!" she said.

Keating has already been working with Hogarth and Songkick through the 
latter's Detour programme 
<http://blog.songkick.com/2013/05/01/100-fans-bring-zoe-keating-5000-miles-with-detour/>
, which helps fans band together to request gigs by favourite artists in their 
cities, and pledge to buy tickets – making it effectively a crowdfunding 
service for live music.

"A ticket over the last 40 years hasn’t really changed: it's a way of figuring 
out if someone should be allowed into a building, and a way to add additional 
fees," he said, before outlining an alternative born from collaboration with 
musicians.

"A ticket should be an expression of what it’s like to be in that room. It’s a 
connection: an economic connection between you as a fan and the artist that you 
love. That’s what we’re trying to do withSongkick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/songkick> and Detour," he said. "Let’s 
look at the first principles of this industry and try to reset them all."
 