
This year’s opulent Oscars swag bags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/08/oscars-gift-bag-nominees-200k-breast-lift-sex-toy-japan-holiday>
 include gifts from the government of Israel; the government of Japan; and a 
“proud farm wife” from Canada. While only a handful of people leave the Academy 
Awards with a gold gong, every year nominees are consoled withan extravagant 
goody bag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/08/oscars-worst-goody-bag-gifts-academy-awards>
. These swag bags aren’t officially endorsed by the Academy; they’re put 
together by Distinctive Assets, a company that helps place products with 
celebrities. “Celebrity seeding” is a cost-effective marketing tactic for 
brands. Sending a celeb a freebie in the hope it gets PR is a lot cheaper than 
an advertisement or endorsement deal.

Mink eyelashes and armpit nappies: what are the worst Oscar goody bag gifts?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/08/oscars-worst-goody-bag-gifts-academy-awards>
The Oscar swag bags have already prompted a blitz of buzz. Largely because 
their contents, worth $200,000, are preposterous. They includeluxury holidays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/israel-offers-free-holidays-oscars-contenders-gift-bag>
, extravagant car rentals, ludicrously expensive toilet paper, and a “vampire” 
breast lift. But among these outlandish offerings, perhaps the most unusual 
item is the most ordinary: CAD$35 (£17) necklaces made by a farmer’s wife in 
Edmonton, Canada.

Kim Ducherer, the founder of Farm Wife Style 
<http://globalnews.ca/news/2502829/leduc-county-jeweller-sending-products-to-hollywood-for-awards-season/>
, started her online jewellery business just over a year ago. Her creations, 
she says, are inspired by farm life. “I think it is really down to earth and 
being a farmer … is being down to earth. Everything I make is really simple, 
really classic and I find farming is like that too.”

This is charming, but the Oscars aren’t an event one would typically 
characterise as “farmyard-chic”. So how did Farm Wife Style end up at the 
Oscars? Well, Ducherer used an interesting piece of technology called
www.google.com <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>. She did some 
research and emailed Distinctive Assets who decided that her jewellery was 
distinctive enough to be an asset to the award ceremony.

When Ducherer found out she was going to have the privilege of donating 185 
pieces of her jewellery to underprivileged celebrities she was in shock. She 
“ran upstairs and told [her] husband. He was in shock too. He didn’t really 
understand.” By the way, for anyone who, at this point, still doesn’t 
understand why celebrities need free stuff, let me refer you to Distinctive 
Asset’s website.This explains that <http://www.distinctiveassets.com/faqs.html>
: “The basis of this question is a confusion of ‘need’ with ‘gratitude’ ... You 
don’t cease to be eligible for gratitude simply because you’re rich and 
famous.” So there you go.

The Farm Wife Style story isn’t just a parable of gratitude; it is a neat case 
study on the extent to which social media has democratised the marketplace. 
Ducherer is representative of a growing tide of Etsy entrepreneurs – 
stay-at-home mumsmonetising their crafting hobbies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/05/make-money-from-hobby>. No 
longer do the big stores have a monopoly on overpriced home decor or costume 
jewellery; you can sell anything online if you package it well enough. You can 
literally print “shit” and sell it on Etsy. And you don’t need a big budget to 
advertise your creations. If you produce content good enough, your cheap 
YouTube video can get more views and buzz than million-dollar productions from 
big brands on big broadcast channels. Or you can just send samples tothe Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>.

For the last decade, Doritos have run a contest called Crash the Super Bowl 
where consumers are invited to come up with an advert for the Super Bowl. The 
winner gets up to $1m and the satisfaction of seeing their homemade commercial 
play alongside big-budget, celeb-stuffed, professionally produced ads. 
Apparently, 2016 may have been the last year forCrash the Super Bowl 
<http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/how-doritos-super-bowl-ad-kicked-twitter-conversation-about-birth-control-169493>
. In its stead, I’d like to suggest a new competition called Crash the 
Swagbowl. Participants must make a product and get it into the Oscars’ swag 
bag. The prize is the chance that your product may end up in the arms of a 
celebrity. To get you started in Crashing the 2017 Swagbowl, here are a few 
pointers.

1. Be white 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/08/oscars-so-white-diversity-issues-protests-sylvester-stallone-creed>


Statistics show that, when it comes to the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>, being of the Caucasian persuasion is 
a distinct asset.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Foscars-swagbag-celebrity-products-nominees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7cde620ab58d0663e4457e4fc71554a1010b6a3%2F0_0_4800_2400%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20crash%20the%20Oscars%E2%80%99%20swag%20bag%20and%20get%20your%20goodies%20into%20celebs%E2%80%99%20hands%20%7C%20Arwa%20Mahdawi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Foscars-swagbag-celebrity-products-nominees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20crash%20the%20Oscars%E2%80%99%20swag%20bag%20and%20get%20your%20goodies%20into%20celebs%E2%80%99%20hands%20%7C%20Arwa%20Mahdawi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Foscars-swagbag-celebrity-products-nominees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7cde620ab58d0663e4457e4fc71554a1010b6a3%2F0_0_4800_2400%2F4800.jpg>
 The 2016 Oscar nominees luncheon. Photograph: Image Group LA/©A.M.P.A.S. 
2. Create something ridiculous

If you want to get free PR then your product should have a novelty factor that 
piques press interest. This year’sVampire Breast Lift 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2015/10/95628/vampire-breast-lift> is a case in 
point. Admittedly, it’s difficult to come up with a bizarre plastic surgery 
procedure at home. However you can always take a common household object and 
sell it at a 2,000% mark-up. This year’s bag also includes $275 luxury toilet 
paper.

3. Or offer something ridiculously good-looking

Anything celebs might be able to Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> is a good bet if you’re 
looking for free PR. Jewellery and confectionery are both ideal. Maybe combine 
the two and try something like a tiara made from meringues.

4. Appeal to narcissism
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Foscars-swagbag-celebrity-products-nominees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42b6df98fef96ebba80813db9bf54a86d35f44cc%2F0_0_5067_3043%2F5067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20crash%20the%20Oscars%E2%80%99%20swag%20bag%20and%20get%20your%20goodies%20into%20celebs%E2%80%99%20hands%20%7C%20Arwa%20Mahdawi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Foscars-swagbag-celebrity-products-nominees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20crash%20the%20Oscars%E2%80%99%20swag%20bag%20and%20get%20your%20goodies%20into%20celebs%E2%80%99%20hands%20%7C%20Arwa%20Mahdawi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Foscars-swagbag-celebrity-products-nominees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42b6df98fef96ebba80813db9bf54a86d35f44cc%2F0_0_5067_3043%2F5067.jpg>
 Personalised confectionery goes down a treat Photograph: Carolyn Jenkins/Alamy 
This year’s gift bag contains personalised M&Ms; smart because appealing to 
narcissism is always a good strategy. So maybe ensure your meringue tiara has a 
nominee’s name on it.

5. When in doubt, ask a farmer’s wife

They seem to know about this stuff.
 