Which artist did not have any kind of formal training?  Jackson Pollock  
Vincent Van Gogh  Henri Matisse  Tracey Emin What job involves interferometry?  
Conservator  Studio assistant  Art dealer  Archivist In 2010-13, what 
percentage of artists in the UK did not get paid for publicly funded 
exhibitions?  56%  71%  79%  37% What is a squeegee used for?  Spreading paint 
across a screen print  Sqeezing paint out of the tube  Squashing paper in an 
ink press  Mixing paint together evenly What does the role of an archivist 
involve?  Chronicling the artwork in a museum holding  Recording information 
and managing documents surrounding artwork  Managing and updating the 
information on museum websites  Researching and recording information on new 
artists How many studio assistants does the artist Damien Hirst have?  0-40  
40-80  80-120  120+ Which of the following roles does not exist in an auction 
house?  Affiliator  Handler  Cataloguer  Valuer Which of the following jobs 
involves using a gavel?  Valuer  Auctioneer  Art collector  Handler On average, 
what is the starting salary of a conservator?  £15,000  £18,000  £20,000  
£22,000 What does a handler handle?  Artists  Art dealers  Deliveries  Artworks 
 You got…  You know your stuff! You're well on your way to a career in the art 
world.  Awesome! Pablo Picasso would be impressed.  Great job! Pablo Picasso 
would be proud.  Good job! Paul Cezanne would be proud.  Good job! Jackson 
Pollock would be pleased.  Nice try, ring up Tracey Emin for some advice 
perhaps.  Good effort, but as Salvador Dali once said: "Have no fear of 
perfection, you'll never reach it."  As Salvador Dali once said: "Have no fear 
of perfection, you'll never reach it."  Poor effort, Michelangelo would be 
turning in his grave.  Poor effort, Michelangelo would be turning in his grave. 
 Try harder next time...  Challenge your friends Submit answers  