
I have a great personal interest in the forthcoming film A Royal Night Out 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fn4pSV0uCfg>, a raucous comedy-drama set on VE 
night, 8 May 1945. It’s based on the true story of how Princesses Elizabeth and 
Margaret pretended to be common folk and mingled incognito with the partying 
crowds on the night of Victory in Europe, a joyous event whose70th anniversary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/15/ve-day-70th-anniversary-events-uk>
 is now being celebrated. What might they have got up to?

Now, no critic in the world is more qualified to review this film than me. I 
practically have a PhD in this film, a professorship in A Royal Night 
Out–ology. But maybe I’m not the guy to actually review it. It just so happens 
that I wrote a novel calledNight of Triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/12/night-triumph-peter-bradshaw-review>
 about exactly these events with precisely the same idea: Elizabeth and 
Margaret leaving the palace on VE night and having a secret adventure. It was 
first published two and half years ago.

Well, there’s no copyright on historical what-if fiction. The film stars 
Rupert Everett <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rupert-everett> and Emily 
Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/14/emily-watson-sexuality-part-of-who-i-am>
 as King George VI and Queen Elizabeth, with the eerily beautiful Canadian 
Sarah Gadon as Elizabeth and Bel Powley as Margaret. Hearing of it, a friend 
congratulated me on what he assumed was the “movie version” of my novel and 
said I must be rolling in dosh. I tensely explained the situation and he 
laughed heartily: “Oh! You mean not only are you not rolling in dosh, your 
novel is just unpaid advertising for this film so someone else can roll in 
dosh! Ha ha ha!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfn4pSV0uCfg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfn4pSV0uCfg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfn4pSV0uCfg&media=>
Harsh. I had the idea around eight years ago and mentioned it over a drink 
with the lateIon Trewin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ion-trewin>, the 
biographer and Booker chairman. I babbled about how fascinating I found VE 
night as a Bacchanalian phenomenon and subversive event in British public life, 
and the comic and fictional potential of the princesses’ adventure. Ion smiled 
and said yes, but now you have to get on and write it.

Good advice. I didn’t follow it. Instead, I became a dad, and work and life in 
general got in the way. But I got around to Night of Triumph eventually, 
reading voraciously, about the mythology ofVE Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gall/0,,1476330,00.html> itself, about the 
princesses, about wartime London and the dark history of crime on the home 
front. Having planned to give Elizabeth an encounter with a seedy Greeneian 
gangster, I also read low-life fiction of the era, discovering the genius of 
Gerald Kersh, James Curtis and Simon Blumenfeld. The short novel came together 
very nicely. But a year or so before publication, I saw a story in Screen 
International magazine: a planned movie on the same theme, then called Girls’ 
Night Out, with Michael Hoffman slated to direct and Juno Temple and Alexandra 
Roach as Margaret and Elizabeth (all these details are now changed).

Well, I was bringing out my novel. Great. But would there be a screen 
adaptation? A movie deal? A villa for me in Antibes? A BMW made out of solid 
gold? Erm, no. Someone else got in there first. That’s showbusiness. So it was 
with mixed feelings, I admit, that I sat down to watchA Royal Night Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-royal-night-out>, directed by Julian 
Jarrold, last week. Might the film-makers have read my novel? Might they have 
been – ahem! – influenced by my humble work?

The lights dimmed, the story began. Elizabeth and Margaret, with much 
kittenish squabbling, persuade their disapproving parents to let them go for a 
VE night on the town. Sort of like my book. And, like Night of Triumph, the 
film gives the princesses two fictional Guards officers as chaperones – much 
more broadly comic turns than I imagined. In real life, incidentally, they went 
out with super-respectable types, including Henry Porchester, later to become 
Lord Carnarvon, the Queen’s racing manager.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Froyal-night-out-ve-day-princesses-elizabeth-margaret-film-peter-bradshaw-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429285616528%2F9ad1e4c6-d119-4154-811a-7662a9648f62-2060x1329.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20I%20imagined%20the%20true%20story%20of%20the%20Queen's%20VE%20Day%20shenanigans%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Froyal-night-out-ve-day-princesses-elizabeth-margaret-film-peter-bradshaw-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20I%20imagined%20the%20true%20story%20of%20the%20Queen%27s%20VE%20Day%20shenanigans%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Froyal-night-out-ve-day-princesses-elizabeth-margaret-film-peter-bradshaw-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429285616528%2F9ad1e4c6-d119-4154-811a-7662a9648f62-2060x1329.jpeg>
 8 May 1945: London crowds celebrate the end of the second world war in Europe. 
Photograph: Hulton-Deutsch Collection/Corbis 
But then … well, I was struck by what I can only describe as dissimilarities. 
I made Princess Margaret a reader of Picturegoer magazine, from which she 
learns of gossip concerningMickey Rooney 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gN5vteiAg5g>. In the film, on the other hand, 
she’s a reader of Tit-Bits magazine, in which she learns of gossip concerning
Gregory Peck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/24/gregory-peck-to-kill-a-mockingbird-atticus-finch-role-model>
. In Night of Triumph, she goes to a dodgy Soho dive called The Butterfly Club 
in Great Windmill Street; in the film, she goes to a dodgy Soho dive called 
Lord Stanley’s in Broadwick Street. In my book, she meets a deserter who is a 
nasty piece of work. In the film, she meets a deserter who is a nice man.

I’m being pernickety. In fact, the film develops broadly in a very different 
way: it is basically a romance whereas my book is a macabre black comedy. On 
the sex front, I gave Elizabeth an all-female kiss, but I got Margaret home 
safely earlier than in this film. Maybe I was primly aware that she was just 15 
at the time, something the film doesn’t convey. A Royal Night Out gives 
Elizabeth a rather funny fish-out-of-water scene in a bus. Very good idea. I 
was kicking myself I didn’t think of that. It also links the VE night 
celebrations with the 1945 general election upset. Again, smart idea. The film 
also continues long into the following morning with Elizabeth learning some 
positive, heartwarming life lessons about her future subjects. My book isn’t a 
heartwarmer.

Scene by scene, minute by minute, I took a personal enjoyment in A Royal Night 
Out. I especially appreciated Rupert Everett as George VI. Now I’m hoping its 
audiences will gallop into Waterstone’s – and lap up my novel.

• A Royal Night Out is on general release on 15 May. Peter Bradshaw’s novel 
Night of Triumph is available in hardback and on Kindle.
 