
Arriving into Songzhuang, you’d be forgiven for wondering what had attracted 
over 5,000 artists to make this far outpost of Beijing the largest artist 
colony inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

Along the dusty main street, a line of boxy, low-rise buildings housing cheap 
restaurants and shops is disrupted occasionally by a brutalist gallery looking 
distinctly out of place. The pavements and exhibition spaces seem almost empty. 
There’s none of the bustle or glamour of Brooklyn or East London, or even 
Beijing’s own trendy 798 art district.

There’s also no sign of the growing confrontations between artists and 
communist authorities that could worsen in coming years with an ambitious plan 
to move much of Beijing city’s government nearby.

Stepping through the small iron door into critic and curator Li Xianting’s 
large courtyard home, Songzhuang’s appeal immediately becomes clear.

Songzhuang was one of the first places in China where you could enjoy a free 
way of life
Li Xianting 
Li leads me into a barn-sized living room with bare brick walls supporting a 
great ceiling of wooden beams. Through the tall windows, geese waddle in an 
orchard. It’s designer-loft-meets-Buddhist-temple, a castle compared with the 
cramped apartments of downtown Beijing, 20 miles and six ring-roads away.

“Songzhuang was one of the first places in China where you could enjoy a free 
way of life,” says Li, an elegant but diminutive 66-year old with luminous 
white hair and beard.

On his walls hangs an A-Z of contemporary Chinese art. Laughing down at us is 
the garish face of Yue Minjun, one of the first Sonzhuang artists to strike 
gold when Chinese art exploded onto the international stage in the 90s. Much of 
the art of that time, which Li Xianting promoted under the movements of 
“Political Pop” and “Cynical Realism”, was brash, ironic and overtly political. 
Foreign collectors lapped it up (Yue Mingjun’s 1995 painting Execution, which 
depicts him laughing at a firing squad, later sold for £2.9m). Li showed 
artists’ work abroad and curated the China pavilion at the 1995 Venice 
Biennale, earning his title as the godfather of the Chinese avant-garde.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9496e8fb29d037c8e07ab9ed27b881e5a24e1d15%2F0_107_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20long%20can%20Beijing's%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20long%20can%20Beijing%27s%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9496e8fb29d037c8e07ab9ed27b881e5a24e1d15%2F0_107_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
 Critic and curator Li Xianting with his personal collection of paintings. 
Photograph: Max Duncan 
It was an amazing time considering what had preceded it. 

“Before, there was no such thing as an independent artist in China,” Li says, 
pouring tea from a tiny ceramic pot before lighting the first of many 
cigarettes.

Under communism artists served the people and, through the 1980s, were still 
confined to work units. As the party gradually loosened its grip on the economy 
and society, artists seized the opportunity and started to make wild and often 
confrontational work. They also started to congregate.

When, in 1994, a group were evicted by police from China’s first art colony in 
northern Beijing, they pitched up in Songzhuang, then a collection of 47 poor 
farming villages and some factories.

They rented unused farmhouses in a village called Xiaopu, but controversy, and 
the police, followed them there. Locals were also suspicious of these youths 
with shaved heads or long hair and holes in their clothes, making work that, to 
them, didn’t look like art at all.

Xiaopu village’s communist party secretary Cui Dabai was under pressure to 
evict them, but he saw their economic potential.

“By renting land to artists, farmers could make up to 10 times times their 
annual income,” says Cui, an affable, no-nonsense official with a broad local 
accent.

“Moreover, the artists helped pay for road building, street lighting and tree 
planting. They set a good example. Villagers eventually embraced them,” he 
tells me from an large armchair in the village committee on Songzhuang’s main 
thoroughfare.

As the word got out, a trickle became a flood and by 2005, there were an 
estimated 3,000 artists in Songzhuang, now a vibrant community of painters, 
poets, filmmakers and musicians.

Shitou, an artist prominent in China’s LGBT community, was one of the early 
arrivals that helped give Songzhuang its reputation as a counterculture haven. 
We sip tea and crack sunflower seeds with her filmmaker girlfriend, Mingming, 
in their small farmhouse crammed with big, colourful paintings.

“The artists weren’t materialistic at all then, most had no money. But after 
they came here, many did really well,” she says.

As demand for Chinese art grew, other colonies emerged across China’s urban 
fringe. As if overnight, a former factory zone closer to the city centre had 
become the hip 798 art district. A little further out,Ai Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> was building vast 
complexes in a village called Caochangdi.

At Cui Dabai’s request, Li Xianting designed an art zone on a disused plot of 
land, with studios and galleries surrounding a spacious art centre, with a 
cinema for film screenings, which Li would run.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3a6ba35e076a89efb16f0acf10e6a8c60190513%2F0_124_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20long%20can%20Beijing's%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20long%20can%20Beijing%27s%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3a6ba35e076a89efb16f0acf10e6a8c60190513%2F0_124_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
 In 1994, a group were evicted from China’s first art colony in northern 
Beijing. They pitched up in Songzhuang, then a collection of 47 poor farming 
villages. Photograph: Max Duncan 
By 2006, the Beijing government had declared Songzhuang a “cultural industry 
base” and an annual art festival was under way. Art-related businesses were 
enticed by cheap land, bringing revenue and pushing up prices. Other local 
governments hungrily eyed the Songzhuang model, and Cui and Li’s unlikely 
partnership was seen as exemplary cooperation.

Songzhuang is a microcosm of China. They built so much so quickly. Everything 
is about profit. Culture is irrelevant
Li Xianting 
“Cui Dabai used to say we were like two grasshoppers on the same piece of 
string – what happened to one of us would happen to the other,” says Li, who is 
fond of idioms. “It’s not like that any more. We don’t communicate at all.”

Things started to turn sour around the 2008 Beijing Olympics.

Authorities, Li says, started to see the art zone as a dangerous thing. “The 
police started to conduct checks, censor and close exhibitions. Since then, 
each year has been tenser than the last.”

Li’s annual independent film festival, which showcased gritty documentaries, 
was banned from the art centre. In the following years, a game of cat and mouse 
saw police shutting the festival down in one location, only for it to pop up in 
another.

When I went to the festival in 2011, a few dozen people had ended up crammed 
into a room in Li’s house, watching documentaries projected straight onto the 
wall.

In August 2014, police and thugs roughly dispersed a would-be audience, 
detained Li and others for several hours andordered them not to hold it again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/24/beijing-independent-film-festival-shut-down-china-freedom>
. In 2015, they didn’t even try.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d7e119481713c3e6c24b16d91544ed156d9b4bf%2F0_142_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20long%20can%20Beijing's%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20long%20can%20Beijing%27s%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d7e119481713c3e6c24b16d91544ed156d9b4bf%2F0_142_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
 Artist Liu Yi in his studio. Photograph: Max Duncan 
“If it carries on like this and the film festival can’t go on, it’s a huge 
destruction of culture,” says Shitou, who has shown films with Mingming at the 
festival before. “These films have educated and enlightened people. It’s a 
great loss if they can’t be seen.”

Two months later, a group of artists and poets were arrested while trying to 
hold a poetry reading in support of pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong. Some 
were only released almost a year later.

“Now the artists have gone as quiet as cicadas in winter,” says Li, using 
another idiom. “Nobody dares speak.”

When asked about the shutting of the film festival, Party Secretary Cui raises 
his voice in determination.

By 2005, there were an estimated 3,000 artists in Songzhuang,a vibrant 
community of painters, filmmakers and musicians

“We firmly oppose anything with political tendencies,” he says. “Our firm 
position is to promote a culture of positive energy and uphold traditional 
culture. Tolerance has limits, we will not budge on principles,” he declared.

Meanwhile, studios and other structures continue to mushroom out of the 
surrounding countryside, filling local government coffers. Land prices have 
soared; artists have protested evictions and demolitions; some have moved 
elsewhere.

“Songzhuang is a microcosm of China,” Li says. “They built so much so quickly. 
Everything is about profit. Culture is irrelevant.”

But the rampant development so far may be just a taster of what is about to 
land on Songzhuang’s doorstep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab3da4fa1ee2ef23c475aae8318d07c77994c20%2F0_68_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20long%20can%20Beijing's%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20long%20can%20Beijing%27s%20biggest%20artist%20colony%20survive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhow-long-can-beijings-biggest-artist-colonies-survive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ab3da4fa1ee2ef23c475aae8318d07c77994c20%2F0_68_4080_2449%2F4080.jpg>
 The new government site is widely expected to be just three miles from 
Songzhuang. Photograph: Max Duncan 
Beijing has drawn up ambitious plans to move much of its municipal government, 
civil servants in tow, to Tongzhou, the district to which Songzhuang belongs. 
The plan aims to take pressure off the capital by moving around 15% of the 
population out of the centre, limiting the city’s expanding population to 23 
million by 2020.

It will make Tongzhou the administrative centre of a massive integrated urban 
cluster encompassing Beijing, the neighbouring city of Tianjin and Hebei 
province, which surrounds the capital.An announcement carried by state media in 
July <http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-07/13/c_134408425.htm> said the 
development is expected to have made “remarkable progress” by 2017.

Crouching trekker, hidden buildings: China's urban explorers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/29/china-urban-explorers> 
Exact details have not been released, but the site is widely expected to be 
just three miles from Songzhuang. A new subway station has recently opened next 
to empty fields. When I visited, migrants living nearby said they were waiting 
for notice to be moved on. A brand new housing complex stood empty, awaiting 
occupants.

Even before the announcement, property prices had soared in Tongzhou on 
speculation with sales in the second quarter up 140% from a year earlier,
according to figures 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2015-08/04/c_134478203.htm> quoted by 
state media.

“It should be beneficial,” says Cui, who has made attracting more business and 
tourism to Songzhuang a key goal of his leadership. “Beijing city government 
has fundamentally decided to develop culture and tourism in the Beijing area. 
This will give a big push to our development in the next few years.”

Li, who sees the big move as another nail in his film festival’s coffin, is 
far less upbeat.

“This will have a huge effect on Songzhuang. As soon as you’re close to the 
government, all the experimentation, creativity and freedom that contemporary 
art needs is essentially impossible.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 