
I came late to Diana Wynne Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/mar/27/diana-wynne-jones-obituary>. I 
managed to miss her first time around, my childhood reading filled instead with 
Asterix and the Hardy Boys, but now I burn with the zeal of the newly 
converted, after finding her charming and exasperating Wizard Howl a bona fide 
star of bedtime reading.

We first hear of our eponymous wizard in the opening chapter, where Jones is 
busy poking fun at the comfortable cliches of fantasy fiction. After suffering 
the misfortune of being born the eldest of three sisters in a land where 
seven-league boots and cloaks of invisibility really exist, Sophie Hatter is 
resigning herself to the uninteresting life that must surely follow, when a 
castle appears on the hills above the prosperous town of Market Chipping and 
refuses to stay still.

Sometimes it was a tall black smudge on the moors to the northwest, sometimes 
it reared above the rocks to the east, and sometimes it came right downhill to 
sit in the heather only just beyond the last farm to the north. You could 
actually see it moving sometimes, with smoke pouring out from the turrets in 
dirty grey gusts.

Soon the townspeople are saying that the castle belongs to Wizard Howl, who 
amuses himself by “collecting young girls and sucking the souls from them. Or 
some people said he ate their hearts.” Before the first chapter is finished 
Sophie’s father is dead, her sisters sent off to apprenticeships various and 
Sophie is withdrawing into a small alcove at the back of her stepmother’s hat 
shop. By the end of the second, she is looking up at the forbidding black 
battlements in hope of shelter, after an awkward customer has transformed her 
into an old crone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhowls-moving-castle-by-diana-wynne-jones-fantastical-fun-fantastically-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ac5eeaac43e8f7f7cbbe019e7719a0a466b7f8%2F43_0_1251_750%2F1251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Howl's%20Moving%20Castle%20by%20Diana%20Wynne%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20fantastical%20fun%2C%20fantastically%20human&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhowls-moving-castle-by-diana-wynne-jones-fantastical-fun-fantastically-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Howl%27s%20Moving%20Castle%20by%20Diana%20Wynne%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%20fantastical%20fun%2C%20fantastically%20human&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fhowls-moving-castle-by-diana-wynne-jones-fantastical-fun-fantastically-human%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ac5eeaac43e8f7f7cbbe019e7719a0a466b7f8%2F43_0_1251_750%2F1251.jpg>
 ‘I’m dying of boredom,’ Howl said pathetically. ‘Or maybe just dying’ ... a 
still from the Studio Ghibli film adaptation of Howl’s Moving Castle. 
Photograph: BuenaVist/Everett/Rex Features 
The spell is typically uncanny, arriving without warning in a flinging motion 
of a spread hand, transforming Sophie in an instant before she or the reader 
has any idea what has happened. Jones measures out the awful realisation over a 
page or so – the strange croak in Sophie’s voice, the look of horror from the 
man standing by the shop door, the large veins on the back of Sophie’s suddenly 
wrinkled hands. Hobbling over to the mirror, Sophie is unsurprised to discover 
a gaunt old woman, “withered and brownish, surrounded by wispy white hair”, 
with her own eyes staring out at her, “looking rather tragic”.

Sophie’s reaction is equally unexpected, and just as straightforwardly 
convincing. Judging that her leathery cheeks are a better reflection of her 
true nature than her former youthful appearance, she decides she must just make 
do. There’s no question of staying in the shop – her stepmother would have a 
fit – and she can’t face saying goodbye to a sister who wouldn’t recognise her, 
so she wraps herself in a shawl, collects her purse and shuffles off on an 
adventure she feels she hardly deserves.

Jessamy Taylor’s top 10 castles in fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/mar/05/jessamy-taylors-top-10-castles-in-fiction>
It’s this combination of the fantastical and the fantastically human that 
makes Howl’s Moving Castle such excellent bedtime fare. How does the castle 
manage to be in four places at once? Do the packets and jars on the bathroom 
shelves labelled SKIN, EYES and HAIR really contain pieces of unfortunate 
girls? Can Sophie trust the fire demon crackling in the grate? And why is Howl 
so infuriatingly difficult to pin down?

With further instalments to follow in the desert city of Zanzib and the 
mountainous kingdom of High Norland, there’s plenty of territory to explore 
until it’s time for lights out. For anyone who, like me, is arriving late to 
Jones’s magical worlds, the only question is whether bedtime should head next 
for Dalemark or for the multiple worlds of Chrestomanci.
 