
Humans are unlikely to ever blow out more than 125 candles on their birthday 
cake, according to research that suggests that our lifespan has already hit its 
natural limit.

 The oldest human who ever lived, according to official records, was 
122-year-old Frenchwoman Jeanne Louise Calment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jun/14/netnotes.simonjeffery>, who died 
in 1997.


Now a team of American researchers suggest Calment is unlikely to lose the top 
spot any time soon, as their research shows that though more people reach old 
age each year, the ceiling for human lifespan appears to be stuck at around 115 
years.

“The chances are very high that we [have] really reached our maximum allotted 
lifespan for the first time,” said Jan Vijg, co-author of the research from the 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York.

Internal 'clock' makes some people age faster and die younger – regardless of 
lifestyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/28/internal-clock-makes-some-people-age-quicker-and-die-younger-regardless-of-lifestyle>
Figures such as Aubrey de Grey,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/aug/01/aubrey-de-grey-ageing-research>
chief scientific officer at theStrategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence 
<http://www.sens.org/> (Sens) Research Foundation, have previously claimed that 
the first person to reach 1,000 years old is likely to be alive today.

But the new study suggests that is highly unlikely. The upshot, says Vijg, is 
that people should focus on enjoying life and staying healthy for as long as 
possible. “That’s where we have to invest our money,” he said.

The notion of extending the human lifespan has captured imaginations for 
millennia. Among scientists, enthusiasm for the idea has grown in recent years 
with a host of Silicon Valley companies springing up to join academic 
institutions in attempting to chip away at issue of longevity - among them 
Google’s California Life Company,or Calico <http://www.calicolabs.com/>, as it 
is known – with big-buck prizes such as the Palo Alto Longevity Prize adding to 
the clamour.

But the researchers, writing in the journal Nature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature19793>, describe how analysis of 
records from a number of international databases suggests there is a limit to 
human lifespan, and that we have already hit it.


Using data for 41 countries and territories from the Human Mortality Database, 
the team found that life expectancy at birth has increased over the last 
century. That, says Vijg, is down to a number of factors, including advances in 
childbirth and maternity care, clean water, the development of antibiotics and 
vaccines and other health measures.

But while the proportion of people surviving to 70 and over has risen since 
1900, the rate of improvements in survival differ greatly between levels of old 
age. Large gains are seen for ages 70 and up, but for ages 100 or more the rate 
of improvement drops rapidly. “[For] the oldest old people, we are still not 
very good at reducing their mortality rates,” said Vijg.


Japanese centenarians' honorary gifts hit by austerity as numbers soar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/japans-centenarians-hit-by-austerity-as-numbers-soar>
What’s more, in 88% of the countries, the ages showing the greatest rate of 
improvement have not changed since 1980.


The researchers then turned to the International Database on Longevity and 
analysed data from France, UK, the US and Japan - four countries with a high 
proportion of those aged 110 or above - so-called “supercentenarians”.

The researchers found that the maximum reported age at death rapidly increased 
between 1970 and the early 1990s, rising by around 0.15 years every year. But 
in the mid-to-late 90s, a plateau was reached, with the yearly maximum reported 
age at death at around 115 years.

Modelling of the possibility of living beyond such an age offered further 
insights. “Based on the data we have now, the chance that you will ever see a 
person of 125 [years] in a given year is about 1 in 10,000,” said Vijg.

The apparent limit to human lifespan, the authors say, is not down to a set of 
biological processes specifically acting to call time on life. Rather, it is a 
byproduct a range of genetic programmes that control processes such as growth 
and development.


Henne Holstege from VU University, Amsterdam works on ageing of centenarians, 
and previously led research into Dutch supercentenarian Hendrikje van 
Andel-Schipper, who died aged 115. She says the new study suggests “there seems 
to be a wall of mortality that modern medicine cannot overcome”.

“If you die from heart disease at 70, then the rest of your body might still 
be in relatively good health. So, a medical intervention to overcome heart 
disease can significantly prolong your lifespan,” she said. “However, in 
centenarians not just the heart, but all bodily systems, have become aged and 
frail. If you do not die from heart disease, you die from something else.”

Live forever: Scientists say they’ll extend life ‘well beyond 120’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/11/-sp-live-forever-extend-life-calico-google-longevity>
 Medical interventions, she says, cannot solve the problem of overall decline, 
with the only promising approach lying in slowing down the ageing process 
itself. But, she added, “It is however not yet clear if and how this can be 
accomplished.”

But Tom Kirkwood, associate dean for ageing at Newcastle University, is 
sanguine that the lifespan ceiling will continue to rise.


“There is no set programme for ageing and we know that the process, which is 
ultimately driven by the build-up of faults and damage in the cells and organs 
of the body, is to some degree malleable,” he said. “Even without any change in 
the biology of ageing, it is almost inevitable that the current record will be 
broken.”

 Cynthia Kenyon, vice president of ageing research at Calico, is also 
optimistic.

“No one, particularly not evolutionary theorists, predicted that single-gene 
mutations could slow the aging process and double the lifespans of animals. But 
they can,” she said. “While we don’t have demographic data supporting the idea 
that the maximum human lifespan is now increasing, that certainly doesn’t mean 
it’s impossible.”
 