
The findings unearthed in Christiane Schulte’s journal article were a 
revelation. The first fatality at theBerlin Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlinwall>, it showed, had not been human 
but a police dog called Rex. And a new law forcing East German border guards to 
keep their canine enforcers on a lead helped prevent a third world war.

Most shockingly, the 26-year-old PhD student revealed that the alsatians that 
patrolled the Berlin Wall were direct descendants of those deployed by the 
Nazis in Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen concentration camps, thus maintaining a 
“tradition of violence”.

In Schulte’s own words, the academic paper she published in a peer-reviewed 
German journal in December “revealed the prime importance of human-animal 
studies for contemporary research into totalitarianism”.

Hundreds of open access journals accept fake science paper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2013/oct/04/open-access-journals-fake-paper>
But two months after publishing these revelations, the editors of the 
Dresden-based publication Totalitarianism and Democracy havehad to admit that 
they have fallen victim to an elaborate academic hoax 
<http://www.hait.tu-dresden.de/td/artikel.asp?art=636&nr=24&m=2>. 

In a statement published this week, the editorial team at the Hannah-Arendt 
Institute for Research into Totalitarianism said they had been “systematically 
deceived, ie through a faked CV and an apparently academic argumentation, which 
sought to convince the reader with detailed explanations, extensive footnotes 
and false archival references”. Christiane Schulte did not exist, and nor did 
the alsatians with totalitarian tendencies.

The hoaxers have since published their own mission statement. In an article 
entitled Plea Against Academic Conformism 
<http://www.heise.de/tp/artikel/47/47395/1.html>, a group of academics calling 
themselves “Christiane Schulte and friends” say they had wanted to instigate “a 
debate on why dedicated social criticism has become such a rarity in the 
humanities”.

The intention of the article, they said, had been to satirise the “animal 
turn” in postmodern theory: the attempt to interpret historical events through 
the perspective of affected animals. Such academic fashions, the group wrote, 
were “the waste products of leftist social critique which has sought refuge in 
academia”, but also signs of an “anti-humanist trend in philosophy”. While 
academics were competing with each other to follow the latest trend, they were 
failing to do the basic work of criticising social conditions.

The group said one of their members, pretending to be “Christiane Schulte”, 
had first given their paper at an academic conference in February 2015. Far 
from attracting ridicule, they said, the talk had inspired a lively discussion 
and tied in nicely with another lecture on rabbits living on the Berlin Wall’s 
death strip.

The academics behind the hoax wrote they had deliberately included details 
that could have got them found out, such as naming the dog shot near the Berlin 
Wall as “Rex” – the name of a police dog in an Austrian TV show popular in
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, Kommissar Rex – or 
suggesting that the planned memorial for the victims of the wall should also 
include a symbolic dog lead made of steel. “At that point at the latest we had 
expected objections, doubt or protest. Instead we got applause,” they said.

Florian Peters, a researcher at Berlin’s Institut für Zeitgeschichte who was 
at the same conference, confirmed that the talk had not been perceived as a 
satire at the time. The woman pretending to be Christiane Schulte had 
convincingly passed as a postdoctoral student but left the event soon after 
delivering her paper. “As a satire, it has certainly hit the spot, particularly 
among some of the more established historians in the field,” Peters told the 
Guardian.

The Sokal affair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2003/jun/05/badscience.research> 
Academic advocates of “human-animal studies”, also known as anthrozoology, 
have since also weighed in on the debate. A working group of German academics 
called “Chimaira” has publisheda statement on its website defending its approach
 <http://www.chimaira-ak.org/?p=1283>, arguing that “while it may indeed seem 
absurd when people like Schulte call for a memorial for border dogs, it is just 
as absurd to expect an outcry [against such a proposal] from those who have a 
different conception of the relationship between human and animal”.

The affair is reminiscent of a hoax by the physics professor Alan Sokal in 
1996, who hadsubmitted a paper to a journal of postmodern cultural studies 
<http://www.physics.nyu.edu/faculty/sokal/transgress_v2/transgress_v2_singlefile.html>
 knowing that it was “liberally salted with nonsense” but flattered the 
ideological orientation of the journal’s editors.

In the wake of the scandal, editors of Totalitarianism and Democracy have 
apologised for “neglecting academic due diligence” by allowing the piece to be 
published. The publishers Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht have since removed the article 
from the journal’s website.
 