
Watch this episode on iPlayer here 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00m0sp9/Desperate_Romantics_Episode_3/>.

"Well, bugger me if it isn't Ali Baba," spluttered Rossetti, boggling at the 
vision of enraged exoticness that had materialised in the doorway. It wasn't 
Ali Baba. It was "Maniac" Hunt, fresh from his all-inclusive Club 18-30 holiday 
in the Holy Land and spoiling for another pointless punch-up.

"GNNNYYEEEEAAAARRR", he said - not unreasonably, as it happens, given that 
Rossetti was using Hunt's girlfriend's breasts as earmuffs at the time. 
Nevertheless, it wasn't until he whipped out his "large supply of hashish – 
straight from Syria," that they were able to chuckle about it (Annie was 
"merely modelling" for Rossetti, silly!), nursing their bruises and generally 
bonging it up in Hunt's impromptu Class B drugs hospice. Maniac unveiled his 
latest masterpiece. It was a painting of a goat. A large, self-conscious goat, 
perched awkwardly on some rock or other under a sky the colour of disemboweled 
tangerines. It was hideous but it was a Religious Metaphor, apparently, which 
made it good. So good, in fact, that it would be purchased for 450 guineas by a 
man who looked likeNoddy Holder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2001/jan/16/tvandradio.television4>. Bingo! 
Progress at last then – and a measurable step forward in the pre-Raphaelite 
Brotherhood's thus far nebulous plan to tear the art establishment apart by 
dint of their balls and excellence.

Elsewhere, the Pygmalionisation of Annie Miller continued apace. Instructed by 
the absent Hunt to attend deportment and etiquette classes, she was now using 
words like "concur" and "diaphanous", spinning a parasol coquettishly as London 
responded to this vision of basic education and knockers by giving her a 21 gun 
trouser salute. Not that this enforced emposhment was having much effect on her 
libido. Indeed, Annie continued to play musical bums with anything in a cravat, 
flirting withCharles Dickens <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/charlesdickens>, 
deflowering a gaspingly grateful Fred and thrusting her loaves at monstrous 
alpha-toff and "well-known rake" Lord Rosterley and his unnaturally stiff hat. 
Hunt was inconsolable. Honking like a bereaved gander, he trudged off to 
Rossetti's studio to punch some advice out of him.

"What you like about Annie is her potential to wander. Her GRUBBINESS," 
counselled Rossetti as his best friend smashed his face into some foliage. 
"Without that (gasp) you no longer (umph) find her (gurgle) desirable."

It seemed to do the trick. Driven crackers by her GRUBBINESS, Maniac begged 
Annie to marry him. Then, desperate, he offered her £100 to sod off to 
Australia to leave him and his conflicted genitals in peace. "I love you", he 
wailed, wringing the tears from hisRa-Ra-Rasputin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kvDMlk3kSYg> beard as the only woman he'd ever 
fancied sniggered off into the night.

Then it was all back to Rossetti's for tea and commerce with John Ruskin. But 
it wasn't Rossetti's work that interested the critic: it was Lizzie's. "She is 
an untouched genius," he observed, scattering praise and cash over her doodles 
and forecasting greatness for the pair's imminent double-act: Lizzie the 
sensationally gifted protégé, Rossetti the … local art teacher.

And that's where we left them: Rossetti glugging laudanum 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laudanum> in an alleyway while a similarly 
emasculated Maniac boohooed all over his drawings.

Could this mark an irreparable tear in the fabric of the PRB fraternity? 
Will the "circle" be "unbroken"? Your thoughts below, please.
 