
In a couple of days the Atlantic hurricane season 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/world-location-news/atlantic-hurricane-season-2016>
 officially comes to a close. 2016 has been very active, with 15 named storms, 
seven of which became hurricanes.

It started nearly five months early with Alex in mid-January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/january-hurricane-forms-in-atlantic-for-first-time-since-1938>
, and ended unusually late withOtto 
<http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/refresh/graphics_at1+shtml/115541.shtml?5-daynl>, just 
a few days ago. Three storms –Gaston 
<https://weather.com/storms/hurricane/news/tropical-depression-tropical-storm-gaston-hurricane-august-2016>
,Matthew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/oct/08/hurricane-matthew-death-toll-nears-900-as-us-braces-for-impact-live>
 andNicole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/oct/17/warm-seas-powered-two-major-hurricanes-matthew-nicole-weatherwatch>
 – developed into major hurricanes, and Matthew’s long passage over land made 
it particularly deadly, taking 1,655 lives. In total the storms have unleashed 
over 60% more energy than an average hurricane season, and it’s also been the 
costliest since 2012, causing over $11.5bn (£9.2bn) of damage thus far.

The die is cast for a wet and stormy winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/25/die-cast-wet-stormy-winter-weatherwatch>
Recent years have seen some eye-watering bills for hurricane damage. The 
storms of 2012 (which includedhurricane Sandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2012/nov/04/hurrican-sandy-teacher-resources-news-round-up>
) resulted in $79.2bn (£63.6bn) of damage, while 2005 (which includedhurricane 
Katrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/27/new-orleans-hurricane-katrina-10-years-lessons>
) cost $158.9bn (£127.7bn) – the most expensive Atlantic hurricane season in 
history. Nowresearch published in Environmental Research Letters 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/084012> predicts that 
the cost associated with Atlantic hurricanes will keep increasing, with the 
average losses becoming three times greater by 2100.

Modelling hurricane damage in the US for the period 1963 through to 2100, the 
scientists found that a third of the increased cost will be due to climate 
change (bringing more frequent and intense hurricanes), while two thirds of the 
increased cost will be due to socio-economic factors. Ownership of more 
expensive gadgets, and confidence that insurance policies or governments will 
pick up the tab, will lead to rapidly increasing hurricane damage bills.

Understanding where and why hurricane costs are increasing is important, to 
make sure governments select the best strategies to reduce the risk.
 