
The hydrogen economy has been a long time coming. The use of hydrogen as a 
replacement energy source for oil and gas has been talked about since the early 
1970s when the term was first coined by an engineer at General Motors in the US.

It still hasn’t really arrived. And doubters remain 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2015/toyota-vs-tesla-can-hydrogen-fuel-cell-vehicles-compete-with-evs-60374>
. They point to the heavy infrastructure needed to support the technology, the 
huge amount of energy it consumes, and wonder how it can compete with the 
falling costs of wind and solar energy, and the surging interest in electric 
vehicles (EVs) .

Ironically, it is those very factors that are making the idea of a hydrogen 
economy appealing again. Wind and solar provide cheap energy, EVs are 
perfecting the drive trains [the power delivery system from engine to wheels] 
that hydrogen cars will use, and there have been significant technology 
breakthroughs making the hardware needed to make hydrogen much more 
cost-competitive.


Now it appears that in Australia, the hydrogen economy is going to have its 
first home in theAustralian Capital Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/australian-capital-territory>. Having put 
in place the architecture and the contracts to ensure that the equivalent of 
100% of the electricity needs are sourced from wind and solar by 2020, the 
Labor government in the ACT is looking at how that clean energy can be used for 
transport and heating.

Saving silver: portable micro-factories could turn e-waste trash into treasure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/21/saving-silver-portable-micro-factories-could-turn-e-waste-trash-into-treasure>
The environment and energy minister, Simon Corbell, recently announced that 
the two companies – Spain’s Union Fenosa and France’s Neoen – that won bids to 
provide electricity to build large wind farms to supply the ACTwill invest $180m
 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2016/act-leads-180m-investment-hydrogen-storage-car-fleet-33870>
 to develop hydrogen facilities.

Union Fenosa, the developer of the Crookwell Wind Farm, will look at how to 
use hydrogen as a substitute for natural gas in gas-fired generators, either 
alone or in combination with natural gas; while Neoen will build Australia’s 
first commercial electrolyser to create hydrogen for vehicles and other uses.

Union Fenosa will invest $125m, including a research and development 
partnership with the Australian National University and ActewAGL Distribution. 
This will focus on renewable energy power to gas, investigating efficiencies in 
the production of hydrogen from renewables and how it can then be introduced to 
the ACT gas network or provide support to the electricity network. A pilot 
testing facility will also be established in the ACT to produce hydrogen from 
water using the ACT’s 100% renewable electricity supply.


For Garth Heron, the head of wind energy for Neoen in Australia, the idea of 
building Australia’s first commercial electrolyser came up as part of his 
company’s tender for the wind contract. He says there are three factors that 
made him change his mind about hydrogen energy.


The first is hydrogen cars. These are often dismissed by EV enthusiasts as 
being just like petrol cars but with different fuel. That’s not exactly right. 
Hydrogen cars will use the same electric drive train as EVs, and because EVs 
are now a major focus of production, half the development problem is solved. 
Furthermore, in hydrogen cars, the fuel cell – which is as easy to fill as a 
petrol car, according to its proponents – replaces the petrol engine, while in 
EVs, it’s the battery that replaces the engine.

The second issue is the amount of wind and solar energy used. The biggest 
input for making hydrogen is electricity. To make hydrogen, you need an 
electrolyser: electricity and water go in one end, and hydrogen and oxygen come 
out the other. But the process consumes a lot of power. Heron says that because 
wind and solar often produce excess energy, driving down wholesale electricity 
costs, this can then be used to power the electrolysers.

The third factor is new technology which means these electrolysers can be 
switched on and off in an instant, taking advantage of the plunges in the 
wholesale price of electricity, and also providing network and load support 
when required.

Neoen is teaming up with Siemens – which built the wind turbines for its big 
Hornsdale wind farm in South Australia – and will contribute $55m towards the 
cost of a 1.25MW electrolyser in the ACT.

That’s enough to keep 1,200 hydrogen cars going each year, but initially it 
will power a fleet of just 20 new-generation Hyundai hydrogen cars, enough to 
test the infrastructure. Still, that 20 will be the first hydrogen fleet in the 
country.

“The idea of a hydrogen fleet of vehicles sounds rather old-fashioned,” Garth 
says. “It was an idea in vogue about 10 years ago, and people thought that 
because of battery technology, it made no sense. But then we started hearing 
more about hydrogen – from Hyundai and Siemens, and looking at what Toyota was 
doing, we realised that the technology has moved quite far.”

“We wanted something that was major and long-lasting and could help turn the 
dial. And we wanted an idea that could attract business and others to the ACT 
to be part of the hydrogen economy that we hope will come out of it.”

Heron says using electricity at low cost means fuel for hydrogen cars might be 
around 75c/litre. But still, there is more work to be done. “The main thing 
holding back the idea of hydrogen cars is infrastructure. We are not there yet. 
It is a bit of a chicken-and-egg situation. We need infrastructure there to get 
cost down but without cars, there is no need for infrastructure. This plan in 
the ACT is to try to get around the situation. And we’re not saying hydrogen 
will replace every electric vehicle. We think there is lot of technology that 
common to both.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fhydrogen-cars-electrolysers-dawn-australia-hydrogen-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aaee69814e112a19e683ce6c5acf25cdf01aa59%2F0_196_3629_2178%2F3629.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hydrogen%20cars%20and%20electrolysers%3A%20the%20dawn%20of%20Australia's%20hydrogen%20economy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fhydrogen-cars-electrolysers-dawn-australia-hydrogen-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hydrogen%20cars%20and%20electrolysers%3A%20the%20dawn%20of%20Australia%27s%20hydrogen%20economy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fhydrogen-cars-electrolysers-dawn-australia-hydrogen-economy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7aaee69814e112a19e683ce6c5acf25cdf01aa59%2F0_196_3629_2178%2F3629.jpg>
 Hyundai’s hydrogen car, the ix35 Fuel Cell. Photograph: Hyundai 
Currently Hyundai has a single hydrogen car in Australia 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2015/australias-first-hydrogen-car-launched-with-solar-refueller-63637>
 as a demonstration model and plans that its fleet of 20 will come from a new, 
yet-to-be-released SUV-style vehicle.

“This is the first order in the world for the vehicle,” says Hyundai spokesman 
Bill Thomas. The concept is so new it does not have a name, but could be based 
loosely around theIntrado concept car. 
<http://www.autoblog.com/2016/07/25/more-details-emerge-on-hyundais-all-new-2018-hydrogen-cuv/>

“The ACT initiative is significant, because it is a forward looking and 
visionary statement about the potential for hydrogen for transport,” he says.

Energy storage: how an abandoned goldmine will be converted into a world first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/12/energy-storage-how-an-abandoned-goldmine-will-be-converted-into-a-world-first>
And that is what attracts Corbell to the idea. He says the program to achieve 
100% renewable energy for its electricity needs 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2016/record-low-wind-energy-price-in-act-auction-but-solar-not-far-behind-12195>
 has made the ACT a centre for renewable energy and research.

Half a dozen clean tech companies have made the ACT their home and a renewable 
energy hub at theCanberra <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra> 
Institute of Technology at Bruce has become a centre for research.

 Like the ACT’s groundbreaking battery storage initiative 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2016/eight-energy-companies-win-act-battery-storage-auction-40680>
 – a program to install batteries in 5,000 homes and businesses – the hydrogen 
initiative will attract more investment, says Corbell. And it won’t cost the 
local government or taxpayers a single dollar. It was Neoen and Union Fenosa 
who, quite separately, brought the idea of hydrogen to the ACT as part of their 
wind auction tenders.

 “This is an exciting project, and it is industry-led,” Corbell says. “We are 
not reaching a view that this technology will win over others. But it is a way 
to seize an opportunity to attract investment from companies – like Hyundai and 
Siemens – and grow our capacity to innovate.

“That’s our opportunity. We [the ACT] are not manufacturers. But we can export 
ideas, innovation and skills. That’s why we are supportive of these 
opportunities.”
 