
Be careful which monster you wish for

Hideously misshapen creations, eh? You never know what you're going to get. 
Sometimes the best minds get it right and the result is an enduring literary 
treat for the ages. At other times, the beast limps off, metaphorical tail 
between its legs. I, Frankenstein from financier-producer Lakeshore 
Entertainment currently resides in the latter category after a rather dismal 
$8.3m (£6m) opening weekend in sixth place through Lionsgate. That is not to 
say the movie will not prosper on VOD and TV in the years to come: it will 
probably do so and a small theatrical uplift like this will have served in the 
end to raise awareness of a feeble offshoot of Mary Shelley's genius creation.
Aaron Eckhart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart> can only have 
been thinking of the payday.

Frozen crosses $800m worldwide


The Disney animation sits at number four in the US charts on $347.8m after 10 
sessions. I read somewhere recently that it was a surprise hit, which floored 
me. There's nothing surprising about this movie's success and just because it's 
not Pixar doesn't preclude it boasting high quality and wide appeal.Frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/05/frozen-review> has soared past 
$800m at the worldwide box office and just overtookThe Lion King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/55604/lion.king> to become the second 
highest grossing original animation (in other words, not based on a 
pre-existing property like a book, TV show or musical) behindFinding Nemo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/95989/finding.nemo>.

Universal riding high

The one-two ranking of Ride Along  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159117/ride-along>and Lone Survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/24/ben-foster-lone-survivor> for the 
second consecutive weekend marks the first time a studio has done this since 
February 1994, when Warner Bros commanded the charts with On Deadly Ground and
Ace Ventura <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/52930/ace-ventura>. 
Universal executives also noted their films have held pole position for three 
weekends in a row – the first time since January 2010 when Fox'sAvatar  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131170/avatar>ruled the roost for five 
sessions.

Award season wins boost Dallas, Slave

The recent flurry of Hollywood awards shows has put it all into perspective, 
which is to say we are none the wiser as to who will win what come the Oscars 
and Baftas. But what seems a little less murky in this tightest of tight races 
is that Matthew McConaughey is now a lock on the best actor prize at the Oscars 
(he missed out on a Bafta nod) following Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild 
triumphs. Accordingly, Focus Features expandedDallas Buyers Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156634/dallas-buyers-club> by 691 sites 
to 1,110 and brought in a further $2m for $20.4m after 13 sessions. In turn,12 
Years a Slave <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156376/12-years-a-slave>, 
a Golden Globe winner that remains very much a best picture contender at Oscar 
and the Baftas, expanded by 470 sites into 1,231 and grossed $2m for $43.5m. 
What a result that is after 15 weekends. Golden Globe success storyAmerican 
Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle> 
continues to storm along and brought in a further $7.1m in the seventh session 
for $127m.

A hymn to Her


Spike Jonze's delightful and profound take on where we're headed as a society 
has not been a big winner this awards season, despite a smattering of trophies 
here and there. So Warner Bros is slowly winding it down. The studio pulledHer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/14/her-new-york-film-festival-first-look-review>
from 404 sites to leave it in 1,325 and the total box office after six sessions 
stands at $19.2m. It ranks 11th and should be on its way up, not down. The 
marketing campaign is partly responsible because I cannot recall what it was. 
The distribution pattern was flawed too. Her opened in six sites in November 
and went up to 1,729 in its fourth weekend of release. Too much too soon: they 
should have built world of mouth and expanded gradually, because the movie 
deserves to gross at least $35m.

North American top 10, 24-26 January 2014

1. Ride Along <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159117/ride-along>, 
$21.2m. Total: $75.4m

2. Lone Survivor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159112/lone-survivor>
, $12.6m. Total: $93.6m

3. The Nut Job <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159118/nut-job>, 
$12.3m. Total: $40.3m

4. Frozen, $9m. Total: $347.8m

5. Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/23/jack-ryan-shadow-recruit-review>, 
$8.8m. Total: $30.2m

6. I, Frankenstein, $8.3m

7. American Hustle, $7.1m. Total: $127m

8. August: Osage County <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156238/august>
, $5m. Total: $26.5m

9. The Wolf of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/wolf-of-wall-street-review>, $5m. 
Total: $98m

10. Devil's Due 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/19/devils-due-review-mark-kermode>, 
$2.8m. Total: $12.9m

• More from US box office analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/thepriceofpopcorn>

• Interview: Aaron Eckhart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/11/aaron-eckhart-olympus-has-fallen>
 