
This is the year that the last scintilla of a hint of a vestige of a scrap of 
a shadow of a hint of guilt is gone. That last stubborn trace ofFomo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2016/jan/18/fomo-five-more-feelings-angst-social-media-acronyms>
 – fear of missing out – has been expunged from my soul and pure Jomos – joy of 
same – swells my heart. I am not going out tonight, and I have never been 
happier about it.

New Year’s Eve 2016: around the world in 15 drinks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/29/new-years-eve-world-15-drinks>
Obviously, this is not my first New Year’s Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/new-years-eve-party-bad-fairy-good-friend-deborah-levy>
 in. I have at least five years’ worth under my belt, and it has only got 
better as that half decade has worn on – I self-canapé ever more elaborately 
(this year I’m doing myself blinis with smoked salmon, sour creamand caviar, 
and to hell with it), pour my prosecco into an ever-fancier glass (per year, I 
mean. I don’t upgrade as each evening progresses. Who do you think is doing the 
washing up tomorrow? That’s why there’s no hot canapés either. I ain’t spending 
1 January dealing with baking sheet detritus. Always think of the morrow, 
people! You begin to see, I’m sure, why there was no great outcry when I first 
withdrew my presence from the festive fray), and choose my evening’s televisual 
entertainment from an expanding range of sources.

But. But. Even the most anhedonic, canker-hearted introvert has internalised 
some social norms and expectations. And for all the bespoke snacks, perfectly 
chilled and unspilled booze and all-round comfort offered by my choice, the 
nagging doubt remains –shouldn’t I be out there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/01/london-police-arrest-90-new-years-eve>
? Battling my way through the city centre, watching the fireworks, and at least 
letting life happen around me even if I never got actively involved in it? 
Sure, the practicalities are hideous – no cabs, endless crowds and queues, 
quite a lot of mugging – but still! New Year’s Eve! A whole year ending and a 
new one beginning! To deny the tug of that on all your most primitive instincts 
is to deny that you are human at all.

It takes a while to silence those doubts and fully come into your non-partying 
kingdom. But 2016, I suspect, has been a year topush a lot of people over the 
line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/dec/24/2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead>
. The appeal of staying home, creating an oasis of safety and serenity at the 
end of what, for many of us, has been a punishing 12 months (and if it hasn’t – 
great! Don’t write in! Enjoy being unbruised and just let the rest of us lick 
our wounds in peace) has surely rarely been greater. And who wants to be away 
from home while there are still any hours left in which 2016 can pick us up in 
its bloodied jaws and give us one last good shake?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnew-years-eve-staying-in-2016-anxiety-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18e15fca3c5e8632a78f5a917b5abfadfb1e25cf%2F57_1527_1861_1117%2F1861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20am%20not%20going%20out%20tonight.%20Not%20while%202016%20is%20still%20on%20the%20prowl%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnew-years-eve-staying-in-2016-anxiety-attacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20am%20not%20going%20out%20tonight.%20Not%20while%202016%20is%20still%20on%20the%20prowl%20%7C%20Lucy%20Mangan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fnew-years-eve-staying-in-2016-anxiety-attacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18e15fca3c5e8632a78f5a917b5abfadfb1e25cf%2F57_1527_1861_1117%2F1861.jpg>
 ‘This year I’m doing myself blinis with smoked salmon, sour cream AND caviar 
and to hell with it!’ Photograph: Alamy 
Of course I know that the striking of the midnight hour doesn’t mean that 
death or destruction will end. I am, unlike all the people who pretend that 
this is what people who “blame” 2016 for the loss of various icons and assorted 
other sorrows believe, not a moron. But it’s that primitive tugging again. The 
beginning of a new year does do something to the psyche. It is irrationally 
restorative. In good times, you are filled with new energy with which to go out 
and grasp all the glorious opportunities that the future holds. In bad, it 
gives you a moment to gird your loins, look to your troops, marshal your mental 
reserves, look up more metaphors and set your face against the coming foes.

At the moment, I don’t even think of my phone as a phone any more, but just a 
device for the deliverance of horrors. All I do now is look at Twitter on the 
hour to check that the Queen,Alan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/15/alan-bennett-interview-after-brexit-wouldnt-give-them-selfie>
,David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/may/04/attenborough-90-wildlife-legend-top-10-tv-moments>
 orMary Berry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/22/mary-berry-leave-great-british-bake-off-paul-hollywood-bbc-mel-giedroyc-sue-perkins>
 aren’t hashtagged RIP.

Anxiety attacks are best experienced on your own sofa. So are generously 
topped blinis. So is drinking. So is drawing up your plans for the coming year. 
Which this time round may literally be true as, while the Thames fireworks 
explode, I intend to be putting the finishing touches to the blueprints for the 
lead-lined bunker I’m having installed in an undisclosed location in the 
Highlands.

Just got to get there before the Scots do the sensible thing and start digging 
Sturgeon’s Chasm behindHadrian’s Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jun/26/walking-hadrians-wall-secret-uk-history-graham-robb-cols-and-passes>
, line it with red, white and blue spikes and set their own faces to a 
beautiful future without us.

Happy New Year.
 