
It is a convention left over from Christian times. In perfect RP, the 
receptionist explains that everything is shut in Paris. Today is a Sunday. The 
hotel is at the foot of Montmartre, by Rue Des Martyrs, one of the finest 
Parisian food streets. Last time I was here, it was a Friday and spectacular. A 
cheeky chien trotted perkily down the middle of the rue with a baguette in his 
mouth. Champignons, wild like delicate orchids, tumbled from wooden boxes. 
Monsters of the deep with claws akimbo lay splayed on ice. Hares hung from 
hooks over coils of sausage. Fromageries oozed their heady pungency. 
Patisseries seduced me with the sweet scent of tartes, a crumb of which could 
exhaust your taste buds for a week. Today is a Sunday. Rue Des Martyrs is 
desolate.

At nightfall, the options are still bleak. Chez Jean, one of the greatest 
restaurants I've ever eaten at, is yards away on Rue Saint Lazare. It is shut. 
Of course. It is open for a total of 23 hours a week. Not weekends. I cross 
Pigale under the glow of busty neon silhouettes, up the narrow cobbled Rue 
Piemontes. There are a lot of corners. Each is occupied. The occupants look 
like they're dressed for the Occupation: veil, fishnets, fag and a clutch bag, 
heritage whores in a historical re-enactment. On Rue Aristide Bruant, Le 
Taroudant II is bright like my grandparents' living room - homely and 
welcoming, but a bit more Moroccan. Everybody smokes - between courses, during 
courses. It is run by a couple in their mid-fifties. M Taroudant has a clipped 
moustache and a silver teapot in his hand. He brings the spout to the lip of a 
cup and raises his arm, slicing an arc of mercury through the air. He is stoic 
with the confidence of a practised showman. Mme Taroudant brings me a tagine 
d'agneau. The clay is black with splashes hardened by the unforgiving fire, the 
ghosts of a thousand meals. Prunes fall from the stone. L'agneau falls from the 
Y-shaped bone. I try to summon some knowledge of agneau anatomy, but give up. 
It is magnificent. Thank God for Parisians who are unaware of Christian 
conventions.

Â· The writer is the lead singer of Franz Ferdinand. This column appears weekly 
as the band travel the globe.
 