
For all the manipulation, Alok only shaved 500 calories a day off his intake; 
this is in line with what all healthy eating weight-loss programmes recommend, 
creating a weekly deficit of 3,500 calories and a 1lb loss of fat.

The difference with the Atkins approach was that 70% of the calories in the 
diet were provided by fat, compared with the healthy recommended limit of 35% 
fat calories, which most other commercial slimming programmes easily adhere to. 
The reliance on dairy sources of protein increased Alok's saturated fat intake 
so it was not surprising that his LDL cholesterol levels rose. Vitamin and 
mineral intakes were not significantly different between diets because Alok - 
typical of his age and lifestyle - ate little fruit and veg anyway, so the 
restrictions had little impact on his final nutritional intake.

The recommended daily amount for a nutrient is based on normal body function. 
The fact that Alok's metabolic profile became so deranged implies that it is 
unlikely he utilised the nutrients that he did take in effectively. For 
example, his calcium intake was borderline acceptable, but ketosis and raised 
citrate levels could indicate disordered mineral metabolism and losses. 
Nutrients such as magnesium and potassium would also be lost in greater amounts 
through the urine in his metabolic state.

The bottom line has to be: why bother? Alok's efforts did not take his carb 
intake as low as recommended even on the more liberal pre-maintenance level of 
Atkins. If he had, his dietary fat intake would have been even higher. Alok put 
his body through a metabolic stress for what could have been a simpler Weight 
Watcher-style approach to diet more compatible with daily life, and not 
associated with biochemical abnormalities. Biochemical abnormalities, foul 
breath and constipation: is this what every slimmer wants from a diet?

Â· Catherine Collins is a dietitian based at St George's Hospital in London. 
She was assisted by Alison Green
 