
Ford's $2m-a-year chief executive, Alan Mulally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-mulally>, today vowed to work for an 
annual salary of just one dollar if the struggling US car maker has to take 
government money as part of a $25bn (Â£16.76bn) bail-out of the US car industry.

In a further move to woo congressional support Mulally has vowed to sell 
Ford's fleet of corporate jets, cancel next year's bonuses for global 
management and US employees as well as closing more plants, trimming its dealer 
network and stepping up its work on electric vehicles.

In its business plan, submitted to Congress today, Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ford> said it was seeking bridging 
finance of some $9bn but argued that if Congress gave its approval it would not 
have to draw down the money.

"For Ford, government loans would serve as a critical backstop or safeguard 
against worsening conditions, as we drive transformational change in our 
company," Mulally said.

America's big three auto makers Ford, General Motors and Chrysler, were all 
due to submit business plans to Congress as they seek financial support to 
weather the economic downturn which has seen the industry faced with fierce 
competition and plunging sales.

Some congressional leaders have already made it clear they are determined to 
ensure the car makers will only get their support if they come up with credible 
restructuring plans.

Today Ford said that it expected both the company overall and the north 
American operations to be either profitable or breaking even in 2011. The 
forecast is based on a US market recovery which would see sales of 12.5m units 
next year, 14.5m in 2010 and 15.5m in 2011.

Ford has already sold Aston Martin, Jaguar and Land Rover over the last two 
years and yesterday said it was looking at the future of Volvo, which could 
involve the sale of the Swedish car maker.
 