
The winner

Paramount’s method of spinning the hot mess that is Terminator Genisys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terminator-genesis> is telling. When it 
became clear on Friday night that the film’s debut at the US box office was 
going to be seriously under par, the studio stopped using previous Terminator 
films as comparison points and opted instead for 2011’s Mission Impossible: 
Ghost Protocol – a yardstick that, other than the fact that both are PG-13 
action films, seems rather arbitrary in terms of tone and cinematic heritage. 
What Paramount didn’t want widely pored over was that, even unadjusted for 
inflation, $28.7m is the lowest Terminator opening since the low-budget 
original’s $4m in 1984. Instead, they were able to point to a result almost on 
par with Ghost Protocol – and more importantly, imply that Genisys, with $155m 
in costs and a reported two sequels in the works, will also rally abroad 
(almost 70% of Ghost Protocol’s $694.7m was made overseas).

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Famy-magic-mike-terminator-genisys-magician-reviews-guardian&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435920840528%2FKP_339196_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20live%3A%20Amy%2C%20Terminator%20Genisys%2C%20Magic%20Mike%20XXL%20and%20Orson%20Welles%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Famy-magic-mike-terminator-genisys-magician-reviews-guardian>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20film%20show%20live%3A%20Amy%2C%20Terminator%20Genisys%2C%20Magic%20Mike%20XXL%20and%20Orson%20Welles%20%E2%80%93%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Famy-magic-mike-terminator-genisys-magician-reviews-guardian&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435920840528%2FKP_339196_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch a review of Terminator Genisys 
Unfortunately for the many who disagree with James Cameron’s baffling 
endorsement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/09/james-cameron-terminator-genisys-official-third-film-saga>
 and regard the fifth Terminator as a self-digesting series nadir, Paramount’s 
projection looks feasible. At least based on this week’s set of openings in 36 
markets, where Genisys has been significantly outstripping Ghost Protocol. 
Whether it will go on to $700m is another matter, but a not-unrealistic $400m 
should ensure the series’ continuation. (Terminator 3 managed $433.4m; 
Terminator Salvation, $371.4m.) Disheartening it may be for critics of 
Hollywood’s current fondness for strip-mining intellectual property, but this 
is the modern box-office switcheroo par excellence: leaning on emerging markets 
– where fealty to relics of the star system such as Arnold Schwarzenegger and 
Tom Cruise is strongest – to prop up degraded franchises.

As in the US, Genisys has dropped off compared to previous Terminators in 
developed economies such as the UK and France. But in smaller emerging markets, 
such as the Philippines, Malaysia and Venezuela, it is setting highs for both 
the franchise and for Schwarzenegger. And the bigger emerging markets – which 
probably had big enough screen counts in 1991 for Terminator 2 to make its mark 
– are still showing strong enough growth for the franchise: most impressively, 
Russia (T3: $4.1m; Salvation: $7.9m; Genisys: $12.5m), Mexico (T3: $4.6m; 
Salvation: $2.6m; Genisys: $6.2m), Brazil (Salvation: $2.1m; Genisys: $4m). 
Unlike time travel, some rules of the box office seem depressingly unbendable.


Wuxia revival
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdY00f9yH130&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdY00f9yH130>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdY00f9yH130&media=>
A Chinese martial arts movie hasn’t broken out internationally in nearly a 
decade, since The Curse of the Golden Flower, the last in Zhang Yimou’s trilogy 
of kung fu epics, hit the US in December 2006. That’s despite admirable 
domestic openings in the meantime for the likes of 2013’s Journey to the West 
($92.4m) and 2014’s The Monkey King ($50.9m). But a firm $28m No 1 start in 
China for Monk Comes Down the Mountain could augur a return to those 
early-noughties glory days, which were kicked off by Crouching Tiger, Hidden 
Dragon’s $213.5m worldwide take in 2001. Also co-produced by Sony-Columbia, the 
film, which stars Wang Baoquiang, from Chinese indie mega-hit Lost in Thailand, 
as the titular monk forced to leave his Taoist temple, looks to be a return to 
the comparatively realistic, literary-derivedwuxia 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wuxia> of Crouching Tiger. 

It’s the rowdy supernatural variety, fuelled by Chinese mythology that perhaps 
limits its overseas prospects, which has dominated the Chinese box office 
recently. Like Yimou’s trilogy, Monk Comes Down the Mountain is helmed by a
Fifth Generation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/21/3> legend: Chen 
Kaige, of Farewell My Concubine renown. Wong Kar-wai’s The Grandmaster, which 
managed a respectable $6.6m US grab, hinted at a return for arty chop-socky 
last year, and Hou Hsiao-Hsien’s The Assassinwowed at Cannes in May 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wuxia>. No release dates in the west have been 
set for Monk Comes Down the Mountain, but are presumably forthcoming with Sony 
guiding things. This could be a chance for the supposed cinematic powerhouse 
China to resume exports of its most popular genre and get back on the global 
scoreboard.


Grin and bare it

Magic Mike XXL – strippers' verdict: 'A public liability claim waiting to 
happen'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/02/magic-mike-xxl-naked-truth-dreamboy-strippers>
Oh, Mike, what happened? Raunchy trailers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RwPR0q5es0A> hyped the crowd hard for the 
return of Tampa’s premier male entertainer, and reviews suggested a sizeable 
section of the critical community were in the mood, too. But when it came time 
for sequel Magic Mike XXL to whip everything off, it proved more Magic Mike 
XXS, its $12m US debut looking rather flaccid next to its 2012 predecessor’s 
$39.1m. The audience was notably 96% female, against Magic Mike’s 73%, 
suggesting Warner Bros’ promotional efforts – bigging up the bump’n’grind at 
the expense of virtually any dramatic interest – had worked too well, 
destroying any consensus appeal. Plus, Steven Soderbergh’s central involvement 
lent the first film the curious allure of one of America’s most respected 
directors edifying trashy material; with him (as pseudonymous DoP and editor) 
merely oiling up new director Gregory Jacobs this time, the sequel had more of 
an air of smash-and-grab exploitation.

With the original’s box-office takings so heavily (68%) US-centric, it’ll be 
hard for XXL to pump it up internationally – though it took $6.2m from 15 
territories in this frame. Luckily, the $14.7m budget (double the first’s) 
means this is no catastrophe – except perhaps for headlinerChanning Tatum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/channing-tatum>. On the back of Magic Mike 
and 21 Jump Street, he was looking like a bona fide star in 2012, but the twin 
failures of XXL and Jupiter Ascending this year cast serious doubt over his 
efficacy as a leading man. Or, at least, over his choice of projects. He’s that 
quintessential 21st-century A-list head-scratcher: great as an added franchise 
element, or in partnership with another big-hitter; risky on his own.


Beyond Hollywood
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX9frx_v7KUQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX9frx_v7KUQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DX9frx_v7KUQ&media=>
China’s Hollywood moratorium is still in force until the end of July, so local 
pictures – including Monk Comes Down the Mountain and, asalready covered in 
previous columns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/29/global-box-office-ted-2-minions-jurassic-world>
, Hollywood Adventures and SPL 2 – are having the run of it. Joining them, with 
a $4.2m take putting it in 14th spot globally, wasI Am Somebody 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jFYHKFp9MZU>, Derek Yee’s docudrama-ish peek 
at fame-hungry wannabes at Hengdian World Studios (inevitably dubbed 
Chinawood). Korean thrillerNLL: Battle of Yeonpyeong 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IYnBYSsqy0>, in ninth place globally, 
continued to mine north-south paranoia and held extremely well for another $8m, 
planting it inside the annual top 10 in Korea. Hollywood – with Kingsman and 
Age of Ultron over-performing there – has been doing very well in 2015, but NLL 
is another dart in the board for one of its most formidable local competitors. 
And clocking in at 12th globally with the best opening ($6.8m) for a local 
title in France this year was Les Profs 2 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X9frx_v7KUQ>, followup to the $32.5m-grossing 
comedy about a group of teachers who rescue the worstlycée in France. The same 
UGC production outfit which turned out 2014’s ($104.6m) top film, the 
multicultural wedding comedyQu’Est-Ce Qu’On A Fait au Bon Dieu? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8VLN6LPXK_w>, sends these profs to the one 
place where sequel mirth is guaranteed: England. Hey, we’ve done it to them 
plenty of times.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3NQRhE772b0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3NQRhE772b0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3NQRhE772b0&media=>
There is no major new Hollywood product being stacked next week – just further 
shelves of Terminator Genisys, Magic Mike XXL, Inside Out and, most 
significantly, Minions. The latter, going great guns in the 26 territories 
already in play, gets its US opening, as well as openings in France, Mexico and 
Russia. Which leaves room in China forTiny Times 4 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U2FdzS9DdQU>, the fourth instalment in three 
years of the massively successful saga swooning over the work and love lives of 
young, moneyed Shanghai urbanites.

The presumably moneyed Guo Jingming, on whose novels the series is based, 
writes and directs again, and will be hoping to beat the last film’s $82.3m. 
And India gets its own Avatar moment with the release of SS Rajamouli’sBaahubali
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3NQRhE772b0> – which, depending on how you 
measure it, could bethe country’s most expensive production ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/26/baahubali-film-bollywood-tamil-telugu-language>
. Budgeted at $40m across two parts, this pristine-looking epic about two royal 
brothers’ struggle over an ancient kingdom is certainly up there on India’s 
big-spenders list – which surprisingly is mostly filled with Tamil-language 
works, not Bollywood Hindi works (Baahubali is filmed in both Tamil and 
Telugu). Rajamouli has a reputation as one of the Telugu industry’s leading 
lights: his previous film,Eega (The Fly) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lbWURFD4vdE>, told the story of a man 
reincarnated as a house fly who must avenge his own murder. Top that, Ant-Man.

Top 10 global box office, 3-5 July

1. Terminator Genisys, $102.7m from 47 territories. $129.6m cum – 65.9% 
international; 34.1% US
2. Jurassic World, $72.9m from 67 territories. $1.39bn cum – 59.7% int; 40.3% 
US
3. Minions, $54.3m from 26 territories. $124.2m cum – 100% int
4. Inside Out, $48.7m from 44 territories. $363.5m cum – 32.3% int; 67.7% US
5. (New) Monk Comes Down the Mountain, $28m from 3 territories. $34.5m cum – 
100% int
6. Ted 2, $19.8m from 32 territories. $94.3m cum – 38.2% int; 61.8% US
7. (New) Magic Mike XXL <https://www.theguardian.com/film/magic-mike-xxl>, 
$18.2m from 16 territories. $33.3m cum – 18.6% int; 81.4% US
8. Spy, $8.9m from 46 territories. $210.7m cum – 53.5% int; 46.5% US
9. NLL: Battle of Yeonpyeong, $8m from 1 territory. $22m cum – 100% int
10. Avengers: Age of Ultron, $7.4m from 2 territories. $1.38bn cum – 67.2% 
int; 32.8% US


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. This week’s figures are based 
on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

• This article was amended on 6 July 2015. The original stated Baahubali was a 
Tamil-industry film. This has been corrected.
 