
Q I graduated last year from a MA course. Since then I have worked in sales, 
which I left after four days as the role was different from how it was 
described to me. I also did some temp work (data entry) and am now on a 
graduate internship. I thought this would be the perfect job but I just can't 
stand being behind a desk all day - I find it so boring and uncreative. I'm 
getting really depressed and hitting a real low. Other issues are coming to the 
forefront because of my dispirited career situation, such as my dad's death 
just over a year ago. I really don't think I'm suited to a desk job, but am 
just so unsure of what my next step should be!

A First, let's deal with the stuff with which I can't help. Grief and 
depression are no strangers to an office environment - work goes on even when 
we're not really in a state to face it properly - but that does not make me the 
person to help you with them. Whether or not your career is at the root of the 
problem you should seek professional help; a trip to your GP may be the easiest 
way to explore the options available to you. Certainly, you shouldn't expect 
finding the "perfect" job to automatically make things better.

In fact, we should talk about this idea of a perfect job. After the freedom of 
university most jobs seem a bit, well, constricting. There's the problem of 
having to go and do them all day, every day for a start. And in every job there 
are bits that are frankly a bit dull, particularly at a more junior level.

If you don't like sitting behind a desk all day you should investigate the 
possibility of roles that involve a bit more activity, or that are altogether 
more practical - but I think writing off any office-based job altogether is a 
bit short-sighted. You can be creative while sitting down - it's much more a 
question of attitude than physical situation.

Your internship offers a chance for you to look at the company and the work it 
does, as much as it is for it to gauge whether you'd make a good employee. 
Don't think of it not working as a failure - it's quite the opposite. Be 
positive: you've avoided rushing into a situation that doesn't suit you.

That said, give it some time. You dropped your sales job after four days, 
which sounds a little hasty. It's much better to take your time and come to a 
considered and informed opinion about the role.

Don't worry too much about your degree - employers are often interested in the 
skills you gained rather than what you studied - otherwise what would history 
graduates all do? Think about running through your qualities and aptitudes - it 
might even be a useful exercise to note them down so you can work them into 
future job applications.

And if your "perfect" job does come with specific degree requirements 
attached, you might have to think about a further period of study, though it's 
always worth approaching employers and seeing if they ever look at people with 
equivalent level qualifications. But please, before you commit to anything, do 
some work experience in the area in which you think you'd like to work. If your 
current situation teaches you anything, it should be that until you try 
something out you never know what the reality will be.

One other thing: you only graduated a year ago. Working life stretches on for 
a long time (and sometimes feels like even longer). You have time on your side, 
so relax a little - there's really no need to panic.

Â· This article was amended on Wednesday March 12 2008.
 