
I was 29 and mowing the lawn at my mother’s house in Birmingham, Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, on a hot day in July 1985 when I 
looked up and saw two police officers. When my mom saw the handcuffs, she 
screamed. They asked me whether I owned a firearm, and I said no. They asked if 
my mother owned one, and I said yes. I asked the detective 50 times why I was 
being arrested. Eventually, he told me I was being arrested for a robbery. 
I told him, “You have the wrong man.” He said, “I don’t care whether you did it 
or not. You will be convicted.”

At the station, it became clear I’d been at work when the robbery occurred. 
The detective verified this with my supervisor, but then told me they were 
going to charge me with two counts of first-degree murder from two other 
robberies. They said my mother’s gun was the same kind as the one used at the 
crime scene, and that I matched the description of the man they were looking 
for. That was enough for them to pursue charges.

When I met my appointed lawyer, I told him I was innocent. He said, “All of 
y’all always say you didn’t do something.” I might have seen him three times in 
the two years I waited for trial. The only evidence linking me to the crime was 
the testimony of a ballistics expert who said the bullets from the murder 
weapon could be a match to my mother’s gun. They found me guilty and on 17 
December 1986 I went to death row.

On death row, the day starts at 2.45am. At 10am they bring lunch. Dinner was 
at 2pm. And that was it. They don’t care about actual mealtimes: they say they 
have to get through everyone, so they start early. The cell was 5ft x 7ft. You 
spend about 24 hours in there.

For three years I didn’t say a word to another human. I had to watch 54 men 
walk past to be executed. My cell was 30ft from the chamber and I could smell 
the burning flesh. There were 22 who took their own life. Going into my fourth 
year, I heard the man in the cell next to me crying. He told me his mother had 
died. I said, “Well, now you have someone in heaven to argue your case.” The 
next morning, it was as though a light had come on: my sense of humour was back.

I let my mind travel. I visited the Queen; I married Halle Berry. My mind went 
everywhere, and at night I’d come back and check on my body.

Without lawyer Bryan Stevenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/01/bryan-stevenson-americas-mandela>
 and theEqual Justice Initiative <http://eji.org/> (EJI), I wouldn’t be where I 
am now. I wrote to him after seeing him on TV one day while being walked back 
to my cell. I got to meet him in 1995 and finally had someone to fight for me.

He hired a ballistics expert and when we got the news that the bullets didn’t 
match, we went to the attorney general. They refused to take an hour to 
re-examine the case because it would be a “waste of taxpayers’ money”, and I 
sat on death row for another 16 years.

EJI kept pushing for a retrial and eventually, on 3 April 2015, the State of 
Alabama dropped all charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/03/alabama-man-death-row-freed-anthony-ray-hinton>
. I was released that same day. I couldn’t take it in: when you’ve been locked 
up for nearly 30 years, nothing is the same. It was like walking out on to 
another planet at the age of 58. Someone had to introduce me to the internet. 
My mother had died, but I was fortunate to have a best friend who let me move 
in and who supported me.

Experience: I own the world’s ugliest dog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/17/i-own-worlds-ugliest-dog-quasi-modo>
In jail, you spend all your time thinking of the things you’re going to eat, 
only to get out and discover you want nothing. I bought a king-size bed – after 
sleeping in the foetal position for years, I dreamed of stretching out. I’ve 
been out of prison for a year and half now, and I have yet to stretch out.

Every night, I go outside and look up at the stars and moon, because for years 
I could not see either. I walk in the rain, because I didn’t feel rain for 
years. Now, I am determined to go wherever I am asked to help end the death 
penalty. I am so thankful that I get to travel withLifelines 
<http://www.lifelines-uk.org.uk/> and EJI, and share my story.

I’ve never had an apology, but I forgave those involved in my conviction long 
before I left prison. I didn’t forgive them so they can sleep well at night. I 
did it so I can.

• As told to Fran Singh

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
 