
Golf <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> is a strange game. There is no 
other major sport in which an amateur can play to exactly the same level of a 
professional, walking the same fairways and greens as the game’s greatest 
players and – every now and again – coming up with pretty much the same result.

Such was my opportunity on a trip to play at Huntingdale 
<http://www.huntingdalegolf.com.au/welcome/index.mhtml> in Melbourne’s sand 
belt, where theAustralian Masters <http://www.australianmasters.com.au/> 
returns to its spiritual home from 19-22 November after a seven-year absence.

Standing on the first tee, you can still just about see the clubhouse gallery 
of past winners such as Greg Norman, who did so much to popularise the game in 
Australia with a string of victories in the tournament in the early 80s. Other 
greats who played the course include Tiger Woods, Nick Faldo, Severiano 
Ballesteros and Rory McIlroy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d82f694a73e23c2a4aedc09196944f4ace083a%2F0_41_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20walked%20in%20the%20footsteps%20of%20golfing%20greats%20and%20came%20up%20par%20%E2%80%93%20well%2C%20almost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20walked%20in%20the%20footsteps%20of%20golfing%20greats%20and%20came%20up%20par%20%E2%80%93%20well%2C%20almost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d82f694a73e23c2a4aedc09196944f4ace083a%2F0_41_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Greg Norman in action at Huntingdale in 2000. He made the Masters his own with 
six gold jackets between 1981 and 1990. Photograph: Julian Smith/AAP 
No pressure then, I thought. Just keep your head down and swing through the 
ball. Off we go. The ball takes its familiar arc, starting off well but then 
veering off to the right. Not too bad. Could have been worse, I think. It’s 
only my second round in about four years so I could have duffed it completely. 
It’s virtually a miracle shot.

I find my ball. The elevated green looks a long way off. But a morning 
downpour inMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> has 
not only ignited the beautiful scent of the gum trees, it has also softened the 
ground and I manage to float the ball 160 yards or so on to the green. I take 
two putts and mark down a par four. Easy game.

This is brilliant. I’ve just played that hole to the same standard as those 
great players. OK, Norman might have got the odd birdie three, but I bet he 
probably also had the odd four. When I just miss a putt for a birdie two at the 
short third hole, I’m wondering why I never turned pro.

The answer is not long in coming. At the dog-leg fourth my drive clatters into 
the trees. Several hacks and too many putts later I’ve got myself a four-over 
par eight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e64a729b75796d25ca0c948436b836bba18fa4e%2F0_4_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20walked%20in%20the%20footsteps%20of%20golfing%20greats%20and%20came%20up%20par%20%E2%80%93%20well%2C%20almost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20walked%20in%20the%20footsteps%20of%20golfing%20greats%20and%20came%20up%20par%20%E2%80%93%20well%2C%20almost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e64a729b75796d25ca0c948436b836bba18fa4e%2F0_4_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 One of the club’s greens in Melbourne, Australia. Photograph: Gary 
Lisbon/Huntingdale Golf Club 
Not for the first time I’m reminded that professional golfers make a living 
from the game because they’re really, really good at it, and have a lot more 
threes and fours on their cards than eights.

By the time I’ve finished following in their footsteps – who was I trying to 
kid? – I’m crushed by the inevitability of my score, which is a lot nearer to 
100 than it is to the par of 72.

But at least it’s an enjoyable walk. The course is wonderfully set up and in 
great condition to welcome back the Masters and the crowds that will come with 
it. The clubhouse has been rebuilt in the interregnum and boasts a huge bar and 
dining area where you can enjoy a good meal and talk about where it all went 
right – or wrong.

Melbourne’s famous run of great sporting events is well and truly under way. 
After the baton passed from the AFL grand final to the Melbourne Cup, it’s the 
turn of some of the world’s best golfers to take up the running at Huntingdale 
– one of seven championship-grade courses in the eastern suburbs. Players vying 
for the yellow jacket will be two who could once call themselves the best in 
the world – Ernie Els and the Australian Adam Scott – so the organisers are 
hoping for good crowds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bf45601c382904136921feabc8cab2e22b80858%2F68_0_2335_3504%2F2335.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20walked%20in%20the%20footsteps%20of%20golfing%20greats%20and%20came%20up%20par%20%E2%80%93%20well%2C%20almost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20walked%20in%20the%20footsteps%20of%20golfing%20greats%20and%20came%20up%20par%20%E2%80%93%20well%2C%20almost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F10%2Fi-walked-in-the-footsteps-of-golfing-greats-and-came-up-par-well-almost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bf45601c382904136921feabc8cab2e22b80858%2F68_0_2335_3504%2F2335.jpg>
 Double major winner John Daly of the USA at Huntingdale in 2008, getting the 
kind of view an amateur might be more familiar with. Photograph: Martin 
Philbey/AAP 
There are, of course, many other reasons to enjoy a whistlestop weekend in 
Melbourne, not least its rightly renowned dining scene and nightlife.

You’re spoiled for choice on a Friday night. The streets of the inner-city 
suburbs throng with likeminded souls, which is complemented on Cup weekend with 
a good number of people dressed to show everyone who cares that this is their 
biggest weekend of the year.

Fitzroy, while more understated, has its narrow old streets bursting with bars 
and restaurants, to the point where you wonder how they all survive. We settle 
on the upstairs bar of the immaculately restoredEverleigh 
<http://www.theeverleigh.com/> on Gertrude Street. It’s known for its cocktails 
but I make the mistake of having a craft beer which has a daft name and is both 
over-strong and overpriced.

No matter – the choice of restaurant is spot on. Hell of the North 
<http://www.hellofthenorth.com.au/>, a nearby French-style bistro, is named 
after a bike race in northern France. Of course it is, you might think. What 
could be trendier than to reference a fairly obscure sporting event staged 
10,000 miles away?

But the restaurant is housed in a beautiful old building with suitably rustic 
bare brick walls and plain wooden tables and it promises a chic but 
uncomplicated dining experience. We go for the “let us feed you” menu, a kind 
of degustation that takes you straight to the point with the minimum of fuss. 
Stage one, to borrow the cycling theme, is a savoury doughnut: deep-fried pork 
and cheese – what could possibly go wrong? Stage two is charcuterie and stage 
three is smoked trout and mussels. Four is pork belly and kingfish to complete 
a great feast, which for $65 a head is also excellent value. If only the (very 
fine) wine was such a bargain.

After all that it’s time for a lie down amid the ginger flower-scented luxury 
of theLangham hotel <http://www.langhamhotels.com/en/the-langham/melbourne/> on 
the Southbank.

On Saturday morning it is alive with the buzz of Cup weekend. Taking the lift 
to breakfast, many people are already in their finery ready to head off to the 
races. It’s lashing down with rain outside so I’m glad we’ve got time to enjoy 
the superb spread and look out over the city – so much to do there, so little 
time.

The golf was provided by the Australian Masters, and flights and accommodation 
by TourismVictoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>.
 