
Momentum Kids isn’t weird and sinister. It’s helping women engage | Suzanne 
Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/momentum-kids-weird-sinister-helping-women-engage-politics-childcare>
On 2 May 1997, Tony Blair made his first speech as prime minister. A few 
minutes earlier, a photo was taken of me, aged three, walking along Downing 
Street, in front of a frenzy of photographers, with a look on my face that 
expressed, very clearly, that I’d rather have been at home watching 
Teletubbies. This isn’t to say I wouldn’t later be proud of my dad, Alastair 
Campbell, forplaying a key part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/may/28/alastair-campbell-exclusive-gordon-brown>
 in winning a landslide election for Labour (the first Labour win since 1974) – 
I have been ever since I was old enough to understand what that means. But at 
that moment, I was blissfully unaware of how political my life already was – 
and how much more political it was going to be.

This week, Momentum launched Momentum Kids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/momentum-to-start-childrens-wing-to-boost-involvement-in-labour-movement>
, a programme that plans to open creches at Momentum events and ultimately aims 
to increase children’s involvement in the Momentum movement, as well as to make 
life easier for parents. I suspect my parents would have found the creche 
useful, but they didn’t need much help with the political involvement: I was 
born, quite literally, into New Labour. My dad started working for Tony not 
long after I was born, and he continued to do so for the first 10 years of my 
life, when my mum alsoworked for Tony and Cherie 
<http://www.hamhigh.co.uk/etcetera/fiona_millar_s_ringside_seat_as_the_blairs_swept_towards_no_10_1_628344>
. It was impossible to escape politics. Holidays were always spent with other 
New Labour people and their families, and dinner time discourse was almost 
always political. I knew nothing different. There were advantages. As my dad 
has written in his next volume of diaries (which, I feel loyalty-bound to tell 
you, is out this autumn), when I was waging a campaign to get a dog, I was able 
to get Tony to issue a prime ministerial order to my mum and dad. Molly duly 
arrived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgrace-campbell-alastair-campbell-how-i-survived-a-childhood-in-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48131752671523ec4741aabc9476fd36f6867b37%2F70_198_2219_2773%2F2219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20was%20a%20Blairite%20baby%3A%20how%20Grace%20Campbell%20survived%20a%20childhood%20in%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgrace-campbell-alastair-campbell-how-i-survived-a-childhood-in-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20was%20a%20Blairite%20baby%3A%20how%20Grace%20Campbell%20survived%20a%20childhood%20in%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgrace-campbell-alastair-campbell-how-i-survived-a-childhood-in-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48131752671523ec4741aabc9476fd36f6867b37%2F70_198_2219_2773%2F2219.jpg>
 Grace Campbell with her father, Alastair, in 2012. Photograph: Dan 
Wooller/REX/Shutterstock 
Momentum’s initiative has been derided, rather unfairly, as “Tiny Trots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/momentum-kids-single-parents-politics>
”; maybe I was a Blairite baby. Even if this image of brainwashing is a bit 
far-fetched, it is true that I have inherited a lot of my parents’ views and 
attitudes. I have been raised to believe in social justice, equality of 
opportunity and supporting public services such as local state schools. I was 
also raised to believe that Tories are generally bad and the Daily Mail is even 
worse. But as I got older, I did realise that politics wasn’t always learned at 
home. I became more liberal than my father, and more feminist than my mother, 
and I had one surprising passion that has dominated my life from a young age 
and still forms my opinions on social justice: reggae.

This independent sense of political self meant that there was now room for 
disagreement in our family. When I started sixth form, I remember that all of a 
sudden people in my politics class were asking me what I thought about the Iraq 
war. When the war began, I was nine, and too young to form an opinion other 
than noticing that there were demonstrations outside our house, and that Mum 
(anti) and Dad (pro) were arguing a lot. But when I was 16 I told my dad that, 
as much as I love him and want always to defend him, I think that, had I been 
old enough in 2003, I would have been on Mum’s side.

Pity the political parent who has to put up with a rebellious teenager when 
they already have to put up with so much else. The unpleasantries politicians 
receive from the media and public can be far worse than that doled out to other 
public figures. Last week, when my dad and John McDonnell argued about the 
future of the Labour partyon Question Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/alastair-campbell-john-mcdonnell-clash-on-question-time>
, I watched from the balcony with Jeremy Corbyn’s son, Seb, who is now 
McDonnell’s chief of staff. Everyone seemed to have an opinion on Corbyn’s 
leadership, some good, some bad. But watching with Seb made me realise that 
although our families lie on the opposite sides of the Labour divide, we both, 
as children of controversial political figures, have had to sit and watch 
people say horrible things about our fathers. (Cue tweets from Momentumites 
telling me my dad is a war criminal and how DARE I compare the two? That wasn’t 
the point, I’m talking about being a kid.)

Alastair Campbell calls for a second EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jul/15/the-new-european-lands-alastair-campbell-brexit-scoop>
My brothers and I grew up with the children of the Blairs and the Goulds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/07/new-abour-architect-philip-gould-dies>
 and the grandchildren of the Kinnocks. We’re all Labour now, which suggests 
parental influence is strong – and perhaps the Momentum plan will be a powerful 
way of reinforcing it for the kids who get taken along. But I can honestly say 
that my brothers and I have all acquired very different particularities: we’re 
the product of our childhoods, but our own people, too.

Anyway, it’s not all Twitter trolls and disagreements over dinner: in the 
years of politics I have experienced, there have been some bad moments, but 
also some really funny ones. My dad and Adam Boultonfighting on TV in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2010/may/10/adam-boulton-alastair-campbell>
, for example. The jokes moments are what I’m determined to focus on, and I’m 
currently developing and writing a sitcom for TV called Politicians’ Kids. 
Politics is a serious game, for sure, but life in my political family has left 
room for some serious comedy value. Thinking about it, the Momentum creche 
might yield some pretty hilarious moments, too.
 