
There are few contemporary writers for whom territory is more important than 
Iain Sinclair <https://www.theguardian.com/books/iain-sinclair>. Born in Wales, 
he has lived in London for half a century, during which time he has become the 
chief literary interpreter of the city's malevolent signs and hidden histories. 
Since 1968, Sinclair and his wife have lived in a mid-Victorian terrace house 
not far from one of Hackney's most elegant garden squares. The first-time 
visitor has the impression that the rooms are under separate governance: while 
kitchen and living room are comfortably immaculate, other parts of the house, 
including the first-floor study, appear to be in mid-construction. The building 
material is books: stored in boxes, piled randomly, shelved neatly. A 
half-life-size cardboard cut-out ofWilliam Burroughs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamburroughs> stands adjacent to the 
small desk, scrutinising the writer at his labours. Sinclair, a former book 
dealer, proudly reveals an array of Burroughs first editions, many of them 
signed. Famous for his documented walks, he makes a morning circuit of the 
neighbourhood before starting to write, "because otherwise I can't". He is 
tall, softly spoken and fluent in conversation. His new book,American Smoke, 
pursues several ghostly figures, includingRoberto Bolaño 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/17/fiction-roberto-bolano-2666-chile>
 andMalcolm Lowry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/malcolm-lowry>. Our talk 
wandered around another of its preoccupations,the Beat Generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2008/oct/22/jack-kerouac-death-archive-report>
.

James Campbell: Let me begin with a quotation from Jack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac>'s "Essentials of Spontaneous 
Prose", which you cite inAmerican Smoke: "Swimming in a sea of English with 
no discipline other than rhythms of rhetorical exhalation and expostulated 
statement, like a fist coming down on a table with each complete utterance, 
bang!" Kerouac could be talking about Iain Sinclair here, no?

Iain Sinclair: (laughter) I wish! I would like to think I was doing that – not 
as a lack of discipline but as a level of spontaneity, where the 
self-censorship in what you're doing is overridden by some kind of inner truth, 
in terms of rhythm and metaphor, in the way that the prose is delivered.

JC: A lot of people would identify your prose, which is unlike the prose of 
most writers, as a rhetorical fist smacking on to the page.

IS: There may be an element of truth in the idea of a gestural prose. Having 
grown up onWyndham Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jan/23/londonreviewofbooks> and Ezra 
Pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/nov/17/featuresreviews.guardianreview1> 
teaching you tostrike, I think I felt that the prose had to grab you, had to 
have tension. It also relates to my interest in film – cutting, short shots. 
Essentially, it's an attempt to be true to the subject matter and the content. 
I don't want to override the content. I go along with that thingRobert Creeley 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/4241/the-art-of-poetry-no-10-robert-creeley>
 said: "Form is never more than an extension of content." It's that 
deliberation over the precise balance between metaphors of place and place 
itself, and then, when it's working, a voice is channelled through you, and – 
you let it all ride. Before cutting it up, Burroughs style.

JC: Do you ever use cut-up methods?

IS: I have done in the past, not in this new book, but in my first novel White 
Chappell, Scarlet Tracings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/interactive/2013/may/18/iain-sinclair-white-chappell-scarlet-tracings-annotations>
. I was going to read a section of it one time with another writer, and he was 
taken ill, so I had to create a whole programme in one night. I discovered the 
way to do it. Since the book wasn't structured at that point, I just took 
chunks of prose and chopped it, then chopped it with other stuff. And it was 
quite a breakthrough. It loosened up lots of ways that the final book took its 
form.

JC: Do you go along with Burroughs's claim about the cut-up method being able 
to foretell the future?

IS: Strangely, yes, I do. I wouldn't use it as a way of writing one of my 
books, but I think these accidental space-time conundrums are accessed by that 
kind of magic. And I do think that writing is a form of magic.

JC: When you started out, did you have that Kerouac statement in mind? Or did 
you begin writing in a more orthodox way?

IS: I wouldn't have known what an orthodox way was. I just started writing in 
response to where I happened to be. It began the moment I arrived in London to 
go to film school. I was about 19 and was very excited by the new rhythms 
around me, and the change from having been in a series of provincial places. 
And I wanted to get down some kind of account of that. Although I was reading 
Kerouac, I wasn't trying to write like him, because I associated him with 
America, and I thought that voice sat in another topography. London didn't have 
that feel to it. I wrote to try and be vivid, to try and get textures and 
details. The theory –Charles Olson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Olson>
's Projective Verse or Kerouac's Spontaneous Prose – didn't touch me until many 
years later. I came to read about what I was doing long after I was actually 
doing it.

JC: In American Smoke, you mention the so-called rebel movement at home. You 
say: "We didn't buy English anger." Can you enlarge a little?

IS: While I was still at school in Cheltenham, I picked up a book, Protest: 
The Beat Generation and the Angry Young Men 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Protest-Beat-Generation-Angry-Young/dp/028562802X>. 
Ostensibly, these were supposed to be equals in some way. As I read through, I 
was engrossed by "William Lee", as Burroughs was called, and Kerouac and the 
others; and distrustful of what the English writers were doing, which seemed to 
be about disgruntled people wanting to climb the social and economic ladder. 
They were carrying on theEvelyn Waugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/evelynwaugh> tradition of satirising society.
Kingsley Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/kingsleyamis> and all that. 
I felt alienated from it, in a way that I didn't from what was coming from 
America. The interesting thing is that when I did go to America and interviewed 
all these underground types, they were interested inPG Wodehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pgwodehouse> and Barbara Pym 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
 – archetypes of Englishness. Maybe, in the same way, I was looking at a 
completely false America.

JC: What was the pull of the American writing you're talking about? After all, 
you went there for the first time only in 1995.

IS: The pull was that I hadn't been there, that there was this otherness, this 
world that was immensely attractive – the way that America could be before you 
knew anything about it. I didn't know anything of the political realities. It 
was the world you got out of cinema and these particular books. My fascination 
started with Kerouac, because he was describing this provincial mill town where 
he had grown up,Lowell, Massachusetts <http://www.lowellma.gov/>, which was 
very like the Welsh town where I grew up. It was a recognition of what you 
could do in a small industrial town. In the more lyrical aspects, 
I saw connections toDylan Thomas <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas>
, who of course had gone to America, and they had responded to him, with his 
performances and his poetry rhetoric – so there were interconnections that made 
sense.

JC: Were you interested in the Black Mountain writers at the same time?

IS: That came later. With Olson and the Maximus Poems, it was different. 
It seemed like the project as epic, the idea of digging into where you are – 
in Olson's case, the fishing port of Gloucester, Massachusetts – accumulating 
information, taking it all the way back, the monstrous reading that you would 
have to undertake to do this, a sort of crazed scholarship.

JC: And that inspired your own crazed scholarship about Hackney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hackney>?

IS: I was very much influenced by Olson when I was doing Lud Heat [a book of 
poetry (1975) centred on Hawksmoor's churches in East London]. He gave me this 
idea that you could create a large-scale text that would incorporate prose and 
poetry and historical information about the palimpsest of London – and yet 
would allow you to take off on a charge with that kind of language that you 
described earlier.

JC: In the anthology Conductors of Chaos, which you edited in 1996, you use a 
phrase about the poetry incorporating "a secret history" – meaning an 
alternative movement. Were you aspiring to create some kind of British 
equivalent to Donald Allen's anthologyThe New American Poetry (1960)?

IS: Absolutely. Reading Allen's book, you realised that there was a whole 
secret literature coming out of San Francisco, Black Mountain College and so 
on. And that was the model forConductors of Chaos. It disappeared almost as 
soon as it had appeared, but it's got a life. A lot of young poets tell me that 
when they came across it it made them realise that there was some kind of 
alternative writing going on. Because the grip of the poetic mainstream in 
England is so dominant, the other stuff is literally not visible.

JC: The sociopolitical side of the Beats is pretty clear, but –

IS: I don't know how political they were. Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/allen-ginsberg> becomes socially, 
culturally, politically a major figure. But Kerouac? Burroughs? They were 
pretty apolitical.

JC: It would be hard to call Burroughs apolitical. We know this from letters 
written in response to civil rights, for example: "Nigra laws eh? That really 
is the pay-off". Sounds quite political to me.

IS: In his own fashion, yes.

JC: If we can describe that as a political stance, I was going to ask: what 
was yours? Did you tie writing to politics in any way?

IS: I was opened up to certain arguments at the Dialectics of Liberation 
Congress <http://www.dialecticsofliberation.com/1967-dialectics/> at the 
Roundhouse in 1967. Talking to people likeRD Laing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/rd-laing>, you became aware of the 
interconnected biological, physiological, political abhorrence of the world as 
it was, understanding that a permanent revolution was going to be undertaken. 
Groups that became the Angry Brigade were very much in evidence. This was of 
romantic interest to me at the age I was then.

JC: Some of the characters in your new book are fictional creations, based 
on real people. Yet long sections deal with meetings withGary Snyder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/16/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>
 and people relevant to the story lines involving Bolaño and Lowry, which are 
important themes in the book. One of your subtitles is "Fictions of memory". 
How is the reader to tell the difference between the fictions and the facts?

IS: Well, a fiction of memory is when I'm describing the more remote past. 
This becomes more like writing fiction. The process of dealing with something 
at that distance inevitably creates a smoothed-out narrative, often through the 
retellings that have occurred over the years. Things get arranged in certain 
ways to make a nice shape. The awkward details are forgotten or suppressed. And 
when you are confronted with them – as I was in the process of writingHackney: 
That Rose-Red Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/21/sinclair-hackney-review> – you 
often find that what you have remembered is completely wrong. When you go back 
to it, it's this peculiar country. But when I'm describing Snyder or Gregory 
Corso, that's fairly recent, and I've kept to what happened.

JC: Is the Hackney book also part fiction, part documentary?

IS: There, and in American Smoke, a straightforward history was not something 
I wanted to do. It was more to see where I stood in relation to my own 
memories. Those forms are permeable. There are texts that are on this side of 
the line and on that side of the line, but there are lots now that are 
somewhere in between. Mainstream publishing, I've found, would be resistant to 
me producing a book of pure fiction. My way of getting round that was to do 
something that would appear to be documentary, but would in fact contain 
fictional elements.

JC: It's a kind of semi-novel, then?

IS: It is, and it sits completely within the ethos of the Beats. Kerouac's 
books are treated as being fiction, but we know very well that they are 
manipulations of a documentary account. He makes changes as he needs to, but 
you could almost pitch some of them as being non-fictional accounts of what 
happened on this particular journey.

JC: I like the link. The difference seems to me that Kerouac was making a 
fiction out of something that happened, and you're making a non-fiction out of 
something that didn't happen.

IS: (laughter) As well as occasionally fictions out of things that did happen. 
But mostly the other way round, it's true. The kind of writing I like has 
always been from people likeCéline 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v11/n03/john-sturrock/doctor-no>, depicting heightened 
versions of events in their own lives. But you don't write a narrative of 
exactly what happened. You have the privilege of reliving your own life 
and making it more interesting.

JC: And you're influenced in that direction by commercial considerations?

IS: The fictions I was doing were not welcomed, whereas by various accidents 
I'd created a brand of London wanderings, oftrips around the M25 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/sep/21/featuresreviews.guardianreview6> 
[described inLondon Orbital] or whatever, that was acceptable. There was a slot 
in the market for that, and now I'm invited to repeat it in different ways. But 
I don't want to repeat it.

JC: You say that the idea behind American Smoke is that of the "bad journey". 
Was writing about the US an escape from the badness of Hackney, the Olympics, 
the regeneration project [as detailed inGhost Milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/15/ghost-milk-iain-sinclair-olympics>
, 2011]?

IS: I thought I'd written my way into a black hole locally, and I didn't think 
there was anywhere else to go. I felt the force of these enclosures round the 
Olympic park, I felt cut off from the memory grounds that I was used to 
exploring. I was being stopped in the course of the walk that I wanted to walk. 
Big blue fences were preventing me entering this particular landscape. Cameras 
were all around. I was challenged dozens of times. My response was to write 
about it in various ways, but I thought that that didn't carry much conviction 
up against the monolithic state hysteria around the events. So one journey 
I could do was back into a sense of freedom and anarchy and energy that I got 
in dealing with people like Olson and Ginsberg and Lowry in the past, in person 
or in books.

JC: That makes it sound like a good journey!

IS: Well, it was a good journey, but there's nothing better than a bad one for 
me. I had to go back and make it seem bad. I suppose it was bad-journey tourism.

JC: There's a nice phrase in the book, about "burning fresh neural pathways" 
when you make your "plodding journeys". Walking is one of the things you're 
known for. What's happening when you walk?

IS: Everything. I do a walk around here every morning before I start. It's 
opening up your system to the world, making the skin porous, letting all the 
impressions pour through and charging circuits to be able to write. And the 
burning of neural pathways is when you've established a set of pathways in the 
head. To go somewhere new is to feel the brain is being remapped, in an 
interesting way. And you hope that by doing that, a new form of writing might 
emerge.

JC: Now the Olympics are over, and Hackney has changed in ways you dislike, is 
there a sense of despair?

IS: Now that it's over, I think we wait for something new. But the shadow, the 
ghost of that, hangs heavy, because almost everything's referred to it. It's 
a stain that runs through the whole of our media – as if that was a golden 
moment in England, and everything's got to try to reflect it. But I feel that 
the territory's breathing a sigh of relief. It's coming back to life in 
different ways. Ginsberg always talked about how the mass media is a 
hallucinatory form. And the business of the writer is to find something out for 
yourself and to stick by it. To forge a new mythology out of materials 
pertinent to the moment. Otherwise you're at the mercy oftheir mythology, which 
is a destruction of language, above everything else. This non-language, this 
bureaucratic-speak of the global corporate entities, is a horror in the world. 
So that strange language we started with – that piece of Kerouac – I think is 
more valuable than ever.

American Smoke is published by Hamish Hamilton.
Iain Sinclair will appear at the Whitechapel Gallery on 7 November
 