
In 1969, the year the writer Iain Sinclair bought a near-condemned house in 
Hackney, complete with period features like an outside toilet and a tin bath 
hanging from a hook on the wall, Ray Davies of the Kinks was at work in Pye 
Studios near Marble Arch finessingArthur (Or the Decline and Fall of the 
British Empire) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0jAgt5OCIrU>, the sequel to his 
band's album The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society. Both records 
obsessed over the declining cultural currency of hardy-perennial British 
institutions: china cups and custard pies, vaudeville and variety, strawberry 
jam and Desperate Dan. And outside conveniences, a reality of everyday life in 
a Hackney landscape still wearing the scars of war, were part of the same 
disappearing London that Davies was lamenting.

Sinclair used his new foothold in East London to begin his life's work 
circumnavigating the city, meticulously documenting the rising tensions between 
London's underpinning mythologies and resonant historical ghosts and the city's 
slide towards being just another clone, coffee-chain metropolis. Books like
Lights Out for the Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/society/9780241965504/lights-out-for-the-territory-penguin-street-art>
,London Orbital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/travel-guides/9780141014746/london-orbital>
 and Hackney, That Rose-Red Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141012742/hackney-that-rose-red-empire-a-confidential-report>
 have a literary style that reads as though it's blossoming out of Blake – 
until Sinclair abruptly punctures his own intense poetics with stark, enraged 
documentary. Meanwhile, Davies rhapsodised and satirised. Like Hogarth with a 
rock backbeat, he sketched portraits of transexuals in Soho (Lola 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ixqbc7X2NQY>), lovers on Waterloo Bridge (
Waterloo Sunset <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5J3gX47rHGg>) and, of course, 
those all-too dedicated followers of Carnaby Street fashion.
 Iain Sinclair in Hackney. Photograph: Karen Robinson 
London handed both men their art and now, with unlikely synchrony, they both 
publish accounts of another cultural milieu that would transform their visions 
of England. Sinclair'sAmerican Smoke: Journeys to the End of the Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/travel-guides/9780241145272/american-smoke-journeys-to-the-end-of-the-light>
 is about his creative debt to the Beat poets and writers, while Davies'
Americana: The Kinks, the Road and The Perfect Riff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/music/9780753555224/americana-the-kinks-the-road-and-the-perfect-riff>
 is a memoir of certainties rocked by the melodic patterns and syncopated beat 
of American popular culture. Davies grew up in a two-up two-down on Fortis 
Green, the road that leads from East Finchley to Muswell Hill in north London. 
Jerry Lee Lewis, Leadbelly and Charles Mingus changed his world. Sinclair 
arrived in London from the small Welsh town of Maesteg, and Jack Kerouac, Allen 
Ginsberg and Charles Olson would help fashion him into the writer he is today.

In his preface, Davies tells us that America as mythic nirvana entered his 
consciousness via flickering celluloid images of superheroes and cowboys. But 
it was his burgeoning appreciation of rock, jazz, skiffle and country that 
properly lifted his spirits out of the monochrome of post-war Britain. And 
discovering Kerouac in his late teens provided Sinclair with a comparable 
portal. "That whole Kingsley Amis and Philip Larkin affectation of 
provincialism and small-town Englishness, and their sense of distrusting what's 
foreign," he told me earlier this summer, as we sat in his Hackney living room, 
"felt so inward turning and against what I wanted to do. These people were 
terrified of pretension, which meant they were terrified of ideas and keeping 
an open mind. I was repelled by that way of looking at things."

Because of his type-casting as a "London author", there has been a tendency to 
overlook Sinclair's roots in American counterculture. But without Ginsberg 
there would have been no house in Hackney. Sinclair purchased his home with the 
£2,000 he earned making a television film about the Howl poet and Bob Dylan 
intimate. And it's no coincidence that much of his literary career has put him 
"on the road", walking and searching and observing, then walking some more, 
before writing up what he finds. "English novels all had this predicable 
structure," he explained. "Characters would appear, do this and that, and then 
a resolution. But Kerouac is totally open-ended: not going anywhere necessarily 
in terms of narrative plot, not resolving anything. He hears Charlie Parker in 
a bar and puts those rhythms, as he understands them, into his writing and it 
becomes a riff, or a solo, as he picks up on that same energy – the jazz 
realities of how you can jump about with language."

Sinclair's loyalty towards a pool of fellow travellers who accompany him from 
book to book, and through thick and thin, baffles some reviewers and 
commentators. Among his companions have beenRenchi Bicknell 
<http://www.renchibicknell.co.uk/about/> the artist, Marc Atkins 
<http://marcatkins.com/> the hard-living photographer and the tenacious agent 
provocateur artist/writerBill Drummond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/28/bill-drummond-creative-urge>, 
who made his statement about the corruption of art by commerce bytorching a 
million pounds in cash <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i6q4n5TQnpA>. In On The 
Road, Kerouac constructs heightened mythologies around his travelling buddies, 
especially the inscrutable Neal Cassidy whom he fictionalises as Dean Moriarty. 
Sinclair's dramatis personae fulfil a similar literary function as 
fully-rounded characters around which hyped-up mythologies and playful 
invention can be hung.

Where does real life fade into fiction? That, said Sinclair, was the question 
that dogged the writing of his 2009 book Hackney, That Rose-Red Empire. A 
chapter about William Lyttle, the so-called "mole-man of Hackney", who in 2008 
found notoriety for digging a honeycomb of tunnels under his Dalston home, has 
Sinclair imagining going beneath the road, shovelling deep into Lyttle's secret 
realm: "Kids in this area imagined the tunnels went even further than they did 
and all kinds of curious things happened there. I tried to gain access, but in 
reality couldn't, so fictionalised an imaginative mythology – mythologising the 
myths of a real person and his real situation."

Mythology doesn't come more frenzied than that surrounding rock stars and Ray 
Davies <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ray-davies>, in notable contrast to 
Sinclair, aims to myth-bust. An affecting passage about the sudden death of 
Labour leader John Smith in 1994 – Davies is driving through the Surrey 
countryside when he hears the news on his car radio and stops at a local church 
to pray for the loss of the Labour movement as his own father would have 
understood it – triggers a chain of events that takes him back to mythic 
America. Who loathes and distrusts Tony Blair more, Sinclair or Davies? It's 
too close to call. But Davies prefers to observe New Labour's 1997 Southbank 
coronation from the relative safety of digs on New York's Upper West Side.
 Their generation … Ray Davies of the Kinks in 1965. Photograph: David 
Magnus/Rex Features 
A kindly teacher handed Sinclair his first copy of On The Road; Davies heard 
Elvis Presley and bebop for the first time through the generosity of his eldest 
sister, married to a Canadian serviceman, who shipped records back to the 
Davies' north London home. "I loved blues singers like Howlin' Wolf, Big Bill 
Broonzy and Bo Diddley," Davies once told me. "But eyebrows were raised when 
You Really Got Me went to No 1 and I wasn't singing in an American accent. The 
generation before us, like Cliff Richard, sang transatlantic. But I didn't know 
I was going to be a songwriter when I wrote You Really Got Me. I assumed it was 
a fluke. So, I thought, I'll sing it the way I am. I'm a London person. That's 
my voice."

Truth is, Davies loved blues and rock'n'roll too ardently to defer towards 
vocal caricature – "I sing as I speak," he says. And nor does Sinclair ape the 
mannerisms and verbal ticks of Kerouac. To love Kerouac or Big Bill Broonzy is 
to learn from their freethinking spirit of independence. With polite society 
still blushing at the pelvis of Elvis, the carnal desires of which Ray Davies 
sang in You Really Got Me left nothing to the imagination. When the record was 
released in 1964, the Who's totemic My Generation was a whole 12 months away. 
The song's raw-boned, rootsy riff had a physicality that could only have 
emanated from a mind fixated on authentic blues and rock. Thanks to his 
sister's parcels, he had absorbed and distilled the American mother music 
earlier than most and British pop had never heard anything like it before.

Sinclair has just turned 70. Davies becomes a septuagenarian next year, and 
their generation were more knowing in their approaches to American culture than 
the generation who proceeded them. InRevolt Into Style 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9871927-revolt-into-style>, George Melly's 
pioneering book about British pop culture, he writes of "the spontaneous if 
mysterious enthusiasm which sprang up all over wartime Britain for Negro jazz 
of the 1920s." And what began with the scholarly devotion of British jazzmen 
like Humphrey Lyttelton and Chris Barber would collapse into Kenny Ball and his 
rhythmically mushy Jazzmen hamming up Jungle Book songs as guests on The Two 
Ronnies: cartoon light-entertainment jazz with layers of unthinking racial 
stereotyping. But Davies needs his readers to understand about that sticky 
patch in the Kinks' history when he decided to add a Trad jazz band to their 
lineup for 1970s concept albums like Preservation andSchoolboys in Disgrace 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/albumreviews/schoolboys-in-disgrace-19760311>
. Davies lived in New Orleans and has walked the streets and searched and 
observed. New Orleans jazz represents fundamental, unchanging truths.

And for Sinclair, there's a point of connection closer to home. The work of 
Dylan Thomas, the man whose inspiration turned Robert Zimmerman into Bob Dylan, 
was intricately woven into Sinclair's Welsh childhood. "Ginsberg was very drawn 
to the apocalyptic, deep rumbling resonance ofDylan Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas>," he says, "and I knew its 
relationship to chapel sermonising and natural Welsh speech rhythms. I could 
feel how Thomas's work had been appropriated by the Beats, while knowing the 
thing itself. And so I took on both."
 