
It's not quite a hole in the ground and Gandalf is not – yet – blowing complex 
smoke rings of dragons chasing pirate ships, but there is a still a welcomely 
ruminative, smoky, timeless ambience. We are sitting, MrMcKellen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/ian-mckellen> and I – he's not one of those 
who goes too big on the "Sir" stuff – in the tiny top room of the ancient 
waterside Limehouse pub the Grapes, which he co-bought a couple of years ago. 
There are candles, there are golds and reds, there's a big mutual ashtray, and 
outside the shaking windows the dirty Thames is growing darker, wilder and 
woollier by the minute.

He is talking of Dickens, who wrote about this place, very possibly this high 
room, as "forever falling into the water". I am thinking, more, about my first 
meeting with Mr McKellen, something like 35 years ago, when I interviewed him 
for my school magazine, the RSC having played in our school gym that Edinburgh 
festival. With incalculable luck I've managed to dig out a copy, just to remind 
myself what badly Xeroxed typewriting looks like and how excruciating my 
interview technique was even back then – it's simple Q&A, and fawning 
questions, but one does stand out between his (lengthy, thoughtful, 
unpatronising) answers, and it runs thus: "Q: Have you ever thought seriously 
about going into films or television?"

Today we both wear specs – neither pair too effective in the darkling light 
from the stormy windows; he's delighted by the half-memory and takes the 
photocopy of my photocopy to pore over later. We can forgive much about our 
younger selves, but that question in particular does seem daft, given that the 
man before me is about to star in probably the year's greatest blockbuster,The 
Hobbit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nOGsB9dORBg>, reprising – or is 
"preprising" yet a word? – the role of Tolkien's wizard which won him worldwide 
fame over the past decade during the slow, complex and ultimately triumphant 
New Zealand filmings of the author's laterLord of the Rings trilogy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Lord_of_the_Rings_%28film_series%29>.

"I do think I used to be a bit snobbish about the cinema and think the real 
acting took place in the theatre," he muses as he tries to remember what the 
answer had been (he'd said then: "I've never met a film star who's happy…").

"But perhaps that was simply excusing my disappointment that I wasn't in 
cinema like some of my contemporaries –Tom Courtenay 
<http://uk.imdb.com/name/nm0183822/>, Alan Bates 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2003/dec/29/guardianobituaries.filmnews>, 
latterlyTony Hopkins <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/anthony-hopkins>. My 
friends tell me I wasalways saying: 'Why aren't I in movies?', but I wasn't 
because I was always on tour, on stage. And also, because of that, I knew I had 
to learn how to be a film actor. And so when I'd set up the film of Richard III 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_III_%281995_film%29> I deliberately took 
very small jobs in other people's movies –Meryl Streep 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/merylstreep>, Arnold Schwarzenegger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/arnold-schwarzenegger> for goodness' sake, Alec 
Baldwin <http://www.alecbaldwin.com/> – and I just began to see what they were 
up to, so that when it came to the real thing I felt that bit more confident. 
And I suppose it was a good calling card, so producers could go: 'Hmm, maybe 
McKellen's a bit more than just a classical stage actor.'"

He has loved the transition to movie superstar at a relatively mellow age – 
he's now 73. "It's easier to go from theatre to film than the other way round. 
In film you're absolutely loved and cossetted and cared for. In film your 
director makes your performance. In theatre you're carrying it all. But films 
appeal to me because I'm still intrigued by how to do them. I'm so pleased that 
I seem to be able to act in films, not waving and shouting too much, just to be 
heard in the gods." And he didn't, as many seem to, mind the concomitant fame? 
"Goodness no. And I travel on the tube. What's nice for me, having identified 
myself for years as being rather shy, is now, wherever I am, in public, there 
tends to be a friendly face who's pleased to see me, and I like that. And for 
someone who doesn't have grandchildren, it's lovely for me to meet those of 
friends, eight or nine years old, who actually want to have a chat to me – 
that's great. And yes, they absolutely understand I'm not Gandalf, I'm only an 
actor. All the world's a stage etc, and kids are so used to play-acting anyway: 
they absolutely get it, no problem. Sometimes they might say: 'Will you sign 
this as Gandalf?' and I say: 'Well, no, Gandalf isn't here,' and they go: 'Of 
course.'"
 Ian McKellen as Gandalf in The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey. Photograph: 
Warner Bros/AFP/Getty Images 
There is, between the two of Tolkien's filmed books, a difference not only in 
size but in mood. Filming forThe Hobbit finished mainly in July, though 
McKellen has to go back Down Under for five weeks next year for extra scenes. 
Since then he's been back in London, catching up with friends, settling into 
running a pub within sight of his home, and learning – in his words – that 
chefs can be every bit as "difficult bloody divas" as actors. Presumably the 
end result, the long-awaitedHobbit, reflects the mood of the writing?

"Absolutely. Tolkien wrote The Hobbit first, and wrote it mainly as a simple 
adventure story. It was written almost in the first person, his own voice, and 
it's a tale of the old world, and Bilbo is simply going on an adventure. InLord 
of the Rings it's war, written as real war loomed, and they're going off to 
save the world: it's big and it's serious.

"But this one is full of fun, and humour, in a way which wouldn't really have 
been appropriate inLord of the Rings. Martin [Freeman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/martin-freeman>] is, apart from anything 
else, a great comedian, as, of course, areBilly Connolly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/billyconnolly>, Stephen Fry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/stephen-fry>, Jimmy Nesbitt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/james-nesbitt>. Also, in this one I am, 
throughout, Gandalf the Grey. InLord of the Rings, two of them anyway, I play 
Gandalf the White, kind of post-resurrection, and there's a different feel to 
him; a certainty. But Gandalf the Grey likes boogieing around Hobbiton and 
having a drink and a smoke and letting off fireworks."

As, it strikes me, does McKellen himself in his fashion, who is just about to 
start work on a sitcom withDerek Jacobi <http://uk.imdb.com/name/nm0001394/>, 
about, essentially, two argumentative old queens living in Soho. "Well, you 
know, I just hadn't done a sitcom before. Hadn't worked with Derek before, 
oddly, even though we've known each other since Cambridge, and it seemed a bit 
of a lark, and the writing is funny, better than funny. And we are capable of 
absorbing each other's cantankerousness – the characters have been together for 
50 years, so there's a basis of love which supersedes the viciousness, as with 
heterosexual marriages."

It is still a risk, however – a prime-time ITV sitcom, filmed live before an 
audience. You're never too old to fail. And it strikes me that something has 
changed from the McKellen who told theObserver 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2002/feb/17/lordoftherings.awardsandprizes> a 
decade ago that he was happily in love, and considering winding down, and 
travelling much more, and letting go more than a little. What had happened? Was 
he, for instance, still with the same chap?

"No, no, I'm on my own." Happily so? "That, for the Observer, is rather a 
cheeky question, but I suppose yes. If I wasn't I'd presumably go out and do 
something about it. But, on your wider note, it turned out that despite travel 
and the other things, gratifying as they are and were, I stillneeded to act. 
That's what I'm best at. And as long as other people want to go on employing 
me, inwhatever capacity, it would be perverse not to. It keeps you alert, part 
of the world – you're not forever being nostalgic… you don't decline into 
self-satisfaction. Now rather than thinking: 'When can I take six months off?', 
it's: 'When can I work again, by God how much time do I have left, I'd better 
do another job.'"
 Ian McKellen and Frances Barber in The Seagull by The Royal Shakespeare 
Company. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Ten years ago, he says, he probably gave that answer to us because he was 
around retiring age and thought he should be winding down, rather than actually 
meaning it. "Actors don't, in fact, retire, do they? It took me a while to 
remember that. And the fact that I'd always wanted to have acareer. Those I 
admired –Gielgud <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2000/may/22/news.obituaries> 
andOlivier <http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/olivier>, Richardson 
<http://uk.imdb.com/name/nm0724732/> – they'd all had careers, not just famous 
for one thing; they'd had their ups and downs but they'd always kept going. And 
there's always the sense of… not much longer for this part. At one age it's: 
'Hell, not much longer to play Romeo, or Hamlet,' then it's soon: 'I'm going to 
be too old for Macbeth.' All right, Lear's always there."

Part of the key to longevity must surely be adaptability. "Yes, but that's not 
a problem, because that's been part of the fascination for me, always, in any 
medium." First, he says, having loved listening to the radio, he was simply 
delighted to be on it to find out how it was done. "Then television, and how is 
itdone? Why and how did they go for that shot? So I would never find myself 
saying: 'Oh I can't do that, it involves something new'. Rather, I hope I'm 
intrigued by it. Not to say I find something likeCGI 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer-generated_imagery>, say, necessarily 
easy, but it can be coped with. Like so much of acting, it's to do with 
technique.

"Perhaps in the past I've been too technical an actor – well, other people 
have said it of me – but if you're makingThe Hobbit you've got to know how to 
cope with the problem of making yourself look much larger than all the other 
characters. Even when they're not there." He is, for instance, technically 
taller thanMartin Freeman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/martin-freeman> 
but not by much more than a jug of Bree's finest hobbit ale. "So I have to act 
with Martin, when we're actually together, looking at his belt, and he has to 
act looking at the top of my hat, and then to the camera it looks as if he's 
much smaller. But it's all just technique, similar to coming on to a stage and 
hitting your mark, making sure you're in the light and the rest, just a bit 
more of it."
 Ian McKellen in The Last Journey, 1972. Photograph: ITV/Rex Features 
Are you still learning? "Oh good lord, yes, absolutely. I might have thought, 
when younger: 'Right, I think I've pretty much now sorted out how to do, say,
Black Coffee by Agatha Christie 
<http://www.agathachristie.com/christies-work/stories/black-coffee/>.' But 
that's about it. Always, I'm still learning. I hope. And I feel that more and 
more, as I age. Anyone of my age feels that the end is… in touchable distance. 
And who knows, it may suddenly come up behind and hit you on the head. And your 
friends are… dying, or incapacitated in some way. And I think I've decided now 
that I'd rather like to keep going, as far and as long as I can."

And ideally, he says, with parts where he can bring something of himself – 
he'd still love, he says incidentally, to do something withMike Leigh 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/mikeleigh> – because "that's part of the fun, 
always part of the fun. With Shakespeare, for instance, you have to think: 'Can 
I imagine myself doing this? What within me would support doing this? Can I 
actually imagine killing Duncan?' Well, I can certainly understand the motives, 
the confusions. And personally I know about guilt, and paranoia, and regret."

All parts, even Gandalf? "Well, aspects, most certainly. He likes going out. 
Likes laying down the law. I love both, on occasion, with… yes, benign 
affectionate tetchiness. I don't have Gandalf the White's certainty about 
everything." Perhaps, I suggest, because he doesn't echo his quasi-religious 
feel, having eschewed religion in this real world. "That is a part of it. What 
I do have is Gandalf the Grey's ability to worry about things. There's got to 
be some truth of you in all the best parts. And that's why I did enjoy it all 
so. That and, to be honest, the fact that I still get a bit starstruck. I can't 
believe my luck! I'm in a room with Billy Connolly, touching him, hugging him, 
and he's teaching me how to play the banjolele, which he gave me. Chatting to 
Stephen Fry, for free, and they're nice to me, think I have something to offer. 
And young people, too, offering me the time of day. What a business to be in, 
and to still be in!"

He gives a sonorous chortle that seems to rattle rafters; and there's genuine 
self-deprecation at his luck in finding himself in such company. I suspect that 
messrs Fry and Connolly – who grew up watching this man segue from gar- landed 
stage-thesp to tireless campaigner (Stonewall, women's and children's rights) 
to Hollywood catnip to that dreadful position for anyone with a fine remaining 
sense of mischief: being on the cusp of national-treasure status – were equally 
conscious of the company they were in.

But he wants briefly to be back with wizards. "Gandalf is trying to do good. 
And basically I'm on the side of people trying to make this world a better 
place. Rather than keep it as it was, or even imagining a golden future. But 
simply getting through life without hurting too many people." Are we in 
a better world than the one into which he was born? "Entirely better, 
personally. At least in the country we live in, there's an acceptance and a 
generosity and inclusiveness which has allowed us to accept alien cultures and 
learn from them. And attitudes to gay culture, and then disability, I hope more 
than momentarily. In so many ways better, and I am so glad."

He's late to return to his house guests, so courteously takes his leave, 
pausing to check with his manager about early Christmas bookings, cast an eye 
over table settings and compliment her on her looks, then bounce away 
dangerously fast down rickety stairs after a winning and grinning handshake. A 
rounded, grounded man, who seems determined to the end to pull out a few fresh 
stops, happy just to be given the chance, and maybe just blow a few more 
dragons after a few more pirate ships.

.
 