
Ian McKellen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ian-mckellen> has called for 
more plays to be broadcast on television, saying they have been lacking in 
recent years.

Speaking ahead of the broadcast of the BBC adaptation of The Dresser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/20/bbc-drama-adaptation-joseph-conrad-the-secret-agent>
, Ronald Harwood’s seminal 1980 play about an ageing actor and his devoted 
dresser during the second world war, McKellen said he hoped the BBC would take 
courage and bring back the one-off drama to screens.

“I can’t recommend plays on television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/20/tv-problem-theatre> enough” said 
McKellen. “I hope the BBC takes courage from this because of late there’s been 
a lack of theatre. In the past few years, we haven’t had the one-off play, and 
plays adapt better to television than they do to film.”

The Dresser, which boasts Anthony Hopkins in the role of actor Sir, Emily 
Watson as his long-suffering wife, Pussy, and McKellen as Norman his dresser, 
is at the centre of a pledge by the BBC director general, Tony Hall, to create 
moretheatre-focused programming on television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/24/critics-notebook-michael-billington>
.

The initiative hopes to build on the increasing popularity of live theatre 
screenings in cinemas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/may/06/effects-of-live-satellite-broadcasts-national-theatre-rsc>
, such as the National Theatre’s NT Live programme. The trend has also been 
embraced by ITV, who will broadcast live a new performance of classic musical 
The Sound Of Music as part of their Christmas schedule.

On television, plays such as The Dresser “benefit from close-ups which you 
don’t get in the theatre,” said McKellen. He also praised the accessibility of 
television and said he had been thrilled to be able to bring the role of 
Norman, “one of the great parts of the 20th century”, to new audiences as well 
as usual theatre-goers.

Colin Callender, executive producer on the The Dresser, also conceded that the 
“single drama on television is an endangered species”.

What's TV's problem with theatre?
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/20/tv-problem-theatre> 
He said: “The sort of writing you find in a play like The Dresser is 
increasingly rare in screenwriters and this is an example of something only the
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> can do, does do and will do. It’s 
glorious to see one of the pieces of great British theatre writing on the 
screen, with a cast you could never get if you revived this on the stage.”

However, Callender admitted they had originally hoped to revive The Dresser 
not on television but back in the theatre. Instead, the idea to put it onto the 
screen had come from Hopkins himself, who refuses to return to the world of 
theatre he abandoned in favour of Hollywood.

“We went to go meet Anthony [Hopkins] in Los Angeles at this hotel and as I 
was walking towards him, he shouted across the room ‘I’m not doing it on 
stage’,” Callender recounted.

“The play is important to him but he made a concrete decision to leave the 
theatre and to pursue his career as a movie star. I think in many ways this was 
him paying homage to his background … so he said he would love to do it for 
television. And all credit to the BBC because they said yes immediately.”

It also took some convincing to get playwright Harwood to agree to the 
television adaptation of his work as he wanted to see it revived only on the 
stage.

“It didn’t happen that way and then they put the pressure on me and I thought, 
oh screw it,” said Harwood, adding that he was “happy-ish” with the BBC version.
 