
There is an unusual quality to Portugal. The Portuguese have a word for part 
of it: saudade. It is for their longing, their sense of fatefulness, perhaps 
even their melancholy.

They are quite unlike their neighbours in Spain, and their fellow Latins. 
Their history has been a roller coaster of heroic and tragic proportions. A 
recent book about them, by Michael Page, is called The First Global Village, to 
convey a sense of the worldwide reach and tiny community that is Portugal.

The Portuguese are different and fascinating. And too few travellers to their 
country seem to get to know them, preferring, instead, to lounge in the sun of 
the Algarve. They are missing out, for our books can introduce you to some 
fascinating people, in houses that are sometimes astonishing.

Take Mary da Pureza O'Neill de Mello, for example. Those are just two of her 
names, but they hint at a rich history. Her cousin Hugo, a Catholic, who lives 
near Lisbon, would, should there ever be a call for a monarchy in Ulster, be 
invited to return as king. His father was even 'slippered' by the reigning 
(Protestant) O'Neills. Now how is that for a solution to the Irish question?

But I digress. On to Portugal and 20 of my favourite places in the Algarve and 
the Alentejo.

 The country code for Portugal is 00 351, which goes before the telephone 
numbers listed below. All prices are per night for two people sharing a room.

 Convento de Santo Antonio
 Rua de Santo Antonio 56, Tavira, Algarve.
 Tel: 281 321573; fax: 281 325632
 Doubles £69-£128 

 An inauspicious area, but seek out a tiny door in the ancient wooden gate_ it 
leads to a dazzling white convent surrounded by banana plants and a pool to 
laze by.

Inside is a Lusitanian feast of hand-crafted terracotta, rich alcobaca fabrics 
and carefully chosen paintings. The seven bedrooms vary in size and have a 
spiritual-like charm. The lounge and bar are just as special, and entirely 
candlelit at night. It is a peaceful place, and your host Isabel is a delight.

 Quinta da Lua 
 Bernardinheiro 1622-X, São Estevao, Tavira, Algarve.
 Tel/fax: 281 961070 
 Doubles from £55 

 Miguel and Vimal love looking after people and the food here is delicious. 
You stay in a two-storey addition to an old Algarve farmhouse, surrounded by 
orange trees, bougainvillaea, palms and a pool, with shaded verandas to the 
side. Inside is a blend of modern and traditional, serene bedrooms with white 
walls and big beds. It is delightful to find such a place so close to the beach.

 Pedras Verdes Guesthouse 
 Sítio da Boavista, CP 658 T Quelfes, Olhao, Algarve. 
 Tel/fax: 289 721343 
 Doubles £55-£68 

 The house is low, in North African style, surrounded by carob and olive 
trees. The bedrooms are sensational: baroque, African, Asiatic, Arabic, Zen. 
There are plain walls, minimalist decor and funky walk-in showers with pebbled 
and wooden floors. Muriel and André love sharing this beautiful, restful place 
with their guests, who can relax and dream by the divine pool or under the 
canvas canopy. And don't miss dinner - it will be French and delicious.

 Casa Tres Palmeiras
 Apartado 84, Portimão, Algarve.
 Tel: 282 401275; fax: 282 401029
 Doubles £134 

 From the casa's perch the view is a symphony of sea, rock and sky. The house 
was built in the Sixties, and the Zen design still feels modern. Simple arches 
give welcome shade to five lovely guest rooms that have everything you might 
expect for the price, and lead straight to a terrace and sea-water pool. 
Entertaining comes naturally to host Dolly, a Brazilian. A path leads from the 
house straight to the beach; get up early and you could have it to yourself.

 Quinta das Achadas 
 Estrada da Barragem, Odiáxere, Lagos, Algarve. 
 Tel: 282 798425; fax: 282 799162 
 Doubles £48-£62 
 Apartment £65-£110 

 One of the most idyllic B&Bs of the Algarve, with a luscious subtropical 
garden, saltwater pool and Jacuzzi. The bedrooms, each with their own small 
terrace, are Algarve-rustic: wooden ceilings, modern art on white walls and 
delicious country antiques. Bathrooms have Santa Katerina tiles. Dinners are 
especially good and former restaurateurs Jill and Julio combine professionalism 
with a warm, human touch. Alternatively, you can cater for yourself in the 
apartment.

 Quintinha de Nova 
 Barrocal, near Messines, Algarve. 
 Tel, via UK number: 01273 747811; fax: 01273 329344 
 Sleeps eight for £525-£1,596 per week 

 A rambling Algarve farmhouse with a large walled garden, flower-filled 
terrace, pool, barbecue, fragrant herbs and shady spots - marvellous for 
families. The dining room was once the cow barn, now the old mangers hold 
Portuguese and English crockery. Delightful Maria lives next door and looks 
after the place, popping in daily for a chat and to feed the two cats. The 
countryside enfolds you, yet you are close to Faro.

 Quinta do Barranco da Estrada 
 Santa Clara a Velha, Alentejo. 
 Tel: 283 933065; fax 283 933066 
 Doubles £62-£100 

 Ideal if you love wild beauty and are looking to escape. In spring the 
lakeside flowers will have you in raptures. Lulu and Frank renovated the 
original low house, then added a row of guest rooms, which are cool and 
uncluttered, with their own terraces and stupendous views. The combined lounge, 
dining room and bar embraces Portuguese and English styles and a sinuous path 
cuts down through verdant terraces to the jetty, where you can fish for 
crayfish or sail on the vast, silent lake.

 Cerro da Fontinha 
 Turismo da Natuereza Lda, Brejao, São Teotonio, Alentejo. 
 Tel/fax: 282 949083 
 Self-catering £62-£110 for two nights 

 Miguel has added original, quirky touches to these two whitewashed cottages. 
The showers have stone bases and terracotta surrounds; pebbles embedded in 
walls make unusual hooks for towels and the kitchen work surfaces curve. There 
are alcoves for oil and vinegar, bold stripes and cheerful gingham. You have a 
eucalyptus wood for shade, a little lake, restaurants and a beach nearby. Hire 
a bike to get there. Both astonishing and inspiring.

 Monte Fonte Nova da Telha 
 Telha, Teotonio, Alentejo.
 Tel: 283 959159
 Doubles £41-£55 

 Bold wall hangings, wicker chairs, Moroccan lamps and rugs: much-travelled 
Xica has collected some ravishing pieces for her farmhouse B&B. The three 
bedrooms are generous and light, the colours glow. This is a deeply relaxing 
place to stay, with cacti in the garden, a barbecue and a pool. Xica only 
occasionally cooks dinner but seafood restaurants line the coast. Dunes, coves 
and beaches are nearby.

 Castelo de Milfontes 
 Vila Nova de Milfontes, Alentejo. 
 Tel: 283 998231; fax: 283 997122 
 Half-board for two £107-£114 

 Meet your fellow guests at dinner as well as Ema, who presides gracefully. It 
is an occasion to dress for. The seven rooms have views that challenge one's 
descriptive powers. The fort dates from the sixteenth century and the furniture 
matches the castle: an old writing desk, an Italian baldequin antique bed and 
original oils. There's a disco across the bay in summer, but a night here is 
worth small sacrifices.

 Monte do Chora Cascas 
 Turismo Rural, Apartado 296, Montemor-o-Novo, Alentejo.
 Tel: 266 899690; fax: 266 899699
 Doubles £52-£79 

 Elegant yet unstuffy, Sónia is an architect and has designed the place with 
panache. Her bedrooms have wooden ceilings, lavish bathrooms and the best 
linen. Breakfasts are generous and delicious, with more than 20 types of tea. 
There are plump sofas, a baby grand and, outside, a courtyard with designer 
sunshades by the paddling pool, tennis and a tree house. Borrow bikes to 
discover the open spaces.

 Monte Saraz 
 Horta dos Révoredos, Barrada, Monsaraz, Alentejo.
 Tel: 266 557385; fax: 266 557485 
 Self-catering from £52 for two 

 Down on the plain below medieval Monsaraz is this cluster of farm buildings 
among gnarled old olive trees. The gardens are enticing and merge seamlessly 
with orchards and groves; the pool with wrap-around colonnade has a Roman feel. 
The three cottages have a simple, restful mix of whitewashed walls with some 
antiques. A bewitching village above, and only the hoot of an owl to break the 
silence at night.

 Casa de Terena
 Rua Direita 45, Terena-Alandroal, Alentejo
 Tel: 268 459132; fax: 268 459155
 Doubles £48 

 Conchita and António were inspired to move from Lisbon to nurse this grand 
old village house back to life. From the inner patio a staircase sweeps you up 
to the rooms with wrought-iron bedsteads, Alentejo rugs, reservoir views and 
ceiling fans to cool things down. The sitting room, with vaulted wafer-brick 
ceiling, encourages late-night conversation. The tranquillity and beauty of 
Terena and your hosts' enthusiasm make the journey worthwhile. Ornithologists, 
bring your binoculars.

 Hotel Convento de Sao Paulo
 Aldeia da Serra, Redondo, Alentejo. 
 Tel: 266 989160; fax: 266 989167 
 Doubles £124 - £134 

This is superb in all respects with an atmosphere of deep spirituality and 
calm. The hand-painted tiles that decorate the chapel, corridors and gardens 
come from the largest such collection in Europe. A red carpet sweeps you along 
to the many bedrooms, each with a white marble bathroom and an uncluttered 
space. Great vaulted ceilings do not overwhelm the dining room, where modern 
art lends a light note. Relax on the tiled patio by the tree-shaded pool or 
walk through the wooded slopes of the estate.

 Quinta da Bela Vista
 Póvoa e Meadas, Alentejo.
 Tel: 245 968125; fax 245 968132
 Doubles £52. Self-catering sleeps four-six for £85-£115 

 The gentle cork hills, the long vistas and sense of space touch you on a 
deeper level. Dona Maria's family has been here since the Twenties, so this is 
very much a family home. Books and a card table create a mood of intimacy, 
while vast reception rooms, chandeliers and a maid evoke one of privilege. All 
four bedrooms are large and quiet. Come for the quinta's own meat, eggs, wine 
and aguardente brandy. Families love the games room, pool, tennis, horses and 
bikes. You can self-cater too.

 Tapada do Barreiro
 Carreiras, Castelo de Vide, Portalegre, Alentejo. 
 Tel/fax: 268 629899
 Sleeps six for £275-£345 per two adults, per week 

 This charming three-bedroom farmhouse sits high above a village in the heart 
of the Sao Mamede Park. There are fresh, white walls, new terracotta floors, 
ancient beamed ceilings and French windows to the terrace. The bedrooms are a 
good size, two with hillside views. The garden, with its tiny dip pool, leads 
to olive groves. All you could wish for is here: shop, bar, restaurant, lake, 
and Peter, the English owner, who lives nearby, to take you birdwatching.

 Quinta da Alfarrobeira 
 Estrada do Palmares, Odiáxere, Lagos, Algarve.
 Tel: 282 798424; fax: 282 799630
 Double £35-£50. Guest house £41-£96 

 For the young family from the Netherlands it was love at first sight. The 
quinta stands on a hill just inland from the coast in six hectares of old fruit 
groves: you might be fired by similar dreams. Choose B&B, or self-catering in 
one of two guest houses. The rooms are light and airy, with antique furnishings 
collected on European travels. Come for private terraces, the exceptionally 
kind hosts and walks to the sea.

 Quinta das Flores
 Vale de Dega, Mexilhoeira Grande, Figueira, Portimão, Algarve.
 Tel: 282 968649; fax: 282 969293
 Double £45
 Cottage sleeps four for £460 per week 

 Gaelle and David, who farmed in Africa, are also landscape gardener and 
painter. The sculpted gardens have beautiful lawns, palms and shady spots, plus 
a tennis court, pool, barbecue and bar. The elegant interior has a colonial 
feel, thanks partly to Gaelle's vibrant landscapes of Africa. The galleried 
sitting room is warm with terracotta floors strewn with rugs. Gaelle prepares 
everything, from Thai curries to Portuguese food. You can also choose 
self-catering.

 Cortinhas
 Vale Bejinha, 2581 Cx. S. Luis, Odemira/Milfontes, Alentejo.
 Tel: 283 976076
 Sleeps four-six for £290-£380 per week 

 The inside of Cortinhas is a delightful surprise. The simple, limewashed 
house is larger than expected, opening onto a lush terrace and a veranda with 
views. The mood is light and sunny; the large kitchen/living room is 
well-equipped. The double bedroom has a patchwork quilt and the twin a painted 
wood ceiling. Flowers peep in through every window so that you hardly know 
where the house ends and the garden begins. There is a splash pool close by, a 
small lake, and the owner to guide you to the best walks for birdwatchers.

 Casa de Peixinhos
 Vila Viçosa, Alentejo.
 Tel: 268 980472; fax: 268 881348 Doubles from £68 

 Like vintage port, this is a rich, mellow experience, the fruit of time and 
patience. The aristocratic house is superbly maintained and, though much of the 
decor is period, everything sparkles. Leading off the handsome sitting room is 
the dining room, with rich mouldings, gold drapes, chandeliers and beautifully 
arranged flowers. Dress for a traditional Alentejo dinner. The bedrooms are 
among the loveliest we have come across, each one different. A regal house.
 