
Following my posting last week, "London Live's experience proves that local TV 
is a dead duck" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jul/25/local-tv-london>, I 
ended up in a debate yesterday with a local TV enthusiaston Radio 4's Media 
Show. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04brn4n>

Well, Nigel Dacre isn't so much an enthusiast as a committed operator. He is 
on the board ofNotts TV <http://www.nottstv.com/> and, since May last year, has 
chaired the Local TV Network. <http://www.nottstv.com/news?id=10> 

He was anything but bullish about the enterprise, conceding that it is 
difficult to build a working business model. "There are a lot of challenges 
facing the sector," he said.

But he remains convinced that it will work and will have "enormous benefits" 
despite the problems faced by London Live, which hasasked Ofcom to reduce its 
commitment to local programming. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/25/london-live-ofcom-slash-local-programming>

By chance, news broke that morning of the latest two local TV licences being 
granted by Ofcom to Maidstone and Basingstoke. 
<http://www.wired-gov.net/wg/news.nsf/articles/Ofcom+awards+Maidstone+and+Basingstoke+local+TV+licences+31072014080500?open>

The winner at Basingstoke is part of the That's TV network, which has secured 
five other licences, for Guildford, Reading, Salisbury, Oxford and Southampton.

Much more interesting is the Maidstone victor, KMTV, a joint operation between 
Kent's leading newspaper publisher,the KM Group 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/km-group/>, and Kent university. 

It's interesting because it will be a real test for the local TV initiative. 
Firstly, it will serve two towns, Maidstone and Tonbridge, so it can be more 
genuinely "local" than channels serving cities, such as London Live, Notts TV 
and Archant'sMustard TV <http://www.mustardtv.co.uk/> in Norwich.

Secondly, the KM Group has broadcasting experience through its radio outlets 
and already has good facilities. Thirdly, it is deeply embedded in the county, 
with a range of well-supported weekly papers and immediate local recognition 
through its Kent Messenger title.

I am not sure the family-owned KM Group really wanted to invest in local TV 
but, like other newspaper publishers faced with the possibility of new 
competition on its patch, it felt it couldn't afford to turn its back on the 
venture.

It is fortunate also in teaming up with a university that not only has a 
journalism department but one headed by a man with considerable experience as a
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> reporter and editor, Tim Luckhurst. 
He will chair KMTV's editorial board.

KM Group's chair, Geraldine Allinson, has registered her delight at securing 
the licence, viewing it as"a natural extension to our publishing activities." 
<http://www.holdthefrontpage.co.uk/2014/news/regional-group-makes-headlines-on-tv-news/>

When I interviewed her last year she was exercised by the BBC "consistently 
treating us like a major competitor." 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/16/km-group-newspaper-competition> 
She added: "We need to have far a more symbiotic, mutually beneficial, 
relationship with the public service broadcaster."

That hope will surely be dashed now because the BBC will view KMTV as a 
competitor. But, if anyone can make local TV work, then it is the KM Group.

It is certainly more viable that the metropolitan channels, so - although I 
remain a sceptic - I look forward to its launch as the ultimate test of the 
initiative.
 