
Has Jeremy Corbyn got a campaign song yet? He’s certainly got one in my head. 
I cannot catch sight of theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
leadership frontrunner on the airwaves or in print without reflexively striking 
up that majestic chorus: “Springtime for Hitler and Germany! Winter for Poland 
and France!”

For lovers of a certain stripe of merriment, there hasn’t been a hit like 
Corbyn since Mel Brooks’s eponymous producers took “a gay romp with Adolf and 
Eva at Berchtesgaden” to Broadway and saw it become a smash. The best laid 
plans, and so on.

Before we go on, and for the benefit of younger readers already crafting death 
threats for the failure to precede the above with a SPOILER ALERT, I’m not 
calling Jeremy a Nazi. In fact, I’m not calling him anything at all, other than 
a very nice man currently threatening to sweep the board at the political Tony 
awards.

The titanic power struggle at the top of the Blair years sucked the oxygen out 
of the nursery

My synthesised concern is instead reserved for the notional Bialystock and 
Bloom in this comically unexpected scenario. We can argue about who would take 
which role, but one thing is beyond debate: if New Labour impresarios Peter 
Mandelson andAlastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> had sat down the 
morning after the general election defeat and attempted to pick the most 
cast-iron, sure-fire failure of a candidate to make sure they got what they 
wanted out of the leadership election, then I can think only that they would 
have alighted on Corbyn. In their eyes, he would have been the equivalent of 
Springtime for Hitler – a man so wantonly, provocatively at odds with 
everything they believed experience had taught them, that his campaign could 
only fail. And not take its time to do so. “Wow,” marvels Bloom, as he reads 
the script. “This play wouldn’t run a night.” “A night?” scoffs Bialystock. 
“Are you kidding? This play’s guaranteed to close on page four!”

I’m not sure which page of this riotous romp we’re on now, but we’re certainly 
past the interval scene in which theatregoers spill into the bar Bialystock and 
Bloom are in and – to their utter horror and disbelief – begin to rave about 
the show.

You have to laugh – unless you are a Blairite terminally opposed to 
self-reflection, in which case you have to get very cross indeed. Which only 
fans the flames of amusement for many of us. In their half-arsed attempts to 
probe why any of this madness is happening, you don’t see too many arch 
defenders of Blairism imagining that what they are watching is perhaps a 
function of its failings. Those doling out the reproaches may care to look 
closer to home, certainly when they survey a field of – drumroll, please! – 
Andy Burnham, Yvette Cooper and Liz Kendall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Flabour-leadership-blairism-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438360033980%2Fe58902c1-bd37-43f4-8e8a-b522718104a3-1020x762.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20Blairism%20was%20the%20Man%20Utd%20of%20politics%2C%20why%20is%20its%20youth%20policy%20so%20rubbish%3F%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Flabour-leadership-blairism-manchester-united%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20Blairism%20was%20the%20Man%20Utd%20of%20politics%2C%20why%20is%20its%20youth%20policy%20so%20rubbish%3F%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Flabour-leadership-blairism-manchester-united%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438360033980%2Fe58902c1-bd37-43f4-8e8a-b522718104a3-1020x762.jpeg>
 Tony Blair parries a shot as Alex Ferguson takes cover. Photograph: Fiona 
Hanson/PA 
Put simply, if Blairism was so brilliantly done, then where was its second 
great team? The Blairites can rightly bang on about their trophies, but only 
meticulous rebuilding was ever going to win them any more, as Alex Ferguson 
produced three great teams at Manchester United. I’m sure New Labour’s finest 
will forgive me for considering them in comparison to Fergie’s United – after 
all, during their intertwined years, the Blair administration was always at 
pains to suggest that the relationship between that club and themselves was 
positively symbiotic.

A regular at conferences, Ferguson was feted and flattered by Blair, who asked 
him for advice on dealing with Brown (ignored), while Campbell used to tell 
people proudly that Ferguson was in the habit of phoning his then pre-teen son 
for tactical chats, apparently valuing the uncluttered, pure way in which a kid 
saw the game. (Yup. For that and the peerage, anyway.) Campbell once gave 
FergusonTeam of Rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/28/abraham-lincoln-review>, Doris 
Kearns Goodwin’s brilliant book on Abraham Lincoln’s skill in managing a 
cabinet of huge figures and drawing on their skills. Ferguson lapped it up – 
but was perhaps less in need of its lessons than Alastair’s own boss.

Islamic State beware – it’s Cameron’s full-spectrum renaming campaign | Marina 
Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/03/islamic-state-cameron-full-spectrum-bbc>
Today, Blairites and non-Blairites may survey the current crop of centre-right 
candidates and ask: what on earth happened to Blairism’s youth policy? Did it 
even have one? I don’t want to go out on a limb here, but I can’t see Burnham 
or Kendall or Cooper or any of their generation coming together effectively on 
whatever constitutes the political equivalent of that night in the Nou Camp 
(the triumph of Ferguson’s second great team).

And please – don’t even start me on putative super-sub David Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidmiliband>. OK, start me on him: he’s 
wetter and less appealing than that bit of paper at the bottom of a packet of 
mince. And somehow even more pointless, which is really something. The idea he 
is some great lost Labour leader is more hallucinogenically ludicrous than the 
premise of a certain aforementioned Broadway show, and I literally think Ed 
Miliband would have been a better leader than him. Which is also something, as 
hardly needs pointing out.

Anyhow. It says so much about the Blairite flame that, for all their confected 
differences in opinion, there are three people in this leadership election who 
appear unable to communicate with other human beings. The legacy of the 
obsessive media management of those years is laid bare: it is no longer android 
backbench MPs who appear to have no discernible views, but senior figures 
campaigning for the leadership. To move past Lady Bracknell, this may not be 
considered unfortunate. It may not even be considered merely careless. It is a 
failure of the thing itself.

The titanic power struggle at the top of the Blair years sucked the oxygen out 
of the nursery, and the next generation withered. At times they were forcibly 
withered by the reigning egomaniacs, who either never heard that great leaders 
bring on and surround themselves with great potential successors, or did not 
care to learn it.A friend recalls being in the party conference hall one year 
when Mo Mowlam made a speech and was given a rapturous standing ovation. On the 
platform, the strength of the love in the room caught Blair visibly by 
surprise, and – whaddya know? – the briefing against Mowlam began with little 
delay.

If the non-favourites in the leadership race want what Spinal Tap’s David St 
Hubbins memorably described as “too much fucking perspective”, they should 
consider the uncomfortable fact that they’re not currently losing to Clement 
Attlee; they’re losing to Jeremy Corbyn. If Blairism was essentially a 
pragmatic sort of progressivism, you’d have thought it would have been 
pragmatic and progressive enough to perpetuate itself better.
 