
The health and safety inspectors are coming for contemporary art. This stuff 
is dangerous, people! All those spiralling slides, dodgy TV monitors reused by 
video artists, the installations made with who knows what flammable substances 
– they all have to go.

Damien Hirst's preserved carcasses leaked formaldehyde gas, study claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/damien-hirsts-preserved-carcasses-leaked-formaldehyde-gas-study-claims>
A supposedly shocking report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/damien-hirsts-preserved-carcasses-leaked-formaldehyde-gas-study-claims>
 on the hidden dangers of modern art has been published. DuringDamien Hirst’s 
retrospective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/mar/03/damian-hirst-famous-art>
 at Tate Modern in 2012, a team of researchers monitored his celebrated 
vitrines containing dead animals (and pieces thereof) and found: “The tanks are 
surrounded by formaldehyde fumes, constantly exuded in the atmosphere (likely 
via the sealant), reaching levels of 5ppm (parts per million), one order of 
magnitude higher than the 0.5ppm limit set up by legislation.”

Before accepting this result at face value, let’s consider how it was 
obtained. The test was not carried out in collaboration with the gallery or the 
artist, who might have used such information to correct the problem. Instead, 
researchers at the Polytechnic University of Milan posed as members of the 
public while secretly using electronic wristbands and modified iPhones to 
monitor formaldehyde levels. They have published their research only now, four 
years later, in a journal of the Royal Society of Chemistry.

What – or who – is this research for? The journal Analytical Methods 
<http://www.rsc.org/journals-books-databases/about-journals/analytical-methods/>
 is getting publicity for supposedly exposing Hirst and Tate Modern. And the 
implication? That modern art is getting away with slow, chemical murder, and we 
need to be more aware of the dangers. Fat chance.

People visit galleries such as Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> to be surprised and 
amazed by wild and crazy art. A bit of physical danger never put anyone off – 
it only adds to the thrill.

When some visitors fell into the huge crack cut into the floor 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/7112960.stm> of Tate Modern’s Turbine 
Hall by Doris Salcedo inher 2007 artwork Shibboleth 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/salcedo-shibboleth-i-p20334>, it was not 
closed down. It became even better attended. People actually came along in the 
hope of falling in, only to find it was quite hard to do so.

Safety fears did, however, cause problems for Ai Weiwei’s Sunflower Seeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/11/tate-modern-sunflower-seeds-review>
 at the same venue. But, even after the floor was roped off because of fears 
about toxic lead dust in the air, people still flocked to see the 100m 
porcelain seeds from the safety of the Turbine Hall bridge. No one was angry 
with Ai Weiwei for this mistake – on the contrary, his Tate installation helped 
make him a global star.

The point is that we don’t expect caution, common sense or even technical 
competence from artists - we expect imagination. In a world of dull rules and 
miserable anxieties, art is a holiday, a carnival. It is the last great 
adventure of technocratic modern societies. Artists are allowed – no, they are 
expected – to break the rules, and that includes safety rules.

No doubt there were very sensible inspections of Carsten Holler’s spiralling 
slides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jan/05/super-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk>
, but no one in the queue asked to see a safety certificate before taking the 
plunge. Nor did the deliberate rickety atmosphere ofBanksy’s Dismaland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/20/banksy-dismaland-amusements-anarchism-weston-super-mare>
 put the crowds off its vaguely sinister rides. And if anyone did get a 
splinter they probably had a good laugh about it.

We allow artists to endanger us, perhaps, because they are even more likely to 
endanger themselves. Paint can be poisonous and sculpture can kill: the French 
artist Aristide Mailloldied in 1944 
<http://www.sladmore.com/Maillol-Aristide-DesktopDefault.aspx?tabid=45&tabindex=44&artistid=97689>
 when his car crashed and he was crushed by a statue in the back. As 
20th-century art became ever more experimental, the risks artists took got more 
spectacular: they have been shot and exposed to fire, and the conceptual artist 
Bas Jan Adervanished in 1975 <http://www.sudsandsoda.com/notes/ader.html> while 
trying to cross the Atlantic in a small sailing boat, as art.

With all the risk and courage artists display, the least they can expect is a 
bit of guts from audiences in return. The truth is that a whiff of formaldehyde 
in the air can only add to art’s appeal. And now we can all say: I visited the
Damien Hirst <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/damienhirst> show in 
2012 and lived to tell the tale.
 