
Imagine Rebekah Brooks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade> 
roller-skating through the Sun’s newsroom as editorial staff, having been told 
to avoid making eye contact, duck below their desks.

And conjure up this image: a wheelchair-bound Rupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> locked in a room by Wendi 
Deng as she spends time with guitar-strumming Tony Blair.

Closer to the home of this blog, envision the former Guardian editor Alan 
Rusbridger <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> leading a news 
conference sing-song of the newspaper’s anthem with a refrain about swinging to 
the left.

These are just three of the memorable scenes from a wonderful TV satire, Red 
Top, to be screened later this month.


It’s a glorious, irreverent post-hacking lampoon, a fantasy set in the 1970s 
with flairs, moustaches and disco music, that tells the story of Rebekah, an 
ingenue from the north of England who, having accidentally become chief 
executive of News International, gets embroiled (innocently of course) in a 
scandal.

At two previews, I witnessed audiences laughing aloud, and often, at the 
unfolding of the surreal plot and the hysterical portrayals of the main 
characters.

Conceived and written by Peter Richardson - with co-writers Pete Richens and 
Brigit Grant - it is his latestComic Strip 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Comic_Strip> presentation.

Maxine Peake stars as the beguiling Brooks, the eponymous red-top, and there 
are a clutch of brilliant cameo performances. They includeHarry Enfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/harry-enfield> as Ross Kemp, Brooks’s 
ex-husband; Stephen Mangan as Blair; Russell Tovey as Andy Coulson; Nigel 
Planer as Murdoch; and Eleanor Matsuura as Wendi.


Look out also for Johnny Vegas <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnny-vegas>
, Alexei Sayle, Dominic Tighe (as a subservient David Cameron) and a double 
role by John Sessions.

Richardson describes Red Top as a “Boogie Nights-style parallel universe with 
a disco soundtrack.” And I agree with Gold’s commissioning editor, Simon 
Lupton, who said: “The script is wonderfully hilarious and playful.”

Red Top is due to be shown on UKTV’s channel, Gold, at 10pm on 20 January. It 
is not to be missed.
 