
The North Sea blows up King Street and through my overcoat. I'm in South 
Shields, where my grandmother lives, and we're queueing outside Dickson's Pork 
Shop, waiting for a saveloy dip. The tiny shop is a centre of frenetic 
activity. A gang of 10 women snap "Next!" with controlled efficiency, sucking 
us inside, where we are overwhelmed by steam and the singing murmur of Geordie 
gossip. A big-eyed baby in a pushchair looks up at me, holding a huge sausage 
like a lollipop in his fists. I'm asked what I want on my dip. "Everything, 
please." "Everything" means that the soft roll is spread with strong mustard, 
pease pudding and soft sage and onion stuffing, to make a savoury setting for 
the smoked sausage. Then comes the dip. An inch and a half of bun sticks out of 
the paper wrapper and is dunked into the boiling sausage water. It is immediate 
and reassuring, rich and revitalising. It's hot and in my hand. I like fast 
food this way.

It tastes as if it could have come from Hamburg or some other German city. 
Indirectly, it did. In the late 19th century, German immigrants settled in the 
north-east and in the process of British naturalisation were transformed from 
Schweinmetzgers into pork butchers. My grandparents remember shops owned by 
Dietz, Siebe and Dummler families, which aren't typical Geordie names. During 
the first and particularly the second world wars, these families were pilloried 
and bullied as jingoism swept the nation. Just as the Battenburgs became 
Mountbattens, those that didn't go out of business anglicised their names. 
Although the names disappeared, the flavours remained and became, with fish and 
chips, the local fast food.

Along with stottie cake, the soft open-textured bread which looks like a large 
muffin, pease pudding is one of the reasons I look forward to visiting the 
north-east. You can get it in cans elsewhere in the country, but it's grey and 
bland. The best pease pudding is made by filling a muslin bag with yellow split 
peas, then boiling them beside a leg of ham. As they swell, they are crushed 
against the bag's sides. The smooth, pureed texture is similar to hummus. As a 
kid, I used to visit my other grandmother in Greece. There wasn't much in 
common between the grannies' diets, but they both ate pease pudding. The Greek 
version, fava, is also a form of fast food, but in a different way. It is the 
staple of the week of fasting that precedes Christmas in the Orthodox Church. 
The only real difference is that my Geordie grandmother doesn't garnish her 
pease pudding with garlic and olive oil.

Â· Alex Kapranos is the lead singer of Franz Ferdinand.
 