
Last week on the Reading group, a contributor called MythicalMagpie wrote 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/28958865>: "I think you 
could write an entire essay on the fact that while Meursault is apparently 
meant to be telling the story, it is really Camus who is guiding his pen. I 
find Meursault an impossible human being and wonder how much of Camus leaked in 
to fill the gaps, including perhaps some of the French national's attitude to 
indigenous Algerians."

So far this month we've skirted round the difficult issue of colonialism and 
The Outsider. Now, I think we should face it, but warily. It's too important to 
ignore when we are marking the 100th anniversary of Camus's birth and 
discussing The Outsider as a historical artefact – and when, even though so 
much time has passed, plenty of people still judge Camus on the basis of his 
reaction to the crisis inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> in 
the 1950s and 1960s.

As far as The Outsider goes, the most obvious point is that Meursault kills an 
"Arab". The French protagonist and his friends all have names: the man he 
kills, and his friends, do not. Since we have so far looked at the book's 
qualities as a novel, the first thing to say is that it is an effective 
literary device. It adds a layer of distancing and strangeness, a feeling that 
Meursault's fate is decided by something outside his usual realm of experience. 
The lack of name is also a reflection of Meursault's detachment, his lack of 
curiosity, his coldness. It adds to the impression that his trial by the French 
state is an intellectual problem as well as a human one. This trial, meanwhile, 
is able to play out the way it does because the man is an Arab and so 
dehumanised. It doesn't seem so surprising that the French state focuses more 
on Meursault's behaviour at his mother's funeral than the dead man on the beach.

Yet although artifice is effective, it sits uncomfortably with reality. In 
1970, the Irish politician and academic Conor Cruise O'Brien wrote that the 
trial is "a myth, the myth of French Algeria". A court in French Algeria simply 
would not work that way. It would not have "condemned a European to death for 
shooting an Arab… [and] by suggesting that the court is impartial between Arab 
and Frenchman, the novel implicitly denies the colonial reality."

I'm not so sure that the court is impartial, but the wider point stands. It's 
worth acknowledging at least that this is fiction and makes no pretence 
otherwise. The trial would not have happened in the same way had Meursault 
killed a Frenchman. Commenting on an earlier Reading group post,TheOrbys wrote 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/28962854> that Camus 
"deliberately" avoided including realistic legal proceedings:

"Such a trial in France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> was very 
implausible - no police testimony, no real background on Raymond, no 
established provenance for the gun, etc."

Yet TheOrbys too has issues with the set-up in the novel::

"It's a bit ugly though since unlike, say, To Kill a Mockingbird, the novel 
does not seem to have any qualms about social injustice."

I worry here that we are in danger of mistaking the narrator for Camus. 
Doesn't the book in fact highlight a social injustice? It's very difficult to 
imagine someone today writing a novel in which only the Europeans are granted 
the dignity of names. But if that novel were written, wouldn't we assume that 
the author was making some kind of point? Is it right to assume that Camus 
wasn't? Could we even take the failure to name the Arab as a deliberate attempt 
to highlight a problem in Algeria?

I can't answer those questions directly. But I can say that Camus' position on 
Algeria is complicated and nuanced.

His most famous quote about the struggle for independence is a plea for peace: 
"People are now planting bombs in the tramways of Algiers. My mother might be 
on one of those tramways. If that is justice, then I prefer my mother."

Plenty have seen that too as a defence of the French state. It's notable that 
there have been few celebrations of Camus' life and death by the authorities in 
his native Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/28/albert-camus-algeria-anniversary-row>
. Yet we do Camus an injustice if we present him as an old-fashioned colonial 
oppressor. The French journalist Jean Daniel (also born French in Algeria) said 
that because of his humble upbringing, Camus was unable to "consider himself 
the inheritor of a long history of colonial oppression. He is humiliated, 
oppressed, exploited like the other little poor people."

It's also worth noting that Camus was writing in sympathy with the Arab 
population in Algeria even before the second world war. After the war, he 
stridently denounced France's refusal to honour promises to grant citizenship 
and equal rights to all Arabs in Algeria and warned presciently: "if you are 
unwilling to change quickly enough, you lose control of the situation." He also 
wrote: "We must convince ourselves that in northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> as elsewhere, we will preserve 
nothing that is French unless we preserve justice as well."

When the war of independence broke out, his position was invidious. He did not 
want to see his 1.2 million compatriots expelled from their Algerian home. He 
did not want to see civilians attacked. Nor did he want to see the French state 
murder and torture those fighting for independence. As his daughter Catherine 
Camus wrote in her moving foreword to the English edition of The First Man, he 
did not believe that "the ends justify the means", and that left him isolated 
from both the left and the right in France, from the French and Arab 
populations in Algeria. He was isolated and roundly condemned. But as his 
daughter also writes, more recently people have come to see that he may not 
have been "so wrong". She held back publication of the Third Man, Camus' 
account of his life in Algeria, until the mid-1990s because she feared the 
reception it received would be so negative while the wounds of the independence 
struggle were still fresh. The healing power of time granted it a largely 
rapturous reception. Even in Algeria, there have been calls to rehabilitate 
Camus. "It's a battle that's of interest only to the generation that is 50 or 
more," sociologist Abdenasser Djabi told the French daily Le Monde on the 50th 
anniversary of Camus' death. "Young people aren't familiar with Camus." I found 
that quote in aGuardian article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/28/albert-camus-algeria-anniversary-row>
 in which Sofiane Hadjadj, one of the heads of the publishing houseEditions 
Barzakh 
<http://www.editionsbarzakh.dz/index.php?option=com_contact&view=contact&id=1&Itemid=14>
 in Algiers, also notes: "IfMohammed Dib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/may/10/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
,Kateb Yacine <http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/kateb.htm> and Assia Djebar 
<http://voices.cla.umn.edu/artistpages/djebarAssia.php> are the founding 
fathers of Algerian literature post-independence, Camus remains part of our 
cultural heritage with the same claim as St Augustine. Camus is for me quite 
clearly an Algerian writer. He understood the reality of Algerian society. Its 
misery."

This quote provokes another series of questions. I think there's a danger of 
underestimating Camus, and of oversimplifying his attitude to the "Arab" in The 
Outsider. There is no easy answer about how we should feel about the 
colonialism in the novel. But if we do agree that there are things we cannot 
accept, does that mean we should condemn the novel, or does it just add to its 
interest as a historical artefact? So far, everyone on the Reading group has 
been very accepting, but when Geoff Dyer wrote a short and very sweet
appreciation of Camus and The Plague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/01/hero-camus-geoff-dyer> a few 
weeks ago, a few commenters took umbrage at Camus' depiction of "France's 
colonialist sins". I didn't buy the arguments on that page, but that isn't the 
only reason they seemed odd. I started to wonder if we should condemn Camus for 
failing to live up to our 21st-century expectations. No one, for instance, 
damns Apuleius for failing to condemn the Roman oppressor in Numidia. Is there 
a statute of limitations on literature?

• On a very different note, a whole new set of questions. I'm delighted to say 
that I'm going to be putting a few email queries toSandra Smith 
<http://www.varsity.co.uk/news/1830>a, the translator of the latest Penguin 
edition of The Outsider. If there's something you'd like to ask her, post it on 
the forum here and I'll do my best to include it.
 