
If you are looking for a documentary film-maker who can link the colour 
revolutions of eastern Europe to the communes of California – via the botanist 
Arthur Tansley, Field Marshal Jan Smuts, Jay Forrester, Ayn Rand, cybernetics, 
and machine theory – then Adam Curtis is your man. Curtis aims each of his 
series at a well-defined target, even if it turns out to be a somewhat 
idiosyncratic one. InThe Century of the Self 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UcYBSXgtmKQ> (2002) it was how Freud's theories 
were used as a means of control in an age of mass democracy. InThe Power of 
Nightmares <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qk1WkmioQvA> (2004) it was the 
deadly symbiosis of Leo Strauss's neoconservatism and Islamic jihadism. In his 
current series,All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/adamcurtis/2011/05/all_watched_over_by_machines_o.html>
, the target is the illusion that nature is self-balancing, and how machines 
make us believe in a stable world. You don't have to be convinced by every link 
in the chain to find this grand, author-driven intellectual tourism 
stimulating. The colour revolutions of Ukraine, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan were not 
utopian projects. Just look at the leaders they threw up and the forces backing 
them. Curtis's scripts are full of sentences like: "This is the story of the 
rise of the dream of the self-organising system and the strange machine fantasy 
that underpins it." Curtis is not afraid to spread his canvas wide, but where 
he succeeds he grounds a familiar narrative of catastrophe in an equally 
disaster- prone history of ideas. The collage of archival film is rich. This is 
documentary as it was before the arrival of reality TV – provocative.
 