
Do you remember the fox? Not just any fox, this one is a sage; the one that 
reveals the truth to the Little Prince, who reveals it to the pilot, who 
reveals it to us, the readers. As he says goodbye to his friend, the fox tells 
the Little Prince, “Here is my secret. It’s quite simple: One sees clearly only 
with the heart. Anything essential is invisible to the eyes.” When as a child I 
first heard my father read meThe Little Prince 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-little-prince.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 in a sunny room in Tehran, I was not aware that the story, along with tales 
fromShahnameh: The Persian Book of Kings 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shahnameh-6.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
,Pinocchio 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pinocchio-35.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, the work of Mulla Nasrudin, the Alice stories,The Wizard of Oz 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/classic-collection-the-wizard-of-oz-2.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 andThe Ugly Duckling 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ugly-duckling-380942.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, among others, would become one of the main pillars of my “republic of 
imagination”.

As a little girl from Iran, I came to know and love France through a little 
prince and a fox

My father’s democratic way of introducing me to these stories shaped my 
attitude towards works of imagination as universal spaces, transcending the 
boundaries of geography, language, ethnicity, religion, gender, race, 
nationality and class. I knew that although this fox and his prince were 
products of a Frenchman’s mind, and although the book was written in a language 
foreign to me, at a time before I was born and in a place I had never seen, 
by virtue of hearing and later reading it, that story would also become my 
story, that Little Prince and fox belonged as much to me as Scheherazade and 
her 1,001 nights belonged to the French, American, British, Turkish, German and 
all other readers who would in reading cherish them and “tame” them, the way 
the Prince learned to tame the fox.

This is how I, a little girl from Iran, came to know and love France, through 
a little prince and a fox. I had met foxes before; in fact, my father 
introduced me to the animal in a fable byJean de La Fontaine 
<https://www.britannica.com/biography/Jean-de-La-Fontaine>. In this story, like 
most stories, the fox is sly and clever, cheating a simple crow of his meal. 
Later, my father translated La Fontaine’s fables complete with their beautiful 
illustrations which he, an amateur painter, drew himself, copying from the 
originals. In those and most other illustrations the fox looked pretty, with a 
gorgeous bushy tail and wide eyes. The Little Prince’s fox was not pretty; its 
bushy tail, more like an upright broom, was not beautiful and his eyes were so 
narrow they could be barely seen. Yet this animal forever changed my attitude 
towards the fox – I began to see it in a different light. From this 
perspective, the fox’s slyness was not due to malice, but to the need to 
survive. Although I felt sorry for the chickens (which didn’t prevent me from 
eating them), the fox hunted them so that he could stay alive, unlike some 
human beings who not only kill and eat the chickens but hunt foxes for 
entertainment and sport. Gradually, I came to understand why those wide eyes, 
always brimming with anxiety and fear, seemed to be on the lookout for some 
invisible but very real menace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fazar-nafisi-heartless-times-the-little-prince-reminds-what-it-is-to-be-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3924d04d065e17403d75d999ec5d6059074f497%2F0_0_1948_2800%2F1948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azar%20Nafisi%3A%20In%20these%20heartless%20times%2C%20The%20Little%20Prince%20reminds%20us%20what%20it%20is%20to%20be%20human&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fazar-nafisi-heartless-times-the-little-prince-reminds-what-it-is-to-be-human%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azar%20Nafisi%3A%20In%20these%20heartless%20times%2C%20The%20Little%20Prince%20reminds%20us%20what%20it%20is%20to%20be%20human&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fazar-nafisi-heartless-times-the-little-prince-reminds-what-it-is-to-be-human%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3924d04d065e17403d75d999ec5d6059074f497%2F0_0_1948_2800%2F1948.jpg>
 A production ofThe Little Prince at Hampstead theatre, London, in 2008. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
At the time I had no idea why I was attracted to the Little Prince’s story. 
I did not know it was teaching me to acquire what is essential to the greatest 
works of imagination: the magical throbbing of the heart, defining us as human 
beings, connecting us to one another, giving us a reason to live, a way to 
survive, and to understand not just the value of happiness and love, but their 
close proximity to pain and loss. Without knowing it, I was experiencing that 
sense of deep anguish mixed with the joy of creation that is the source of all 
beauty. As I started to read more books, I discovered that the fox’s secret was 
shared by the greatest writers, poets, musicians, artists and thinkers, 
throughout time.

Last time I linked France to the fox was after the massacre at the Charlie 
Hebdo office <https://www.theguardian.com/world/charlie-hebdo-attack>, when the 
next issue of the magazine came out. The image of the prophet Muhammad, with 
tears in his eyes and the caption “Tout est pardonné”, had an effect on me 
beyond words. I wanted to cry, not just for the lives lost, but also for the 
compassion. They at Charlie Hebdo had not reciprocated their murderers’ violent 
fury; in the best tradition of art, they had taken us all to their domain, to 
the domain that defies cruelty and violence by refusing to be cruel and 
violent, refusing to become their enemy’s image of them. How could it be that 
this image made me think of the tenderness of my grandmother’s Islam, when she 
forgave with a seeming ease, never complaining and yet always firm in her 
belief, in her faith, in her sense of tolerance. This is how she “tamed” us, 
those of us among her wayward and unruly children and grandchildren who 
rebelled against her beliefs and her faith.

Tenderness is what we need in these heartless times. Not just in Nice and 
Paris, but in Damascus, Beirut, Brussels, New Orleans, Baghdad, London, 
Istanbul and all those other great cities around the world. We need tenderness 
not just against the brutal enemy from outside our borders, but for ourselves, 
caught in a web of fear and violence.

Azar Nafisi: ‘Books are representative of the most democratic way of living’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/26/meet-the-author-azar-nafisi-interview-viv-groskop>
Today I am a long way from that sunny day in a Tehran that exists only in my 
memory, like my father; the shady streets of my childhood, the feeling of 
security and warmth in my room are long gone, even Tehran’s mountains are now 
hidden most days under the fog of pollution. But what has survived is the 
heart, and the fox. In my republic of imagination, they all live: Rudabeh, Vis, 
Esméralda, Elizabeth Bennet,Huck Finn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/24/100-best-novels-huckleberry-finn-twain>
, Emma Bovary, Natasha and Pierre, Catherine and Heathcliff, Anna Karenina, the 
Little Prince and the fox, all from such different times and backgrounds, all 
together, immortal and subversive.

The pilot who wrote the story of The Little Prince died long ago, but 
the fictional pilot, who told the story, is as alive today as he was decades 
ago, along with his Prince, the fox, the rose, the snake and the laughing 
stars, ringing bells that fill the clear nights with voices of the heart. In my 
mind’s eye, the stars only become more brilliant, their music more clear. They 
are signalling that they are here to stay, not just for French readers, but for 
readers all around the world – for the readers who have the eyes to see, the 
ears to listen and the courage to imagine.

• The Republic of the Imagination 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/republic-of-imagination-320465.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Azar Nafisi is published by Windmill.
 