
Insurance <https://www.theguardian.com/money/insurance> policies promising to 
pay an income when customers fall ill or have an accident are failing to meet 
claims for even for the most basic serious injuries, including two broken arms 
or even blindness.

Research by Alan Lakey, a leading independent expert at Highclere Financial 
Services <http://www.highclerefinancial.co.uk/> in Hertfordshire, found that 
policies sold in their thousands each year by many of the UK's biggest insurers 
– includingAxa <http://www.axa.com/en/>, Bupa <http://www.bupa.co.uk/>, Aviva 
<http://www.aviva.com/>, Scottish Equitable <http://www.aegonse.co.uk/> and even
Prudential <http://www.prudential.com/view/page> – vary greatly in their terms.

The result is widespread confusion among consumers about what income 
protection insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2007/oct/25/healthinsurance> or permanent 
health insurance actually is, as well as what it delivers.

"There is a big gap between what we say it is and what consumers are trying 
­to grasp," says Ron Wheatcroft, co-author of a recent paper on the issue for 
insurerSwiss Re <http://www.swissre.com/>. "It is also difficult to get the 
balance right between choice and complexity, which can be a barrier."

Permanent health insurance (PHI) pays a regular income if you suffer long-term 
sickness or injury.

Benefits usually start after a waiting period of between four and 52 weeks, 
typically after work-related pay stops. It is payable until you return to work, 
die, or the policy term expires.

Most financial advisers believe PHI is better than many other variants of 
"protection" insurance. They point out that almost 3,000 people launch a claim 
for long-term benefits every day, but current state­ benefits are just £89.90 a 
week, even at the highest rate payable after 52 weeks' sickness.

When interior design consultant Roy Farrell, 49, was advised to consider PHI 
in 2001 he wasn't keen on the idea. "But with three young children, it made 
sense to protect the family if anything went wrong," says Farrell.

He was glad he did. One day, while riding his Ducati Monster on to the M4 
motorway, Farrell came off. "I broke every bone in my leg – toes, ankle, tibia, 
fibula, femur – and needed skin grafts as I only had jeans on. I was off work 
for nine months and it was another three months before I was back to normal," 
Farrell recalls.

Although forced to put his interior design company, Farrell & Co, on hold, 
Farrell was able to claim PHI payments worth about £900 a month. Together with 
state sickness benefits and tax credits, he was able to keep the family's 
finances above water. "Without that money we would have been in a lot of 
trouble," he admits.

Lakey's research found vast differences between policies, however. For 
example, rather than pay out simply because claimants cannot return to their 
old job, many insurers require them to be unable to perform certain "daily 
living" tasks. Lakey says 20 different activities are used, although they are 
not identical.Scottish Equitable <http://www.aegonse.co.uk/>'s definition of 
"communicating" requires an inability to hear conversational speech in a quiet 
room, understand simple messages and speak with sufficient clarity to be heard. 
But rival insurerBright Grey <http://www.brightgrey.com/> defines "hearing" and 
"speech" separately.

Somebody unable to hear or speak would therefore achieve Bright Grey's 
requirement, which is a failure to perform two out of six tasks. With Scottish 
Equitable it only accomplishes one of the three failures, leaving the 
policyholder requiring two additional failures. Even a simple definition of 
walking 200 metres differs wildly. Some insurers add a stick, thereby reducing 
the chances of a claim, while others pay out if walking involves "significant" 
discomfort.

Replies from insurers to Lakey's survey found a claim caused by two broken 
arms would fail atAxa <http://www.axa.com/en/> and Friends Provident 
<http://www.friendsprovident.co.uk/>, but would receive a payout from Zurich 
<http://www.zurich.com/main/home/welcome.htm>, Shepherd's Friendly 
<http://www.shepherdsfriendly.co.uk/> and, possibly, Aviva 
<http://www.aviva.com/>. Lakey says: "I've asked insurers when they will come 
up with common definitions. In some cases they tell me that their IT systems 
are tied up years in advance. In other cases, all I've had is a shrug of the 
shoulders."

Colin Last, a financial adviser at Tamar IFA <http://www.tamarifa.co.uk/>, 
based in Wokingham, Berkshire, says: "I would add a cynical view – that sales 
of income protection policies have been in decline and product providers have 
no interest in spending a lot of time trying to come up with common 
definitions."

Ed Stuart-Brown, head of protection sales at Friends Provident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/friendsprovident>, agrees that different 
definitions can be confusing. But he points out: "The danger with standardising 
things is that it means providers like us can't then offer a better product to 
consumers."

Lakey recommends policies where a payout is triggered by an inability­ to 
carry out one's "own occupation".­

He also advises watching out for exclusions: some companies might reject 
claims on the grounds that the disability occurred in the course of "immoral or 
disorderly conduct" or an illegal activity. In theory, this could mean 
dangerous driving or just being drunk.

For those needing cheaper monthly payments, Lakey suggests reviewable premiums 
rather than long-term fixed ones. Although reviewable policies do go up in 
price, this is partly offset by the fact that there are fewer years left to 
cover before retirement.

■ Have you had a claim unexpectedly turned down on a health policy? Do you 
think the insurer's reasoning was justified? Share your views with us at 
cash@observer.co.uk or write to us at Cash, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York 
Way, London, N1 9GU.
 