
Journalists at the Independent have put together the paper’s last ever print 
edition for publication on Saturday. A bumper 16-page souvenir pullout will 
mark the end of its 30 years in print before it becomes the first national 
newspaper in the UKto go online only 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/22/independent-staff-pay-cuts-online-nuj>
.

Launched in 1986, it has fallen victim to a digital revolution that has 
upended the economics of the print newspaper market.

Other contributors who have became famous through their association with the 
title include Helen Fielding, who wrote Bridget Jones’s Diary, author Sebastian 
Faulks and its first female editor, Rosie Boycott.
Nick Sutton (@suttonnick) 
Last ever Independent front page -
Revealed: British connection in plot to kill a Saudi king#tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/Ttpffs0TMq <https://t.co/Ttpffs0TMq>
 <https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/713454894074691584> March 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/suttonnick/status/713454894074691584> 
Rajan, who is to become editor-at-large of the online-only Independent, and 
ownerEvgeny Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, 
described it as the latest move in the Independent’s role as an industry 
pioneer. A brave new entrant in the 1980s, it was the first to switch from 
broadsheet to tabloid format in 2003, and later became a “viewspaper” with 
opinion on the front page.

In a statement, Rajan said: “The Independent has always been known for its 
pioneering work and world-class journalism and this special edition reflects 
that. The edition pays tribute to the enormous contribution of the team, both 
current and past, to this legacy, as we look ahead to the evolution of the 
Independent newsbrand, growing our digital, global presence.”
Simon Usborne (@susborne) 
Last conference pic.twitter.com/IV32hICLZP <https://t.co/IV32hICLZP>
 <https://twitter.com/susborne/status/713313790570471424> March 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/susborne/status/713313790570471424> 
Staff – in the office for the last editorial conference – are being encouraged 
to think of the demise of the print edition and shift towards digital as an 
evolution, rather than an extinction, according to a source.

And Steve Auckland, the chief executive of the Indy’s parent company ESI 
Media, said: “We have plans in place to mark this significant occasion 
privately in our office today followed by an event tonight to thank our 
employees for the enormous contribution they have made.”

When he announced the decision to close the Independent and its Sunday print 
sister in February, Lebedev said: “The newspaper industry is changing, and that 
change is being driven by readers. They’re showing us that the future is 
digital.”

In a nod to the title’s most famous advertisement – “It is – are you?” – the 
paper was wrapped in an ad in the last week that asked: “It’s changing – are 
you?”

Independent staff forced to sign gagging clauses to get redundancy pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/24/independent-gagging-clauses-redundancy-pay>
The publisher launched an app last month ago to help boost readers of the 
website, which lags behind several national rivals with 58 million monthly 
readers.
amol rajan (@amolrajan) 
These are the last two letters The @Independent 
<https://twitter.com/Independent> will publish in print. And they are two of 
the best. Just fantasticpic.twitter.com/V7EMd3cZlS <https://t.co/V7EMd3cZlS>
 <https://twitter.com/amolrajan/status/713405881958924288> March 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/amolrajan/status/713405881958924288> Yvette Cooper 
(@YvetteCooperMP) 
Thinking of all the journalists & staff finishing the last print @Independent 
<https://twitter.com/Independent> tonight and the amazing job they've always 
done
 <https://twitter.com/YvetteCooperMP/status/713443177978585088> March 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/YvetteCooperMP/status/713443177978585088> Jason Cowley 
(@JasonCowleyNS) 
The sense of an ending: @amolrajan <https://twitter.com/amolrajan> and his 
team have shown grace under pressure during these sad final weeks
https://t.co/YP7iDrljPz <https://t.co/YP7iDrljPz>
 <https://twitter.com/JasonCowleyNS/status/713465403268276225> March 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JasonCowleyNS/status/713465403268276225> 
More than 100 journalists are expected to lose their jobs after just 30 move 
to the online-only Independent, including long-standing writers such as Robert 
Fisk and Patrick Cockburn. Lebedev has promised to open new editorial bureaux 
in Europe, the Middle East and Asia, and expand the US operation.

At the same time as announcing the closure of the print title, Lebedev 
announcedthe sale of the i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/10/johnston-press-buy-the-i-newspaper-25m-deal>
, the Independent offshoot, to regional newspaper group Johnston Press for 
£24m. Up to 40 people are to transfer to the new owners of a cheaper offshoot 
that had an existing staff of 17, including editor Oliver Duff.

By the time of its sale, the i was selling 275,000 copies, far more than its 
expensive parent title.

Although the final edition is to be published after Good Friday, a national 
holiday, many of the estimated 170 staff were expected to come in, either to 
vie for a slot in the final edition or to mark the moment when the presses roll 
for the last time.

In the US, so many newspapers have been hit by the increasing dominance of 
social media groups such as Facebook and the loss of advertising revenue that 
several major regional titles have closed. So many indeed, that a website 
chronicling the demise of the industry since 2007 was set up calledNewspaper 
Death Watch <http://newspaperdeathwatch.com/>.

The State of the News Media report 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20090320033032/http://www.editorandpublisher.com:80/eandp/news/article_display.jsp?vnu_content_id=1003951616>
 estimated that one in five journalists lost their jobs in the US in the first 
decade of the millennium.
 