
Independent editor Amol Rajan knew that the paper would be closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/independent-and-independent-on-sunday-closures-confirmed>
 on his watch the day he took the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jun/17/amol-rajan-independent-editor> 
in 2013, he said. Nevertheless, Rajan – who will oversee the final print 
edition of the paper next month – said the end came as a “painful shock”.

About 100 staff are expected to lose their jobs as part of the move to a 
digital-only format and Rajan will become editor-at-large role, overseeing the 
business.

“I knew, the minute my job was first mooted, on the steps of San Francesco 
church in the sun-drenched, mafia-infested Sicilian town of Noto, that I would 
be the last editor of the (printed) Independent,” he wrote inan article for the 
Spectator <http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/02/diary-686/>.

“This fact was reinforced at 17.21 on my first day, when the daily email from 
our circulation department put the figure for our paid-for circulation at 
42,000.”

Rajan added: “Commercially, we were losing nearly £13m when I started. I got 
that down to under £5m in my first year, halved that in my second year, and 
this year was heading for further improvement. So why close? Simple. A deal 
happened.”

That deal was the sale of the i paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/11/evgeny-lebedev-in-talks-to-sell-i-newspaper-to-johnston-press>
 - the Independent’s “rubber ring” – to Johnston Press for £24m. Rajan is 
upbeat about the Independent’s digital future and wrote about a visit to the 
favourite post-deadline haunt of Independent journalists, the Elephant and 
Castle pub, near the paper’s Kensington newsroom.

“I was very nervous about going. But my friends and colleagues were so warm, 
and there was such generosity in the ale-tinged air, that later I found myself 
involuntarily bleating ‘I love you guys’ as I walked out, almost sober, to my 
Uber.”

A statement released by his colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/16/independent-closes-print-titles-national-union-journalists>
 within days, however, was less enthusiastic about the changes being made.

Members of the papers’ National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> chapel – who 
form the majority of the print edition’s staff – said they were “deeply 
sceptical about the company’s ability to generate confidence in the new 
Independent website”.

They added that the closure of the daily and Sunday print titles“diminishes 
media plurality and impoverishes the industry”.

Nevertheless, Rajan insists that the “business model for printed general news 
from Monday to Friday is kaput” and predicts that other papers’ proprietors 
will follow in owner Evgeny Lebedevs’ footsteps.

In his article, Rajan wrote that it was the sub-editors – staff who edit 
reporters’ copy – that he felt for the most. “They are the tireless lifesavers 
who never go home, who make good journalism great.

“Twelve minutes to deadline on [the day the sale was announced], I shouted, 
‘Who’s got page 24?’ A sub who shall remain nameless shouted back: ‘I have, 
boss’. I said: ‘That caption busts and the byline should be in bold.’ He said, 
‘Yes, sure thing, boss’ and gave me the thumbs up. That stoicism in the face of 
adversity, motivated by sheer love of journalism, is the spirit of the 
Independent in a nutshell.”
 