
Independent journalists have defied warnings from the editor, Amol Rajan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/amol-rajan>, and voted for industrial action 
over job cuts.

Members of the National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> (NUJ) at the 
title will hold a two-hour mandatory chapel meeting on Friday 9 August in 
protest at plans to shed 27 jobs.

The NUJ said that 65.5% of its members had voted in favour of industrial 
action, and 79.5% voted for action short of a strike.

The vote is against the wishes of Rajan, who warned Independent journalists 
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/26/independent-editor-warns-journalists-strike-lebedev>
 that industrial action would give the owner, Evgeny Lebedev, "very little 
confidence" in their commitment to the future of the title.

"A 'yes' vote will give him very little confidence that we are prepared to 
steer the Independent print brands on a course that can lead them to safety and 
sustainability. This could be catastrophic for the titles," he said inthe 
candid memo to staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/26/independent-editor-warns-journalists-strike-lebedev>
.

The dispute is over plans to make 27 compulsory redundancies among the 
Independent's editorial staff of 190, which some journalists at the paper fear 
will be a "tipping point" and harm editorial quality. Lebedev's Independent 
Print Ltd titles – which include the Independent, Independent on Sunday, i and 
London Evening Standard – areon course to lose £11.8m this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/media-blog/2013/jul/28/independent-strike-action-threaten-lebedevs?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Journalists will down tools and hold a mandatory chapel starting at 4pm next 
Friday, the NUJ said, in a move likely to cause disruption so close to 
newspaper deadlines.

The NUJ's general secretary, Michelle Stanistreet, called for "less machismo 
and more common sense" from Independent management in the consultation process.

"There's a lot of talk about the vision for the future," she said. "It's 
looking like one in which there simply isn't the resources to produce 
hard-hitting quality journalism in print and online; where experience and 
commitment is disregarded; and where the workforce is paid bargain-basement 
salaries and is fearful and compliant."

She added: "This doesn't represent the founding principles of the Independent 
and it doesn't square with what readers expect of these titles."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 