
The Independent <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> editor Amol 
Rajan has warned journalists on the paper that voting for strike action would 
send a "catastrophic" message to the owner, Evgeny Lebedev.

In a candid email to staff on Friday, Rajan said industrial action would give 
Lebedev "very little confidence" that journalists were committed to the future 
of the Independent.

He said in the memo: "I just wanted to say that, as you contemplate how you 
might vote, we must all be clear about what signal this vote will send to the 
owner.

"A 'Yes' vote will give him very little confidence that we are prepared to 
steer the Independent print brands on a course that can lead them to safety and 
sustainability. This could be catastrophic for the titles.

"A 'No' vote on the other hand will be seen as a genuine commitment to 
securing the Independent print brands as a credible and valued part of a wider 
dynamic and influential media company. I'm sure the owner would respond 
positively to this.

"It would be tragic if this opportunity were to be lost. Please show your 
support and vote 'No' to industrial action."

The memo to staff comes 24 hours after Independent journalists wrote to 
Lebedev warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/25/independent-journalists-evgeny-lebedev>
 that the latest cuts could be a "tipping point" for the title.

The National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> has opened a 
ballot for industrial action at the title, including a possible walkout, over 
plans to make 27 staff roles redundant among its editorial staff of 190.

Michelle Stanistreet, NUJ general secretary, said she was "shocked" at the 
Independent management's handling of the latest cost-saving measures.

She added: "It's a poor show when management at the Independent resort to 
issuing threats to staff who are exercising their legal right to take part in a 
ballot – journalists who simply want to be listened to about their livelihoods 
and the future of the titles they work for.

"Members will make their own mind up about whether this has been a meaningful 
consultation process to date. We will be advising any journalist who comes 
under improper pressure to raise it with the union immediately.

"The union is shocked at the Independent's approach and the disgraceful way 
management has treated staff and contributors. It is not just the lip-service 
they have shown to the consultation, but the callous disregard they are showing 
to long-standing and loyal columnists and journalists.

"This email shows exactly why journalists have to stick together and vote yes, 
to stop compulsory redundancies and to defend quality journalism."

Lebedev's Independent Print Ltd titles – which include the Independent, 
Independent on Sunday <https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday>
, i and London Evening Standard – are on course to lose £11.8m this year.

Earlier on Friday it emerged that Independent Print has pulled out of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/jul/26/theindependent-i>, 
with final copies of the Independent and 20p sister title i going on sale in 
both the north and the Republic on 2 August.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 