
Growing up, I knew I was different. But I didn’t know what it meant to be 
Aboriginal. I just knew that I had a really big, extended family. I was taught 
nothing aboutwho we were or where we came from. When I was old enough to start 
asking those questions, my mum, Lisa, told me that we were Adnyamathanha, which 
is a Flinders Ranges mob that means ‘rock people’. In high school people would 
call me names, but it didn’t really mean anything to me – it was water off a 
duck’s back – because I didn’t know what it meant to be Aboriginal. It wasn’t 
until I moved to Sydney and I went to my first Indigenous camp in Melbourne 
where we started talking about our mobs that I realised I had no idea about 
mine, so that really got my juices bubbling to find out more.

I started asking a lot more questions and I realised I needed to go on my own 
journey. I enrolled to do a TAFE course on Indigenous Studies, and over the 
next two-and-a-half years of my course I learned so much about my people and my 
culture in a broader sense. It made me so proud of my Aboriginality and our 
history in this country, which dates back over 40,000 years. I then went on Who 
Do You Think You Are? (on television channel SBS) and was able to discover a 
new part of my ancestry and where both myself and my mum were actually born: 
the Point Pearce Aboriginal Station at Narungga in the Spencer Gulf. Our 
culture is still living and breathing, and I look forward to sharing that with 
the rest of my family.

AFL great Adam Goodes honoured by Sydney Swans fans in delayed farewell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/09/afl-great-adam-goodes-honoured-by-sydney-swans-fans-in-delayed-farewell>
The negative and derogatory remarks started being used against me when I got 
into high school. The majority of my friends were actually white and the only 
Aboriginal people I associated with were my family members, so I never felt 
like I was different and my friends never treated me differently. In fact, we 
all remain friends to this day. People didn’t knowwhat they were teasing me 
about so it didn’t bother me too much before high school. By then I was very 
proud of who I was, so when they started calling me different names that was 
when it started to cut pretty deep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Findigenous-afl-legend-adam-goodes-growing-up-i-knew-i-was-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98b6a4869e25c95579e8ee6fa11fa2017edf80e%2F0_202_4043_2426%2F4043.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indigenous%20AFL%20legend%20Adam%20Goodes%3A%20'Growing%20up%2C%20I%20knew%20I%20was%20different'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Findigenous-afl-legend-adam-goodes-growing-up-i-knew-i-was-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indigenous%20AFL%20legend%20Adam%20Goodes%3A%20%27Growing%20up%2C%20I%20knew%20I%20was%20different%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Findigenous-afl-legend-adam-goodes-growing-up-i-knew-i-was-different%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98b6a4869e25c95579e8ee6fa11fa2017edf80e%2F0_202_4043_2426%2F4043.jpg>
 Adam Goodes unveils Sydney’s first ever Indigenous Round guernsey, designed by 
his mother Lisa Sansbury, in May 2014. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
I didn’t like footy at all growing up. I didn’t play it; I played soccer 
instead. I went to Forbes primary school in South Australia, which was a big 
soccer-loving school. I loved my soccer and still enjoy playing it to this day. 
My path to footy was like destiny. We moved to Victoria when I was 14 and we 
went to sign up with a local soccer team but they only had seniors – no juniors 
– and it was a very spiteful game, so Mum didn’t want me running around out 
there. At the same time, there was an Aussie Rules game being played across the 
road with the Merbein Under-14s and so Mum suggested I playAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>. It appeared I was a lot taller than 
everybody else, so I felt I would be safe out there and decided to try it out. 
That first year worked out well and I won the best and fairest, and I can 
remember looking at the trophy and thinking how 10 years before I won it 
Matthew Knights, who was Richmond’s captain by that stage, had also won it. So 
that was when I thought that footy was worth continuing.

It’s definitely harder for Aboriginal players to relocate to the city than it 
is for non-Aboriginal players. Just having that family support network makes it 
a lot easier, so, in my case, having Michael O’Loughlin at Sydney for most of 
my journey just helped me so much. And I have no doubt that Lewis Jetta will 
say that when I retire. Just having that brother there to lean on for support, 
who understands the struggles you go through as an Aboriginal player is so 
important. Football clubs are getting better and player development managers 
are getting better. But to have that senior figure there to help and support 
you really makes a difference.

As a leader you have to be yourself. I was very lucky to have fantastic 
leaders before me in Paul Kelly, Leo Barry, Brett Kirk, Craig Bolton, Mick 
O’Loughlin and Stuart Maxfield, and all of those players led in completely 
different ways. That’s what you have to understand: that everyone’s different. 
In our current leadership group we have eight guys who all lead differently 
from each other but they all complement each other. You need to understand how 
you lead, and in my case it is through my actions and the way I bring others 
into the game and also how I am able to form relationships. I am somebody who 
can earn people’s trust, and that’s crucial to how I try to lead the team. It’s 
really rewarding to be in that leadership role and help drive our culture.

Paul Roos was an awesome facilitator and teacher to me. My personal 
relationship with both him and Tami, his wife, is one that will continue into 
the future. Roosey unleashed the shackles for me in 2003 and let me play footy. 
I certainly needed to learn the discipline from Rodney Eade, but I needed to 
learn to be harder and fitter and test myself mentally. Roosey forced me to 
focus on the small things, and without having that discipline that had been 
instilled in me by Rodney who knows which way my career would have gone? But 
Roosey came in and took those restrictions off me and allowed me to back myself 
because he knew I would make the best decisions out there for the team. It was 
a massive stepping stone for me to know that the coaching staff was backing me 
in, and it gave me the confidence to back myself, and from there I went to the 
next level.

I never got to enjoy the 2006 Brownlow Medal. That night it wasn’t about the 
Brownlow for me, because we were preparing for the Grand Final against the West 
Coast Eagles that week, so it was more of a distraction than in 2003. We stayed 
up in Sydney and had our own event, which was a really great night, but I 
didn’t get to celebrate it like I had in 2003. We lost that Grand Final a few 
days later. I knew what Nathan Buckley would’ve felt like in 2003 when he won 
the Brownlow then lost the Grand Final a few days later.

The best thing that came from injuring my knee in 2004 was that I never played 
in the ruck again. There had been a number of blokes injure their knees at the 
centre bounce, so that brought about a rule change at the end of that year 
where they put a bigger circle around the little circle in the centre, which 
helped to reduce the impact on the ruckmen. What it also did for me was I 
learned how to play through injury. I had ruptured my posterior cruciate 
ligament (PCL) but could still run in straight lines, so I went down back and 
stayed there for much of that year. I showed my teammates that year that I 
didn’t need to be 100 per cent fit to still be able to play a role for the team 
and I think they all respected me for that. I was told I couldn’t injure the 
knee any worse than I had so I figured that there was no point in resting it. 
That was my commitment to the team and to my role within it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Findigenous-afl-legend-adam-goodes-growing-up-i-knew-i-was-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe52263e7bc6dc4d4b0fb21be028d9f86917d215%2F0_255_4446_2666%2F4446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indigenous%20AFL%20legend%20Adam%20Goodes%3A%20'Growing%20up%2C%20I%20knew%20I%20was%20different'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Findigenous-afl-legend-adam-goodes-growing-up-i-knew-i-was-different%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indigenous%20AFL%20legend%20Adam%20Goodes%3A%20%27Growing%20up%2C%20I%20knew%20I%20was%20different%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Findigenous-afl-legend-adam-goodes-growing-up-i-knew-i-was-different%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe52263e7bc6dc4d4b0fb21be028d9f86917d215%2F0_255_4446_2666%2F4446.jpg>
 Goodes in full flight during Sydney’s round 19 clash with Geelong last year. 
Photograph: Robert Cianflone/Getty Images 
Our 2005 side was more talented than most people realised. Whether we got the 
plaudits for how talented we were or not, I’m not sure, but internally we 
certainly did. But our culture wasn’t based on ego; it was based on individuals 
playing their role for the team. So when we broke it down like that, no one 
wanted the accolades or to be singled out because it was never about 
individuals in our group, it was always about how the team went.

John “Horse” Longmire taught me my craft. “Horse” coaches differently from 
Roosey, and he guided me for many years as the midfield coach before taking on 
the senior role, in 2011. He taught to understand what my strengths were. His 
mantra was to continue to work on areas that need improving, but know what 
you’re good at and bring that to the contest. You just need to focus on that 
every time you run out. “Horse” also taught me how to continually give back to 
the playing group through my leadership role. I need to not only be challenging 
our leaders, but I also need to support them in taking the next step in their 
careers.

The biggest thing about the 2012 premiership was it helped to heal the 
disappointment from losing in 2006. If I had not won another premiership I 
would have always had a bad taste in my mouth from narrowly losing that Grand 
Final to West Coast. In 2012 there were three of my teammates who hadn’t played 
in the 2005 win but had played in the 2006 loss – Jarrad McVeigh, Nick Malceski 
and Ted Richards – so I was just so happy to be able to share one with them. 
Then there were the four of us who had played in the 2005 flag – Lewis 
Roberts-Thomson, Jude Bolton, Ryan O’Keefe and me – so it was pretty special to 
win another one with them, too.

Racism remains an ongoing issue in sport. To think that it is more than 20 
years since Nicky Winmar’s famous stand against racism 
<http://www.afl.com.au/news/2013-05-23/winmars-nationbuilding-moment> and, yet, 
it is still going on in our game is disappointing. We’ve come a long way in 
that time, no doubt about it, but unfortunately there are still incidents 
happening, which is why we need to keep educating people that it’s wrong to 
racially discriminate against anyone. We also need to support players out there 
when it does happen. I have said thank you to Nicky – as well as to Michael 
Long, who stood up against Damian Monkhorst in 1995 – for their brave stances, 
because it has made the industry and the environment a lot easier for 
Aboriginal kids coming through in the years since they played. It has also made 
us strong enough to stand up just like they did. Without people making those 
stands for what’s right, it makes it very hard for the next person faced with 
the same challenge to have the courage to do it.

I’m the chairman of the advisory body for the Indigenous boys at the AFL 
Players’ Association. One of our priorities over the next three to five years 
is to have Aboriginal liaison officers at every football club. At the moment 
there are two who are full-time. That’s something that we intend to rectify. It 
would be perfect if these roles could be filled by former Indigenous players 
who can help with that transition, as I had Mick (O’Loughlin) there to mentor 
me.

Mick O’Loughlin and I started up the Go Foundation in 2009. We wanted to 
create a way for us to give back to the community in Sydney. We provide 
Indigenous scholarships for young boys and girls (11 were awarded in 2014) and 
we really want to guide that next batch of Indigenous role models. Who is going 
to take over from us? These scholarships are all academic – there’s no footy 
focus behind it – it’s all about these guys being the next doctors and lawyers. 
It’s for those people to go and get their education and then go back to their 
communities once they’re qualified and really help drive others to go and do 
great things like we did.

I needed a strong plan when I was named the Australian of the Year in 2014. 
The first month after I became the recipient of the award we had 180 requests 
to appear at various events and give talks, so I needed to sit down with my 
manager, Lucy Mills, and work out a plan. I was already involved as an 
ambassador with White Ribbon, the Recognise Campaign and the Racism Stops With 
Me campaign, so I felt we needed to focus on those three pillars. They became 
the priorities for me that year because I wanted people to be really clear, 
once my tenure as Australian of the Year ended, that I stood for specific 
things. I think we really nailed that. We were really clear on what we were 
trying to achieve and the awareness that we were able to raise across those 
three platforms was pretty good. But it doesn’t stop for me now my tenure is 
over. The great thing about being Australian of the Year is that you get this 
wonderful platform to try to make a difference by standing up for what you are 
passionate about. There’s no doubt the things I have done off the field over 
the past couple of years have allowed me to use football as my outlet, and I’ve 
been able to find some great balance between all that.

Football has shaped my life. There is no doubt that it has shaped who I am. 
Being at theSydney Swans <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sydney-swans> has 
helped me to become a leader and to be proud of who I am and where I come from. 
My commitment to the game has been very high and I wouldn’t have it any other 
way. Football has given my family and I an opportunity to break the 
welfare-dependant cycle, and I was able to do help other families to see and 
believe that we can have better lives than we have had in the past.

Champions: Conversations with Great Players and Coaches of Australian Football 
<https://books.slatterymedia.com/store/viewItem/champions--conversations-with-great-players-and-coaches-of-australian-football>
, by Dan Eddy and Ben Collins, is published by Slattery Media group, priced 
$49.95
 