
Indian police have detained the country's most prominent anti-corruption 
campaigner, hours before he was due to begin an indefinite hunger strike to 
demand tough new laws against graft.

The arrest of 74-year-old Anna Hazare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> prompted outrage, with 
opposition politicians accusing Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's beleaguered 
administration, currently in the middle of its second term, of repeating 
draconian crackdowns of the 1970s.

A series of impromptu demonstrations were organised across the country in 
support of Hazare. More than 250 campaigners associated with him, including 
other well-known anti-corruption activists, were also detained by police.

There were reports of protests in western Punjab, in eastern Orissa, in the 
far south, in northern Himachel Pradesh and in Ralegan Siddhi, Hazare's home 
village in central Maharashtra state.

Singh's government has been on the defensive in recent months after a series 
of corruption scams which, combined with rampant food inflation, have sparked 
public anger and sent poll ratings plummeting.

The campaign of Hazare, a controversial but respected figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/12/india-fast-activist-poor-comments-corruption>
, has rattled officials and politicians. Negotiations had been continuing over 
hisplanned public "fast unto death" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/07/anna-hazare-hunger-strike> for 
several weeks. Thousands of demonstrators were expected to converge on the 
capital to join the former army soldier and activist.

"When you have a crowd of 10,000 people, can anyone guarantee there will be no 
disruption? â€¦ The police is doing its duty. We should allow them to do it," 
argued the information and broadcasting minister, Ambika Soni, in an interview 
with CNN-IBN television.

Dressed in his trademark plain white shirt, white cap and spectacles in the 
style of independence leader Mahatma Gandhi, Hazare was driven away in a white 
car by plainclothes police, waving to hundreds of supporters.

A police spokesman said the veteran campaigner and four others had been placed 
under "preventive arrest". No charges have yet been filed.

Hazare recently called for a "second freedom struggle" in India, which threw 
off British imperial rule in 1947. "This is a fight for change. Unless there is 
change, there is no freedom, there is no actual democracy, there is no true 
republic, there is no true people's rule. The protests should not stop. The 
time has come for no jail in the country to have a free space,"he said in a 
message broadcast on YouTube <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EhC2cN394W4>.

Both houses of parliament were adjourned after the opposition protested at the 
arrests. Though politicians from all political parties have been implicated in 
corruption scams, many figures associated with the biggest and most 
high-profile cases of graft are from the ruling Congress party.

Opposition figures likened the crackdown to the 1975 "Emergency", when Prime 
Minister Indira Gandhi arrested thousands of opposition members in order to 
stay in power.

Manish Tewari, a Congress party spokesman, said Hazare was surrounded by 
"armchair fascists, overground Maoists, closet anarchists".

A crackdown earlier this year on a fasting yoga guru who had rallied tens of 
thousands of people in the capital managed to break up his anti-corruption 
protests successfully.

Hazare's first hunger strike in April won concessions from the government that 
promised a parliamentary bill creating a special ombudsman with power to 
investigate and punish corrupt politicians, bureaucrats and judges.

But the changes proposed by the legislation presented in early August were 
criticised by activists as insufficient. They accused the government of 
backtracking.
 