
The practical and sometimes dirty business of power-seeking and deal-making 
has in the past been countered in Indian politics by periodic impulses to 
transform society root and branch. This dualism was famously embodied in the 
divide between Nehru and Gandhi, partners but also rivals in the Indian 
independence movement.

The two men had profoundly different ideas on the direction in which India 
ought to go, Nehru seeing a future India as a great industrial and military 
power, while Gandhi wanted a society which would keep the 
worst aspects of modernity at bay while transcending caste, class and religious 
differences. Although such later figures as Vinoba Bhave and JP Narayan carried 
on to make their mark onIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> after 
Gandhi, it has become commonplace to say that the Gandhian tradition has 
largely petered out in recent years.

Not quite. Anna Hazare, the 74-year-old former soldier whose anti-corruption 
movement is posing an increasingly serious challenge to the Indian government, 
has certainly borrowed both style and technique from the Mahatma. He wears 
plain white clothes, if not the actual homespun on which Gandhi insisted. Like 
Gandhi, he fasts. Like Gandhi, he goes to prison – and sometimes refuses to 
come out. Like Gandhi, he has amodel village 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/30/books/in-great-soul-joseph-lelyveld-re-examines-gandhi.html?pagewanted=all>
, in his case in his home state of Maharashtra. Like Gandhi, he is against 
tobacco, alcohol and other drugs. Like Gandhi he has mobilised large numbers of 
Indians, many thousands of whom have been demonstrating in New Delhi and other 
cities after Manmohan Singh's government made the mistake of arresting him two 
days ago. Anger at corruption, of both the grand and the petty kind, has never 
been so intense.

The basic issue is simple. Mr Hazare and his followers want a powerful 
anti-corruption agency established, something that various governments had 
promised in the past. The prime minister pushed legislation to create such an 
agency, but without giving it powers to investigate the senior judiciary and 
the prime minister's office, or to pursue the lower- level officials who make 
life an expensive hell for Indians seeking driving licences, passports 
and other documents. Mr Hazare will not accept this, while Mr Singh says 
democracy is beingsubverted 
<http://www.northindiatimes.com/news/137/ARTICLE/11032/2011-08-17.html>.

Mr Hazare does not have, or aspire to, anything like Gandhi's stature. He does 
not confront, as Gandhi did, his followers' complicity in social evils, an 
aspect of his career underlined by the subtitle –His Struggle With India 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/30/books/in-great-soul-joseph-lelyveld-re-examines-gandhi.html?pagewanted=all>
 – of a recent book on Gandhi. But Mr Hazare has found an issue – and is 
exerting a leverage which on balance must be good for India.
 