
The high-profile anti-corruption activist whose detention sparked massive 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/17/anna-hazare-protests-india> 
across India has won the right to fast publicly for two weeks in the centre of 
Delhi after reaching a deal with authorities.

As tens of thousands marched on the streets of towns and cities or held 
candlelit vigils,Anna Hazare <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-hazare> 
and police officials held talks in the jail where the 74-year-old was taken 
after refusing to abandon his plans for a public protest earlier this week.

Hazare was granted a release warrant to leave Delhi's high security Tihar 
prison after less than 12 hours' detention, but he refused to move – or to eat 
– until his demands were met.

The crisis has forced the beleaguered Congress-party-led government, weakened 
by a series of graft scandals involving senior party figures or allies, on to 
the defensive. Anattempt on Wednesday by Manmohan Singh, the prime minister, to 
use a speech in parliament to regain the initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/17/anna-hazare-fast-india-singh> 
failed as protests across India grew. Tens of thousands joined an impromptu 
march in Delhi and hundreds of other demonstrations all over the country drew 
large crowds.

Crowds outside Tihar jail erupted in joy at news of the deal, reached in the 
middle of the night, shouting "Anna, we are with you," singing, playing guitar 
and waving the Indian flag. Hazare was expected to go to the protest ground on 
Thursday.

Few expected the campaign to attract such attention, but Hazare has tapped a 
deep vein of resentment inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> at 
the endemic graft, both petty and large scale, that successive administrations 
have either fuelled or failed to tackle.

Support for Hazare is particularly strong in urban areas and among those who 
have benefited most from India's fast-paced economic development. But analysts 
say the movement's growing momentum owes much to the government's chaotic 
response. Although the government has expressed sympathy with campaigners' 
motives, previous demonstrations have been met with teargas and baton charges.A 
huge anti-corruption demonstration held by a yoga guru earlier this summer was 
broken up by riot police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/05/india-yoga-guru-corruption-protest>
.

"What you are seeing on the street is a middle-class rebellion," said Mohan 
Guruswamy, a former senior official in the ministry of finance and founder of 
the Centre for Policy Alternatives thinktank.

Around 2,500 followers of Hazare were arrested on Tuesday, provoking 
comparisons with draconian measures employed by British imperial rulers before 
India gained independence in 1947.

Among those held was Kiran Bedi, a widely respected former senior police 
officer.

"None of us is looking at this as a victory," Bedi told the local Times Now 
television station after announcing the deal on Twitter.

"We are not playing games. We are doing this to move the country forward."

Large crowds were already converging on the parade ground where Hazare is set 
to hold his fast.

Although few analysts expect the government to fall, in part due to weak 
political opposition, the crisis has increased the sense of drift surrounding 
78-year-old Singh and the Congress party mid-way through its second consecutive 
term. Much-needed economic and legal reforms remain blocked in parliament while 
progress in the delivery of basic services is patchy at best.

"It's bad enough that power goes off all the time, police are misbehaving and 
healthcare is awful," said Ashok Kumar, 26, an engineering student in Delhi. 
"But to have to pay bribes for it as well, that really is too much."
 