
An Indigenous group who won a huge land title claim is partnering with a 
commercial tourism operator to bring visitors to its region – a remote and 
seldom visited part of Australia.

Intrepid Travel, a global company known for taking tourists on adventures 
through Asia, South America and Africa, will begin to take small groups on to 
Olkola land in Cape York after forming a joint venture with the traditional 
owners.

Olkola reclaim traditional Cape York land after three-decade struggle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/10/olkola-reclaim-traditional-cape-york-land-after-three-decade-struggle>
In December 2014 the Olkola clan won a 30-year battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/10/olkola-reclaim-traditional-cape-york-land-after-three-decade-struggle>
 to gain use rights over more than 6,300 sq km of former cattle grazing land in 
far north Queensland.

But when the question of employment and livelihood arose, the clan decided not 
to mine the land, which is rich in uranium and other minerals.

A French company, Areva, had taken a licence over 1000 sq km to explore for 
uranium but a deal negotiated by the Olkola forced Areva to give it up.

Instead, the only exploration will be done by foot and four-wheel drive as the 
Olkola people get ready to welcome the first group of tourists when the dry 
season starts in June.

With Indigenous guides, groups of up to 12 visitors, paying $2,845, will 
explore and camp in the region – known for its biodiversity and the largest 
unbroken tropical savanna in the world.

“When we got the land back on 10 December, we got all this country. What are 
we going to do with it? What do you do with it when you’ve got it? That’s been 
on my mind all the time,” Mike Ross, the chairman of the Olkola Aboriginal 
Corporation, told Guardian Australia.

Ross, and many group members who maintained their connection to the land, had 
been working with cattle since the group was dispossessed of its traditional 
way of life about a century ago. Others dispersed.

“They got shifted out,” Ross said. “People were scattered – Sydney, Palm 
Island, all the big missions. We are still looking for their descendants. It’s 
really hard finding the people and bringing them back.”

Those left working with the cattle earned subsistence wages but were able to 
keep their link to the land. “They talk the language,” Ross said. “I’m just 
picking it up myself now. But our language is still there. We have a 
dictionary.”

After a slump in the cattle industry, the Olkola people who were left in the 
region moved to town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Findigenous-community-lets-tourists-in-on-newly-won-australian-homeland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff11056a449175b30fd6eca820f14dcf2c04a0f15%2F0_66_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indigenous%20community%20lets%20tourists%20in%20on%20newly%20won%20Australian%20homeland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Findigenous-community-lets-tourists-in-on-newly-won-australian-homeland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indigenous%20community%20lets%20tourists%20in%20on%20newly%20won%20Australian%20homeland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Findigenous-community-lets-tourists-in-on-newly-won-australian-homeland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff11056a449175b30fd6eca820f14dcf2c04a0f15%2F0_66_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 “Me and the visitors, we’re learning together,” says Michael Ross, of the 
Olkola Aboriginal Corporation, as he gets ready to bring visitors to his 
traditional land. Photograph: Ben McNamara/Intrepid Travel 
There was a work program in Cooktown but, Ross said, “all you were doing was 
mowing lawns and picking up sticks”.

He said opening up their traditional lands to tourism was appealing “because 
me and the visitors, we’re learning together”. “I’m still learning about my 
country,” he said. “It still looks the same from years and years ago. The 
stones are all intact – left here from the old people. I’d like to show that 
off and tell stories.”

Many people returning to the land are clamouring to work on the Intrepid tours 
– as cooks, guides and rangers.

Intrepid became involved after the Australian Conservation Foundation got in 
touch and said the Olkola people were interested in running a tourism business 
on their land rather than mining it.

“The ACF has been working with Olkola for a few years, helping them with their 
land title claim,” Intrepid Travel co-founder, Geoff Manchester, said. “We are 
interested in helping an Aboriginal community get into tourism, so we worked 
assisting them in creating a sustainable business.”

There are many types of Indigenous tourism initiatives 
<http://www.tourism.australia.com/aboriginal/operator-directory.aspx> running 
in Australia but most involve day trips or tours to specific sites, such as 
rock art areas, rather than hosting groups on homelands, where permits are 
required for visitors.

The Yolngu people in Arnhem Land run cultural tours on homelands – including a 
week-long weaving workshop – but such initiatives are the exception rather than 
the rule.

A proposal was discussed in 2014 to open more of Arnhem Land to tourists. 

Indigenous homelands could be opened up in tourism plan for Arnhem Land
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/03/indigenous-homelands-opened-up-tourism-arnhem-land>
 More than 20 Yolngu homelands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/03/indigenous-homelands-opened-up-tourism-arnhem-land>
 had signaled interest in cultural tourism in the region as a means of 
achieving economic independence and staying on country. However, the projects 
are unlikely to go ahead this year.

For the Olkola people, the tourism joint venture with Intrepid was a “big 
challenge”, Ross said. The land mass was so huge, he said, “you could fit 
Sydney in it twice”.

Ross is 64 but ready for a new career. “I’m just starting,” he said.

For Manchester, the project is “ground-breaking”. “We work with them from 
scratch, including what the product should be that we will be able to sell – so 
things that exist on their land that travellers will be interested in,” he said.

Manchester said Intrepid was also helping the Olkola with “infrastructure, 
some properties and housing – doing improvements to housing and also training 
their own people to lead the groups”. “We don’t want a middle man running it,” 
he said.

Cultural factors will also be taken into account when bringing tourists on to 
the land. “We are working through ways of going around things like funerals, so 
that there will always be people who are available for tours during the 
season,” Manchester said.

He said there was a big demand across the world for Indigenous travel 
experiences.
 