
In 19 years, Ramu Gaviti’s six acres of land have gone from barren, dry and 
sparsely vegetated to fertile, moist and thick with biomass. Peacocks, wild 
pigs and rabbits have reappeared and in rejuvenated rivers, boys trap fish in 
baskets.

Gaviti once scratched $29 (£23) worth of millet and grass per acre per year. 
In bad years he left his smallholding in Jawhar, in the hills to the north-east 
of Mumbai, and went to mine sand at the coast for construction. “Sometimes you 
feel as if you can go in the river and drown,” said the farmer, who has heard 
of 50 men who never returned. Now he has more than 1,000 fruit, nut and forest 
trees, paddy rice, a tractor, a brick house, and an income the equivalent of 
$1,200 (£975) a year.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Findian-farmers-fight-against-climate-change-using-trees-as-a-weapon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04746000d4b343d17cf1c2d9f1d5c711ba413a21%2F0_67_1921_1153%2F1921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indian%20farmers%20fight%20against%20climate%20change%20using%20trees%20as%20a%20weapon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Findian-farmers-fight-against-climate-change-using-trees-as-a-weapon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indian%20farmers%20fight%20against%20climate%20change%20using%20trees%20as%20a%20weapon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Findian-farmers-fight-against-climate-change-using-trees-as-a-weapon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04746000d4b343d17cf1c2d9f1d5c711ba413a21%2F0_67_1921_1153%2F1921.jpg>
 Farmer Ramu Gaviti. Photograph: World Agroforestry Centre 
Gaviti’s life has been transformed by a model of agroforestry pioneered by an 
Indian NGO. “If the organisation had not come, we would have had no guiding 
person,” he says. The NGOBAIF <http://www.baif.org.in/>, who specialise in 
supporting climate-resilient agriculture, arrived in 1997 and worked closely 
with local people until 2004. “It was a wasteland virtually,” says 
agriculturalist Sudhir Wagle, who led the effort. “We began by suggesting 40-60 
mango and cashew trees per acre and a boundary of indigenous trees. Including 
costs such as development of common water sources, we calculate that each acre 
cost us $130 [£105] a year to improve and that it took us and the farmers five 
years. But we saw families getting $225 [£180] per acre a year after five years 
and $670 [£545] per acre a year after ten.”

 Gaviti and his fellow farmers are more than an economic success, however. 
They are a climate success too. Agriculture is the world’ssecond largest emitter
 
<http://www.wri.org/blog/2014/05/everything-you-need-know-about-agricultural-emissions>
 of gases such as CO2 that cause climate change. But the villagers’ trees have 
been drawing carbon from the atmosphere for years. This represents one of the 
greatest hopes for India, which has committed to capture 2.5 to 3bn tonnes of 
carbon through new tree and forest cover by 2030, to deliver on the Paris 
accord.

“The vast majority of India is agricultural land,” says World Agroforestry 
Centre <http://www.worldagroforestry.org/>’s Dr Ravi Prabhu. “We can deliver 
from this landscape and help people at the same time. Agriculture finds no 
mention in the accord. The focus is forests. But agriculture accounts for 
10-12% ofemissions 
<http://www.wri.org/blog/2014/05/everything-you-need-know-about-agricultural-emissions>
 and 70% ofbiodiversity loss 
<https://www.cbd.int/gbo/gbo4/publication/gbo4-en.pdf> and fresh water use 
<http://bioscience.oxfordjournals.org/content/54/10/909.full>. We cannot afford 
to segregate or we will be left with islands of biodiversity surrounded by 
deserts.”


Turning agriculture into a carbon sink is not a dream. Scientists 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/srep29987> from the World Agroforestry Centre, 
Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh, and elsewhere found that agricultural land can 
hold four times as much carbon as previously estimated by theIntergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change <http://www.ipcc.ch/>. The US Environmental Protection 
Agency states that, while fossil fuel use is the primary source of CO2: “The 
way in which people use land is also an important source, especially when it 
involves deforestation.” Likewise, land can remove CO2 from the atmosphere 
through reforestation and improvement of soils.


Scaling up what Gaviti and the other villagers are doing could be one of 
India’s greatest hopes for delivering on its commitments tothe Paris agreement 
on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/obama-paris-climate-deal-ratification>
.

India’s government recognised the value of trees on farms in 2014 with the 
world’s firstnational agroforestry policy 
<http://www.nrcaf.res.in/NAF_Policy.pdf> (pdf), which aims to help increase 
forest or tree cover to 33% from the present21% 
<http://indiatoday.intoday.in/education/story/forest-report/1/540270.html>. A 
key impetus was timber; farm trees meet 65% of India’s demand. The policy could 
put India leagues ahead on climate change and save land from ruination: 50% of 
India’s land is degraded and 86% of the degraded land is agricultural, says 
World Resources Institute’s Dr Nitin Pandit.

Rakesh Sinha, joint secretary in the Ministry of Agriculture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/agriculture>, is in charge of rolling out 
the plan. “Trees have always been part and parcel of Indian agriculture but now 
we are considering paying farmers for ecological services from agroforestry.”

Back in Jawhar, Gaviti tends his trees, among the many fruits of which have 
also been a change in social status. “When I go to town, they don’t disrespect 
me for being a labourer“. Bowing his head and putting his hands together, he 
says: “They now sayNamaskar 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=Namaskar&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&client=firefox-b>.”





Cathy Watson is chief of programme development at the World Agroforestry 
Centre.
 