
This time of year is all about traditions. The Germans like to eat pickles on 
Christmas Eve. The Rough Trade shops'top ten albums list 
<http://www.roughtrade.com/site/content.lasso?page=aoy_2009.html> always 
includes at least one record that has been randomly elevated far above its 
rightful station in the rump of some generic indie sub-category as testimony to 
the RT brand's enduring maverick sensibility (this year it's Survival by Forest 
Fire). And New Yorker pop critic Sasha Frere-Jones usually opts to celebrate 
the coming of the winter solstice by advancing an argument full of holes big 
enough for Santa to drive his sleigh through.

2009's entry into this canon 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/musical/2009/10/26/091026crmu_music_frerejones>
 put forward the proposition that the year that has just passed is the one in 
which hip-hop can confidently be said to have "died". Proclaiming the demise of 
one major form of musical endeavour or another has never really been a good 
critical look. (Remember the early 90s, when Tony Parsons ushered in the 
Britpop era by going on Channel 4 to tell us that British pop music would never 
again have the power to touch the lives of millions?) And given that pretty 
much the only concrete evidence Jones cites is thatJay-Z 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/jayz>'s The Blueprint 3 is not as good as The 
Black Album, (no shit, Sherlock, and yet, Jay's decline is nowhere near as 
vertiginous as the jump in quality from Mos Def's last album to 2009's The 
Ecstatic, so where does that leave us?) andAlex MacPherson (against) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/dec/03/death-of-hip-hop> and Simon 
Reynolds (for) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2009/nov/26/notes-noughties-hip-hop> 
have already gone mano a mano here on the whole hip-hop-is-dead issue, it would 
be tempting to leave this particular cold potato in the back of the fridge with 
the uneaten bread sauce, were Frere-Jones's entire theory not predicated on a 
jaw-dropping (and as yet publicly unremarked) colonialist assumption.

In casually letting slip that his own current Brooklyn residence is just 
around the corner from the territory so artfully mythologised in Jay-Z's 
earlier releases, Frere-Jones seems to be suggesting that a realistic 
assessment of hip-hop's vital signs can only be made by someone living in New 
York. But that particular genie is long out of the bottle.Hip-hop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/hip-hop> is no longer – if it ever was – a 
geographically specific entity, it's a set of tools that can be used equally 
effectively more or less anywhere in the world. And just as even the 
blazered-up poltroons of the MCC have now had to concede that cricket's centre 
of gravity is no longer located in the Long Room at Lords, anyone planning to 
proclaim the death of hip-hop should maybe check out the MTV Africa Awards 
before presuming to speak for the planet as a whole.

As if to prove that there's room for the odd surprise amid the familiar 
pleasures of the year's dying weeks, the globally-attuned hipsters ofUncut 
magazine <http://www.uncut.co.uk/music/>showed the New Yorker's curmudgeonly 
homeboy the way by voting forTinariwen's Imidiwan: Companions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jul/05/tinariwen-imidiwan-companions> as 
their album of the year. Not since Jeremy Clarkson announced that he had become 
a vegan has the British media come up with such a remarkable ideological 
turnaround (You didn't see that episode of Top Gear? It was superb… they made 
Richard Hammond live in a tiny cage for a week, subsisting entirely on 
wood-shavings). And those who enjoy having their expectations confounded should 
be alert to the availability of another equally unexpected treat.

"I must read more about Jacko" will not be a fashionable new year's resolution 
at the turn of this particular decade. But for those with the resolve to get 
past its slightly indigestible title, the new anthology of reflections on 
Jackson's life and work put together by Mark Fisher (aka blogosphere heavyweight
K-Punk <http://k-punk.abstractdynamics.org/>) makes a hugely worthwhile 
counterweight to the many rush-released cash-in titles published in the 
indecent aftermath of his death.

Since the most dramatic recent shift in our understanding of the Jackson saga 
is that we now know its ending, the most appropriate way to capture the 
improbably potent allure ofThe Resistible Demise of Michael Jackson 
<http://www.o-books.com/obookssite/book/detail/928> (Zero Books, £9.99) seems 
to be with a selection of its last lines. "What if the young black man in those 
Off the Wall videos had not disappeared?" Fisher himself demands, at the end of 
a cogent introductory essay. Marcello Carlin's concluding counsel is that "We 
must be careful not to start treating his memory like a child", while David 
Stubbs proclaims the following good news: "The 'King' is dead, long live 
everything else".

There are good bits in the middle of these essays, too. Geeta Dyall's brief 
but fascinating assessment of Jackson's impact on Bollywood, Robin Carmody's 
valiant quest for socio-political resonance ("In Eastern Europe especially, 
Jackson really was precisely what Elvis had been to post-Suez Britain") and 
former Wire editor Mark Sinker's invigoratingly out-there interpretation of the 
meaning of Jackson's demise (which he at one point characterises as "the center 
of the yellow mattress, the sacred fart") are particularly eye-catching in this 
regard.

As a final year-end treat, all those who don't yet feel they've had a 
definitive best-of-the-decade experience (or are suffering from serious 
insomnia) are strongly advised to hot-finger it to theRock's Back Pages 
<http://www.rocksbackpages.com/> website, where even non-subscribers can get 
free access to 100 different music journalists' individual top 20 lists. Yes, I 
did say 100.

Those who've complained about other newspaper and magazine lists being too 
obviously compiled by committee will no doubt be intrigued to discover that 
while Nirvana biographer Michael Azerad's favourite album of the decade was 
Rise Above (Dirty Projectors' tragic-comic act of afro-pop vandalism on Black 
Flag's hardcore rosetta stone Damaged), Garry Bushell picked Green Day's 
American Idiot. The keenly contested Inky Fingers award for top 20 list of the 
year, though, goes to US metal sage Chuck Eddy, for picking not one but two 
Ashlee Simpson albums (at numbers 5 and 12). Readers looking to do themselves a 
seasonal favour are strongly advised to treat themselves to a festive copy of 
Eddy'sStairway To Hell: The 500 Best Heavy Metal Albums in The Universe 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Stairway-Hell-Heavy-Albums-Universe/dp/030680817X/ref=sr_1_7?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1261034203&sr=1-7>
. In the immortal words of Frank Carson, "it's a cracker".
 