
A nationwide prison strike over conditions and wages behind bars, which 
organizers tipped to be the biggest of its kind in US history, was under way in 
at least several correctional facilities across the country on Friday, 
according to prison rights advocates.

Inmates from several states, who had bound together with the help of activists 
and organizing groups, aimed the national strikes – which had been in the 
making for several months – against what they said amounted to slave labor 
conditions amid mass incarceration in the country.

The coordinated events, which organizers targeted in as many as 24 states, 
occurred on the 45th anniversary of the riots at Attica prison in New York – 
the largest prison uprising in American history – over grievances today’s 
protesters say are similar, including poor sanitary conditions and prison jobs 
that amount to forced labor.

New Attica documents reveal inmate accounts of torture after 1971 prison riot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/22/new-attica-documents-reveal-inmate-torture>
In April, one of the main national groups organizing the campaign, the 
Incarcerated Workers Organizing Committee (IWOC), under the banner of the 
Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) union, announcedits call to action 
<https://iwoc.noblogs.org/post/2016/04/01/announcement-of-nationally-coordinated-prisoner-workstoppage-for-sept-9-2016/>
.

“This is a call for a nation-wide prisoner work stoppage to end prison 
slavery,” it said. “They cannot run these facilities without us.”

“Work is good for anyone,” Melvin Ray, who is incarcerated at the WE Donaldson 
correctional facility in Bessemer, Alabama,told Mother Jones on Friday 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/09/national-prison-strike-inmates>. 
“The problem is that our work is producing services that we’re being charged 
for, that we don’t get any compensation from.”

Ray is a member of the group called the Free Alabama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> Movement, which has been 
instrumental in leading the strike efforts, along with other groups formed with 
the help of incarcerated individuals such as the Free Ohio Movement, the Free 
Mississippi Movement and the End Prison Slavery in Texas movement.

According to the Federal Bureau of Prisons 
<https://www.bop.gov/inmates/custody_and_care/work_programs.jsp>, prisoners at 
federal facilities can make between 12 and 40 cents an hour for their work, 
while state prison rates can be higher or lower. In several states, including 
Texas and Arkansas, inmates are paid no wage for their labor.

But the issue is not merely about earning meager amounts of money on the side. 
Inmates and outside organizers say that manyUS prisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-prisons> simply would not run without 
the labor of inmates, including the work of building maintenance, cooking and 
cleaning.

“These strikes are our method for challenging mass incarceration,” Kinetik 
Justice, a founder of the Free Alabama Movement, who serves at the Holman 
correctional facility in Alabama,told Democracy Now in May 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2016/9/9/nationwide_prison_strike_launches_in_24>, 
during a prior 10-day strike which mirrors what he and others planned for 
Friday.

Justice said that effort to push for a coordinated strikes came after “we 
understood that our incarceration was pretty much about our labor and the money 
that was being generated through the prison system”. He added that the 
prisoners, as a result, “began organizing around our labor and used it as a 
means and a method in order to bring about reform in the Alabama prison system”.

A press release from the Free Alabama Movement 
<https://freealabamamovement.wordpress.com/2016/09/09/press-statement-sept-9-nationwide-protest-workstrike-boycott-and-demonstrations/>
 said that a widespread strike at Holman correctional facility had been 
launched a minute after midnight on Friday. The Alabama department of 
correctionssubsequently said that at least 45 inmates had gone on strike 
<http://www.al.com/news/birmingham/index.ssf/2016/09/nearly_4_dozen_inmates_at_alab.html>
.

The Free Alabama Movement also said also that strikes were under way at other 
prisons in Florida,South Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-carolina> and Texas.

An IWOC statement on Friday 
<https://www.facebook.com/incarceratedworkers/posts/526009274257886> said the 
South Carolina prisoners who were striking had released a set of demands before 
they would return to work, including the end of “free labor”. The IWOC also 
said on Friday that inmates at the Fluvanna correctional center for women in 
Virginia had gone on strike.

A report from the Miami Herald 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/community/miami-dade/article100874582.html>
 said that two prisons in the state had put their facilities on lockdown, a day 
after it reported that prison guards across the state were gearing up for 
possible strikes in conjunction with the national protests.

The full scope of Friday’s planned protests, however, has not yet emerged.

Strikes have happened at many prisons across the country over wages and 
conditions in the past several years.

In 2013, one of the largest coordinated inmate resistance actions to date 
occurredwhen some 30,000 inmates across California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/09/california-prisoners-hunger-strike>
 went on hunger strike to protest at penal conditions, including a heavy 
reliance upon solitary confinement.
 