
In five words

The South Pacific’s melting pot


Sound of the city

You’re never far from a beach in Tāmaki Makaurau, Auckland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/auckland>. The central city lies across an 
isthmus straddling the Pacific Ocean on its east and the Tasman Sea on its west.

This recording at Point Chevalier, a relatively central location, captures the 
buzz of a city defined by its nautical location. Seagulls, sparrows and the 
native tui bird occupy thepōhutukawa trees 
<https://nzhistory.govt.nz/media/photo/pohutukawa-flowers> above the beach, 
competing with the sound of young people singing and playing an impromptu game 
of touch rugby.

Best building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F427af9d0b43e43406d00b089ba924c61a86c9071%2F0_144_4288_2574%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Auckland%3A%20a%20multicultural%20melting%20pot%20by%20the%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Auckland%3A%20a%20multicultural%20melting%20pot%20by%20the%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F427af9d0b43e43406d00b089ba924c61a86c9071%2F0_144_4288_2574%2F4288.jpg>
 The Auckland Art Gallery’s timber atrium has been recognised internationally 
for its design. Photograph: David St George 
It would be too easy to pick the Sky Tower 
<https://www.skycityauckland.co.nz/attractions/sky-tower/>, the building that 
gives this city its distinct skyline; and while it is a significant structure 
and a central focus for downtown Auckland, it’s not the best. Over the other 
side of Victoria Street though, you’ll find the Auckland Art Gallery backing on 
to Albert Park.

With its remodelled main atrium opening in 2011, the building – and 
particularly its ceiling 
<http://www.stuff.co.nz/auckland/local-news/auckland-city-harbour-news/4640778/Gallerys-artful-kauri-ceiling>
 – is a refined example of architecture that pays homage to New Zealand 
materials. The stunning Kauri wood ceiling consists of 28 pods, towering 15 
metres above the entrance. The intricate detail andlocal craftsmanship 
<http://www.stuff.co.nz/auckland/local-news/auckland-city-harbour-news/4640778/Gallerys-artful-kauri-ceiling>
 are impressive, and the council-owned organisation has picked up numerousawards
 <http://www.aucklandartgallery.com/about/building/awards>.

Most under-rated location


On a bus trip out of the city I once heard a Kiwi give advice to a tourist 
telling them to avoid K Road (Karangahape Road) because it’s “a bit dodgy, if 
you know what I mean”. Avoiding K Road on a trip to Auckland would be like 
dismissing theReeperbahn in Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/04/st-pauli-pees-back-hamburg-red-light-district-revenge>
 – it may not have a pristine reputation but it certainly makes up the fabric 
of the city, and that’s why it’s a must-visit. The notoriously bohemian street 
is known as the red-light district, the gay district and generally the 
welcoming, all embracing home of the artists, the cultured and the misfits.

Hit by a recent wave of gentrification, the street is changing. It’s now 
becoming a modern foodie destination, spearheaded by the growing influence of 
local favourites like bistroCocos Cantina 
<https://www.instagram.com/cocoscantina/>. The slightly grungy Peach Pit a few 
doors up also does amazing food, while across the road, the former strip club 
Las Vegas is now home to a dumpling and cocktail bar. So don’t be put off by 
small-minded advice: make sure you visit Karangahape Road.

Biggest controversy

New Zealand has just held its local council elections. In Auckland, voter 
turnout was a poor35.18% 
<http://www.radionz.co.nz/news/political/315169/auckland-election-low-turnout,-large-variation-in-voting-patterns>
. In a city where average house prices have recently crept over the 
million-dollar mark andfamilies who can’t afford rent are sleeping in 
<http://thewireless.co.nz/articles/the-pencilsword-b-is-for-brave> cars, such 
voter apathy is disappointing and unhelpful. Not least for the fact that it 
leaves citizens with little direct democratic ability to steer the city in a 
different direction.

But this poor turnout is also controversial for the fact that nobody can 
decide whose fault it is: are Aucklanders, particularlyyoung people 
<http://m.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=11717733>, just 
too alienated from local politics? Did the politicians runparticularly boring 
campaigns 
<http://salient.org.nz/2016/09/it-doesnt-have-to-be-boring-chloe-swarbrick-vs-status-quo/>
? Does the council just not makethe voting process 
<http://thespinoff.co.nz/society/01-11-2016/voting-for-hillary-clinton-was-easier-than-voting-for-chloe-swarbrick-and-i-live-in-auckland/>
 relevant and easy? Ordid the media provide 
<http://www.listener.co.nz/commentary/features/local-body-elections-vote/> 
irrelevant coverage?

The look on the street

What does your city smell like?

There is nothing more satisfying than a summertime backyard or beachside 
barbecue – and walking home along streets where the smell of soft smoke from a 
grill wafts over the fence is about as homely as it gets.

That is, until you travel abroad. After living in northern Europe for some 
time where cities often have the stale smell of cigarettes hanging in the air, 
arriving back in Auckland and being hit with the smell of sea is literally like 
a breath of fresh air. Auckland Airport is situated on the edge of Manukau 
Harbour, and you’ll get that first salty whiff of clean air as soon as you 
land. There is nothing like the smell of the sea to know you’re home.

Homegrown talent

The “post-graffiti” movement has really taken off in Auckland in the last few 
years, with street art following the global trend of rising beyond the 
backstreets and train carriages, to the front pages of society as a medium for 
socially conscious messaging. Aucklander Elliot O’Donnell, better known asAskew 
One <https://www.instagram.com/askewone/?hl=en>, is a progressive force in this 
field. Askew strongly associates with the South Pacific’s colours and politics, 
and has been involved with local Auckland graffiti art collectiveTMD 
<http://www.tmdcrew.com/>.

His bright, refined and layered street work 
<https://stonesoupsyndicate.com/features/askew-one/> has been commissioned on 
city walls and exhibited in galleries around the world, with his stunning 
public art appearing everywhere from Detroit to Tahiti.

Moment in history
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cb08f0d389a0d4a0e27871b4706c6cb89cb381c%2F0_0_1833_1099%2F1833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Auckland%3A%20a%20multicultural%20melting%20pot%20by%20the%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Auckland%3A%20a%20multicultural%20melting%20pot%20by%20the%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cb08f0d389a0d4a0e27871b4706c6cb89cb381c%2F0_0_1833_1099%2F1833.jpg>
 Anti-apartheid demonstrators march through Auckland to protest the tour of 
South Africa’s Springbok rugby union team in July 1981. Photograph: Associated 
Press 
Welcoming sporting teams on 9 September 2011 for the opening night of the 
Rugby World Cup was a moment of celebration for Auckland. But it was also an 
opportunity to reflect on Auckland’s sporting history. Almost 30 years earlier 
a Cessna plane flew low over Eden Park and dropped flour bombs on the field in 
the middle of a rugby test match between New Zealand’s All Blacks andSouth 
Africa’s Springboks 
<http://www.thenational.ae/sport/rugby/the-flour-bomb-test-when-apartheid-protest-and-rugby-mixed-in-new-zealand>
.

It was one of many anti-apartheid protests inside and out of the stadium in 
September 1981. The Springbok tour cut to the core of New Zealander’s 
identities. While today the majority would recognise that sport should have the 
power to foster dialogues of diversity and inclusion, at the time the issue was 
divisive. The Rugby World Cup opening in 2011 was not only memorable for being 
a giant street party and night-long celebration, it was also a chance to 
reflect on how far the city, the sport and the nation has come in the last 
three decades.

Worst building?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8321dcee164ec67fb9a54e26b8e9fdc9f0db124d%2F0_83_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insider's%20guide%20to%20Auckland%3A%20a%20multicultural%20melting%20pot%20by%20the%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Auckland%3A%20a%20multicultural%20melting%20pot%20by%20the%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Finsiders-guide-auckland-multicultural-melting-pot-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8321dcee164ec67fb9a54e26b8e9fdc9f0db124d%2F0_83_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
 These concrete block apartments have got to be some of the city’s ugliest. 
Photograph: Hannah Spyksma 
A few years ago, Auckland news magazine Metro published an article called The 
City’s shame: Why is Auckland’s Urban Design so bad 
<http://www.metromag.co.nz/metro-archive/citys-shame-aucklands-urban-design-bad/>
? Metro argued that between the 1950s and the 2000s, the city somehow dropped 
the ball on urban development, neglecting good design for the most part. 
Broadly speaking, the city has expanded outwards and upwards since post-war 
state housing developments gave way to a laissez-faire approach to planning 
from the late 70s through till the turn of century.

Since then, we’ve started to see a renewed and necessary interest in smart 
urban design that will help the city respond to its burgeoning growing pains. 
But this buffer of in-between time saw the unfortunate rise of several concrete 
bunker-style apartment blocks in the central city, including the often loathed 
Auckland council stalwart Bledisloe House. In my opinion, these soviet-style 
block towers are an eye sore in a city where attention should be won by it’s 
natural beauty.


Top insider’s tip

Treat Auckland as more than just a layover destination for New Zealand’s 
picturesque South Island and you’ll see why roughly one quarter of the 
country’s inhabitants live here. With its magnificent harbours, beaches, 
islands and regional parks the city is a destination in its own right. Spend a 
day or two wandering around the inner city going from cafes to art galleries or 
museums, and then out to dinner along Ponsonby Road, Karangahape Road or near 
Britomart. If you’re here in the warmer months spend an evening at the open air 
cinema at Wynyard Quarter’sSilo Park <http://www.silopark.co.nz/>, where films 
are screened against old silo tanks with the harbour bridge as a back drop.

Best Instagram account

A few years ago Courteney Peters 
<http://gatherandhunt.co.nz/five-years-gather-hunt/> returned from Melbourne, 
determined that Auckland was as good as its hip city cousin across the ditch. 
From her desire to showcase local food, art and talent here,Gather and Hunt 
<https://www.instagram.com/gatherandhuntnz/> has become an evolving platform to 
showcase the best of trendy Auckland.

What does your city do better than anywhere else?

While New Zealand as a nation has a bi-cultural framework, there’s no denying 
that Auckland is multicultural. It is the biggest Polynesian city in the world 
and is home totwo thirds 
<http://www.aucklandcouncil.govt.nz/EN/planspoliciesprojects/reports/Documents/aucklandprofileinitialresults2013census201405.pdf>
 of the country’s Pacific and Asian identifying populations. This, combined 
with its Māori and Pākeha (white) heritage, means that Auckland is a South 
Pacific melting pot like no other.

The extent of its diversity is ever-present in politics and particularly in 
regards to socio-economic issues. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/12/how-new-zealands-rich-poor-divide-killed-its-egalitarian-paradise>
 But a more tangible and positive expression of this is in the local cuisine 
and creative communities. Much of the city’s vibrant arts scene revolves around 
people trying to understand and make sense of their identity in relation to 
this place – the team behindFlat3 webseries <http://www.flat3webseries.com/> is 
a perfect example of this.

How green is your city?

The city is formed on an isthmus with more than 40 volcanoes. So naturally, 
the city is pretty green, and the 2010 amalgamation of Auckland council helped 
with this too. In expanding the city’s boundaries, it picked up a few regional 
parks, so you can now go camping in the countryside while technically still 
being in the city.

However, despite its abundance of parks and outdoor space the city still 
struggles with poor public transport and clogged motorways. It still has a long 
way to go in terms of being environmentally friendly, but it’s making baby 
steps every day. Recently, a dedicatedcycling lane over the Harbour Bridge 
<http://www.radionz.co.nz/news/national/309130/auckland-council-gives-nod-to-skypath>
 was formally approved.

Five to follow

Auckland Museum <https://www.facebook.com/AucklandMuseum/>


PublicAddress <https://twitter.com/publicaddress>


Flying Nun Records <https://soundcloud.com/flyingnunrecords>

Rachel Soh <http://rachelsohphotography.tumblr.com/>


Epic Little Missions <http://www.epiclittlemissions.co.nz/>

From me
 Hannah Spyksma. Photograph: Chloe Fill 
Hannah Spyksma <http://www.hannahspyksma.com/> is a journalist and media 
researcher. Originally from a beach town on the north-east coast of New 
Zealand, she’s lived in the UK, Denmark and Germany but always seems to find 
her way back to Auckland. Follow her onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/hannahspyksma>.
 