
It was a couple of months ago when I last wrote about the role the University 
of Leicester's alumni could play in boosting the employability prospects of 
current students.

I have now been inspired to write again after a networking event in London, 
set against the backdrop of the beautiful Mandarin hotel, saw previous 
graduates exchanging business cards and the promise of LinkedIn "connections" 
with the class of 2011.

It was superb, and has set a clear challenge to Leicester's alumni committee 
(on which I am a member), to both engage those graduates looking to give 
something back to their institution and enhance the employment prospects of 
current students.

Back in October we had our first committee meeting of the academic year, where 
we formalised many of our plans for the next 12 months. In addition to the core 
of our work, which involves huge fundraising events, an employability working 
group has been formed to feed into the university's overall strategy on 
enhancing chances for Leicester's students, through active alumni engagement.

While work is yet to begin proper to deliver this objective, I believe this 
directly addresses two key issues. The first is that in an era of higher fees, 
Leicester, like every other university, should be focusing more on increasing 
opportunities for its students, not least because this is what they will be 
expecting from in 2012 and beyond.

The second is that there will now be more chances for alumni to re-engage with 
their alma mater without necessarily affecting their bank balance. 
'Friendraising' as well as fundraising will no doubt become a strategic 
priority in this new era of higher education and I am delighted this is already 
being pushed higher up Leicester's agenda.

So, having been set the challenge of co-ordinating this working group, I 
thought I might share some of the themes of our discussions.

The first priority is, of course, what we want to achieve from the working 
group. Increasing the number of alumni currently involved in the university's 
graduate careers and employability programme is a good place to start, and 
taken from the university's alumni strategy.

For me, though, this could go further, and extend to what we'd like the 
outcome to be for students as well as alumni. If we're to accept there is an 
inextricable link between the activities of university careers' departments, 
the traditional holder of student employability targets, and alumni offices, 
then our aims need to reflect this. My feeling is that to serve both issues 
above, you need to tackle them both simultaneously.

The second will be how to achieve our objective. Mapping our path will come as 
a result of identifying what the university already does, which currently 
includes developing a professional networking program and working more 
effectively with departments to publicise internship opportunities, drawing out 
how we as a working group can see alumni engage with students, and then 
reconciling this with the resources available at our disposal.

The third will be the delivery of our objective. As a group of volunteers the 
actual delivery will be largely the responsibility of the alumni relations 
team. However, I am sure that, like me, the rest of the committee will be happy 
to get their hands dirty when they can.

Time frames will need to be put in place as will milestones, to enable a 
constant review of our work. Though whatever time we have, our group will need 
to remain dynamic and try to avoid running out of steam â€“ it will need to plug 
into the detail of the work that both the alumni team and committee do before 
the academic year is over.

A short burst of enthusiasm coupled with action is sure to start delivering 
the results we want. Hold tight for outcomes post our December meeting.

Alex Smith is development manager at Recourse <http://recourse.org.uk/>, a 
support network for post-16 education professionals and a member of the
University of Leicester's Alumni Association 
<http://www2.le.ac.uk/alumni/about/association>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 