
Music exists beyond genre labels. I generally follow my enthusiasm when 
listening, so this selection is a typically mixed bag. A few things in this 
list, such as Dinu Lipatti playing Bach, have visited my turntable for years; 
others, such as Girl Band, are recent additions to my home vinyl collection. 
I’ve just finisheda project <http://www.maxrichtermusic.com/en/news/view/225/MT>
 concerned with sleep, perception and dreams, and many of the picks here feel 
like reveries: the abstract melancholy love song byAphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aphex-twin>, or the cavernous spaces of 
Grouper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/24/grouper-review-st-johns-church-london-liz-harris>
’s music both seem disembodied in their own way. One of the images that music 
calls to mind for me is that of the daydream. I think many of these tracks are 
like daydreams, though not all of them are the kind of dreams we might want to 
have.

Osvaldo Golijov – Tenebrae II
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPTFSqvoRnN8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPTFSqvoRnN8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPTFSqvoRnN8&media=>
This is a contemporary take on a common Renaissance compositional technique. 
Golijov is a very creative thinker – his work is multidirectional and 
omnivorous in the best possible way. This piece feels embedded in tradition 
while simultaneously pointing forward. I love its lyricism and directness, even 
though the music is much more complex than it seems.

Aphex Twin – Nannou
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA-Pkx37kYf4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA-Pkx37kYf4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA-Pkx37kYf4&media=>
An oldie. This delicate and tender track from Aphex is completely unusual for 
him, but nevertheless beautifully made – and incredibly smart. Apparently, this 
was written for his then-girlfriend: a rare chink in the armour of intellectual 
mumbo jumbo with which critics normally surround his work. I mean that as a 
compliment, actually. I love a bit of mumbo jumbo.

David Lang – Wed 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0nuSlrj3nZ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0nuSlrj3nZ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0nuSlrj3nZ0&media=>
Another very sweet piece. David Lang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/09/crowd-out-review-david-lang-birmingham>
 has been on fire these last few years; he turns out an amazing amount of 
high-quality music. He once told me that, after the New York Philharmonic 
premiered one of his first pieces, his mother turned to him and said: “It’s not 
too late to study to be a dentist.” Just goes to show that mum is not always 
right.

Grouper – Disengaged
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DujsCaYznwTA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DujsCaYznwTA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DujsCaYznwTA&media=>
Grouper has been doing great things over the last couple of years, but this 
goes back a little to the beginning of her story. I love records that sound 
like they were recorded in a cave or underwater, and Grouper is queen of this 
sort of thing. She is a fascinating storyteller – it will be interesting to see 
what she does next.

Girl Band – Lawman
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnqxe3NZKYL0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnqxe3NZKYL0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnqxe3NZKYL0&media=>
I keep waiting for Girl Band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/16/girl-band-dublin-quartet-review> 
to be huge, but it hasn’t happened yet. I love everything about this: the 
sonics of the guitars, which are just perfect; the incomprehensible vocals; the 
manic pulse; the video. It’s perfect. Come on people, wake up! Girl Band is it!

Hildur Guðnadóttir – Erupting Light
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNmZ2pAFbXsE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNmZ2pAFbXsE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNmZ2pAFbXsE&media=>
This is a perfectly titled piece from the mercurial Múm cellist (and now 
actual mum). There are a lot of folks out there doing the 
“solo-instrument-plus-looping-pedals” thing, and some of this work is great, 
but I think Hildur is a real storyteller. And that is one of things I think 
music is for: telling stories.

Dinu Lipatti – Nun Komm, der Heiden Heiland (Bach/Busoni)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMC3Upv8DuRQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMC3Upv8DuRQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMC3Upv8DuRQ&media=>
This Bach organ chorale prelude was arranged in the early 20th century by the 
Italian piano virtuoso Ferruccio Busoni, and is played here by Dinu Lipatti. 
For me, there is Bach, and then there is everything else. I can’t get away from 
the feeling that Bach wrote the language we are all using. Lipatti died young 
in 1950, shortly after he made this recording. Vladimir Horowitz and Alfred 
Brendel also made fine recordings of this arrangement, but I could listen to 
Lipatti’s all day long.

Godspeed You! Black Emperor – Storm: Lift Yr Skinny Fists, Like Antennas to 
Heaven
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DShvo9t2qznw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DShvo9t2qznw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DShvo9t2qznw&media=>
This track has that quality that I really like in music: a kind of 
inevitability.Godspeed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/21/godspeed-you-black-emperor-review>
 have a fairly unique philosophical position, and everything they do feels real 
to me. In fact, that’s something else I really like in music: a sense of 
conviction and authenticity.

 * Richter’s eight-hour album Sleep 
<http://GlobalClassics.lnk.to/MaxRichter_Sleep> and its one-hour adaptation 
From Sleep <http://GlobalClassics.lnk.to/MaxRichterFromSleep> are out on 4 
September via Deutsche Grammophon.
 