
What's the vibe?

Auckland is a collection of hilly suburbs, with beaches encompassing a small 
but modern city that drops into a harbour full of boats. It's got a laid-back 
vibe, so even though it's the biggest city in New Zealand, there's a village 
feel to it.

One Tree Hill (next to Cornwall Park) is my favourite place in Auckland. I 
used to go there a lot as a kid: my Mum would take me up there and I'd do the 
skateboard track, and then she'd let me loose for a couple of hours and I'd run 
with the sheep. I'd climb to the top of the hill, which was always an 
adventure, then I'd look out from the top at the view of Auckland, which is 
amazing. I did a kids' show in Cornwall Park called Space Adventure. It was 
inside the planetarium with the stars as a background, and I was in front of it 
pretending I was in a rocket ship flying through space, then I'd land on 
certain planets and become a monster.

Best live music

I haven't seen that many bands in New Zealand; I'm similar to Murray, the band 
manager character I play in Flight of the Conchords - he's never seen a single 
band in his life, and he's constantly getting the names of bands wrong. I like 
the idea of going to see bands, but I've hardly been to any! If I do want to 
see a band I go to theKings Arms (59 France Street, kingsarms.co.nz 
<http://www.kingsarms.co.nz>), or Grand Central (126 Ponsonby Road, 
grandcentral.net.nz/GC/index.htm <http://www.grandcentral.net.nz/GC/index.htm>
). I saw Steve Earle at theTown Hall (the-edge.co.nz <http://www.the-edge.co.nz>
) when I was about 19.

Best comedy venue

The only club to go to is the Classic Comedy and Bar (321 Queen Street, 
comedy.co.nz <http://www.comedy.co.nz>). It's an old porn theatre from the 50s. 
They revamped it in the 90s but it's still got a bit of the original front bar 
area and leather booth seats, and now people go there and laugh, or don't 
laugh, at the comedians.

Best beaches

I was brought up in Pakuranga so I like the east coast suburbs, like Howick (
welcome2manukau.com/tourism/howick 
<http://www.welcome2manukau.com/tourism/howick>) and Eastern Beach. But my 
favourites are the west coast beaches like Piha (piha.co.nz 
<http://www.piha.co.nz>) and Muriwai (muriwai.com <http://www.muriwai.com>), 
just out of Auckland. Muriwai is a big surf beach, and it's a bit harder to get 
to, but I love frolicking in the sand dunes there. When I was a kid I used to 
imagine it was like being on another planet.

Best view

The Sky Tower (corner Victoria and Federal Street) has to be the best. It's 
Auckland's landmark - without it, the skyline would look boring. I like it as 
an architectural landmark - I've only been inside once, to try out the casino, 
but there's a theatre and restaurants in there too. But mainly I like it 
because I've got a very bad sense of direction. When I'm driving around 
Auckland, if I can see the Sky Tower, I know where I'm heading.

Where to eat, drink and shop

I love Tanuki's Cave (319b Queen Street, sakebars.co.nz/cave.html 
<http://www.sakebars.co.nz/cave.html>), and also Ken Yakitori (kenyakitori.co.nz
 <http://www.kenyakitori.co.nz>) up on 89 Karangahape Road (or K Road, as the 
locals call it). If I'm going out for a nice meal I'll pick somewhere on 
Ponsonby Road likePrego (ponsonbyroad.co.nz/websites/prego 
<http://www.ponsonbyroad.co.nz/websites/prego>) or SPQR (spqrnz.co.nz 
<http://www.spqrnz.co.nz>). The Gypsy Tea Room (455 Richmond Road) is great, 
and theVerona (169 K Road, verona.co.nz <http://www.verona.co.nz>) is my 
favourite cafe. Ponsonby's my favourite area - it used to be the new Parnell 
[an upmarket area full of designer boutiques], but now it's just regular - all 
of the artists and actors and people I know live around there. I loveSt Kevin's 
Arcade on K Road - I used to get my clothing from the op shops [short for 
opportunity shops, the equivalent of charity shops in the UK] in there. I'm 
going to go back and get some more classic New Zealand gear, like Stubbies 
shorts, for Murray to wear. There's a little cafe in the arcade called the
Alleluya, which looks out over Myers Park, a sort of secret park. And at the 
top of the hill (in Western Park) there are sculptures that look like buildings 
that have sunk into the earth, with just the corners poking out.

Best pies

My favourites are Ponsonby Pies - back at school it was always steak and 
cheese, but as we got older the gourmet ones came in. Some of them sound 
disgusting, like tandoori chicken ones and scallop pies, but they're amazing. 
You can get these gourmet pies with ridiculous fillings anywhere (there are 
about three good pie shops in the city centre). But mostly I'm a basic steak 
and cheese man.

Best day trip

Get in a boat and go to Waiheke Island (waiheke.co.nz 
<http://www.waiheke.co.nz>) - the 35-minute ferry trip takes you through the 
Hauraki Gulf and you get to see Rangitoto [a dormant volcano] and Browns 
Island. When you get to Waiheke it's like arriving on an ancient island. There 
are 26 vineyards on Waiheke, so wine trails are great. (You can hire a scooter 
- just don't have too many wines.) Visit Stony Batter at the end of the island 
where the New Zealand army built massive gun turrets as part of a second world 
war defence system in case the Japanese invaded the harbour. The guns have been 
taken away, but the emplacements are still there. as are underground tunnels 
you can explore. You've had a couple of wines, and it's great, and then you 
come out and you can't remember where you parked your bike, and it gets dark, 
and you have to call a taxi but there aren't any, so you're stuffed. But it's 
good fun - a good day of adventure.

Best seafood

You have to try whitebait patties, bluff oysters and New Zealand mussels. You 
can go diving for your own mussels at Waiheke Island and at most beaches around 
Auckland. You find a local who knows the right spots, take a plastic bag with 
you and swim out. You take your friend Luke, and he forgets to take his 
sunglasses off and you've got to leave them on the rocks. And then he tells you 
to bloody dive down, and it's a bit scary, so you wait for him to do it, and he 
dives down and comes up and he's got a handful of mussels and you've got to 
pull them off the rocks. It's amazing. And they're great big mussels - mussels 
in New Zealand are huge - and then you've got yourself a bag full of freshly 
picked mussels, so you swim back to shore and cook them up on a barbie.

Where to stay

There's the Hilton (hilton.co.nz/ <http://www.hilton.co.nz/>) down on the 
viaduct or theMetropolis (the-ascott.com <http://www.the-ascott.com>) in the 
centre of town - it depends how much money you've got. I would stay in the 
inner city - Ponsonby, Grey Lynn, Newmarket. That whole area encompasses the 
Domain, and you're close to Greenlane and One Tree Hill. I find they're quite 
leafy, and who doesn't like leaves?

·  For more information on New Zealand, newzealand.com 
<http://www.newzealand.com>

·  Rhys Darby's first stand-up DVD will be released later this year.
 