
This week's news has been dominated by protest. From Ukraine, Thailand and 
Bulgaria, where massive crowds gathered demanding governmental change, to 
Egypt, where authorities have cracked down brutally on even the thinnest 
evidence of dissent. As you'd expect, the Guardian Weekly brings you the 
stories and analysis behind all of these remarkable demonstrations of public 
discontent.

But our cover story this week comes from Bangladesh, a country riven by 
poverty, corruption and growing religious zealotry. As elections loom in the 
new year the Observer's Jason Burke reports from Dhaka ona society still 
struggling to find its identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/30/dhaka-clothing-workers-bangladesh-political-turmoil>
 after April's Rana Plaza building collapse that killed more than 1,000 garment 
workers, and where violent and often deadly street protests are becoming 
depressingly commonplace.

From the streets of South Asia to the skies further east, where China has 
flown fighter jets in the air zone around the disputed, Japanese-controlled 
Senkaku islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/29/china-scrambles-fighter-jets-us-japan-aircraft>
, known as the Diaoyu to the Chinese. We look at why China has chosen to raise 
the stakes in this dispute with Japan as well as the tangled repercussions for 
security in the Asia Pacific region.

In Italy, the senate voted to expel former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi, 
much to the delight of his many political enemies. In Germany meanwhile, the 
CDU chancellor Angela Merkel finally succeeded in forming a new coalition 
government with the Social Democrats, more than two months after her election 
victory.

There's also a special package from Saudi Arabia this week. Ian Black reports 
on a crackdown on illegal foreign workers, predominantly from Ethiopia. And the 
Washington Post visits Puerto Rico, the unincorporated US territory where deep 
financial cracks could haveserious repercussions for America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/puerto-rico-economy-debt-us-bailout>
.

In the UK, David Cameron has set out new benefit restrictions on EU migrants. 
And Scottish Nationalist leader Alex Salmond has laid out more details of how 
an independent Scotland might look ahead of next year's referendum.

In the Weekly review, Alok Jha considers how the world could act to stop a 
global epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/nov/12/deadly-disease-modern-global-epidemic>
, while Jon Henley reports from the Norwegian valley town thatrediscovered its 
place in the sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/06/rjukan-sun-norway-town-mirrors> 
thanks to some large, strategically placed mirrors.

Discovery this week asks why humans seek meaning in the mundane and whether 
tyres can be made from straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/03/michelin-tyres-organic-oil-butadiene>
, Books finds some sparkling wordplay in former Smiths singer Morrissey's 
autobiography, and Culture features a Washington Post interviewwith the 
evergreen Robert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/03/robert-redford-all-is-lost-jc-chandor-sundance>
, who rediscovering a pure form of acting in his new survivor film All is Lost.

Notes & Queries chews on the thorny issue of diplomacy and deviousness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2013/dec/03/guardian-weekly-notes-queries>, 
while Good to Meet You features a reader from Australiawho shares Weekly 
stories with those who cannot read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2013/dec/03/good-to-meet-you-jeanette-ward> 
for themselves via the airwaves.

On the subject of sharing, thanks to those who have sent in their wonderful 
thoughts on and images of where they read their Guardian Weekly.There's still 
plenty of time to join in by clicking this link 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5277db80e4b00ff3f5c0fc26>. We plan 
to run a selection of these contributions in our expanded holiday edition 
coming up 20 December.

Finally a special mention for two Guardian Weekly regulars, Guardian Egypt 
correspondent Patrick Kingsley and Observer science editor Robin McKie, both of 
whom werehonoured at the British Journalism Awards this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/guardian-news-media-wins-british-journalism-awards>
. The judges commended McKie'spiece on the controversial GM crop Golden Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/02/genetic-modification-breakthrough-golden-rice>
, which ran as our cover story in our 8 February edition this year.

Would you like to change your delivery address? Your email address? Suspend 
delivery?You can manage your account online by clicking here. 
<https://www.myguardianweekly.co.uk/Login.aspx?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>

Are you a subscriber looking for our digital edition? If so, click here. 
<http://subscriber.pagesuite-professional.co.uk/custompages/9cc33fb9-de8c-4e90-b6ba-545475feb862/subscribe.aspx>
 That digital edition can also be viewed by subscribers on iPads, iPhones, 
Kindle Fires, Android tablets and smartphones. Log in on the device to the 
digital edition and the technology should take you to the correct format.

Want to know more about the Weekly? Check out our frequently asked questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2012/jan/19/guardian-weekly-faqs>. 
 