
The winner

Delivering the biggest UK opening number since The Inbetweeners 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-inbetweeners-2> three months ago, 
Interstellar tops the chart with a weekend gross greater than the films in 
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth places all added 
together. However, the £5.38m opening is down on the £5.91m debut ofInception 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inception>, from July 2010. The Inception 
comparison is apt, since both these Christopher Nolan films are based on 
original ideas, rather than benefiting from audience interest in established 
characters.The Dark Knight Rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-dark-knight-rises> – a less suitable 
comparison – debuted here with £14.36m in July 2012.

Distributor Warners will point to the running time of Interstellar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interstellar> (169 minutes) putting a brake 
on box office: cinemas have more limited opportunities to squeeze in two 
evening showtimes with a film of such epic duration. On the other hand, 
multiplexes can simply programme on more screens to get round the problem. 
Inception came in at a relatively trim 148 minutes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmatthew-mcconaughey-christopher-nolan-interstellar-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F3%2F1415019640177%2FMatthew-McConaughey-talks-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Matthew%20McConaughey%20and%20the%20cast%20of%20Christopher%20Nolan's%20Interstellar%3A%20'Mother%20nature's%20going%20to%20be%20just%20fine%2C%20it's%20us%20that%20might%20not%20be'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmatthew-mcconaughey-christopher-nolan-interstellar-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Matthew%20McConaughey%20and%20the%20cast%20of%20Christopher%20Nolan%27s%20Interstellar%3A%20%27Mother%20nature%27s%20going%20to%20be%20just%20fine%2C%20it%27s%20us%20that%20might%20not%20be%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmatthew-mcconaughey-christopher-nolan-interstellar-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F3%2F1415019640177%2FMatthew-McConaughey-talks-014.jpg>
 Matthew McConaughey and the cast of Christopher Nolan’s Interstellar: ‘Mother 
nature’s going to be just fine, it’s us that might not be’ - video interview 
Interstellar opened on exactly the same date as Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity> a year ago – another Imax-friendly 
cerebral space adventure from a commercial auteur director. Gravity debuted 
with £6.24m, including £619,000 in previews, going on to achieve a robust 
£27.1m by year’s end, and £32.7m by the end of its run. Positive audience 
approval will be needed to give Interstellar an equivalent sustain, and awards 
attention would also help.

The runner-up
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcannes-2014-mr-turners-timothy-spall-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F18%2F1400412351653%2FTimothy-Spall-in-Mr-Turne-010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cannes%202014%3A%20Mr%20Turner's%20Timothy%20Spall%3A%20'I%20like%20to%20paint%20angels%20in%20anguish'%20%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcannes-2014-mr-turners-timothy-spall-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cannes%202014%3A%20Mr%20Turner%27s%20Timothy%20Spall%3A%20%27I%20like%20to%20paint%20angels%20in%20anguish%27%20%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcannes-2014-mr-turners-timothy-spall-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F18%2F1400412351653%2FTimothy-Spall-in-Mr-Turne-010.jpg>
 Mr Turner’s Timothy Spall: ‘I like to paint angels in anguish’ – video 
Rising from seventh to second place, Mr Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-turner> continues its remarkable 
box-office performance, with £2.67m after 10 days. That’s already more than the 
lifetime gross of any previous Mike Leigh film.

Distributor eOne is following an aggressive strategy never tried before with a 
Mike Leigh <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mikeleigh> title, expanding in 
week two to a hefty 252 cinemas. That of course means that the screen average 
on the second weekend has diluted – but at £4,026 it’s still an attractive 
number. More cinemas, evidently, are clamouring to take the film, and Mr Turner 
expands its site count to 380 from Friday.

Among venues Mr Turner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-turner> expanded 
into, best-performing were Bluewater Showcase, Vue Plymouth, The Quad in Derby 
and Eastbourne Cineworld. Overall, after 10 days, Odeon has highest market 
share on the film, and the Olympic Barnes is the biggest-grossing site. 
Following more of a London/South-east skew on opening weekend, eOne reports 
that the business is spreading more regionally as the run progresses. Now that 
the film is at more than 250 venues, multiplex sites outnumber arthouses.

Vera Drake <https://www.theguardian.com/film/vera-drake> (£2.38m lifetime) is 
the only other Mike Leigh film to crack £2m in the UK. Secrets & Lies, Happy Go 
Lucky, Another Year and Topsy-Turvy all landed in the £1-2m range. With Mr 
Turner performing strongly on weekdays as well as at the weekend, it’s 
reasonable to assume that £5m is now a very safe bet for the title. Bafta 
nominations in the new year could extend the film’s life into January and 
February. Including Monday takings, Mr Turner now has an 11-day cume of £2.86m.

The rival newcomers
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Finterstellar-leviathan-say-when-the-possibilities-are-endless-video-reviews&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415368043429%2FMatthew-McConaughey-and-A-024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Interstellar%2C%20Leviathan%2C%20Say%20When%20and%20The%20Possibilities%20are%20Endless%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Finterstellar-leviathan-say-when-the-possibilities-are-endless-video-reviews>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20Film%20Show%3A%20Interstellar%2C%20Leviathan%2C%20Say%20When%20and%20The%20Possibilities%20are%20Endless%20-%20video%20reviews&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Finterstellar-leviathan-say-when-the-possibilities-are-endless-video-reviews&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415368043429%2FMatthew-McConaughey-and-A-024.jpg>
 The Guardian Film Show: Interstellar, Leviathan, Say When and The 
Possibilities are Endless - video reviews 
Thanks to the release of Interstellar, studios gave the weekend date a wide 
berth, at least for any film with hope of significant commercial achievement. 
But a few more modestly proportioned titles were given a run, notably US indie 
comedy Say When, starring Keira Knightley, Sam Rockwell and Chloë Grace Moretz. 
The film debuted in 12th place, with a mediocre £93,000 from 122 cinemas. But 
that number looks positively rosy compared to the gross achieved byThe Skeleton 
Twins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-skeleton-twins>, starring Kristen 
Wiig and Bill Hader: £19,200 from 85 venues, and a dismal £226 average.

Despite having a cast topped by Pierce Brosnan, Disney took an ultra-cautious 
approach to its new spy thrillerThe November Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-november-man>, placing it in just 12 
cinemas. A gross of just under £5,000 resulted, yielding a £415 average. With a 
production budget reported at $15m, Disney evidently decided there was no point 
trying to recoup any of this cost from the UK theatrical market. Doubtless a 
happier fate awaits the film on DVD and via another ancillary revenue streams.

The documentary glut
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-possibilities-are-endless-trailer-stroke-edwyn-collins-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410867153754%2FEdwyn-Collins-in-a-still--014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Possibilities%20are%20Endless%3A%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20Edwyn%20Collins's%20post-stroke%20documentary%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-possibilities-are-endless-trailer-stroke-edwyn-collins-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Possibilities%20are%20Endless%3A%20world%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20Edwyn%20Collins%27s%20post-stroke%20documentary%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthe-possibilities-are-endless-trailer-stroke-edwyn-collins-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F16%2F1410867153754%2FEdwyn-Collins-in-a-still--014.jpg>
 The Possibilities are Endless: world exclusive trailer for Edwyn Collins’s 
post-stroke documentary - video 
Five feature-length documentaries appear in the “Other openers chart”, below, 
including films aboutsinger Edwyn Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-possibilities-are-endless>, film-maker 
Hayao Miyazaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/kingdom-of-dreams-and-madness-review-studio-ghibli>
 andequal marriage in California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-case-against-8>. In addition, two further 
documentary titles,Algorithms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/algorithms-film-review-blind-chess-india>
 andOne Rogue Reporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/one-rogue-reporter-review-steve-coogan-hugh-grant>
, were listed as official 7 November releases by the UK Film Distributors 
Association, and were both reviewed by UK newspaper critics, including in the 
Guardian. Neither appear in Rentrak’s weekend box-office report. The seven 
documentaries grossed a collective £10,200, including previews.

Digital screens and flexible programming have allowed documentaries to be 
given more of a theatrical life than was the case in former times. In the 
equivalent weekend 10 years ago – when a typical cinema release would occupy 
all the showtimes every day in a screen it occupied – there was only one 
documentary released in cinemas:End of the Century: The Story of the Ramones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101484/end.of.the.century>. The 
comparison is mentioned not out of nostalgia for such scant programming – but 
present-day audiences may be forgiven for feeling overwhelmed with choice, 
especially when there are as many documentaries reaching cinemas as there are 
days in the week.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-imitation-game-watch-benedict-cumberbatch-as-alan-turing-in-the-oscar-tipped-biopic-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415280432762%2FBenedict-Cumberbatch-as-A-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Imitation%20Game%3A%20watch%20Benedict%20Cumberbatch%20as%20Alan%20Turing%20in%20the%20Oscar-tipped%20biopic%20-%20video%20exclusive&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-imitation-game-watch-benedict-cumberbatch-as-alan-turing-in-the-oscar-tipped-biopic-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Imitation%20Game%3A%20watch%20Benedict%20Cumberbatch%20as%20Alan%20Turing%20in%20the%20Oscar-tipped%20biopic%20-%20video%20exclusive&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-imitation-game-watch-benedict-cumberbatch-as-alan-turing-in-the-oscar-tipped-biopic-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415280432762%2FBenedict-Cumberbatch-as-A-014.jpg>
 The Imitation Game: watch Benedict Cumberbatch as Alan Turing - video exclusive
Despite the arrival of Interstellar, takings are nevertheless 21% down on the 
equivalent weekend from last year, whenGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity> arrived in the top spot, and Thor: 
The Dark World <https://www.theguardian.com/film/thor-the-dark-world>, Philomena
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/philomena> and Captain Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-phillips> offered robust support. 
Salvation seems immediately not at hand, since the weekend slot sandwiched in 
between Interstellar and the arrival ofa new Hunger Games film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hunger-games-mockingjay-part-1> isn’t a 
propitious slot to release a major blockbuster. However, the market should 
segment nicely with Nativity 3: Dude Where’s My Donkey? chasing family 
audiences in the run-up to Christmas. Upscale and older cinemagoers are 
well-targeted byThe Imitation Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-imitation-game>, starring Benedict 
Cumberbatch as second world war codebreaker Alan Turing. Tom Hardy, Noomi 
Rapace and James Gandolfini star in US indie thrillerThe Drop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-drop>. Paul Haggis (Crash) offers 
ensemble dramaThird Person <https://www.theguardian.com/film/third-person>.

Top 10 films 7-9 November

1. Interstellar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/interstellar>, £5,378,220 
from 574 sites (new)

2. Mr Turner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-turner>, £1,014,433 from 252 
sites. Total: £2,671,313

3. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles>, £738,766 from 
489 sites. Total: £12,889,684

4. Gone Girl <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-girl>, £696,874 from 420 
sites. Total: £20,634,368

5. Fury <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fury>, £674,430 from 480 sites. 
Total: £7,056,559

6. The Book of Life <https://www.theguardian.com/film/book-of-life>, £655,010 
from 522 sites. Total: £4,855,785

7. Ouija <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ouija>, £653,678 from 404 sites. 
Total: £2,587,106

8. Nightcrawler <https://www.theguardian.com/film/nightcrawler>, £545,221 from 
412 sites. Total: £2,169,731

9. The Maze Runner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-maze-runner>, 
£396,286 from 369 sites. Total: £8,345,914

10. Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-and-the-terrible-horrible-no-good-very-bad-day>
, £318,647 from 446 sites. Total: £2,868,463

Other openers

Say When <https://www.theguardian.com/film/say-when>, £93,259 from 122 sites

Chaar Sahibzaade, £87,849 from 16 sites

Leviathan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leviathan>, £29,895 from 15 sites

The Shaukeens, £21,857 from 24 sites

The Skeleton Twins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-skeleton-twins>, 
£19,204 from 85 sites

Oru Oorla Rendu Raja, £5,619 from 7 sites

The November Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-november-man>, £4,980 
from 12 sites

Playtime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/playtime-film-review-jacques-tati>
, £4,617 from 3 sites (rerelease)

The Possibilities Are Endless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-possibilities-are-endless>, £3,575 from 
10 sites

Sacro GRA <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sacro-gra>, £2,429 from 4 sites

The Case Against 8 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-case-against-8>, 
£2,161 from 1 site

Set Fire to the Stars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/set-fire-to-the-stars>
, £1,959 from 8 sites

The Remaining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/the-remaining-alexa-vega-film-review>
, £1,640 from 15 sites

The Kingdom of Dreams and Madness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/06/kingdom-of-dreams-and-madness-review-studio-ghibli>
, £1,383 from 2 sites

My Sweet Canary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/04/roza-eskenazi-my-sweet-canary>, 
£655 from 5 sites

Varsham, £212 from 1 site

• Thanks to Rentrak <https://twitter.com/Rentrak_UK>
 