
Once a docile adjunct that in some small way contributed to fundraising, 
alumni engagement programmes are now adding institutional value in their own 
right. Smart institutions are investing, looking towards their growing alumni 
communities overseas to boost their international efforts.

The cost of undervaluing (or underestimating) graduates' contributions in this 
area is becoming clear. In a recentreport commissioned by the Higher Education 
Academy 
<http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/resources/detail/disciplines/Languages/Strategic_affinity_engaging_international_alumni_to_support_internationalisation>
 (HEA), colleagues and I outlined a range of programmes designed to engage 
alumni to support international activities. The case studies are categorised 
under three headings: promoting student employability; enhancing international 
recruitment; and supporting academic developments.

In an environment of continuing globalisation, employers are increasingly 
demanding graduates who can compete in global marketplaces and meet global 
challenges. The UK is the second highest receiver of international students 
worldwide. But while we are very good at producing global graduates,too few of 
them are UK citizens 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2011/nov/29/universities-uk-students-global-graduates>
; UK students are reticent to take advantage of overseas exchange opportunities.

Case studies in the HEA report highlight ways in which international alumni 
can promote student mobility opportunities, support students studying abroad, 
and bridge the gap for those students who are not (or cannot be) 
internationally mobile during their studies – through planned activities such 
as e-mentoring and remotely delivered masterclasses. These initiatives are also 
invaluable for the employment prospects of international students, where the 
stakes have been raised by the introduction of non-EU graduates into theDLHE 
survey 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/component/option,com_studrec/task,show_file/Itemid,233/mnl,11018/href,coverage.html/>
.

Arguably, the sector does not have a developed understanding about the diverse 
employability needs of students from outside the UK, and international students 
have historically beencritical about the lack of specialised careers support 
<http://www.hecsu.ac.uk/careers_advisory_services_and_international_students_casis.htm>
 (partly attributable to inconsistent expectations about what this might 
entail). A benchmarking survey undertaken last academic year revealed that the 
proportion of institutions providing specialist careers provision for 
international students increased from 42% in 2009/10 to 60% 2010/11, partly 
because a third of careers services developed programmes with alumni overseas 
to promote the employability of international students.

International student recruitment is "complex, costly and competitive", and 
the recruitment of international students is being "implemented in a shorter 
timeframe and under tighter budgets" 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CDcQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.uis.unesco.org%2FLibrary%2FDocuments%2Fresearch-trends-international-student-mobility-education-2012-en.pdf&ei=PBJUUcbkN8HUPJPqgPgE&usg=AFQjCNHMhbL_a8MuqVCqXRGTRKFf4Xzduw&bvm=bv.44342787,d.ZWU&cad=rja>
. The HEA report outlines ways in which alumni are enhancing universities' 
recruitment efforts overseas, with many institutions achieving demonstrable 
impact.

In overseas recruitment, international officers bring essential expertise 
about the market, and academic colleagues can convey authority and specialised 
insights – but alumni add authenticity to the message, especially when this is 
relayed in the prospective students' native tongue. Through carefully managed 
programmes, alumni based overseas can also be engaged to deliver independent 
talks in schools and colleges, extending the institution's reach into areas 
where recruitment officers may not operate.

The report also highlights how academic colleagues can collaborate with alumni 
to enhance international aspects of teaching and learning, facilitating links 
overseas that otherwise may be inaccessible, or require significant investment.
International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/international> graduates 
are also actively supporting colleagues in adapting curriculum content and 
delivery modes into international markets, while preserving the academic rigour 
that they became accustomed to as students.

Graduates based overseas are a valuable resource to be nurtured and engaged 
strategically. They can contribute to institutional success in unique ways that 
cannot be found through work with other stakeholders: they are the authentic 
voice of endorsement in international recruitment; the empathetic careers 
mentor who can connect familiar campus experiences with the overseas employment 
market; and the leader of a masterclass that couples global perspectives with 
experiential knowledge of the academic programme.

While activity in this area is increasing, too many areas are underexplored. 
The use of social media in alumni relations has been well documented, but we 
need better understanding of how to employ it as a meaningful engagement tool, 
and how to connect through international sites such as Weibo and VK. Most 
significantly, though, the case study materials in the HEA report point towards 
the diversity of the international alumni community, and the need to understand 
more about attitudes to giving (time and money) to the alma mater.

Greater knowledge in this area will help UK institutions to design and promote 
programmes that respond to the needs and expectations of international alumni, 
especially as the growth ofTransnational Education 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2012/sep/10/transnational-student-profile-careers-networks>
 (TNE) further diversifies what it means to be an alumnus from a UK university.

Nik Miller is head of alumni engagement at the University of York 
<http://www.york.ac.uk/> – follow it on Twitter @YorkAlumni 
<https://twitter.com/YorkAlumni>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 