
Christopher Nolan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-nolan> has 
defended the “adventurous and creative” sound mix used for blockbuster space 
drama Interstellar, which has seen some viewers complaining that they cannot 
understand key moments of dialogue.

Speaking to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/behind-screen/christopher-nolan-breaks-silence-interstellar-749465?utm_source=twitter>
, Nolan said he had worked on the film’s audio for six months alongside 
composer Hans Zimmer, re-recording mixers Gary Rizzo and Gregg Landaker and 
sound designer Richard King. He admitted to an “unconventional” approach for a 
Hollywood movie, but said the final result was entirely considered and 
deliberate.

“I’ve always loved films that approach sound in an impressionistic way and 
that is an unusual approach for a mainstream blockbuster, but I feel it’s the 
right approach for this experiential film,” said Nolan. “Many of the 
film-makers I’ve admired over the years have used sound in bold and adventurous 
ways. I don’t agree with the idea that you can only achieve clarity through 
dialogue. Clarity of story, clarity of emotions — I try to achieve that in a 
very layered way using all the different things at my disposal — picture and 
sound.”

One scene in which some viewers struggled to hear dialogue featured Michael 
Caine’s character revealing key information to Jessica Chastain’s from his 
hospital bed. “We are following the emotional state of Jessica’s character as 
she starts to understand what he’s been saying,” said Nolan. “Information is 
communicated in various different ways over the next few scenes. That’s the way 
I like to work; I don’t like to hang everything on one particular line.”

Last week one cinema in Rochester, New York, posted a notice confirming that 
its equipment was in full working order in apparent response to complaints 
regarding Interstellar’s sound mix. “Christopher Nolan mixed the soundtrack 
with an emphasis on the music,” read posters at the Cinemark Tinseltown USA and 
Imax. “This is how it is intended to sound.”
Jay Shooke (@JShooke) 
Hey @wellshwood <https://twitter.com/wellshwood> this is taped up all over the 
box office. People are obviously complainingpic.twitter.com/jRq9nixkzH 
<http://t.co/jRq9nixkzH>
 <https://twitter.com/JShooke/status/532567006240075777> November 12, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/JShooke/status/532567006240075777> 
Nolan’s creative decisions with regard to dialogue have proven controversial 
in the past. In 2011 the British film-maker was moved to retool the sound mix 
for superhero epic The Dark Knight Risesafter test audiences complained they 
could not understand Tom Hardy’s masked villain Bane during an extended prologue
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/dark-knight-rises-bane-muffled> 
to the film that screened before Imax presentations of Mission: Impossible - 
Ghost Protocol. “The Dark Knight Rises prologue was really great, especially 
when Bane spoke the soon-to-be-classic line: ‘Mmrbl ffrmrff hmrbblfmm,’” wrote 
one fan on Twitter.

Issues over the audibility of dialogue in Interstellar do not appear to be 
hampering the space epic’s global box office clout.Nolan’s film blasted past 
the $300m mark at the weekend after just two weeks of release 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/box-office-dumb-dumber-laughs-747520>, 
thanks largely to a huge $42m debut in China and another $29.2m in north 
America.
 