
A flaw in the way Apple software handles images allows hackers to take over an 
iPhone, iPad,Apple Watch <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch>, 
Mac or Apple TV with a simple iMessage or email.


The vulnerability in Apple’s picture-handling Image I/O API means that a 
malicious Tagged Image File Format (TIFF) file can force a so-called buffer 
overflow, which allows a hacker to break through Apple’s security and run their 
own code on a device.

Tyler Bohan from security firm Cisco Talos said 
<http://blog.talosintel.com/2016/07/apple-image-rce.html>: “This vulnerability 
is especially concerning as it can be triggered in any application that makes 
use of the Apple Image I/O API when rendering tiled TIFF images.”

Most apps on an iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, for 
instance, use the Image I/O API to render pictures, including Messages, MMS, 
Safari, Mail and others, leaving them all vulnerable to this attack.

“Depending on the delivery method chosen by an attacker, this vulnerability is 
potentially exploitable through methods that do not require explicit user 
interaction since many applications (ie iMessage) automatically attempt to 
render images when they are received in their default configurations,” said 
Bohan.

Should the image be viewed automatically or manually, the attacker could then 
gain full control of the device, steal passwords and other information, all 
potentially without the user knowing.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> released iOS 9.3.3, OS X 
10.11.6, tvOS 9.2.2 and watchOS 2.2.2 software updates to address the bug and 
several others on Monday, but those who have not updated either through the 
Settings app on their iOS device, iTunes or the Mac App Store are still 
vulnerable to attack.

The iOS 9.3.3 update is not available for the iPhone 4 and older models, which 
are still at risk. There are 1bniOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios>
 devices around the globe, all of which will be affected by this security hole 
unless updated.

Google’s Android faced two similar security holes known as Stagefright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/28/stagefright-android-vulnerability-heartbleed-mobile>
 andStagefright 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/18/stagefright-2-all-versions-android-since-2010-hit-by-privacy-flaw>
, which affected almost a billion devices, but theupdates required to fix the 
hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/06/google-stagefright-megabug-patch-nexus-phones-samsung-android>
 were slow in their release from various smartphone manufacturers and mobile 
phone networks.

 * HummingBad malware infects 10m Android devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/06/hummingbad-malware-infects-10m-android-devices-information-apps-ads> 