
There will be a new iPhone, an iPad Pro and a new Apple TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-tv> announced on stage in San 
Francisco on Wednesday – at least if the combined wisdom of 5,000 Guardian 
readers is to be believed.

We asked you to tell us what you expected from the world’s biggest company, 
and the answers were surprising.

First up, the iPhone. An overwhelming majority expect a simple “tock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/28/what-apple-needs-to-get-right-new-iphone-6s-plus>
” update to the phones, with the iPhone 6S being a speed bump and a few new 
features, not a radical redesign like the iPhone 6 was. That matches the 
pattern the company has set since the iPhone 3GS, so it’s not too surprising 
that there’s unanimity on the question.

But readers were much more split on what the new features would actually be, 
with no single option getting more than 15% of the votes. But the top five were 
all yawn-worthy, suggesting no one will be jumping out of their chairs in 
surprise: faster processors, better cameras, a “force touch” screen, better 
battery life, and a wider array of colours for the phone.

That last guess is based on rumours that the company will be launching a 
fourth colour for the iPhone: rose gold. If they do, almost 20% of you said 
you’d fork out for the shiny pinkish hue, vulgar or not.

On pricing, the majority of you expect prices to stay the same, although 40% 
thought the company might sneak in a price-rise for the line. An optimistic 5% 
hoped for a price cut. Good luck, guys.

And finally, pour one out for the iPhone 5C, that unloved, primary-coloured 
baby of the iPhone line. Introduced in 2013 as a recased version of 2012’siPhone
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> 5, it’s now the lowest-powered 
iOS device the company still sells following the surprise redesign of the iPod 
Touch in July this year. As a result, 39% of you expect the phone to be quietly 
shuffled off this mortal coil, in the same way the iPod Classic was ruthlessly 
executed last year. But almost as many think that the company will keep the 5C 
on sale and cut the price still further, leaving Apple with a super-cheap entry 
level phone.

As for iPads, there’s again agreement that there will be a new one (72% say 
yes) and that it will be a larger “iPad Pro” (64% say yes). That larger screen 
will, you think, be between 12 and 13in diagonal (43% think so), or maybe 
between 11 and 12in (33% think so).

That megaPad could be pricy. The most expensive model is pegged by 24% of you 
as being priced between £700 and £800 (for comparison, the iPad Air 2 maxes out 
at £675), but 21% think it could reach £800, 18% think £900 and 15% think that 
theiPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> Pro could be a staggering 
£1000 or more.

The older iPads might both get a speed bump and a new number – meaning we’ll 
see an iPad Air 3 and iPad Mini 4, if you’re keeping track – and 36% of you 
think that’s a possibility (though a further 29% think there will be some 
change in at least one iPad, and 12% of you think there might be a full 
redesign in one or both of them).

iPhone 6s or iPad Pro? What is Apple launching? Tell us your thoughts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/08/apple-launch-iphone-6s-ipad-tell-us-your-thoughts-survey>
The Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> TV is likely to be 
front and centre of the event, and everyone agrees: There will be a new one 
(84% say yes), it will have an App Store (85% think so), it might have an 
Apple-branded Netflix competitor (64% say yes) which might make original 
programmes (69% say yes), or maybe it will focus on gaming (63% say yes) with a 
fancy, motion-controlled remote (54% think that will happen).

The bad news? Even all those changes won’t be enough to make the damn thing 
interesting, according to 58% of you.

As for the rest of the event: more people think there will be dad jokes on 
stage than a woman on stage (44% to 35% respectively), only 23% expect new 
laptops to be announced, and just 8% are holding out hope for the Apple Car – 
iCar? iDrive? Whatever, it’s not happening today.

You also expect an update on the Apple Watch (72% do, at least), which is 
likely to get a new range of accessories, perhaps including its first 
solid-gold band, as well as the second version of its OS.

Oh, and one more thing: two-and-a-half months after the launch of Apple Music, 
don’t expect anyone on stage to repeat their acknowledgement of the service’s 
painful teething problems. While the companyacknowledges in interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/03/apple-music-improve-festival-streaming>
 that it has “homework to do” with the service, 65% of you expect pure puff on 
stage. “It’s been our best launch yet”, Tim Cook might say.
 