
I can't repeat my Ipso <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> facto joke yet 
again. But there, I just did. The announcement that almost all of the major 
publishers have signed up to fund the Independent Press Standards Organisation, 
and agreed therefore to be regulated by it, is hardly a shock.

But Paul Vickers, the Trinity Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/trinity-mirror> director who has been 
leading the industry's implementation group, is right in saying that it marks 
"an important milestone" in the process of setting up the new system.

It is formal confirmation of the publishing companies' refusal to be bound by 
the provisions laid down in the press regulation royal charter and it amounts 
to a giant snub to the coalition and the Labour party leadership.

It is also a two-fingered salute to Hacked Off, the body that represents the 
victims of past press misbehaviour, which is credited with creating the charter 
in company with the politicians.

In effect, the publishers - having constructed their own train set - are 
unsurprisingly happily leaping aboard.

Vickers says that the publishers who have signed amount to "more than 90% of 
the national press and the vast majority of the regional press, along with 
major magazine publishers."

They include the national newspaper publishers - the Telegraph Media Group, 
Associated Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-newspapers>
, News UK and Trinity Mirror - plus Northern & Shell, which has been outside 
the current regulatory system for several years. Independent Print is expected 
to sign soon.

Among the regional groups that have signed up are Newsquest, Local World, 
Archant and Tindle. I understandJohnston Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/johnston-press> will join them soon.

But The Guardian and The Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theobserver> have not done so or given any 
suggestion that they will. Nor, of course, have those titles shown any 
enthusiasm for the royal charter.

A spokesperson said: "The Guardian has not ruled out joining Ipso in the 
future, but - along with one or two other national papers - has concerns about 
some aspects of the proposed regulator, which we continue to discuss.

"We have consistently argued for a regulator that is independent of 
politicians and credible with the public. We will continue to engage in 
conversations with all concerned parties in order to help achieve this."

So we are about to enter a lengthy period of what might be regarded as a 
polite stand-off between publishers and government.

In many ways, despite some tinkering and the provision of Â£1m fines, we are 
back where we started, with the industry controlling the "independent" press 
regulator.

Lord Justice Leveson <https://www.theguardian.com/law/lord-justice-leveson>, 
his legal team and the assessors must be wondering why they bothered.
 