
Thousands of Iranian asylum seekers caught in limbo in Australia could be 
returned home under a deal set to be discussed when Iran’s foreign affairs 
minister visits Australia next week.

Dr Mohammad Javad Zarif will visit as part of a broader push from Tehran to 
improve its economic and diplomatic relations with the west after last year’s 
nuclear deal and the lifting of sanctions in January.

Bill to make it easier for Australia to return non-refugees rests with Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/03/bill-to-make-it-easier-for-australia-to-return-non-refugees-rests-with-senate>
An asylum deal is seen as a key agenda item for his visit, particularly from 
the Australian government’s perspective.

There are about 9,000 Iranian asylum seekers in Australia’s immigration 
system. About 400 are on Nauru and Manus Island, but most are in Australia, in 
detention or living in the community on bridging visas.


Iranians who do not to meet the Refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> Convention threshold for 
protection cannot be forcibly returned to Iran because Tehran refuses to accept 
anyone being repatriated against their will.

As a result, hundreds of Iranians are stuck in limbo in Australia, unable to 
be deported and without any apparent prospect of being granted the right to 
stay.

The new deal would enable Australia to forcibly return asylum seekers, in 
exchange for guarantees from Tehran they would not face persecution or 
punishment.

Australia also wants to weaken its complementary protection regime, making it 
easier to send people back to places where they could potentially face 
significant harm.

Historically, most Iranians seeking asylum in Australia are ultimately granted 
the right to stay because of a “well-founded fear” of persecution in their 
homeland.

The latest available government statistics are from 2013-14. The protection 
visa grant rate for asylum seekers who arrived by plane was 87%, the protection 
visa grant rate for those who arrived by boat was 65.2%.

Ethnic and religious minorities, homosexuals, journalists and opponents of the 
government face particular persecution in Iran 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2015/country-chapters/iran#814a01>.

Since signing a framework agreement to limit its nuclear program with a host 
of global powers in April last year – the so-called P5+1 talks –Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> has sought to strengthen its economic 
and diplomatic ties with the west.

And its emergence into more open relations is seen as timely globally. Iran is 
increasingly seen by western powers as a key player in helping broker a 
political solution to the long-running conflict in Syria, the major driver of 
the European refugee influx.


The bulk of Australia’s economic and financial sanctions against Iran were 
lifted in January but it maintains restrictions on transferring nuclear 
proliferation-sensitive goods and weapons.

Zarif is understood to also be meeting the immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, the trade minister, 
Steve Ciobo, the trade envoy, Andrew Robb, and, diary permitting, the prime 
minister, Malcolm Turnbull.


An asylum deal between Australia and Iran was first publicly floated when the 
foreign affairs minister,Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, visited Tehran 12 
months ago.


A spokeswoman for Bishop said the government had made a priority of resolving 
the “legacy caseload” of asylum seekers still within the Australian immigration 
system. Iranian asylum seekers are a significant cohort of that caseload.

Where people were found to not require Australia’s protection, the government 
would seek to return them to their country of origin.

“Our preference is for people not owed protection to return voluntarily,” the 
spokeswoman said. “However, where people do not have a legal basis to remain 
they may be subject to deportation.

“A key outcome of the [minister’s] visit to Iran in April 2015 was an 
agreement to commence a formal consular dialogue with Iran, which covers topics 
including people-to-people links and immigration issues including cooperation 
to prevent people smuggling. Officials-level talks are ongoing.”
 