
Ah, the wisdom of crowded beaches. TripAdvisor's latest user poll on the best 
strips of sand in Europe has caused quite a stir – withBournemouth in at number 
four 
<http://www.bournemouthecho.co.uk/news/9572951.Bournemouth_beach_named_best_in_the_UK/>
, ahead of anything France, Italy or Greece have to offer. Top of the 
flip-flops (sorry) is Olu Deniz, a perpetually rammed picture-perfect 
promontory on Turkey's Aegean coast, followed by Icemeler, a hotel-lined 
crescent beach 100km up the coast, and package holiday favourite Puerto Alcudia 
in Majorca.

To be fair, Bournemouth beach is lovely. It should be – the seven-mile strip 
of sand has received almost£11m in investment 
<http://www.prnewswire.co.uk/cgi/news/release?id=350982> over the last few 
years, including theconstruction of an artificial surf reef at Boscombe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/othersports/surfing/7735759/3m-Boscombe-artificial-reef-produces-wrong-kind-of-waves.html>
 that doesn't really work. Yet while Bournemouth's PR team will be doing 
cartwheels, savvy beach-lovers will be taking note – the unwritten rule of 
beach-hunting is that the more people who know about a beach, the worse it is.

Want my tips? Hunt for Irakli beach 
<http://www.bulgariansearesorts.com/beaches/irakli/> on the Bulgarian Black Sea 
coast, home to tortoises, off-shore dolphins and the occasional nudist, or the
wild beaches of the Albanian coast 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2007/aug/11/saturday.albania>, where the 
roads are too pock-marked for the big hoteliers to venture down. At both, 
you'll have miles of sand and crystalline sea to yourself. Just don't tell 
anyone.

But, go on, risk spoiling it with crowds and tell us about your perfect 
European beach...
 