
Our warmest congratulations, then, to Howard Jacobson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/howard-jacobson> on winning the Booker. A 
good few of the headlines that this year's award has generated have been along 
the lines of: "Finally, the Booker does comedy". And indeed only last week in 
this paper Jacobson wrote a typically bracing and learned defence of the comic 
novel. As he argued, the term "comic novel" should be acknowledged as 
tautologous. And yet that isn't the whole story. Although it's true thatThe 
Finkler Question has its moments of high comedy, it also has moments of 
heartbreaking sadness; the two are, indeed, intertwined. But if there's one 
thing that everyone can agree on, it's thatThe Finkler Question is about 
Jewishness. Actually, it's not really, as Jacobson himself has said; it's about 
love; just as it has been remarked thatThe Act of Love, which to my 
recollection doesn't have a single declared Jew in it, is his most Jewish novel 
of all. But these are rather abstruse arguments. So let's just say thatThe 
Finkler Question, whose (Gentile) hero tries, in effect, to become Jewish, has 
an awful lot about Jews in it.

As do many of Jacobson's novels. Kalooki Nights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/18/book-club-kalooki-nights-jacobson>
, he once said, in an off-hand remark which has come to haunt him, was intended 
to be the most Jewish book ever written. But the whole corpus is pretty Jewish. 
His protagonists are often Manchester-born Jews, as he is; one of them is even 
a gifted ping-pong player, as I understand Jacobson is, or was ("Is it too much 
for you to bear, you yiddenfeit, you antisemitic piece of crap, that we should 
be good at a game and win scholarships to Oxford and Cambridge? Is that more 
than an erstwhile fucking Church of England grammar school can swallow? Well, 
prepare to swallow more, shithead. Meet the master race. You're looking at a 
double-starred first and the next World Ping-Pong Champion"). When it comes to 
describing Jews in this country, it's as if Jacobson has cornered the market.

This is, when you think about it, a bit unusual. Jonathan Safran Foer posited 
the intriguing question of what Jacobson's reputation would be like had he been 
born in America and written exactly the same novels. He said that he'd be up 
there with Roth and Bellow. Which raises the question: why is there no British 
Jewish novelistic tradition, in the way that there is in America? Where has the 
Jewish novel gone in the British Isles? In America, Jewishness is crucial to 
the work of, among plenty of others, Roth, Bellow, Michael Chabon and indeed 
Safran Foer, to pick just four. Europe has produced so many Jewish writers for 
whom their Jewishness was crucial that listing them would take up too much 
space. But British Jewish novelists?

Actually, there are quite a few. For instance: Anita Brookner, Stephen Fry 
(whose talent as a novelist is debatable, but let's put him in),Will Self 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/audio/2010/mar/03/jewish-book-week-sounds-jewish>
 (Jewish mother), Jackie Collins (whose talent as a novelist is ... etc),Zoë 
Heller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/28/bookerprize2003.thebookerprize>, 
Harold Pinter (not primarily a novelist, I know, but a pretty major literary 
figure). There is a much longer list, although rather incomplete,on Wikipedia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_British_Jewish_writers> if you want to 
see more names, but the point about them is that they don't really make much of 
a point about Jewishness; it's not their shtick. (Although Heller'sThe Believers
 is about an American-English Jewish family, it's not exactly a Jewish novel.)

And though, say, Linda Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/feb/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview23>
 andJenny Diski <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v30/n19/jenny-diski/the-khugistic-sandal> 
can mine their upbringings and come up with shining nuggets of Jewishness, they 
don't write in that rolling, full-on, querulous and combative tone that 
characterises not just Jacobson, but the kind of Jewish writing that comes from 
America.

Jacobson has long bridled at being called "the British Philip Roth", but has 
turned the label to his advantage by saying these days that he is the love 
child of Roth and Jane Austen. But that still leaves us with the question of 
why Jewish novelists from the British Isles don't touch on the subject nearly 
as much as Jacobson does. Jews in fiction were more likely, it seems, to come 
up in works by non-Jews, either as Fagin or Leopold Bloom.

You wonder whether it is something about British literary Jewry, to use an 
old-fashioned word, which is so assimilated that its own cultural traditions 
are attenuated, or absorbed into the national culture, in a way that is not the 
case in America. (On the European continent, for much of the 20th century being 
Jewish carried, or was freighted with, its own terrible burdens.) Safran Foer's 
remarks were made on a Guardian podcast during Jewish Book Week; and one of the 
questions raised was whether there is even such a thing as a Jewish novel. 
Aretha Franklin is black, Safran Foer said, but does that make "Respect" a 
black song? Well, there may or may not be such a thing as a Jewish novel, but 
if there is, they aren't being written here. Of the nine Jewish books 
recommended as a reading list, only two of the authors were born in this 
country: Jacobson and Heller.

Jacobson told me, when The Finkler Question made the Booker longlist, that its 
success might have something to do with the fact that, for once, its Jewishness 
is being approached from the outside, by a non-Jew.

That would be a little disturbing if it were the case. Maybe it is time for 
there to be more novels which deal with the British Jewish experience. There 
is, after all, plenty of material. And as Howard Jacobson has happily said, 
being Jewish has given him a hell of a head start when it comes to 
writing comedy.

• This is a preview from tomorrow's Guardian Review. Also in tomorrow's 
Review: Don Paterson takes fresh look at Shakespeare's sonnets, the Booker 
prizewinner Howard Jacobson admires the artist Stanley Spencer, Nicholas Hytner 
talks about Hamlet and running the National Theatre, Richard Williams goes off 
pitch with Alex Ferguson and much more

• Find out how to subscribe to the Guardian at a special rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/subscription-services>
 