
There’s a great scene in last season’s Black-ish – Kenya Barris’s family 
comedy on ABC – where a group of co-workers make up a system for who should be 
allowed to say the N-word. “Bill Clinton? Probably shouldn’t use it either,” 
says one. “But I wouldn’t be crazy if he did.” The entire episodewas inspired 
by true events <http://www.vulture.com/2015/09/blackish-n-word-episode.html> 
when Barris found out the word was being used by his 16-year-old daughter’s 
white male friends. The experience triggered Barris and his writers into making 
one of the funniest episodes since the show launched two years ago, but more 
importantly it confirmed something we already knew: the show is a series of 
modern-day parables on race relations disguised as a comedy.

Black-ish: a revolutionary new comedy tackling issues of race head on – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/24/black-ish-abc-show-race-issues-review>
Here are a group of writers and actors, black and white, teaching America that 
it’s OK to laugh, it’s OK to cry, it’s even OK to be angry about race – just 
make sure you engage with it. Barris began with a show about black identity and 
it has now developed into something much bigger. “We should be aware and 
constantly having conversations about the world because that’s how you change 
it from the bigger standpoint rather than acutely trying to change things,” he 
told Vulture. “We have to get into a place where we are able to have 
conversations, and it starts with the family. It starts within the home. If you 
don’t put yourself in the place in your home where you talk about things going 
on in the world – you only talk about what’s hip and hot – then nothing ever 
gets solved.”


Black-ish resonates with the African American community and helps white 
America understand another point of view. The show is a bridge-builder of race, 
and as the viewer you’re paying attention to the point of the show.

So if networks have finally woken up and realized that diversity is not only 
ethically important but also financially viable in order to create a popular, 
smart, funny show, then it’s time to focus on a demographic that keeps getting 
ignored: the Latino audience.

When it comes to understanding who the Latino community is – and I am not 
talking about immigration andtaco bowls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/donald-trump-taco-bowl-i-love-hispanics-picture>
 – the general American still struggles. Despite the fact that 18% of the US 
population is Latino or Hispanic, we are still mainly ignored by Hollywood. 
Earlier this year, astudy released by Media, Diversity and Social Change 
Initiative 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/latino/latinos-hollywood-few-roles-frequent-stereotypes-new-study-finds-n523511>
 called the Comprehensive Annenberg Report on Diversity, pointed out that out 
of more than 11,000 speaking characters surveyed in film and TV, 5.8% were 
Hispanic or Latino. This past Sunday at the Emmys, there wasnot one single 
Hispanic or Latino performer nominated in the top acting categories. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/18/when-it-comes-to-the-emmys-few-latino-nominees>

Aside from giving more opportunities for a number of Latino writers and 
actors, our own Black-ish would open the doors to a conversation about so many 
issues that remain unresolved – and just like Barris said, we will be able to 
change them because we are talking about it ourselves.

Picture this hypothetical scene for a moment: the main character, Luis (Lucho) 
Calderón comes back from work (he’s an architect) and sits with his family as 
they watch Trump’s speech on immigration. The entire episode would focus on 
Lucho and his wife, Gabriela, having to explain to their children why there is 
so much hate and ignorance in the only country they know. The impact it would 
have on an audience could be a powerful statement, similar to Hope – 
Black-ish’s remarkableepisode on police brutality from last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/25/black-ish-police-brutality-episode-abc-rodney-king>
. New York Times’ James Poniewoziksummed it up 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/arts/television/blackish-police-brutality.html>
 nicely: “It was funny but heartbreaking, nuanced but not mealy-mouthed, blunt 
but not despairing. It firmly established Black-ish, if there was any doubt, as 
a sitcom that’s not just timely but up to the challenge of its times.”
Another imaginary episode would deal with Luis’s office as his colleagues 
celebrate Cinco de Mayo by wearing oversized sombreros and fake mustaches – in 
case you’re unsure, this is a big red flag. The storylines are endless. I am a 
huge admirer of Jane the Virgin and Gina Rodriguez, but the show’s message is 
less about the family dynamic and more about the value of womanhood – in this 
case Latina womanhood.

What we need is a family who can stand together alongside the Johnsons and the 
Carmichaels, the O’Neills, the Huangs and the Goldbergs, to confidently stand 
up and explain to network executives and America that we need a voice.
 