
Q I have recently started my own, very small, bookkeeping business which I am 
working at on a part-time basis as my son has now started full-time education. 
At this stage I do not expect my turnover to exceed Â£6,000 a year. I have 
registered with HM Revenue & Customs as a sole trader and have started paying 
the basic national insurance contributions directly from my personal bank 
account. I am aware that a business should have its own account so have opened 
a second current account for the bookkeeping company, to pay in cheques 
received and for any business purchases.

I have just been told by another bookkeeper that it is a legal offence not to 
have a formal business account if you are running a business. Is it okay that I 
am running a separate, but personal current account for the business? If it is 
not a legal requirement for a small business to have a business account what 
are the benefits to having such an account? These seem to charge a fee for all 
transactions and don't appear to have any extra benefits.

BK

A There is no legal requirement to have a business bank account if you are a 
sole trader or partnership. It is only necessary for a limited company. However 
it is quite useful to keep your personal and trading accounts separate 
especially for completing your tax returns and claiming expenses that can be 
offset against the profits made to reduce your tax bill.

At the same time you are likely to come under pressure from your bank. It will 
be unwilling to provide free banking services for business transactions. 
Fortunately several banks offer "free" business accounts for periods of six to 
12 months. So if your present bank starts to impose charges on your second 
account threaten them with a transfer to another bank offering a free period. 
That should do the trick.
 