
Dorian Lynskey is a music writer

I love Aaliyah and Kurt Cobain <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kurt-cobain>
, and one of the reasons I love them is that they were thoughtful, 
strong-willed artists who were very careful about how they presented their 
music to the public. They knew that not everything they touched turned to gold. 
So I’m uneasy about the news that they both have “new” releases coming.

In Aaliyah’s case, her producer Timbaland has excitedly tweeted  
<http://jezebel.com/timbaland-says-he-has-unreleased-music-from-aaliyah-1723009148?utm_campaign=socialfow_jezebel_twitter&utm_source=jezebel_twitter&utm_medium=socialflow>
news of unreleased collaborations, using no fewer than 30 exclamation marks.
Cobain’s album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/13/kurt-cobain-montage-heck-film-soundtrack-november-release>
 will function as the soundtrack album to the recent documentaryCobain: Montage 
of Heck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/12/cobain-montage-of-heck-observer-film-review>
, and is said to range “from thrash to ragtime and everything in between” – 
including, alarmingly, “a sketch comedy routine”.

As a fan I’m curious, but I can’t help thinking that Cobain never intended the 
world to hear his ragtime goof-offs or comedy stylings. If a living artist 
wants to raid the vaults and illuminate their creative process by spilling 
every doodle or abandoned experiment, that’s up to them, but when someone’s not 
around to say yes or no and approval is posthumously assumed it feels 
intrusive. What right do fans have to hear what their favourite artists threw 
away?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4180fa0ee332f473836f9aa5b7d8f08730133ea%2F0_41_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20OK%20to%20release%20%E2%80%98new%E2%80%99%20music%20after%20an%20artist%E2%80%99s%20death%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20OK%20to%20release%20%E2%80%98new%E2%80%99%20music%20after%20an%20artist%E2%80%99s%20death%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4180fa0ee332f473836f9aa5b7d8f08730133ea%2F0_41_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Fans of Aaliyah write messages on a Sunset Boulevard billboard after her death 
in a plane crash in 2001. Photograph: Kevork Djansezian/AP 
Peter Robinson is editor of popjustice.com

I totally agree that the threat of “new” Aaliyah and Cobain music is worrying: 
neither artist’s catalogue has exactly been left alone in recent years, and if 
either artist had anything of worth in the vaults it would have been released 
long ago. But what if there had been anotherMore Than a Woman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ao7Xs1eyimM> in Aaliyah’s catalogue, or another
Smells Like Teen Spirit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTWKbfoikeg> in 
Cobain’s? I think it’s wrong to assume that just because an artist pops their 
clogs they leave behind nothing of worth.

Let’s imagine Adele dies tomorrow afternoon. Would we really say that the 
album she’s been working on for three years and must surely be almost finished, 
if not on the verge of a surprise release, should remain in the vaults? I’d 
trust the judgment of her label, XL, more than I’d trust a hunch based on the 
questionable quality of other artists’ posthumous releases.

Would it destroy her legacy? With respect for the hypothetically dead I’d 
suggest that if an artist can’t come up with anything decent in three years 
they don’t deserve legend status anyway. To put it another way,(Sittin’ On) the 
Dock of the Bay <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rTVjnBo96Ug>is a banger for 
the ages; some would say it sealed Otis Redding’s legacy, rather than 
annihilated it. Should that song never have been released?

DL I wouldn’t want to bury Dock of the Bay any more than Joy Division’s Love 
Will Tear Us Apart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuuObGsB0No> or Sam Cooke’s 
A Change Is Gonna Come <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nOYuhLNwh3A> because 
those were completed records by artists who died at their creative peak. They 
were meant to be heard. Regarding your grim Adele scenario, even an unfinished 
album, likeElliott Smith’s From a Basement on the Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/oct/15/popandrock.shopping7>, can be 
shepherded to a respectful conclusion if the artist themselves laid down the 
blueprint. Rummaging for scraps is a different enterprise altogether.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36700583ab86202416bd842009e3a509d5442fa%2F0_0_2999_1801%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20OK%20to%20release%20%E2%80%98new%E2%80%99%20music%20after%20an%20artist%E2%80%99s%20death%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20OK%20to%20release%20%E2%80%98new%E2%80%99%20music%20after%20an%20artist%E2%80%99s%20death%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36700583ab86202416bd842009e3a509d5442fa%2F0_0_2999_1801%2F2999.jpg>
 Amy Winehouse: demos for her third album were destroyed after her death in 
2011 to prevent a posthumous ‘Frankenstein’ record. Photograph: Luke 
MacGregor/Reuters 
I was impressed by the recent revelation from David Joseph, CEO of Universal 
Music UK, thathe’d destroyed Amy Winehouse’s sketchy demos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/01/amy-winehouss-demos-label-boss-destroyed-them>
 for her third album so that none of his successors could Frankenstein a record 
out of them. Ultimately, my objection comes down to aesthetics more than ethics.
Winehouse’s 2011 collectionLioness: Hidden Treasures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/dec/04/amy-winehouse-lioness-hidden-treasures>
 was pieced together by her regular collaborators with the best of intentions 
but it just left me feeling depressed because it highlighted how little music 
she created in her last five years. A posthumous collection of bits and pieces 
is like a chalk outline after a dead body’s been taken to the morgue: it draws 
your attention to what’s missing.

PR I found David Joseph’s statement 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/news/6612646/amy-winehouse-documentary-sam-smith-mark-ronson-salaam-remi-addiction>
 moving in lots of ways. He clearly acted with the best intentions, and it’s 
completely understandable that he wanted to protect Amy’s legacy. He was also 
right to be wary of how his successors, many years from now, might view the 
tapes at the end of each accounting period.

But in the same interview producer Salaam Remi said that the writing of 14 
songs for that third album had been completed: “Whatever needed to happen, it 
was right there.” He’d worked with her from the start; I assume he had a decent 
grasp on when an Amy song was finished or not. Whether Amy’s initial vocals did 
those compositions justice is another question. Even so, and while in normal 
circumstances it’s natural for an artist to demand creative control over every 
aspect of their work, I wonder how many would really want their hard work to 
disappear for ever. It’s important to respect the artistic process, but I also 
wonder how respectful it is to hit delete. If those Amy tracks appeared on 
iTunes tomorrow, I’d listen. Wouldn’t you?

DL Oh, I’m sure I’d listen but I wouldn’t feel good about it, knowing how 
seriously Winehouse took the job of crafting an album. You can’t applaud an 
artist’s uncompromising vision and then collude in diluting that vision once 
they’re gone.

Of course I can’t claim to have a better insight into a musician’s mind than 
their family or collaborators but to me it matters that the work is more than 
half-finished. There’s still life in records like J Dilla’sThe Shining, Johnny 
Cash’sAmerican V <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t49jfFRB9tA> or Jeff Buckley’s
Sketches for My Sweetheart the Drunk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nrMwgTc69y4> .
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca4fecae137050ee4ab8bbe3b794f716050d017%2F0_60_1790_1075%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20OK%20to%20release%20%E2%80%98new%E2%80%99%20music%20after%20an%20artist%E2%80%99s%20death%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20OK%20to%20release%20%E2%80%98new%E2%80%99%20music%20after%20an%20artist%E2%80%99s%20death%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Fdebate-release-music-posthumously-kurt-cobain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca4fecae137050ee4ab8bbe3b794f716050d017%2F0_60_1790_1075%2F1790.jpg>
 Tupac Shakur in 1993 – ‘treated like play-dough’ after his death Photograph: AP
At the other extreme are the afterlives of Tupac and Notorious BIG. Alive, 
they scripted their own narratives. Since their murders, they’ve been treated 
like play-dough. Really lucrative play-dough. Biggie’s2005 “duet” with Bob 
Marley <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vqbD-DTObFo> achieved the impressive 
feat of desecrating two legacies at once. And do you remember Queen’s mawkishly 
titledMade in Heaven <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBCTasRgFqo>, cobbled 
together four years after Freddie Mercury died?

I’ll admit, guiltily eyeing up my copy of Arthur Russell’s Love Is Overtaking 
Me <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YmcjPk-lgbc> (a compilation released 16 
years after his death), that there’s no point insisting on hard and fast rules. 
But the question should always be: “Would this music have been released in 
roughly this form if the person who made it was still alive?” And the answer 
needs to be honest.

PR More often than not the honest answer to that question would be a slightly 
disheartening “yes”. When a musician dies there’s a romantic notion that their 
greatest work must surely have been ahead of them, but in truth diminishing 
returns are more commonplace. Yet artists still happily release albums destined 
to be remembered, if they’re remembered at all, as little more than 
curiosities. And maybe that’s how most posthumous albums should be regarded by 
fans, with the distant chance that a true gem might occasionally be unearthed. 
Or perhaps record labels and managers should listen to a deceased artist’s work 
and honestly answer a different question: “Is this music actually any good?” 
It’s a tall order – few record labels even seem to ask that question when an 
artist’s alive.
 