
Do we need to rewrite the classics? Increasingly, people seem to think so. The 
latest news is that Jeanette Winterson and Anne Tyler are among the novelists 
who havesigned up to a project involving "prose retellings" of Shakespeare's 
plays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/27/shakespeare-reworked-jeanette-winterson-anne-tyler>
. Actually, I have no problem with that, since the original works are in 
constant revival. Where I get a bit shirty is when rare Elizabethan and 
Jacobean plays – which we hardly ever see on stage – are adapted on the grounds 
of their supposed "difficulty". There's a ripe example at Stratford-on-Avon 
right now, whereThomas Middleton's A Mad World My Masters has been "edited" by 
Sean Foley and Phil Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/14/mad-world-my-masters-review> on 
the dubious assumption that modern audiences are too dumb to understand it.

Foley and Porter keep the basic story but change many of the names, set the 
action in 1956 and cut or rewrite the text 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/whats-on/a-mad-world-my-masters/>. But are the 
name-changes really necessary? Middleton creates the wonderful character of an 
insanely jealous husband called Master Short-Rod Harebrain. By dubbing him Mr 
Littledick, Foley and Porter give us only half the original joke. In trimming 
the text, they also rob it of much of its texture.

There's also a short scene where Sir Bounteous Progress (here rechristened 
"Peersucker") grovels before a guest and both apologises for, and yet secretly 
boasts of, his humble lodging. He says of his guest's bed: "The curtains indeed 
were wrought in Venice, with the story of the Prodigal Child in silk and gold; 
only the swine were left out, my lord, for spoiling the curtains." Lines like 
that, inevitably junked in Stratford, give us a vivid portrait ofa Jacobean 
world in which show-off aristocratic swagger was mixed with false economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jun/07/theatre.stage>.

But the past is either boring or incomprehensible: that, at least, would seem 
to be the premise of Foley and Porter. Even the filth is tarted up and given a 
modern spin. At one point, Middleton's hero, Follywit, appears in drag. In 
Foley and Porter's version, he tells us: "There's not a man here that wouldn't 
like to circumnavigate my globes, sail his frigate into my harbour and fire off 
a twenty-four gun salute. Oh, they'd polish my rollocks on the poopdeck and wax 
my futtocks given half the chance." This is more the nudge-nudge, wink-wink of
Kenneth Williams in Round The Horne <http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/roundthehorne/>
 than Middleton's impoverished gallant.

Does it matter? Probably not, if audiences are having a good time. But I still 
feel, in a period when the Jacobean repertoire is rarely performed, it would be 
good to see the original play. By a strange chance, a week after seeing A Mad 
World I was at theUniversity of York 
<http://www.york.ac.uk/tftv/news-events/events/2013/the-dutch-courtesan/> to 
watch student actors performing John Marston's The Dutch Courtesan. If the text 
had been tweaked, it was barely visible. What I saw were young actors,under the 
direction of Michael Cordner <http://www.york.ac.uk/tftv/staff/cordner/>, 
taking a tricky play and making it totally accessible through their vocal 
clarity. And isn't that the point? If we are to revive old plays, which 
inevitably contain obscure words and allusions, surely it is the job of the 
actor to make us understand them. The only alternative is to shrug our 
shoulders, admit defeat and say that the past is a foreign country – and now 
utterly dead.
 