
In the last four years Myanmar’s Rohingya, a centuries-old Muslim minority 
group, have been subjected tosharply escalating persecution 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/12/21/burma-rohingya-recount-killings-rape-and-arson>
 by the Myanmar army, and by a particular sector of extreme nationalist 
Buddhist monks.

Myanmar to investigate video of police beating Rohingya villagers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/myanmar-to-investigate-video-of-police-beating-muslim-minority-rohingya-villagers>
A brutal attack marking a new level of violence 
<https://www.iom.int/sites/default/files/country_appeal/file/IOM-Myanmar-Appeal-April-2016-April-2018.pdf>
 (pdf) against the Rohingya occurred in 2012 and led to the flight of thousands 
to other countries. More recently, military forces entered one of the rural 
areas occupied by the Rohingya. They destroyed at least1,500 buildings 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/12/13/burma-military-burned-villages-rakhine-state>
 andshot unarmed men 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/11/rohingya-muslims-flee-myanmar-deadly-attacks-161123201948561.html>
, women and children dead. Earlier this week a video emerged showing villagers 
sitting on the ground with their arms over their heads, as soldiers appearto 
beat one of the men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/myanmar-to-investigate-video-of-police-beating-muslim-minority-rohingya-villagers>
.

The world’s coverage of these events has focused entirely on the 
religious/ethnic aspect, characterising them as religious persecution. Human 
Rights Watch described the anti-Rohingya violence as amounting to “crimes 
against humanity,” carried out as part of a campaign of ethnic cleansing. 
Malaysia’s foreign ministerdescribed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/aung-san-suu-kyi-accuses-international-community-of-stoking-unrest-in-myanmar>
 the Myanmar government’s actions as ethnic cleansing and called on them to 
stop the practice, leading in turn to a strong response from Myanmar’s 
government. John McKissick, head of the UN refugee agency, said the Myanmar 
government was carrying outethnic cleansing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/rohingya-flee-to-bangladesh-to-escape-myanmar-military-strikes>
 of the Rohingya people.

But my research <http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674599222> 
leads me to argue that religion and ethnicity might be only part of what 
explains this forced displacement.

The past two decades have seen a massive worldwide rise of corporate 
acquisitions of land for mining, timber, agriculture and water. In the case of 
Myanmar, the military have beengrabbing vast stretches of land 
<http://www.ashleysouth.co.uk/files/COHRE_November_2007.pdf> (pdf) from 
smallholders since the 1990s, without compensation, but with threats if they 
try to fight back. This land grabbing has continued across the decades but has 
expanded enormously in the last few years. At the time of the 2012 attacks, the 
land allocated to large projects had increased by 170% between 2010 and 2013. 
By 2012 thelaw governing land 
<http://forest-trends.org/releases/uploads/Conversion_Timber_in_Myanmar.pdf> 
(pdf) was changed to favour large corporate acquisitions.

We must ask whether the sharpened persecution of the Rohingya (and other 
minority groups) might be partly generated by military-economic interests, 
rather than by mostly religious/ethnic issues. Expelling Rohingya from their 
land might well be good for future business. In fact, quite recently the 
government allocated 1,268,077 hectares (3,100,000 acres) in the Rohingya’s 
area of Myanmar for corporate rural development; this is quite a jump compared 
to the first such formal allocation which was in 2012, for just 7,000 hectares 
(17,000 acres). To some extent the international focus on religion has 
overshadowed the vast land grabs that have affected millions, including the
Rohingya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya>.

Who are the Rohingya?

Rohingya are an old Muslim minority that has long been part of Myanmar, going 
back to the 15th century when thousands of Muslims came to the former Arakan 
Kingdom. Rohingya is aself-identifying term 
<http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/asia/south-east-asia/burma-myanmar/261-myanmar-the-politics-of-rakhine-state.pdf>
 that surfaced in the 1950s and that experts say provides the group with a 
collective, political identity.

Over one-third of the Rohingya are concentrated in the western state of 
Rakhine – one of Myanmar’s least developed states, with plentiful land. The 
Rohingya are poor, with more than 78% of households living below the poverty 
line, according toWorld Bank estimates 
<https://www.iom.int/appeal/iom-appeal-myanmar-rakhine-state-april-2016-april-2018>
. Their poverty might further enable their evictions to make room for 
development projects.

Co-existence was never exactly peaceful, but from the 1990s until 2012 there 
were nomajor killings 
<http://icta.uab.cat/etnoecologia/Docs/%5B470%5D-corbera.pdf> (pdf). But in 
2012 Arakanese Buddhists called for their persecution after three Muslim men 
were accused of raping an Arakanese woman. That year, Arakanese political 
parties, local monks’ associations, and civic groups publicly urged the ethnic 
cleansing of Rohingya. A particular sect of Buddhists went so far as to 
re-interpret sections of Buddhist texts to urge people to kill Rohingya. The 
vast majority of Buddhists did not join in.

After 2012 the Rohingya begin to leave Myanmar in large numbers: it had become 
clear that they were now an actively persecuted people. The 2012 violence 
against the Rohingya civilian population “resulted in approximately 200 deaths 
and over 140,000 displaced” according to the US state department. The UN high 
commissioner for refugees estimates that since 2012, 160,000 Rohingya left by 
sea to neighbouring countries – mostly to Bangladesh, Malaysia, Thailand, and 
Indonesia. More than 120,000 Rohingya are still housed in over 40 internment 
camps in Myanmar according to the regional rights organisationFortify Rights 
<http://www.fortifyrights.org/>.

But is it about religion?

The treatment of the Rohingya is sometimes described as a crime against 
humanity. But we need to interrogate its sources. If we bring in some of the 
larger trends affecting modest rural communities, two major facts stand out. 
One is the far larger numbers of Buddhist smallholders who have also been 
expelled from their land in the last few years. And the other is the fact that 
large-scale timber extraction, mining, and water projects are replacing the 
expelled.

This combination of conditions have until recently rarely been mentioned in 
the media, and are absent from the religion discussion. The focus of the global 
media, and to a large extent insideMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>, has been on religious hatred.

There were high expectations that Aung San Suu Kyi party’s electoral victory 
in November 2015 would bring justice. But she has made a point of not 
addressing these developments in her public statements. Indeedas recently as 
May 2016 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/07/world/asia/myanmar-rohingya-aung-san-suu-kyi.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share&mtrref=t.co&_r=0>
, she requested that the US not use the word Rohingya because, according to one 
of her spokesmen, the term is not useful as part of the national reconciliation 
process.

But the land grabs have been silently ignored. In fact, the military were 
already taking land from Buddhist smallholders and other groups in the 1990s. 
But in 2012 a change in the law escalated matters and (formally) opened the 
country to foreign investors. On 30 March 2012, the joint lower and upper 
houses of parliament approved the revision of two land laws: the Farmland Law 
and the Vacant Land Law. This amounted to a new Foreign Investment Law that 
allowed 100% foreign capital, and lease periods of up to 70 years. Compared to 
mining, the agriculture sector still has some restrictions on foreign 
investment in that the government promotes joint ventures with local 
entrepreneurs. However, foreign firms often use local companies asproxies 
<http://forest-trends.org/releases/uploads/Conversion_Timber_in_Myanmar.pdf> 
(pdf) for investments.

The 1963 Peasant Law was also annulled in 2012, this piece of statute, which 
protected smallholders and the “tiller’s rights to the land”, had been in place 
since the country’s socialist era.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fis-rohingya-persecution-caused-by-business-interests-rather-than-religion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa5979625ae57ca33dbbff9b6b5304a6ccd4c43f%2F0_213_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Rohingya%20persecution%20caused%20by%20business%20interests%20rather%20than%20religion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fis-rohingya-persecution-caused-by-business-interests-rather-than-religion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Rohingya%20persecution%20caused%20by%20business%20interests%20rather%20than%20religion%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fis-rohingya-persecution-caused-by-business-interests-rather-than-religion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa5979625ae57ca33dbbff9b6b5304a6ccd4c43f%2F0_213_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Protest in Bangladesh against attacks on the Rohingya
 Photograph: Abir Abdullah/EPA 
Against this background, the escalating displacement of millions of 
smallholders (mostly Buddhists) from the land was a major change as to who was 
to manage the land. Smallholders became refugees of a new economic ordering. 
Myanmar is not unique in this. Similar brutal expulsions of smallholders have 
been happening across the world as large corporations take over because they 
“establish” that the smallholders have no contracts showing the land is theirs, 
no matter how long they and their ancestors worked that land. What is different 
in Myanmar is the almost absolute control the military have long had over much 
of the country’s land, and hence their key role in theexpulsion of smallholders 
<http://icta.uab.cat/etnoecologia/Docs/%5B470%5D-corbera.pdf> (pdf).

Today there are whole new economies – mining, timber, geothermal projects – 
where before there were smallholders. Economic development may require this: 
but it should also work for the millions of displaced and never compensated
smallholders 
<https://www.tni.org/en/publication/the-challenge-of-democratic-and-inclusive-land-policymaking-in-myanmar>
. Foreign direct investment is now concentrated in extractive sectors and power 
generation. Not much of the new investment has gone to sectors such as 
manufacturing that can generate a strong working class anda modest middle class 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/41446243?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents>. For 
example, Myanmar’sYadana pipeline project 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/41446243?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents>, “required 
investment of over $1bn (£0.8bn), yet employs only 800 workers”.

Furthermore, the 2012 law empowered foreign investors. It offered government 
loans – but no help for the smallholders who lost their land. Land properties 
can range from 2,000 hectares up to 20,000 hectares (5,000 acres to 50,000 
acres) for an initial period of 30 years. The extent of land grabs is such that 
Myanmar is losingmore than a million acres of forest a year 
<http://forest-trends.org/releases/uploads/Conversion_Timber_in_Myanmar.pdf> 
(pdf).

Many, perhaps most, of the contracts signed for major land deals have their 
own conditions and effects. For instance, regional military commanders and 
non-state armed groups have de facto control over most land development in 
northern Myanmar.

Two parallel worlds 

The Myanmar of brutal religious persecutions that has led to huge worldwide 
concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/nobel-laureates-aung-san-suu-kyi-ethnic-cleansing-rohingya>
 is only getting worse. But then there is the Myanmar of evictions of 
smallholders to make room for massive land grabs.

Since the first set of foreign investors entered the country, demand for land 
has become a major factor in conflict

Myanmar has become a last Asian frontier for our current modes of development 
– plantation agriculture, mining, and water extraction. Its location makes it 
even more strategic. Besides being the largest country of south-east Asia, 
Myanmar is between the two most populous countries in the world, China and 
India, both hungry for natural resources.

Since that first set of major foreign investors entered the country under the 
new legal regime, demand for land has become a major factor in conflict. 
Foreign firms have moved in, land grabs have risen, smallholders keep losing 
ground. Farmers have become poorer or lost their land. But the land market is 
booming.

Seen from this angle, persecution of the Rohingya has at least two functions, 
even if unplanned. Expelling them from their land is a way of freeing up land 
and water. Burning their homes makes this irreversible: the Rohingya are forced 
to flee and leave their lands behind. Secondly, a focus on religious difference 
mobilises passions around religion, rather than aiming, let’s say, at creating 
pressure on the government to stop evictions of all smallholders, no matter 
their religion.

Against the background of millions of expelled smallholders, it is remarkable 
how much religion has captured the attention of observers and commentators. In 
the meantime, a third of Myanmar’s vast forests are gone, and the government 
has allocated million of hectares, including a significant allotment in Rakhine 
state, for further development.

Saskia Sassen <http://www.saskiasassen.com/> is Robert S. Lind professor of 
Sociology at Columbia University, and the author of several books including 
Expulsions: Brutality and Complexity in the Global Economy.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.


 