
Time is running out for the New York Sun, the bastion of conservatism on the 
Big Apple's media scene which was co-founded by the crooked peerConrad Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/conradblack> in 2002.

In a letter <http://www.nysun.com/new-york/the-future-of-the-sun/85129/> to 
readers published in Thursday's paper, editor Seth Lipsky revealed that the 
publication will shut at the end of the month unless it can find fresh 
financial backing.

Lipsky said that when it was created, the Sun had two goals - an "editorial - 
and idealistic" goal of providing an alternative to the New York Times' 
generally left-leaning commentary and a financial goal of making a profit: "We 
have always been, and still are, of the view that the paper needs to achieve 
both goals to be a success."

The Sun's senior managers say 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=20601103&sid=a16qOOaE1zcI&refer=us> the 
paper, which has a circulation of about 70,000, needs "tens of millions" of 
dollars to survive.

When it first appeared, the Sun was derided as an "intellectual vanity 
publication" by Ed Kosner, then editor of the New York Daily News. But its 
quirky worldview and uncompromising leader columns have become a fixture on 
newsstands. In the last 10 days, the paper has thundered on America's moral 
standing in the world (high), the Democrats' convention (apparently a 
"disaster") andthe US economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> 
(doing better than socialist Europe).

Its internal culture is nothing if not consistent with its political mantra. A 
hilarious memo <http://gawker.com/5044701/interns-banned-from-long-subway-rides>
 leaked to Gawker this week contains guidelines for student interns, 
instructing them on the required dress code: "Interns will not be admitted to 
the newsroom without a suit and tie - matching jacket and slacks, belt, white 
or blue shirt, necktie properly knotted, shoes polished."

On Sundays, they're allowed to downgrade to wool (not cotton or khaki) slacks. 
But woe betide anybody who lives in the suburbs. Subway rides of more than 30 
minutes are verboten in the evenings because interns must be available to 
answer their cellphones.

A nine-zero man

Now this will be a legal showdown to die for. Donald Trump has got the green 
light from a judge to subpoena the New York Times' publisher, Arthur 
Sulzberger, over a book which has infuriated the coiffured property magnate by 
describing him as a millionaire, rather than a billionaire.

Trump has been on the warpath since late 2005 over a biography called 
"TrumpNation: the art of being Donald" which was written by an NYT reporter, 
Timothy O'Brien.

The far from flattering volume alleges that Trump's personal fortune amounts 
to a mere $150m to $250m. When The Donald read this, he was incandescent - he 
insists that he is a nine-zero man and that underestimates of his wealth hurt 
his "brand and reputation".
Trump wants to quiz Sulzberger, who is nicknamed "pinch" for his cost-cutting 
ways, over an email exchange in which the NYT supremo discussed the book with 
O'Brien.

During the exchange, O'Brien wrote: "Donald is easy to lampoon but harder to 
portray accurately (and deep down inside he's really sort of likeable - in the 
way that endearing but out-of-control 8-year-olds are likeable)."

A supreme court in New York this week quashed Sulzberger's objection and 
allowed Trump's lawyers to take a deposition.
"The New York supreme court ruled that even the publisher of the New York 
Times is not shielded from the legal process when it comes to his knowledge of 
Timothy O'Brien's actual malice towards Donald Trump," saidTrump's lawyer, 
William Tambussi, in a statement 
<http://www.philly.com/inquirer/local/nj/20080830_Court_sides_with_Trump_in_lawsuit.html>
.

Plenty of angry words have been flying over the disputed book. When it came 
out, Trump described O'Brien as a "terrible writer". The journalist in turn 
compared Trump to a Barnum-style circus showman. Trump took this surprisingly 
well, telling the New York Post: "That's not an insult, that's a compliment."

Another billionaire's woes

A (slight) reality check is looming for John Paulson, the hedge fund boss who 
earned an eye-watering $3.7bn last year by correctly forecasting a collapse in 
the market forsub-prime mortgage securities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/subprimecrisis>.

Because of America's housing woes, Paulson has had to cut the asking price for 
his seven-bedroom retreat in The Hamptons from $19.5m to $16.9m. Paulson wants 
to offload the 6,800 square foot "cottage style" mansion because it is too 
small - he has traded up to an estate worth $41.3m 
<http://www.cityfile.com/dailyfile/1597>.

Paulson emerged as the George Soros of the credit crunch last year by winning 
while everybody else was losing. He is not in the good books of organisations 
which help those facing foreclosure - one leading community advocate,Bruce 
Marks, told me recently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/apr/19/subprimecrisis.useconomy> 
that Paulson's profits were "obscene" and that he should devote the money to 
good works, Bill Gates style, to redeem himself. And he's struggling to pull 
off the same trick again -one of his funds was apparently down 3.7% in July 
<http://www.nypost.com/seven/08062008/business/july_brought_heat_for_hedgie_paulson_123256.htm>
.

According to estate agent Prudential Douglas Elliman, the up-for-sale Paulson 
pad has a year-round pool tastefully enclosed with solar glass. I don't think 
much of hisbouffant white living room 
<http://www.prudentialelliman.com/Listings.aspx?ListingID=H37917> armchairs, 
though.
 