
Antoni Gaudí <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/antoni-gaudi> was the 
most modern and the most medieval of souls. The great Catalan architect, whose 
ecstatic, organic vision has made his buildings among the world's best-loved, 
saw himself as recreating a Christian society through art. What makes him so 
great is that his architecture expresses that longing with no regard for 
convention and no tyranny of tradition, and with such an enthusiasm for the 
techniques and fragments of modern life - the shards of mosaic on his facades, 
the dynamism of his interiors - that it becomes an art of energy and change 
even as it wishes for order. Gaudí's genius is inexhaustibly rich. But has it 
been betrayed?

A group of Spanish architects and art world types has savagely denounced the 
continuing work to complete Gaudí's religious masterpiecethe Sagrada Familia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/aug/14/gaudi.sagrada.familia>. 
Should work on this vast church - often mistaken, with good reason, for 
Barcelona's cathedral – have been carried on, after his death in 1926 left it 
unfinished? The grumpy intellectuals say no. Gaudí, they complain, is being 
banalised in the name of tourism.

It's true that a lot of tourists go to the Sagrada Familia. Last time I was 
there, some English blokes on a stag weekend stood staring up bleary-eyed at 
the crazed plenitudes of the building's Victor Hugo fantasia of a facade - the 
section of the building that Gaudí himself brought closest to completion. It's 
probably not the best thing to look at with a hangover. But what is wrong with 
Gaudí's popularity? Nothing. He was an architect with a generous social vision 
and it is fitting that his works are visited. It is so rare for an architect to 
be truly loved that to carp at the masses who go to see Gaudí is a quite nasty 
form of snobbery.

But what about the specific question of the drive to finish the church? Work 
there has carried on, sporadically, since 1926. In other words the completion 
effort predates Gaudí's contemporary fame. I personally find it moving. Anyone 
can see that the interior is not by Gaudí and never will be: however closely 
based on his designs, it does not have his touch. Obviously. The collective 
work, however, has the poetry of an architectural spectacle more medieval than 
modern - the century-long effort to build a great cathedral. These critics need 
to read their Ruskin. Far from betraying Gaudí's spirit, the belief that the 
Sagrada Familia should be finished is in accord with a religious sensibility in 
which the architect is a worker, not a star.

Michelangelo, another great religious architect, designed the dome of St 
Peter's <http://www.bluffton.edu/~sullivanm/stpeters/stpeters.html> but died 
before he could erect it. His designs were adapted by later architects. Does 
this make St Peter's a botched job, a betrayal? No. We experience it for what 
it is - a great collective religious work in which the individual contributions 
of Michelangelo,Bramante <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bramante>, Raphael, 
Sangallo andBernini  
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/cgi-bin/WebObjects.dll/CollectionPublisher.woa/wa/artistBiography?artistID=58>
 are visible, yet at the same time subsumed in the common purpose.

Significantly, Michelangelo for once set aside his habitual rivalries at St 
Peter's and incorporated into his own contribution designs by his enemy 
Bramante. This was the place to work together, not against one another.

That ancient attitude to building churches - which can also be experienced at 
Salisbury Cathedral <http://www.salisburycathedral.org.uk/>, or Notre Dame, or 
Cologne - is kept alive today by the pious effort to finish Gaudí's 
masterpiece. I love the emerging result, kitsch and all.
 