
Edinburgh is the biggest open access arts festival in the world, but is it 
really a level playing field and if not, what can be done to change the points 
of access? It was one of the issues raised in the latest in theA Nation’s 
Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/24/a-nations-theatre-battersea-arts-centre-bac>
 debates which are hosted around the country by Battersea Arts Centre and the 
Guardian. This one was set up byNorthern Stage 
<https://www.northernstage.co.uk/edinburgh/northern-stage-at-summerhall>, who 
have a strong presence here on the fringe, to consider the place that Edinburgh 
has in the wider arts ecology, for better or worse.


Do theatre companies put too much faith in the Edinburgh effect?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/20/edinburgh-fringe-festival-theatre-companies-networking-agents-northern-stage-peoples-theatre-debate>
In fact it was quite clear from the wide-ranging discussion that Edinburgh 
remains a magnet for theatre-makers and producers and programmers for very good 
reasons despitethe economics of the fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/04/the-cost-of-staging-an-edinburgh-fringe-show-artists-open-their-account-books>
. While there may be some truth in the perception that Edinburgh has simply 
become some kind of vast cultural supermarket around which producers and 
programmers dash looking to fill their shopping trolleys with shows fornext 
year’s seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/20/edinburgh-fringe-festival-theatre-companies-networking-agents-northern-stage-peoples-theatre-debate>
, independent producerJo Crowley 
<http://theatre.farnhammaltings.com/projects/jo-crowley/>, who also runs the 
Total Theatre awards, made the point that beneath the surface there is a vast 
amount of activity and peer to peer discussion and debate around the work that 
feeds the cultural landscape for the rest of the year and even decades to come.

For this year’s Total Theatre awards <https://twitter.com/totaltheatreawd> 
alone 522 productions have been seen by 35 assessors from all over the world 
which so far has led to 37 hours of formal rigorous discussion around the work 
and that’s not counting the less formal on-going discussions that have taken 
place. A lot of the best of Edinburgh happens below the radar in the 
connections and networks forged and dialogues started. Those aren’t about 
buying stuff but about making stuff and talking about stuff. Many young 
theatre-makers will see a wider range of work in Edinburgh than they will at 
any other time of the year.

Of course Edinburgh is not without its problems. Every artist has the right to 
fail, but Edinburgh is a very cruel and exposing place to do so, which means 
that artists have to think carefully about the work they present here. Lorne 
Campbell of Northern Stage pointed to the significant boost that the Edinburgh 
festivals bring to the local economy (estimated to be over £260 million each 
year) but also the ongoing under-investment by the city council which raises 
issues around investment in cultural infrastructure and the economic impact of 
the arts. After all if Edinburgh, with one of the biggest cash cows on its 
doorstep, still can’t understand the economic argument for the arts, what 
hopeis there for thatargument about economic impact 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2015/alistair-smith-subsidised-culture-shouldnt-be-chasing-economic-impact/>
 in the wider world witharts cuts looming 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/opinion/2015/alistair-smith-arts-funding-deep-40-cut/>
? Charlie Wood, one of the co-founders ofUnderbelly 
<http://www.underbelly.co.uk/about>, suggested a voluntary tourist levy should 
be instigated, but made it quite clear that if this was to happen the proceeds 
should not go to Edinburgh City Council but an independent trust that would 
then distribute the monies raised.

How can we keep theatre wages fair?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/15/theatre-wages-lorne-campbell-cuts-edinburgh-festival-2015>
But the really significant question was whether we are really happy that the 
fringe is often being most significantly subsidised by those who can least 
afford it – the artists – and that despite an open access policy the fringe is 
out of reach for many for both social and economic reasons? Venues do try and 
help: out of 141 productions at Underbelly this year they are underwriting the 
entire risk of 12 shows to a tune of £584,000. But the hard truth is that this 
is a festival where the young and often poor play to the older and more 
affluent, and for many the benefits that Crowley detailed are way out of reach. 
The fringe remains largely white,middle class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/19/sarah-callaghan-kevin-j-is-the-edinburgh-fringe-middle-class>
, confident and, despite some advances this year,non-disabled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/27/refusing-limits-why-the-government-must-fund-disability-arts>
.

One member of the audience, a young director, spoke eloquently of the 
opportunities and confidence that being part of the Northern stage setup and 
Campbell pointed to the artistic benefits and professional development that has 
accrued as a result of regularly bringing 20 young technical volunteers to the 
festival who get accommodation and a podium and the opportunity to work on 
shows and see artists at the top of their game performing and meet and talk 
with them. “The base level at which they enter the profession and start making 
work is so much higher,” he said pointing to the fact that this kind of 
cultural capital cannot be measured statistically but is none the less very 
real. Underbelly has run something similar at theCircus Hub 
<http://www.underbellyedinburgh.co.uk/your-visit/venues/circus-hub> this year 
given a week of supported work to 16 year olds who have dropped out of full 
time education.

Why radical kindness is the key to artistic development
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jul/28/theatre-artistic-development-schemes-derby-in-good-company>
So what to do? BAC’s David Jubb 
<http://www.thespace.org/news/view/david-jubb-interview> suggested that maybe 
theatres need to get together to pay and support one young person or more each 
with whom they already have contact through creative learning projects to come 
to Edinburgh on properly paid placements each year. Such an initiative would 
potentially see an influx of 100s of young people from more disadvantaged or 
different backgrounds flooding into the fringe each year, getting the 
opportunities and incredible learning experience that it offers and which 
introduce a crucial layer of diversity in the fringe.

Everyone knows that the fringe is a significant feeder into the wider arts 
industry so such an initiative would potentially have a knock on effect on a 
sector that currently lacks diversity but which knows that it must diversify 
and do it quickly if it is tostay creative and relevant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/06/diversity-creativity-british-theatre-2015>
 in the 21st century.



 