
The leader of Islamic State, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, has expressed confidence in 
victory as Iraqi forcesentered the city of Mosul  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/iraqi-troops-enter-mosul-first-time-since-2014>
where he declared a “caliphate” two years ago.

“This … total war and the great jihad that the Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> is fighting today only increases our 
firm belief, God willing, and our conviction that all this is a prelude to 
victory,” said a voice purporting to be that of Baghdadi in a recording 
released on Thursday by the Isis-affiliated al-Furqan media.



“Do not retreat … Holding your ground with honour is a thousand times easier 
than retreating in shame,” he said in the message,his first since December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/26/islamic-state-leader-praises-progress-of-caliphate>
.

“To all the people of Nineveh, especially the fighters, beware of any weakness 
in facing your enemy,” Baghdadi said, referring to the northern Iraqi province 
of which Mosul is the capital. The audio message does not refer toMosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul> specifically.

In June 2014, days after jihadist fighters swept across swaths of Iraq, 
Baghdadi made a rare public appearance in Mosul and announced the creation of 
an Islamic “state” straddlingIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and 
Syria.


Mosul civilians flee heavy fighting and Isis: 'They killed people in front of 
me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/mosul-iraq-civilians-flee-isis> 
The “caliphate” has been shrinking steadily since last year and Iraqi forces 
earlier this week reached Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/iraqi-troops-enter-mosul-first-time-since-2014>
, the jihadists’ last key stronghold in Iraq.

Rumours have abounded about the Iraqi jihadist leader’s health and movements 
buthis whereabouts are unclear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/27/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-isis-worlds-most-wanted-man-video>
.

In his latest message, which is undated but refers to the death of a senior 
Isis leader, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani who was killed in Syria in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/key-isis-leader-killed-in-syria-jihadi-group-says>
, Baghdadi calls for attacks against Saudi Arabia – a favourite target of his – 
and Turkey.

Ankara has troops stationed at a base just outside Mosul and the Turkish 
president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s escalating rhetoric has raised fears of a 
unilateral Turkish intervention in Iraq.
Charlie Winter (@charliewinter) 
137. I'm astonished that Baghdadi doesn't refer directly to #Mosul 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Mosul?src=hash>. Astonished.
 <https://twitter.com/charliewinter/status/793964402399707136> November 2, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/charliewinter/status/793964402399707136> 
Baghdadi told fighters to “unleash the fire of their anger” on Turkish troops 
fighting them in Syria, and to take the battle into Turkey.

“Turkey today entered your range of action and the aim of your jihad … invade 
it and turn its safety into fear,” the recording says.

Baghadi told his followers to launch “attack after attack” in Saudi Arabia, 
targeting security forces, government officials, members of the ruling al-Saud 
family and media outlets, for “siding with the infidel nations in the war on 
Islam and the Sunna [Sunni Muslims] in Iraq and Syria”.


Baghdadi also said that his followers who could not travel to Syria or Iraq 
should aim for Libya and urged all Isis fighters to remain united in adversity.

He attempted to stir up sectarian resentment by referring to religious flags 
and slogans of Shia fighters among the Iraqi forces and by accusing the 
country’s Sunni politicians of treason.

What drove a British dairy farmer to the Syrian frontline?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/29/isis-wasnt-about-killing-people-what-drove-british-farmer-syrian-frontline>
The US-led coalition estimates there are 3,000 to 5,000 Isis fighters inside 
Mosul but the outcome of the battle appears to be in little doubt.

Tens of thousands of Iraqi forces, backed by the US-led coalition and its 
warplanes, launched a huge offensive on the city on 17 October.

Isis has tended to fall back when outnumbered, giving up bastions such as 
Falluja in Iraq and Dabiq in Syria despite its apocalyptic rhetoric of fighting 
to the bitter end.

The recapture of Mosul by Iraqi forces could spell the end of the group’s days 
as a land-holding force in Iraq. Forces advancing on three main fronts have 
retaken dozens of villages and towns scattered over hundreds of square miles in 
just over two weeks.

Earlier this week, federal forces reached the eastern edge of Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/iraqi-troops-enter-mosul-first-time-since-2014>
 and on Wednesday were clearing the most recently reconquered areas to set up a 
breach of the city.

Agence France-Presse and Reuters contributed to this report
 