
The Islamic State has released a new audio recording, purportedly by their 
leaderAbu Bakr al-Baghdadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi>, who has not been seen 
or heard in public for months.

The message, entitled March Forth Whether Light or Heavy”, seems designed to 
inspire Isis supporters rather than outline any new strategy for the militants, 
who overran large areas of Syria and Iraq in June.

In the 34-minute recording, the speaker calls for the mass mobilization of 
“every Muslim” to fight on the side of Isis, whether at home or in theIslamic 
State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> itself. The voice in the 
recording resembles Baghdadi’s, but this has not been confirmed.

The message also criticises the rulers of Gulf countries and Saudi Arabia and 
its release coincided with Barack Obama’s summit meeting with leaders of the 
Gulf Cooperation Council at Camp David 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/14/barack-obama-arab-gulf-leaders-camp-david-summit>
.

“O Muslims go to war everywhere. It is the duty of every Muslim,” the speaker 
says.

Baghdadi’s wounding is good news, but it is no mortal blow to Isis | Ranj 
Alaaldin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/22/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-wounding-isis-islamic-state-iraq>
The recording contains no indication of how recently it was made but refers to 
the Saudi-led campaign in Yemen, Decisive Storm, which began on 26 March.


The Guardian reported last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/21/isis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-wounded-air-strike>
 that Baghdadi had been severely wounded in a coalition air strike,which has 
left him incapacitated due to spinal damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/01/isis-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-incapacitated-suspected-spinal-injuries-iraq>
. Two months after being injured in the US air strike in north-western Iraq, 
the self-proclaimed caliph has not yet resumed command of the extremist group.

Referring to the US-led coalition campaign against Isis, the message warns 
Muslims that soon “America and its allies” will target “every Muslim 
everywhere”, despite the coalition’s claims to “confine themselves to targeting 
the armed among them”.

The central focus of the message seems to be a rebuke of the leaders of Gulf 
countries and of Saudi Arabia, referred to as “guard dogs” and “apostate 
rulers”. The message refers to Operation Decisive Storm as a “storm of 
delusion” saying the west had replaced Saudi Arabia with Shia powers – probably 
in reference to Iran – and “Kurdish atheists”.

The speaker calls for the humiliation of the Saudi regime and vows to liberate 
Isis prisoners in Saudi jails.

The last audio message by the Islamic State purporting to be from Baghdadi was 
released last November. Baghdadi has only ever appeared in public once, filmed 
delivering a Friday sermon in Mosul in July 2014.

Transcripts of the audio message were disseminated online in English, French, 
Russian, German and Turkish.

 