
No one could have predicted that the Bangladeshi writer Rafida Bonya Ahmed 
would make it to London last week. That she is alive at all is a miracle – to 
use a word of which she would thoroughly disapprove. As I watched her deliver 
the British Humanist Association’sannual Voltaire lecture  
<https://humanism.org.uk/2015/07/02/attacked-bangladeshi-humanist-blogger-bonya-ahmed-delivers-2015-voltaire-lecture/>
, I saw a dignified and principled intellectual it was our duty to emulate and 
defend. I could not understand why anyone would want to harm, let alone kill, 
her

But many do. In February, Islamist fanatics hacked her husband, Avijit Roy, to 
death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/american-atheist-blogger-hacked-to-death-in-bangladesh>
 with meat cleavers as the couple left a book fair in Dhaka. They nearly killed 
Ahmed too: slicing off her thumb and covering her body with wounds. To hear her 
talk about her murdered husband made me long to have met him. He was a typical 
intellectual – hopeless with anything practical but in love with literature, 
science and free debate.

Together, Ahmed and Roy ran a secular blog that promoted the writings of young 
liberal Bangladeshis They wrote on evolution and humanism; they condemned 
extremism fearlessly, as the title of Roy’s 2014 bookThe Virus of Faith makes 
clear. Seeing and fearing a courageous opponent, the enemies of free thought 
killed him for his ideas.

Ahmed talked about how compromised the Bangladeshi state had become, and you 
could easily make the mistake of thinking her story had nothing to do with us. 
Yet there were guards at the doors of her lecture room, searching bags for 
bombs and guns. A widow, still recovering from the slash of meat cleavers, with 
no weapon to threaten anyone beyond the power of her thought, is as much a 
target in London as Dhaka.

The comparisons don’t stop there. Immigration has meant that Bangladeshi 
politics are British politics too. You will never understand why London’s East 
End returns politicians as grotesque as George Galloway or mayors as bent as
Lutfur Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/25/tower-hamlets-dictatorship-east-end-lutfur-rahman>
 unless you know that Tower Hamlets is Jamaat-e-Islami’s British stronghold. 
Grasp that the party of Bangladesh’s religious right is always willing to lend 
its vote bank to politicians who bow before its prejudices and you will gaze on 
the East End’s fetid politics with less bewilderment.

Above all else, the fear that religious terror brings, the lies it makes 
people tell and concessions it forces them to make are as familiar here as on 
the subcontinent.

Ahmed was in despair about Bangladesh. Islamists had not only murdered her 
beloved husband, buttwo other atheist bloggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/12/third-atheist-blogger-killed-in-bangladesh-after-knife-attack>
. As Bangladesh’s ruling party is officially secular, and as Islamists have 
opposed the state ever since Jamaat-e-Islami death squads collaborated with the 
Pakistani army in committing crimes that came close to genocide during 
Bangladesh’s 1971 war of independence, the naive might assume that the 
government would be keen to fight her husband’s enemies.

Not so. After one prominent Jamaat activist was sentenced to death  
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/04/bangladesh-hangs-islamist-leader-1971-war-crimes-150411163958023.html>
for his part in the 1971 war, Islamists responded by demanding that dozens of 
secularists who had allegedly “insulted” their famously thin-skinned religion 
be tried for blasphemy and condemned to death. The state did not reply that 
Bangladeshis had the freedom to believe what they wanted. It said the 
authorities would prosecute blasphemers under repressive laws that date from 
the British empire.

Liberals in Bangladesh are therefore on both Islamist death lists and police 
arrest lists. If killers with meat cleavers don’t get them, cops with warrants 
will. To Bangladesh’s shame, the state hasthreatened 
<http://ioc.sagepub.com/content/43/1/119.full> friends and allies of Ahmed and 
Roy with prison for the crime of “hurting religious sentiments” and 
jeopardising “communal harmony”.

Lenin said: “The capitalists will sell us the rope with which we will hang 
them.” Islamists must feel the same about the “moderate” governments they want 
to destroy. Instead of taking extremists on and upholding human rights, 
Bangladesh justifies extremism by turning on the liberal critics of religion 
and treating them as criminals. In one of the most pathetic interviews you’ll 
ever read, Sajeeb Wazed, the son of Sheikh Hasina toldReuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/05/11/us-usa-bangladesh-assassination-exclusiv-idUSKBN0NW04S20150511>
 that his mother had found it prudent to offer only private condolences to 
Roy’s family after his assassination. Although “we believe in secularism”, the 
wretched man explained, the prime minister could not make a public stand 
“because our opposition party plays that religion card against us relentlessly, 
we cannot come out strongly. It’s about perception, not about reality.” 
(Incidentally, they are both related to Tulip Siddiq, the new Labour MP for 
Hampstead and Kilburn.)

Avijit Roy lost his life because he wanted to change reality, not perception. 
He knew the dangers, but knew too that there are fights that cannot be ducked. 
“Those who think victory will be realised without any bloodshed are living in a 
fool’s paradise,” he wrote before his death. “We risk our lives the moment we 
started wielding our pens against religious bigotry and fundamentalism.”

Compare the bravery of Bangladeshi intellectuals with the attitude of the bulk 
of the western intelligentsia. Whole books could be written on why it failed to 
argue against the fascism of our age – indeed I’ve written a couple myself – 
but the decisive reason is a fear that dare not speak its name. They are 
frightened of accusations of racism, frightened of breaking with the consensus, 
frightened most of all of violence. They dare not admit they are afraid. So 
they struggle to produce justifications to excuse their dereliction of duty. 
They turn militant religion into a rational reaction to poverty or western 
foreign policy. They maintain there is a moral equivalence between militant 
religion and militant atheism.

On occasion, they drop even that spurious attempt at evenhandedness and seem 
to suggest, as Professor Craig Calhoun, director of the London School of 
Economics,did recently 
<http://www.secularism.org.uk/blog/2015/06/academic-claims-university-atheists-are-militant>
, that the real menace facing universities is not students heading to Syria to 
rape and behead but secularists whose calls for free speech “challenge the 
faith and beliefs of religious students” and disrupt “campus harmony”. David 
Cameron will clearly have trouble taking his mission to “root out” extremism to 
the LSE.

For all the similarities, there is no moral equivalence between Britain and 
Bangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>. They have thinkers 
of the calibre of Rafida Bonya Ahmed and Avijit Roy, while we have liberals 
whom Karl Marx might have looked at and said: “Religion is the opium of the 
intellectuals.”



 