 Nowhere has been more affected by the crash than the Dominican Republic, where 
American Airlines flight 587 had been due to land shortly before noon local 
time.
Initial reports suggest that more than half of the passengers came from the 
republic.

More than 100 relatives and friends of the estimated 150 Dominicans on board 
hurried to the airport in the capital, Santo Domingo, as news of the crash 
reached the country.

An airport spokesman, Ellis Perez, said there were fears that as many as 90% 
of the passengers on Flight 587 came from the island.

"We know it was a very ethnic flight," he said, adding that psychologists were 
now at the airport to counsel grieving relatives.

"Oh my God!" screamed Miriam Fajardo on being told that her sister, Norma 
Lilian Baloi, and three nephews were aboard the flight. "I hadn't seen them in 
eight years. Now they're gone."

"Not the child, please not the child," sobbed Germania Brito, waiting for her 
sister, brother-in-law and their two-year-old son. "May God help us all."

"I woke up early just to greet them," said Melida Reinoso who had gone to the 
airport to meet her husband and son. "Why did this happen?"

A government spokesman said that the Dominican president, Hipolito Mejia, was 
monitoring the situation and was in touch with his consulate in New York. "The 
president expressed his deep sorrow," said Luis Gonzalez Fabra.

"This is a very emotional moment," Bernardo Then, American Airlines operations 
director for theDominican Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dominicanrepublic> and Haiti, said.

The republic - not to be confused with the Caribbean island of Dominica - has 
about 850,000 citizens resident in the US, an embassy spokesman in Washington 
said yesterday.

Many of them were drawn to the US by the chance to work and send money home to 
an impoverished country.

In total, Dominicans in the US are estimated to send back $1.1bn (Â£755m) 
annually to their homeland, making them a vital part of its economy.

New York is the main centre in the US for expatriates from the republic, many 
of whom work in low-paid jobs in the catering and cleaning industries. Some 
were among the World Trade Centre victims.

The latest estimates suggest that as many as 75,000 are in the US illegally, 
the highest number from the Caribbean after Haiti.

Earlier this year, two ships carrying illegal immigrants from the island sank 
with nearly 100 deaths. Thousands also try to enter the US via the neighbouring 
island of Puerto Rico, paying smugglers $500 each.

Others attempt to cross from Mexico, and earlier this year a group died when a 
small plane crashed in a bid to enter.

The Dominican Republic, with a population of 8.5m, forms the eastern 
two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola, the remainder of which is Haitian.

It has a mixed population, with latest estimates suggesting that 11% are of 
African origin, 16% European and 73% mixed. The population is almost entirely 
Roman Catholic, about half of them living in rural communities.

The economy is heavily dependent on tourism, which accounts for more than 
$1bn, and the service industry recently overtook agriculture as the country's 
main employer.

The island's tourism industry has been badly hit by the events of September 11.
 