
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-bakr-al-baghdadi>, 
leader of the Islamic State (Isis), has apparently surfaced alive after he was 
rumoured to have been killed in a US air strike last week, calling for attacks 
in Saudi Arabia and for “volcanoes of jihad” across the world.

Baghdadi’s call, in a defiant speech purported to be in his name 
<https://ia601509.us.archive.org/6/items/kalimah_201411/english.pdf>, claimed 
that the “crusader” US-led military campaign against Isis was failing. “America 
and its allies are terrified, weak, and powerless,” he said, repeatedly 
attacking “the Jews” and “apostate” and “treacherous” Muslim (Arab) leaders who 
feared the return of the Muslim faithful to the ways of the caliphate.

In a 17-minute audio tape released by al-Furqan media — a jihadi site — 
Baghdadi was described as “commander of the faithful” and “Caliph of the 
Muslims”. It was not immediately possible to determine the tape’s authenticity 
but the voice, articulation and tone all appeared close to his prior speech 
patterns.

“Oh soldiers of the Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, 
continue to harvest the [enemy] soldiers,” the recording exhorted in a key 
passage. “Erupt volcanoes of jihad everywhere. Light the earth with fire under 
all the tyrants and their soldiers and supporters.”

The speech was in florid, classical Arabic shot through with expressions of 
Muslim piety in the extremist takfiri tradition. The timing of the recording 
was unclear, but it referred to Barack Obama’s recent decision to send a 
further 1,500 US military advisers to train the Iraqi army and to a pledge of 
allegiance by Egyptian jihadis to the Islamic State last weekend.

In a triumphant survey of what he described as the group’s growing influence, 
the speaker also mentioned support from Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Libya, Algeria, 
Tunisia and Morocco. In Saudi Arabia, singled out in the message as the “head 
of the snake and stronghold of disease”, people were urged to “draw their 
swords” to fight and to kill Shia Muslims – referred to in pejorative sectarian 
terms as “rafidah”. Shia worshippers were indeed attacked in a terrorist 
shooting in the country’s Eastern Province 10 days ago.

In Yemen, Baghdadi called for attacks on the “apostate” Houthis – rebels it is 
claimed are backed by Iran (seen as the embodiment of Shia power) who are 
fighting the central government in Sana’a.

There was a mention too for the Sinai Peninsula, where “the people of jihad” - 
a group called Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis- are fighting the “Egyptian tyrant” and had 
“terrified the Jews”. God would grant victory, the recording said.

It also attacked “lying media” in claiming that the coalition, which includes 
Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Jordan and Bahrain, had hit Isis targets.

“Be assured, O Muslims, for your state is good and in the best condition,” 
Baghdadi declared. “Its march will not stop and it will continue to expand, by 
Allah’s permission. The march of the mujahidin [Muslim holy warriors] will 
continue until they reach Rome. And soon, the Jews and Crusaders will be forced 
to come down to the ground and send their ground forces to their deaths and 
destruction.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fisis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-us-strikes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20leader%20Abu%20Bakr%20al-Baghdadi%20'resurfaces'%20after%20claims%20he%20was%20injured%20in%20US%20strikes%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fisis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-us-strikes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20leader%20Abu%20Bakr%20al-Baghdadi%20%27resurfaces%27%20after%20claims%20he%20was%20injured%20in%20US%20strikes%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fisis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-us-strikes-video&media=>
 Islamic State (Isis) leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi reportedly makes an audio 
address to his Isis followers on Thursday 
The audio message was the first of Baghdadi since a video released in July, 
shortly after Isis proclaimed its caliphate over parts of Iraq and Syria, 
showed him delivering a Friday sermon in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul.

Its release again underlined the groups reputation for a sophisticated media 
strategy. It was distributed on Twitter with accompanying Arabic, English, and 
Russian transcripts for easy access and maximum impact.

Additional reporting Raya Jalabi
 