
Commuters, shoppers and tourists in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City bustled through their 
start-of-the-week routines on Monday, largely carrying on as usual after a bomb 
in the Chelsea neighborhood injured 29 people over the weekend.


As authorities arrested Ahmad Khan Rahami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ahmad-khan-rahami> in Linden, New Jersey, 
on Monday morning, many New Yorkers in Grand Central station across town seemed 
unfazed by Saturday’s explosion, which injured 29 people.

Suspect in New York bombing arrested after shootout with police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
New Yorker Ronnie Santos said he wasn’t worried about the detonation, which 
went off near the roadway at 23rd Street.

“I think you just kind of have to move on,” Santos said while waiting in line 
for his morning coffee. “In New York we just kind of expect things like that. 
You can’t really get too stressed about it.”

Rahami was arrested after a shootout with police, and is wanted in connection 
with the explosion in Chelsea. Six additional devices were found: one just 
blocks from the explosion site and the rest near the Elizabeth, New Jersey, 
train station on Sunday, according to authorities. All 29 people injured on 
Saturday have been treated and released from the hospital. Police said they 
also suspect Rahami was involved in a pipe bomb that detonated but didn’t 
injure anyone earlier on Saturday in Seaside Park,New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>.

Several people who worked at shops in Grand Central noted a “heightened 
awareness” when they showed up to work on Monday, but said the transportation 
hub, through which an estimated 750,000 people travel each day, had largely 
resumed business as usual.

Victoria Bruc, who works in a jewelry store, said she was nervous but had 
resumed her daily routine with no changes since Saturday’s bombing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcommute-new-york-subway-manhattan-chelsea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6638c04a7e3877df441fd96f7ffa7e676a988ab8%2F0_178_5341_3205%2F5341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20Monday%20as%20usual%20for%20New%20York%20commuters%20after%20weekend%20scare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcommute-new-york-subway-manhattan-chelsea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20Monday%20as%20usual%20for%20New%20York%20commuters%20after%20weekend%20scare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fcommute-new-york-subway-manhattan-chelsea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6638c04a7e3877df441fd96f7ffa7e676a988ab8%2F0_178_5341_3205%2F5341.jpg>
 A national guardsman stands in Grand Central station on Monday. Photograph: 
John Moore/Getty Images 
“I work in Grand Central, I’m always concerned that it might be a target,” she 
said. “But I feel like you have to go on doing your thing, you can’t live in 
fear.”

Bruc said the transportation hub was humming along as usual, with regular foot 
traffic passing through the halls and security and law enforcement officers 
stationed regularly throughout the station. Bruc, 23, added that the visible 
security presence did make her feel safer working in such a famous and busy 
train depot. New York’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, said on Sunday that about 1,000 
additional law enforcement officers had been deployed throughout the city “just 
to err on the side of caution”.

Visitors coming from out of town and across the globe said that although 
Saturday’s bombing was concerning, they weren’t deterred from hopping on trains 
and planes on Sunday morning to reach Manhattan.

Jim Senn said he felt safe traveling to the city from Arlington, Virginia, and 
that news of the bombing didn’t change his plans to visit.


“You’re always concerned when you hear about bombs exploding,” Senn, 71, said 
while standing in the shopping concourse. “But I guess the scope of it wasn’t 
so great in my mind that it really gave me pause about coming here.”

Several city dwellers noted that in the wake of 9/11, the metropolis had 
proved its resilience. Dan Summa said he was concerned about Saturday’s attack, 
but that “you have to keep going on,” he said. “It would feel different 
someplace else.”
 