
An awful lot has been said about privilege in the arts: the concept of an 
elite class of privileged artists has become a stick with which to beat the 
arts sector. Most recently, Chris Bryant, shadow minister for the arts, spoke 
of the preponderance ofartists from wealthy backgrounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/16/arts-diversity-chris-bryant-eddie-redmayne>
 to beat off criticism following Labour’s casual announcement on Twitter that 
it would not repealTory funding cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/06/labour-accused-bragging-commitment-83m-arts-funding-cuts-harman-defend>
.

Bryant’s attack on a subsection of the arts community follows more than five 
years of government built on the principles of divide and rule. Our political 
elites have become adept at vilifying parts of our society as a tool to direct 
our attention away from their own failings. Now, we’re so busy hurling rocks at 
the “benefit scroungers” that there is no critical mass of dissent to topple the
under-regulated, tax-avoiding superrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/08/hsbc-files-expose-swiss-bank-clients-dodge-taxes-hide-millions>
.

And I guess it worked for Bryant, too. All of a sudden, my social media feeds 
were full of voices attacking the privileged few for taking up valuable space 
in the arts. A few peoplecriticised Bryant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/23/chris-bryant-enemy-diversity-in-arts-politics>
 for taking cheap shots, but by and large, they all seemed to agree. To accept 
the blame. To say: “Yes. We’ve screwed up.”

Have we? I don’t believe the lack of working-class voices in our cultural 
landscape is primarily the fault of artists and organisations. Judi Dench,David 
Morrissey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/nov/09/david-morrissey-walking-dead-interview>
 andJulie Walters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/24/julie-walters-people-like-me-wouldnt-get-a-chance-today>
 have all lamented their absence. But, interestingly, they each talk about the 
opportunities for working-class kids that existed 20, 30, even 40 years ago, 
when they were establishing their careers.

Royal Shakespeare Company plans bursaries for disadvantaged children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/09/royal-shakespeare-company-bursary-training-deprived-children-theatre-cuts>
What has changed between then and now has nothing to do with the socially and 
ethically conscious people that largely make up our arts sector. The arts sits 
in the eye of a perfect storm of failing social provision, substandard 
education systems and a heartless welfare state. In the past 20 years, 
government policy has decimatedarts provision in the national curriculum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/23/performing-arts-colleges-elitism-row>
. The introduction of tuition fees means higher education has come to represent 
a life sentence of debt, while cuts to welfare provision have removed any 
viable safety net for those without family money to fall back on. Meanwhile,the 
role of art and artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/apr/27/value-of-arts-and-culture-to-society-peter-bazalgette>
 in our society is consistently undervalued by those in power. Last time I 
checked, actors, designers and directors weren’t the ones making those 
decisions in parliament.

The industry is competitive and, because of the cultural devaluation of 
vocational training for the majority of kids who want to work in theatre, the 
best way to build the skills and contacts you need is by training at a good 
drama school orworking unpaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/09/arts-universities-against-unpaid-internships>
 for people you can learn from. Who in their right mind would seriously choose 
to take on £30,000 of debt just to work without pay in a job so few people 
respect and in which they don’t even have the safety net of decent social 
welfare to rely on in an emergency? What working-class kid looking for a 
sustainable career path and basic financial security would choose this one?


For the 10 years I’ve been part of it, the theatre community has been tying 
itself in knots about the levels of diversity, class and privilege in our 
ranks. We wrestle with reductive definitions that encourage us to think of 
people as categories rather than unique human beings. This simplistic 
categorisation encourages the veneer of easy solutions rather than a complex 
and genuine investment. A huge amount of time, thought and effort goes into 
fruitless attempts from within the theatre and the wider arts communities to 
solve these huge social problems. Chris Bryant’s divisive tactic to pit us 
against each other misdirects our energies even more.

'Go forth and fight': how to stage an arts funding revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/jul/11/in-battalions-theatre-blog-arts-funding-policy>
Cultural leaders of all social classes are made in primary school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/nov/24/arts-teachers-changed-my-life-education>
, where they are captivated, possibly for the first time, by the wonder and 
power of the arts. There’s nothing we can do right now to reverse the damage 
for this generation of young adults. Is it time to admit it’s too late for 
them, and start fighting for the arts of the future? Should we stop exhausting 
ourselves in our pursuit of hollow tick boxes and instead focus on campaigning 
for the more meaningful social change that will nurture a healthy and diverse 
cultural landscape in the long term? Perhaps if we redirected our energies into
vociferous artistic activism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/aug/21/edinburgh-festival-activism-fringe-theatre>
, lobbying the government for genuinely equal social structures, we’d see a 
more meaningful return on our efforts.

For a long time, I don’t think I’ve been angry enough. But Chris Bryant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chris-bryant> attacking my community for 
failing to fix the problems caused by the bad decision making of central 
government has tipped the balance. I think it’s time to come out fighting. In 
that spirit, here are the changes I’ll be fighting for over the next five years.

• Compulsory, practical arts education in schools. A national curriculum 
requirement that all children under the age of 13 have at least 5 hours of 
practical contact time with a practicing artist per term, supported by a 
minimum one hour per week of practical performing arts education delivered by a 
specialist teacher.

• A universal safety net accessible to artists. A sustainable welfare system 
to provide people from all backgrounds with a version of the “safety net” that 
the more privileged enjoy.

• Fair pay that reflects the true value of art in our society. A requirement 
from Arts Council England for national portfolio organisations to demonstrate, 
as part of their funding agreements, how they have contributed to a sustainable 
livelihood for the artists they work with and companies they book. (Thanks to 
the community of artists atDevoted and Disgruntled 10 
<http://www.devotedanddisgruntled.com/> for this idea.)

What changes would you add?
 