
You don’t get to devise and make arts programmes like Arena or Imagine by 
accident. Nor do you somehow, mysteriously, become controller of BBC2 then 
controller of BBC1. You aren’t kept on as corporation creative director into 
your late 60s either, or doomed to leave that post reluctantly of your own 
volition. Least of all – taking on so much, maybe too much – is there any 
obvious point in adding another juggling ball, markedKids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>, to your manic act?

Alan Yentob may have become a knockabout target for BBC critics  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/yentob-wont-face-bbc-trust-probe-over-kids-company-as-he-has-quit>
who gag over big salaries and pensions. He may have walked a little close to 
the line of editorial interference when Kids Company hit studio stage centre. 
He surely rubs some colleagues up the wrong way. But he is a high talent, a BBC 
servant from intern to last P50. He’s one of a select few who put the arts on 
television. He commissioned countless terrific shows. He is undeniably 
creative. And it’s quite wrong not to say that amid so much axe-grinding and 
easy jeering. The most valuable people in any big organisation are ones of 
individual talent. That may make them a bit difficult to deal with sometimes. 
But – golly! – you miss them when they’re gone.

Allegra con brio

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbbc-alan-yentob-resignation-preston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b1e72fafc708dc985d9e969c194d08a780a2a6%2F0_127_1290_774%2F1290.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20hard%20to%20Imagine%20the%20BBC%20without%20Yentob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbbc-alan-yentob-resignation-preston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20hard%20to%20Imagine%20the%20BBC%20without%20Yentob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbbc-alan-yentob-resignation-preston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33b1e72fafc708dc985d9e969c194d08a780a2a6%2F0_127_1290_774%2F1290.jpg>
 And Newsnight will miss Allegra Stratton, too 
Allegra Stratton combines political savvy with human warmth. She’s been a great
Newsnight guide through the thickets of parliament. She deserves her step up to 
be national editor atITV News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/itv-news>. And 
there’s only one tremor of doubt, perhaps, at the prospect of Stratton and 
Robert Peston (new political editor) and Tom Bradby (political editor turned 
master of the revels) getting together atTen. You don’t have to live in Oldham 
West to know about the fearsome Westminster bubble of introspection. ITV will 
have to be careful this isn’t it.
 