
The BBC is in trouble. It’s in the midst of a crisis so serious that the 
corporation’s very existence is in question. The government is baying for 
Auntie’s blood: George Osborne has alreadysaddled the Beeb with a £600m bill 
for free TV licences for the elderly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/16/bbc-review-government-green-paper-john-whittingdale>
 and, inthe secretary of state for culture, media and sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/11/john-whittingdale-culture-secretary-bbc-charter-renewal>
, a man has said the licence fee is“worse than the poll tax” and ultimately 
“unsustainable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/29/bbc-licence-fee-poll-tax-tory-john-whittingdale>
. That’s like entrusting the future of Burger King to a shifty ginger clown 
named Ronald. So, the obvious question is: how can the BBC possibly survive? 
The answer is, of course, with Chris Eubank.

Earlier this week, Mr Eubank – the legendary boxer and sartorial peacock – 
took to Twitter <https://twitter.com/ChrisEubank/status/630488278194626560> to 
finally get to the bottom of a problem that has been bothering him for the past 
18 long years: he wanted to know just what exactly was the link between him and 
youth hostels.
Christopher Eubank (@ChrisEubank) 
@CarlPackman <https://twitter.com/CarlPackman> Can you please explain the link 
between me and youth hostels?
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisEubank/status/630488278194626560> August 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisEubank/status/630488278194626560> 
Now, because we’re not Chris Eubank, we know that the connection between him 
and youth hostels is the comedy seriesI’m Alan Partridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-partridge>. In the first-ever 
episode,Alan desperately pitches evermore ludicrous TV ideas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QUTFm55I_9g> to an uninterested BBC executive, 
eventually resorting to plucking random words out of the ether, sticking them 
together and hoping for gold. Hence: Youth Hostelling with Chris Eubank. But 
Chris Eubank somehow doesn’t know or understand this. Imagine that. Just 
imagine what the last 18 years have been like for Chris Eubank.
Christopher Eubank (@ChrisEubank) 
Happy everyone is having a roaringly good time with this, however I'm slightly 
upset as I'm failing to see the funny side but really want to
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisEubank/status/630849998817783809> August 10, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisEubank/status/630849998817783809> 
It’s 1998 and, as you enter your favourite shop to purchase a new silver knob 
for the top of your cane, the man at the counter smirks and says: “Been to any 
nice youth hostels lately?” You’re embarrassed and walk out, utterly perplexed. 
It’s 2007 and you’re at a service station near Plymouth about to buy a nice 
cheese sandwich when some teenagers yell: “Oi, Eubank, why do you spend so much 
time in youth hostels?!” You pull your taupe fedora down and walk sadly back to 
your car. You sit in the driver’s seat, shake your head and think: “Why youth 
hostels? For the love of christ, why?” It’s 2015 and someone onTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> asks you if you’re ever going 
to make a programme about the UK’s youth hostels. “Right, that’s it!” you 
think, and tweet him back. At long last maybe your torture can end.

That’s what Chris Eubank’s life has been like for last 18 years. 

Alan Partridge: a look inside his mind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/27/alan-partridge-a-look-inside-his-mind>
But what does this have to do with saving the BBC? Well, after Chris tweeted 
the question he has been wanting to ask since the last century, it became 
clear, from the enormous response, what the public wants. It wants Youth 
Hostelling with Chris Eubank. Perhaps it has always wanted Youth Hostelling 
with Chris Eubank. The extraordinary reaction on Twitter and enormous coverage 
given to it shows that the idea of actually commissioning Youth Hostelling with 
Chris Eubank is so ludicrous that it’s almost sensible. The following would be 
colossal.


The show would also fit nicely with those Reithian principles 
<http://www.dictionarycentral.com/definition/reithian.html> the government 
likes so much. Eubank is a learned man and is sure to have interesting and 
informative things to say about the places he visits – he can certainly educate 
any man on the correct way to wear a cummerbund. Anyone who doesn’t think that 
seeing a silk-suited Christopher Livingstone Eubank extol the virtues of the 
half Windsor knot to a gap-year student on a soiled mattress in 
Stockton-on-Tees would be entertaining, won’t find anything entertaining. They 
can go and watch something really stupid instead such as – to take another 
Patridgian example – cooking in prison. You’ll find it on Channel 4 called
Gordon Behind Bars <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/gordon-behind-bars>.
 