
A century after Albert Einstein formulated general relativity, the theory 
holds a profoundly strange place in modern life. On one hand, it underwrites 
all the marvels of technology today, from smartphones to space probes. We 
wouldn’t betweeting from orbit around Mercury 
<https://twitter.com/messenger2011> without the physics Einstein published in 
1915. On the other hand, while a fair number of people can tell you what 
special relativity’s E=MC2 stands for, a vanishingly small number can claim to 
really understand the universe as Einstein’s famous equation reveals it to us.

The popular understanding of relativity comes almost entirely from science 
fiction. A crew of astronauts crash land on a planet populated by apes, where 
humans are mutes kept as cattle. But it’s only whenCharlton Heston screams “You 
maniacs, you blew it up!” at Lady Liberty 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XvuM3DjvYf0> that the other moon boot drops: 
we’re on Earth after a nuclear apocalypse, transported into the future as a 
result of time dilation, an effect of relativity predicted by Einstein’s theory.

Video: 100 years of Einstein's General Relativity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2015/nov/25/video-100-years-of-einsteins-general-relativity>
Pierre Boulle’s 1963 novel La Planète des Singes, via its Hollywood movie 
adaptation, arguably remains the most famous illustration of relativity in 
sci-fi. But Boulle’s story is less about science than it is about humanity, 
with time dilation simply providing what the criticDarko Suvin describes as the 
“novum” <http://www.depauw.edu/sfs/backissues/14/suvin14art.htm>, the pivotal 
idea around which any sci-fi metaphor is constructed. Boulle exploits 
relativity to transport his readers into the future – but only to show us the 
folly of the present.

For most of the 20th century, SF went out of its way to dodge relativity. The 
postulation of warp engines, hyperdrives and other varieties of 
faster-than-light (FTL) transportation is less a scientific idea than a 
dramatic device. In space opera novels such as Frank Herbert’s Dune or CJ 
Cherryh’s Alliance-Union series, FTL is first and foremost a way to play out 
human political dramas that would be impossible if it took eight centuries to 
travel between locations. We want stories told on a human scale, but on the 
scale of a relative universe, human stories don’t even register.

Poul Anderson <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/aug/06/guardianobituaries>
’s Tau Zero won the Hugo award for best novel in 1971 for it’s hard-edged take 
on relativity and space travel. Fifty colonists travel from Earth on aBussard 
ramjet <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bussard_ramjet>-powered spacecraft. An 
onboard malfunction causes the ship to continue accelerating endlessly, taking 
ship and crew far beyond the limits of light-speed, flying between galaxy 
superclusters with all they know left billions of years in the past.

From its title – a reference to the Lorentz equations that underpin relativity 
<http://mathworld.wolfram.com/LorentzTransformation.html> – to Anderson’s 
frequent authorial interventions explaining the science of relativity, Tau Zero 
dedicates itself to showing us a relativistic model of the universe. And yet 
the result is still much like a fairy tale transposed to space; a galactic 
Hansel and Gretel, of men and women lost in a star-strewn wilderness. However 
hard we try, we can only conceive of the weirdness of relativity through the 
mundanity of stories already known.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fsci-fi-general-relativity-einstein-planet-of-the-apes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcbc619e1d86542913487abc03e2ccb8895603c8%2F0_114_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20about%20time%3A%20how%20sci-fi%20has%20described%20Einstein's%20universe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fsci-fi-general-relativity-einstein-planet-of-the-apes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20about%20time%3A%20how%20sci-fi%20has%20described%20Einstein%27s%20universe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fsci-fi-general-relativity-einstein-planet-of-the-apes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcbc619e1d86542913487abc03e2ccb8895603c8%2F0_114_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 It’s all relative … Planet of the Apes (1968), adapted from Pierre Boulle’s 
1963 novel, is one of the most famous illustrations of the concept of time 
dilation. Photograph: 20th Century Fox/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Conjuring stories on the scale of a relativistic universe is among the 
greatest challenges in modern SF writing.Alastair Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/13/alastair-reynolds-science-fiction>
 pushes the possibilities of sub-light empire-building to their limits in House 
of Suns, where human civilisations rise and fall in cycles of a few millennia 
without breaking Einstein’s laws of physics. Vernor Vinge’s A Fire Upon the 
Deep incorporates the tricky question of consciousness into relativity, 
describing a galaxy in which the speed of thought increases the further life 
travels away from the “unthinking depths” of the galactic core.

In Shikasta, the wide-ranging imagination of Doris Lessing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorislessing> took the union of 
consciousness and physics to its ultimate conclusion, in a universe where 
travel between worlds is achieved by the passage through higher planes of 
existence that we would probably recognise as forms of heaven or nirvana. It’s 
one of SF’s strange conundrums, that the further it projects hard scientific 
fact into our future, the more it arrives back at a vision that echoes the 
myths of spirituality and religion.

“Reality becomes illusory and observer-oriented when you study general 
relativity. Or Buddhism. Or get drafted,” jokes William Mandella inThe Forever 
War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/apr/14/back-to-the-hugos-joe-haldeman>
. Joe Haldeman’s SF classic makes a beautiful literary device of time dilation 
and relativity, as its protagonist is sent on multiple tours of duty in a war 
against aliens that explicitly echoes Haldeman’s own experiences in the Vietnam 
war. Every time Mandella returns home he is further forward in human history, 
and further isolated from the world he knew.

It’s the illusory, observer-oriented nature of reality that the theory of 
relativity brings us crashing up against. As we live them, the moments of our 
lives seem solidly real. But look at them through the lens of spacetime and 
they will be, in the words of Roy Batty, the replicant from Blade Runner whose 
inception date was 8 January 2016, “lost in time, like tears in rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/14/why-blade-runner-is-timeless>”. A 
century after Einstein’s equations revealed a universe that humanity can never 
truly perceive, sci-fi has only just begun to let us see, however imperfectly, 
through eyes that can.

 