
Friday marked the first day of spring, a time to celebrate renewal, rebirth, 
unseasonal weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/19/snow-storm-us-north-east-first-day-of-spring-new-york-philadelphia>
 – and, as it turns out, divas. This week, Mariah Carey, Chaka Khan, Aretha 
Franklin, Diana Ross and Lady Gaga all turn one year older. Coincidence? 
Astrologically speaking, no. These dynamic women are all Aries, the first and 
fieriest sign of the zodiac,who like to take the plunge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-swimming-blog/2014/apr/01/star-sign-affects-swimming-ability>
. Imagine them as the first creatures that emerged from the proto-blaze as the 
earth exploded into existence. Or, if you would prefer a firmer science, 
imagine what qualities you can borrow from these women as you clean house, and 
hit the reset button on your New Year’s resolutions. Ask yourself: what kind of 
person doyou want to be this year? And does any of it involve big hair?

We are not raising Generation Diva | Viv Groskop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/10/generation-diva-children-parenting>
What you can borrow from Mariah: longevity 

The year 2015 is a big one for the Long Island warbler, as it marks Mariah’s 
25th anniversary in the biz. Yet despite the passage of time, she seems to 
remain forever 21 –at least in her fashion sense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/22/mariah-carey-me-i-a-am-mariah-elusive-chanteuse-review>
. Then again, perhaps that youthful stamina is the key to her success: she is, 
after all, one of the biggest-selling female artist of all time, withan 
incredible ability to pick catchy songs 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/music/2014/jul/11/owen-pallett-what-makes-an-earworm>
. And as the composer of most of her tracks, Mariah has ensured that her heirs 
(and theirs) will be living the good life for years to come. She’s a true 
master of the long game.

What you can borrow from Chaka: it’s never too late for a comeback

Chaka started her career as the lead singer of the funk band Rufus, which 
spawned hits such as Tell Me Something Good, Sweet Thing and You Got the Love. 
But her tremendous success and talents were often disrupted by her struggles 
with drug abuse and alcoholism. Fast forward to 2013: Chaka at age 60, 
celebrating her career’s 40th anniversary with a new album, a tour and a 
stunning makeover. Have youseen Chaka Khan lately? Her 60 is the new 
everything-below-60 and proof it’s never too late to make a comeback.

What you can borrow from Aretha: versatility 

Aretha Franklin may be the queen of soul, but her reign extends to jazz, pop 
and, of course, gospel (and don’t forget that time she did a duet with Kid Rock 
on Divas Live – or maybe do). Last year, she released the albumAretha Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aretha-franklin> Sings the Great Diva 
Classics, which featured standbys like Midnight Train to Georgia and I’m Every 
Woman, but also showcased her performing newer material, such as Adele’s 
Rolling in the Deep, most famously on David Letterman. Being open-minded and 
willing to try something new are the things that keep Aretha fresh.

What you can borrow from Diana: glamour 

In her early career with the Supremes, as a solo act, an actress and in her 
personal life, Diana Ross always faced criticisms,often being called a diva in 
themean way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/mar/26/honour-diana-ross-reclaim-diva>
. Yet when have you ever seen her in sweatpants? Or a ponytail? She has that 
special kind of resilience that manifests as a divine, polished exterior. Or, 
in more common parlance: fake it till you make it. Even when things inwardly 
are a mess, you can put on your game face and persevere.
 