
"Is it really necessary for you to always say no before you say yes?" – Jake

If Netflix had a "Female-friendly films with annoyingly chatty titles 
featuring era-specific phrases" category, that's where you'd findIt's 
Complicated <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/133273/it-s-complicated>. 
It's also where you'd findSomething's Gotta Give 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/98755/something.s.gotta.give>, You've 
Got Mail,I Don't Know How She Does It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143372/i-don-t-know-how-she-does-it> and
Must Love Dogs <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/107998/must.love.dogs> – 
all immediately recognisable, thanks largely to their gratuitous use of the 
Didot font on all their posters.

But even though It's Complicated goes to great lengths to lump itself in with 
these frustrating bedfellows, the breadth of talent involved here automatically 
raises it above the rest of the pack. It's a film by Nancy Meyers, who'll 
forever be remembered for making you cry every Christmas withThe Holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/116455/holiday>. It stars Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> and a briefly resurgent Steve 
Martin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-martin>. And, best of all, 
Alec Baldwin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-baldwin> even managed to 
squeeze the film into his busy schedule of constantly telling everyone that he 
doesn't want to be famous any more. It's fluff, but it's quality fluff. Right?

"I like a lot of semen, always have" – Jane

On the surface, It's Complicated proudly wears its middle-class comedy 
identifiers on its sleeve. Like so many films of this ilk, the characters are 
all fabulously successful jazz-lovers who drink expensive wine and live to 
glide up and down endless gravel drives in their shiny four-by-fours. Their 
lives aren't difficult, their problems aren't serious, and everyone more or 
less ends the film in the same way they started it.

However – and it's hard to tell if this is down to the script or the 
performance – Streep's character is one of the saddest I can ever remember 
seeing. She's been divorced for 10 years, watched her husband remarry a much 
younger woman, and waved her children off as they all left home. Now she's 
completely adrift. Struggling through a life of unforced chastity, she obsesses 
about having her home redesigned, just because it gives her something to do. 
She toys with the idea of plastic surgery in an effort to recapture years 
she'll never get back. She makes an unwise sexual decision and, as a result, 
flies almost completely off the rails. It wouldn't take an awful lot – perhaps 
a different soundtrack and a 15% reduction of hamminess – to turn this into 
something that Streep would win an Oscar for, rather than being the sort of 
thing she consciously chooses to do when she's bored of winning Oscars.

"Do you poke smot?" – Jane

But while Streep takes the material and adds depth, Martin somehow does the 
opposite. His architect is bland to the point of barely being there at all. 
While that's a deliberate character trait, Martin possibly goes too far and 
almost dehumanises the character. When Streep asks, "Why is a man like you 
divorced?" halfway through, the answer's perfectly clear – it's because he's an 
expressionless mannequin. Also, I think Streep only falls for him because he's 
good at the thing she's hired him to do, which is probably another reason why 
she's such an abjectly tragic figure.

Still, at least it's all tied up neatly at the end. Streep's affair with 
Baldwin ends when he accidentally Skypes his testicles to Martin and everyone 
bursts into tears. There's soul-searching, heartfelt discussions on park 
benches, and then – with heavy hearts – Streep and Baldwin go their separate 
ways. Then, and only then, does Streep start to take Martin seriously as a 
romantic prospect. The moral is there for everyone to see: if you're a dull man 
with no prospects, the best way to get the woman of your dreams is to wait 
while she explores her sexuality and then make your move when she's broken and 
confused and vulnerable. Gets you right there, doesn't it?

Notes

• Remember when Facebook made "It's complicated" a popular term? It seems so 
quaint now. Still, look out for the updated sequel, Somebody Took a Screenshot 
of Your Snapchat.

• This week in How Rom-Coms Make You Feel Less Bad About the Person Being 
Cheated On: it's OK to not like Baldwins's wife, because she once ran away and 
got pregnant by another man. Convenient.

• Has there ever been a more harrowing euphemism for sexual intercourse than 
that shot of the lawn sprinkler springing into action? No. No there hasn't.
 