
Ivan Lendl is as obdurate a coach as he was a player, giving away nothing but 
a stare that defies scrutiny. On the eve ofAndy Murray's quarter-final against 
Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/20/roger-federer-andy-murray-2014-australian-open-quarter-final>
 in this Australian Open the Scot's minder-in-chief claimed he had taken no 
notice of the Swiss's early wins here but he did have a lookat his fourth-round 
encounter with Jo-Wilfried Tsonga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/20/roger-federer-jo-wilfried-tsonga-australian-open>
.

As he put it when asked what differences he had noticed in Federer's game 
since theworld No6 took on Stefan Edberg as a strategist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2014/jan/12/roger-federer-stefan-edberg-australian-open-video>
, "I have no idea what their arrangement is or what Roger expects. Quite 
frankly, it's none of my business, so I don't even waste a thought about it. I 
have one issue and that's how to prepare Andy for the next match."

Having watched the Tsonga match, he must have been impressed because it was 
another exquisite display by Federer. Lendl will have seen how Federer came to 
the net, how his new, slightly larger racket was in control of the ball when 
struck before bouncing and how his speed of mind compensated for an almost 
imperceptible slippage in sharpness with his feet. Federer schooled the off-key 
Frenchman in nearly every exchange to win in an hour and 52 minutes, nudging 
his aggregate time on court to just over seven hours – compared with Murray's 
of nearly eight and a half hours.

The time and effort spent in the first week often means little because the 
best players invariably turn into different beasts against each other in the 
second week. That said, Murray (and Lendl) will know that Federer is in the 
sort of form he showed before the tense semi-final here a year ago,which Murray 
won after they had exchanged hard glances over a disputed line call in the 
fourth set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/25/andy-murray-roger-federer-live>.

Lendl is happy that Murray has made good progress since surgery on his back in 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/19/andy-murray-surgery-back>. "He 
is hitting the ball great," he said. "The mental and physical goes together. He 
has played enough matches now, I am not concerned about that. He actually 
stepped it up [against the unfancied and unorthodox Frenchman Stéphane Robert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/20/andy-murray-win-stephane-robert>
], even towards the end of the second set and in the tiebreak. He hit a lot of 
good shots. He was unlucky not to win that."

But had Lendl's expectations for Murray dipped a little? "You know what my 
expectations are: only the highest level is what I expect."

Murray is not quite so adamant. He wants and expects to play his best tennis 
but he does not seem sure he will be good enough after an absence from the Tour 
of four months.

And was Lendl pleased with the first nine days of this tournament? "Generally. 
But I can always find thousands of things I would like to be better at – or for 
Andy to do better – but that is just me."

Lendl is addicted to perfection. He demands it from Murray and Murray demands 
no less from himself. Suddenly Lendl opens up a little. "There's no question 
Andy had a very good draw and took advantage of it. So that's very helpful. He 
played his way into the tournament nicely.

"How difficult is it? It's much tougher now than 30 years ago because the 
depth is much bigger. You look at the players in today's game and even guys 
ranked 200 are very good players, so you still have to perform well. Obviously 
they're ranked 200 for some reason – not because they're great under pressure 
or they're great all around – but you still have to play well to beat them, 
whereas in our times when anybody was ranked 200, it was most of the time just 
glorified practice. That has changed dramatically."
 