
Continued fighting and looting in Ivory Coast have marred President Alassane 
Ouattara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>'s first two 
weeks in office. The four month post-electoral standoff came to an end when 
pro-Ouattara forces captured the outgoing president, Laurent Gbagbo, but 
fighting has been slow to end in the capital, Abidjan. This was demonstrated by 
the recent killing of the high-profile militia leaderIbrahim "IB" Coulibaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/28/ivory-coast-renegade-warlord-ibrahim-coulibaly>
 and the discovery of mass graves in the neighbourhood of Yopougon. Last 
weekend,Desmond Tutu, Kofi Annan and Mary Robinson 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5gHbxnErQoK9oNwO-LVju-XDHNdwQ?docId=CNG.4ec0d644f5638e40f182b6d39cbee4b3.5b1>
 travelled to Abidjan to encourage national reconciliation. Atruth and 
reconciliation commission 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/05/01/us-ivorycoast-reconciliation-idUSTRE7401PQ20110501>
 has been established after the South African model and will be led by the the 
ex-prime minister, Charles Konan Banny.

Genuine reconciliation implies a common story of events. Yet in Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast> today there is a profound 
divergence in the understanding of the issues at the heart of the 
post-electoral crisis. Indeed, the elections have exacerbated some of the very 
conflicts they were supposed to end. While some view the post-electoral crisis 
as focused on Gbagbo's attempt to illegitimately cling on to power despite 
losing the election, others see the central issue as French neocolonial 
aggression that aims to install Ouattara as a puppet.

Ouattara has been internationally recognised as having won the elections of 28 
November 2010, yet this view has not been unanimously accepted in Ivory Coast 
and it has given rise to two very different readings of the crisis.

On 4 April helicopters of the UN Mission in Ivory Coast and the French 
Operation Licorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/11/sarkozy-ivory-coast-vote-winner> 
forces fired on military installations of the Gbagbo government. According to 
the UN, this was done in order to protect the civilian population. During 
further attacks on heavy weapons belonging to the Gbagbo regime, the 
presidential palace was heavily damaged, and on 11 April pro-Ouattara forces 
stormed the building and captured Gbagbo and members of his family. Supporters 
of Ouattara cheered Gbagbo's arrest, rejoicing at the capture of, according to 
them, a man illegitimately hanging on to power.

Many of Gbagbo's supporters (he obtained 46% of the votes in the November 2010 
election) see things quite differently: they claim that the election was rigged 
in favour of Ouattara by the former rebels who control the north, and that 
Ouattara first tried to come to power by fermenting a rebellion and, when this 
failed, by rigging the elections.

According to this reading of the crisis, Ouattara lost the elections, and has 
since refused a recount of the ballot. Instead, he called on rebels and the 
former colonial power France to launch an assault on the main city of Abidjan. 
Ouattara has denied links to the rebellion, but there are familiar faces among 
those backing him: the prime minister, Guillaume Soro, Issiaka "Wattao" 
Ouattara, Ibrahim and Ousmane Coulibaly, and Martin Kouakou Fofi√© were all part 
of the New Forces rebellion that attempted a coup against Gbagbo in 2002, and 
have since taken control of the northern half of the country.

While French forces say they were not directly involved in the arrest of 
Gbagbo, the Licorne/UN air strikes laid the groundwork by destroying much of 
the heavy weaponry of the Gbagbo regime. The fact that these airstrikes have 
taken place during the battle for Abidjan and have shifted the balance in power 
in favour of the pro-Ouattara fighters has given rise to the view among the 
Gbagbo-supporting population that this was a political intervention, rather 
than a humanitarian one.

According to one interpretation, the intervention was about peacekeepers 
protecting the civilian population and re-establishing democracy. To others, it 
was about France using its military weight to help resolve an electoral dispute 
in its favour by installing Ouattara as a president who will serve French 
interests. For reconciliation to be meaningful, and for Ivory Coast to exit the 
spiral of political instability and increasing violence, the divergences in the 
reading of the key issues in the crisis need to be taken into account.

Indeed, these radically different understandings point not to citizens 
supporting alternative political programmes, but to different conceptions of 
the state, different accounts of national history, and different visions of 
national sovereignty.
 