
Militias loyal to the former Ivory Coast president Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo> are recruiting child 
soldiers in Liberia to launch attacks similar to that which caused the death 
last week of 15 people, including seven UN peacekeepers.

Child soldiers as young as 14 are being groomed in training camps and used as 
scouts in increasingly deadly attacks in the volatile west ofIvory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>, witnesses said. Human Rights 
Watch said that youths aged between 14 and 17 were being trained.

"They call us 'small boys unit,' and we are always safe when we go to the war 
zones in Ivory Coast. I don't know the total that we have killed," a child 
soldier told the campaigning group.

Ivory Coast's rugged western region is a stronghold of Gbagbo, whose refusal 
to leave power landed him in the international criminal court last May after 
five months of post-electoral conflict dislodged him.

But neighbouring Liberia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/liberia> has been 
reluctant to clamp down on mercenaries notorious for recruiting child soldiers, 
while high-profile members of the regime's inner circle live unhindered in 
upmarket villas in Ghana despite international arrest warrants.

"There are training camps in Liberia, you can walk there in 20 minutes. They 
send boys over several hours before attacks, then they join in later," said 
Traore Adama, an Ivorian soldier who fled to Abidjan after attacks in recent 
months. "Youths can make up to a third of the attacking groups. Some of them 
are older teenagers but others are waifs you'd never imagine carrying guns."

On Friday, UN "blue helmets", deployed to a suspected raid in a remote western 
village, wereambushed and killed by a large group of Liberian-based "militias 
or mercenaries," 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/08/un-peacekeepers-killed-ivory-coast?newsfeed=true>
 Paul Koffi Koffi, Ivory Coast's deputy defence minister, said. Eight civilians 
also died in the attack.

Liberia has since closed its 435-mile border with Ivory Coast, whose dense 
forests and maze of creeks make policing difficult. Hundreds began fleeing the 
mineral-rich region, where long-simmering ethnic tensions exploded in the 
massacres during last year's political conflict.

Alassane Ouattara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, 
president of Ivory Coast since 2010, has struggled to unify a post-conflict 
army composed of quarrelling former rebels (who are also accused of war crimes) 
and government soldiers whom they once fought against.

One former rebel soldier, Aboubacar Souleymane, said" "It's very visible when 
an attack is imminent. Last week I told my superiors that Liberian mercenaries 
were planning an attack with the help of pro-Gbagbo supporters in the area. He 
said there was not enough evidence, so I fled the area. I wasn't prepared to 
stay there and get killed.

"There are too many cases of soldiers not being on their post when they should 
be, and disappearing from barracks at odd hours."

Officials say arms funding for the cross-border raids comes from Ghana, where 
several wanted Gbagbo insiders fled after the regime fell last year. Among them 
is Charles Blé Goudé, leader of the Young Patriots militia, whose armed 
supporters helped crush dissenters of the Gbagbo regime. Goudé, whom sources 
say is under investigation by the ICC, has saidhe is willing to face trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/10/ivory-coast-militia-leader-trial>
.

An African diplomat said cooperation was unlikely to be forthcoming from 
either of Ivory Coast's neighbours in the near future. "Liberia's armed forces' 
capability is limited by its small size and corruption because they're highly 
underpaid. But there's more than just a lack of capacity in both countries for 
failing to go after well-known criminals."
 