
The long queue zigzagging outside a reopened bakery on Wednesday hinted at a 
city rediscovering itself. It was one of several signs that Abidjan, the 
commercial capital of Ivory Coast, could be returning to something like 
normality two days after the capture of its rogue president,Laurent Gbagbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/laurent-gbagbo>.

Just down the street, formerly the scene of fierce combat, hundreds of people 
milled around fruit and vegetable stalls. A minibus pulled up and women stepped 
out carrying crates of eggs. At nearby restaurants, people smiled and waved at 
passing French military patrols.

Some petrol stations reopened, communal taxis were operating and water and 
electricity, cut off by 10 days of fighting, were restored to most 
neighbourhoods, residents said. The UN Children's Fund, Unicef, was able to 
deliver supplies such as medicine, soap and blankets to the city for the first 
time in weeks.

But people were forced to step over the detritus of battle and several burnt 
bodies could still be seen in grasslands â€“ one, a young man, clutching a bunch 
of fruit.

"Life is gradually returning to normal, shops have reopened as well as 
pharmacies," Mariam Kone, in the southern district of Koumassi, told Reuters. 
"At night, though, there is still shooting by those who have weapons. They are 
not happy at all that Gbagbo's gone."

There were reports of continued violence in Yopougon, a pro-Gbagbo stronghold. 
"There's a lot of submachine gunfire and we don't know who is doing the 
shooting," Stella Gogo, a resident, told Reuters.

Amnesty International reported that on Tuesday armed men, some wearing 
military uniforms, carried out house-to-house searches in real or perceived 
pro-Gbagbo neighbourhoods. One witness told the rights group how a policeman 
from Gbagbo's ethnic group was taken from his house and shot dead at 
point-blank range.

Footage has emerged showing forces loyal to Gbagbo's rival, Alassane Ouattara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara>, walking through the 
front gate of Gbagbo's presidential residence carrying firearms. Many are 
dressed in camouflage and wearing helmets, and some are crouched in shooting 
position. After orders from a commander, fighters enter the property by 
shooting at the lock and forcing their way inside. The footage, shot by a 
pro-Ouattara fighter and obtained by Associated Press, shows fighters putting a 
camouflage flak jacket on Gbagbo. He and his wife are then escorted to a car 
with a tank sitting nearby.

On a visit to the residence on Wednesday, the Guardian observed burned-out 
armoured vehicles, wrecked cars and discarded uniforms. The front entrance was 
battered. A sign for Gbagbo's elite republican guard lay lopsided. French 
soldiers fired teargas to deter would-be looters.

In one part of the compound, a building that contained a prison cell was 
littered with grenades, newspapers and upturned beds, while outside a guitar 
rested on a fridge beside two neatly packed leather suitcases. A pristine 
picture of Gbagbo was on the wall. Outside, curiously, amid discarded sofas and 
mattresses, was a blackboard on which was chalked: "Beyonce, I love you."

Philippe Mangou, Gbagbo's ex-army chief of staff, called on all soldiers to 
report to their base to serve under Ouattara's army, the Republican Forces of
Ivory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>.

Ouattara said Gbagbo had been moved out of the Golf hotel, where he was taken 
after his capture on Monday. He said Gbagbo would be kept in a villa and his 
rights as a former head of state would be respected. "Gbagbo is in a residence 
under surveillance somewhere in Ivory Coast," Ouattara said. "There will be 
charges [against Gbagbo] on a national level and an international level. 
Reconciliation cannot happen without justice."

He said he had phoned South Africa's president, Jacob Zuma, for advice about 
setting up a credible and independent truth and reconciliation committee.

Ouattara repeated his call against violence, and said all minors being held 
should be released immediately. "We need to secure the country, notably 
Abidjan," he said. "It is important for the country to emerge from this crisis 
on top."
 