
A well-worn path for bright young recruits to television in the 1950s to 1970s 
would take them from shooting little news and current affairs items to 
directing documentary features, thence to dramatised documentaries and finally 
into fully-fledged drama. Many trod this path, but few progressed more surely 
than Jack Gold, who has died aged 85.

Born in London, and having graduated from London University with degrees in 
economics and law, he entered BBC Radio in 1954 in the traditional apprentice 
role of assistant studio manager. After two years he transferred to TV as a 
film editor, and in 1960 joinedDonald Baverstock 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituarydonald-baverstock-1611694.html>
’s revolutionary early-evening miscellany Tonight. Here, he duly started to 
make the programme’s brisk little trademark films starring its idiosyncratic 
reporters –Fyfe Robertson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/gh7g8P3tFsx6bxCN3RQWWV/fyfe-robertson>
, Macdonald Hastings, Derek Hart,Alan Whicker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jul/12/alan-whicker-tv-world-dies>
 andTrevor Philpott 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-trevor-philpott-1168779.html>
.

Sheila Hancock on Jack Gold: he was the director my husband John Thaw loved 
and respected above all others
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/16/sheila-hancock-jack-gold-obituary-letter>
In 1964 came the break which made Gold’s name overnight. The Tonight team made 
occasional 40-minute specials devoted to a single subject. Death in the Morning 
was about fox-hunting, with Whicker in full cry after the Quorn but upstaged, 
for once, by the sheer brilliance of Gold’s film-making, notably a breathless 
pursuit sequence as seen and heard and suffered by the fox. It won him the 
first of his three Bafta awards.

Call the Gun Expert (1964), a whole series spun off from Tonight, gave Gold 
his first nudge towards dramatisation. The object of the programme was to 
demonstrate the forensic skills of a London gunsmith, Robert Churchill, whose 
expertise had been used by Scotland Yard in the successful prosecution of many 
armed criminals and a few murderers. Gold’s innovation – periodically 
reinvented ever since – was to have the reporter, Hastings, step in and out of 
re-enactments of the cases. In utter contrast, Ladies and Gentleman, It is My 
Pleasure (1965) followed a world-wearyMalcolm Muggeridge 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/11/15/obituaries/malcolm-muggeridge-writer-dies-at-87.html>
 as he trod the American lecture circuit while biting the hand that paid him.

It was 1967 before Gold directed his first out-and-out drama, for the BBC’s 
prestigious, if controversial, Wednesday Play spot. Much of the controversy was 
stirred up by the prevailing leftwing tone of the scripts, and on the surface
Jim Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/jun/25/guardianobituaries2>’s 
The Lump was no exception – a grim exposé of unsafe practices and the 
exploitation of casual labour in the building trade. But instead of starting 
with the political premise and running up a suitable victim, as too many of the 
other tracts were doing, in his central character, Yorky, Allen created a true 
outsize hero whose destruction was just as much due to his own pride and 
stubborn beliefs.

Jane Lapotaire on Jack Gold: ‘A great sign of love and respect for the best 
director ever’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/20/jane-lapotaire-jack-gold-obituary-letter>
Gold chose Leslie Sands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/23/guardianobituaries> to play the 
part and wrung an epic performance from him against a backdrop of scaffolding, 
mud and flooded workings. As if to balance this blunt tragedy with something 
more delicate, at the end of 1967 Gold directed The World of Coppard for the 
arts programme Omnibus. The virtue of this package of three dramatised short 
stories by a master of the form, AE Coppard, was not lost on the BBC’s great 
rival Granada, which five years later sustained a triumph with Country Matters, 
a 13-part series to the same prescription but drawing on the stories of HE 
Bates as well as Coppard’s.

Gold turned freelance, and proved to be at home with almost every kind of 
subject. Faith and Henry (1969) for LWT told a schoolboy and schoolgirl love 
story all the more touching for being played out amid decaying industrial 
landscapes they nevertheless find romantic. Mad Jack, written byTom Clarke 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-tom-clarke-1479326.html> 
(Wednesday Play, 1970), gave a stunning account of the first world war 
soldier-poet Siegfried Sassoon’s single-handed protest against the carnage of 
the Western Front.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7ymbgf0MDE8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7ymbgf0MDE8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7ymbgf0MDE8&media=>
 The Naked Civil Servant, 1975 
Also from the pen of Clarke came Stocker’s Copper (1972), based on a 
forgotten, forlorn strike by Cornish china-clay miners in 1913. One masterwork 
in a very long list was The Naked Civil Servant (1975); Philip Mackie’s tender, 
brave and funny biopic of the “stately homo”Quentin Crisp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/nov/22/news.obituaries> was hailed by 
Kenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/critic/feature/0,,567652,00.html> as the best 
TV programme he had ever seen. Also memorable were two contributions to the 
then-new Channel 4, Praying Mantis (1983), an extravagantly Gallic murder 
serial, again from Mackie, and Red Monarch (1983), Charles Wood’s knockabout 
comedy, with deadly serious undertones, about Stalin and his henchman Beria.

Letter: Playing with Jack Gold was more like an eccentric version of BBC2’s 
Late Review than a tennis match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/12/jack-gold-obituary-letter>
Where Gold surprisingly faltered was in the mammoth BBC Shakespeare project of 
1978-84. His Merchant of Venice (1980), with Warren Mitchell as Shylock, scored 
well, but his Macbeth (1983) was let down byNicol Williamson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/26/nicol-williamson>’s sheep-like 
mien and bleating voice.

Many directors saw TV merely as a stepping-stone to making movies. Gold was 
not one of these, but inevitably he was drawn to a parallel cinema career. He 
retained his affection for TV and continued to work in it between films. As he 
collected his bus-pass and then entered his 70s he enjoyed directing episodes 
of the latter-day crime series which, in their reliance on character and 
dialogue, came closest to classic studio drama. He particularly admiredJohn Thaw
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/feb/22/broadcasting.guardianobituaries>
, whom he directed in episodes of Inspector Morse and Kavanagh QC, and the TV 
movie Goodnight Mister Tom (1998), and in 2002 oversaw ITV’s tribute 
documentary after the actor’s death.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVeRo2vTYlJI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVeRo2vTYlJI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVeRo2vTYlJI&media=>
 Goodnight Mister Tom, 1998, with John Thaw 
Letter: Jack Gold’s early film Ninety Days deserves to be remembered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/12/letter-jack-gold-obituary>
Gold married, in 1957, Denyse Macpherson, who survives him, along with a 
daughter, Kate, and two sons, Jamie and Nick, seven grandchildren and a 
great-grandson.
Philip Purser

Brian Baxter writes: Jack Gold’s concerns in film were primarily social and 
personal, often on an intimate scale and with a regard for source material that 
suited the upstart medium of television better than the more flamboyant art of 
the movies.

His powerful debut, The Bofors Gun (1968), was a case in point. Adapted by 
John McGrath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jan/24/guardianobituaries.books> from 
his own drama set in an army barracks during the mid-50s, it became a 
blistering, claustrophobic portrait of men under stress as an “officer 
material” corporal has his authority undermined by a rebellious group dominated 
by a boozy Irishman (Nicol Williamson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/26/nicol-williamson>).

Letter: Jack Gold obituray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/26/jack-gold-obituary-letter>
It led to The Reckoning (1970), which reunited Gold with both writer and actor 
in a trenchant depiction of a businessman who has hauled himself from the 
Liverpool slums at the expense of his moral standing. With The National Health 
(1973), adapted by Peter Nichols from his own play about life in a vast, 
decaying hospital ward, Gold completed a third, socially reflective work, in 
tune with the realist features that had dominated British cinema for 15 years.

As that “movement” drew to a slow close, Gold moved to a cold war thriller, 
Who? (1973), that went straight toBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
television. A take on Robinson Crusoe, under the title Man Friday (1975), 
proved despite an intriguing premise to be an unengaging blend of broad comedy 
and liberalism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQ8fAmLVvVk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQ8fAmLVvVk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQ8fAmLVvVk&media=>
 Aces High, 1976 
Gold’s attempts at commercial movies were only modestly successful. Aces High 
(1976) was another “updating” – this time of RC Sherriff’s play Journey’s End, 
set not in the trenches but in the skies. A piece of hokum, The Medusa Touch 
(1978), starred Richard Burton and showed the director working on a genre 
piece, in one of the ITC (IncorporatedTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Company) productions that 
helped sound the death knell of British cinema.

The Sailor’s Return (1978) derived from David Garnett’s Victorian-set novel 
about an English mariner who brings home a black princess as his bride and 
weathers storms greater than any at sea. It was congenial territory for Gold, 
in its treatment of nonconformity. In lighter vein he directed The Chain 
(1985), an interwoven portrait of Londoners moving house on the same day.Jack 
Rosenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/may/31/guardianobituaries.broadcasting>
’s screenplay suggested that it was in reality a television drama in search of 
a big screen.

Gold’s films were linked by a seriousness of purpose and unostentatious 
direction. Many collaborators returned to work with him, including the composer 
Carl Davis and editor Anne Coates, plus, most notably, the actor John Thaw, who 
had been in The Bofors Gun.

• Jack Gold, television and film director, born 28 June 1930; died 9 August 
2015
 