
Forget the Liberal party men and their blue ties – the closest thing the 
Australian parliament has toclothes as a signifier is Jacqui Lambie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jacqui-lambie> and her scarf 
collection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjacqui-lambies-scarves-stylewatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417488122933%2F8f6f7a27-a012-4f5d-bfbf-1998f2139605-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jacqui%20Lambie's%20scarves%3A%20stylewatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjacqui-lambies-scarves-stylewatch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jacqui%20Lambie%27s%20scarves%3A%20stylewatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2014%2Fdec%2F02%2Fjacqui-lambies-scarves-stylewatch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F2%2F1417488122933%2F8f6f7a27-a012-4f5d-bfbf-1998f2139605-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In post-PUP white, Senator Jacqui Lambie speaks to the media outside 
Parliament House on Monday. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAPIMAGE 
The yellow scarf she wore through her PUP days, in a loose roll around her 
neck, with a soft crossover at the base, was discarded when left she Clive’s 
camp.

Think of medieval days, when regalia was worn to signify house loyalty. The 
abandonment of the golden scarf left no one in doubt that Lambie had struck out 
on her own. Think of a dude getting a divorce and throwing his wedding ring 
into the sea then filming a YouTube video of it and sending it to his ex-wife. 
That is the Lambie way.
 Lambie announces she is leaving PUP in the Senate. Photograph: parlview 
Neutral colours have followed – but the scarf has remained, as if to ward off 
the Canberra chill, forever in the corridors and forecourt despite the start of 
summer.

As for Palmer, his style appears to have changed little since his split with 
Lambie. He wears, according to some cruel colleagues, “tea-towel checked 
shirts”. That is, shirts with a large checked pattern that is common on some 
tea-towels.

On Tuesday night on Kitchen Cabinet 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-12-02/clive-palmer-mixes-politics-and-poetry/5933752>
 he will be rocking country casual, in moleskin pants and an open-necked 
chambray shirt.

Lambie’s style opposite is Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>. Bishop has helmet 
hair, even more so now that her style is more modern, whereas Lambie sports the 
scraped-back scrunchie look.

Bishop favours law firm attire – all corporate, tailored suits, while Lambie – 
even after her supposed makeover in late November – has stayed true to her 
original style.

Bishop’s gear is a nod to the corporate class. It says look, we wear the same 
uniform. Lambie is appealing to the working class – the one she refers to 
passionately in parliament expressing her opposition to university fees.

On her Sky TV interview on Tuesday she wore a hoodie. 
Susannah Guthrie (@susg91) 
Lambie wears hoodie. Cue fashion revolution (amongst small group of people who 
count Lambie as style icon)#auspol <https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash>
pic.twitter.com/RcmzDxMKAs <http://t.co/RcmzDxMKAs>
 <https://twitter.com/susg91/status/539567948583534592> December 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/susg91/status/539567948583534592> 
A hoodie! She rocked it with bright earring, pink lipstick and pulled-back 
hair. On it was a picture of the Australia flag – and in big letter I SUPPORT 
OUR TROOPS. As if anyone was in doubt …

Lambie need not even open her mouth. Her clothes tell her story. 
 