
A political cartoonist who was jailed on sedition charges for drawings that 
mocked corruption in the Indian government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/10/indian-cartoonist-jailed-sedition>
 has been released on bail.

Supporters cheered and waved flags as Aseem Trivedi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/10/indian-cartoonist-jailed-sedition>
 walked out of Mumbai's Arthur Road jail on Wednesday after a high court said 
there was no need to hold him in prison.

Trivedi had earlier refused bail until all charges against him were dropped. 
The local government has promised to review the charges against him. Sedition 
is punishable by up to life in prison.

Trivedi told reporters after his release: "When you hear the word 'sedition' 
you are transported to 1857 where there is a king and citizens are afraid to 
criticise him. We must rethink the law."

India's sedition laws date to the 1800s when the country was a British colony. 
They have been used in the past to punish rights activists despite alandmark 
1962 supreme court ruling that sedition required incitement to violence 
<http://www.hrw.org/news/2012/09/12/india-drop-sedition-charges-against-cartoonist>
, as it would otherwise violate the constitutional right to freedom of speech.

Trivedi was arrested on Sunday based on a political activist's complaint that 
his cartoons insulted the country. The arrest highlighted the government's 
increased sensitivity to criticism.

A day later, amid protests by free-speech advocates and opposition parties, RR 
Patel, the home minister of Maharashtra state, said the government would review 
Trivedi's case.

Trivedi was one of two winners of the 2012 Courage in Editorial Cartooning 
Award by the US-based Cartoonists Rights Network International. His cartoons 
mocked corruption among Indian politicians and were displayed at a Mumbai 
protest in December by the anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare.

In 2010 Indian police sought to charge the Booker Prize winner and social 
activistArundhati Roy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arundhatiroy> with 
sedition for questioning India's claim over the disputed Himalayan region of 
Kashmir.

Also that year, Binayak Sen, a doctor and activist working with tribal poor in 
India's Chhattisgarh state, was convicted of sedition and sentenced to life in 
prison. The local government said Sen used his medical work as a front to 
support the cause of a Maoist insurgency in that state. He was later released 
on bail by India's top court and is appealing against his conviction.
 