
A Palestinian poet imprisoned in Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> for renouncing Islam has 
written his first poem since he was incarcerated two years ago, provoked by the 
loss of his father who died after hearing his son was to be beheaded.

 The poem, entitled Tense Times, explores Ashraf Fayadh’s grief and the 
isolation of his imprisonment in the city of Abha in the south west of the 
ultraconservative kingdom.

 His father, Abdul-Satar Fayadh, suffered a fatal heart attack last November 
and his family believe this was caused by the shock of learning thathis son had 
been sentenced to death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/saudi-court-sentences-poet-to-death-for-renouncing-islam>
. The poet was not allowed to attend the funeral.

In the poem, published by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/21/tense-times-poem-by-ashraf-fayadh-world-poetry-day>
 onWorld Poetry Day <http://www.un.org/en/events/poetryday/>, Fayadh recalls 
how he last saw his 82-year-old father “through thick [prison] glass” and 
questions “what good is it to be alive … while others die from sorrow over you?”


The 35-year-old Palestinian refugee also writes of being besieged by soldiers, 
laws and regimes.


 In a message relayed with the poem by a friend, he said: “I am in good health 
and staying positive but I am alone. Only my mother visits me twice a week. I 
just hope I will survive and that people continue to remember me. I am scared 
to be forgotten.”

 Fayadh, who is also a leading member of Saudi Arabia’s nascent contemporary 
art scene, was jailed in 2014 following a complaint that he was cursing against 
Allah and the prophet Muhammad and distributing a book ofhis poems 
<http://arablit.org/2015/01/13/imprisoned-poet-ashraf-fayadhs-frida-kahlos-mustache/>
 that promoted atheism.

Palestinian poet Ashraf Fayadh's death sentence quashed by Saudi court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/02/palestinian-poet-ashraf-fayadhs-death-sentence-overturned-by-saudi-court>
His lawyer, Abdulrahman al-Lahem, appealed against his conviction in January, 
arguing it was seriously flawed because he was denied a fair trial. A panel of 
judges in Abha last monthquashed the order to execute Fayadh, but upheld the 
charge of apostasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/02/palestinian-poet-ashraf-fayadhs-death-sentence-overturned-by-saudi-court>
, imposing an eight-year prison term and 800 lashes instead. He must also 
repent through an announcement in official media.


 Irvine Welsh, one of hundreds of leading writers campaigning for Fayadh’s 
release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/14/writers-join-worldwide-action-to-protest-palestinian-poets-death-sentence-in-saudi-arabia>
, said of the poem: “It is a bleak, despairing piece of work, and the only 
thing that mitigates against the hopelessness of its message is its existence – 
that he was able to produce it and can share it with the world.”

 Chris Dercon, director of Tate Modern, who visited an exhibition in Jeddah 
curated by Fayadh, said the poem conveyed how “prison feels like an endless 
cycle, a tunnel without light at the end”. He added: “He seems to wonder as if 
there is an outside left. He seems to want to conquer his own grave.”

 Writer and activist Mona  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mona-eltahawy>
Eltahawy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mona-eltahawy> said the poem gave 
her goosebumps. “[It] is a reminder of how destructive the Saudi regime’s 
injustice is not just on the individuals it imprisons but on their loved ones. 
But Ashraf’s words are also a reminder that he will not be silenced.”

 Poet Andrew McMillan, who is writing a poem in response to Fayadh’s case for 
the English PEN Modern Literature festival 
<https://www.englishpen.org/event/modern-literature-festival/> next month, said 
the line “other humans cannot maintain neutrality” seemed “to be a plea to the 
wider world that we can’t be indifferent to these kinds of injustices”.

 The poem comes as Fayadh’s legal team makes a final bid to get him released. 
The appeal court is now considering an objection to their revised sentence. 
There will be no public hearing and his lawyer is not permitted to argue his 
case.

 If the court refuses to drop the apostasy charge, Fayadh’s supporters will 
ask for a royal pardon, which might lead to him being deported from Saudi 
Arabia. It is customary for these to be issued during Ramadan, which is in June.
 