
Former Essendon coach James Hird has taken a swipe at the AFL over its 
handling of theAdam Goodes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-goodes> 
booing saga. Sydney’s dual Brownlow medallist Goodes was booed throughout 2015, 
his final season. Hird told ABC NewsRadio on Sunday that the league should have 
sent a stronger message to those booing the indigenous icon.

The Joy of Six: blockbuster AFL trades | Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/22/the-joy-of-six-blockbuster-afl-trades>
“Adam had every right, and I think everyone had every right, to be very 
disappointed in the reaction of the crowd,” Hird said. “But then the commentary 
that was around it initially by people in authority - that people are entitled 
to support their team. That’s ridiculous because there was racist tones to the 
booing.”

Hird described the booing of 2014 Australian of the Year Goodes as 
“disturbing”.

“But I thought the commentary was probably the most disappointing ... from 
people in power,” he said. “Because it’s unacceptable (behaviour) and it should 
have been talked about as unacceptable from day one. I think everyone in theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> world was pretty confident that they’d 
done a lot to remove racism. For people to say ... there was an element (to 
booing Goodes) that was not racist is wrong.”

Hird was reinstated as Bombers coach for the 2015 season but left mid-campaign 
due to a lack of success as the club’s anti-doping saga continued to fester. 
Some 34 present and former Essendon players were found not guilty by the 
Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority, which investigated the club’s 
injections program in 2012.

However, the World Anti-Doping Agency appealed the verdict and Essendon is 
still waiting on the Court of Arbitration for Sport’s ruling. “There’s always 
positives to come out of every year and I think there was a lot said about what 
happened to our players and a lot of fact came out,” Hird said. “Our players 
were cleared of doping charges.

“That was probably the most positive thing to come out of this whole saga for 
us - that initially our players were cleared.” Asked to detail his hopes for 
world sport in 2016, Hird noted it was “about the facts”.

“Instead of PR and manipulation it’s about the facts in everything,” he said. 
“Bring them out on the table and let’s look at them, so we can move on. Because 
if we just try and brush it under the carpet and look on the field again, then 
we’ll always be hiding something. So put everything on the table and confront 
it and let’s move on.”



 