
Midway through our interview, James Kelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/james-kelman> is relaxing into an acutely 
knowledgable exposition of 19th‑century land clearances across the north-west 
of Scotland, and the resulting suppression of local language and culture, when 
it strikes me that the role of schoolmaster suits him far better than that of 
guarded, watchful subject.

He has recently returned from a term’s teaching at California’s San José State 
university. Does he enjoy it? He takes a long pause: “It depends,” he says. 
“Usually it’s upsetting for students.” There is a hint of the imp in his tone.

“When I was teaching creative writing in Texas, for example, the students 
found some of what I was doing difficult, asking ‘why are you giving us Van 
Gogh’s diaries?’” Or he would challenge why they had adopted a certain accent 
rather than speaking in their own vernacular. “Young people get angry when you 
point out they are fighting for the right to conform.” Surely that’s the point, 
to be the grit in the oyster? “If your students are upset it’s no longer a 
theoretical position, if they get angry and walk out of your tutorial.” He 
roars with laughter.

Kelman is so much more than a professional irritant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/29/james-kelman-why-is-my-work-so-upsetting>
, and yet it is now near impossible to consider his work without some reference 
to this perception – it is at the heart of how he describes his creative 
development. Although he’s been the recipient of a tranche of literary awards 
throughout his 40-year career, it is the furore around his1994 novel How Late 
It Was, How Late  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/14/booker-club-james-kelman-how-late>
that still defines his biography to the extent that it is possible to forget 
the key fact that it won the Booker prize. Describing one desperate day in the 
life of ex-con Sammy, and told in broad Glaswegian idiom, it was “a disgrace”, 
according to Rabbi Julia Neuberger, one of the judges; dismissed as “literary 
vandalism” by one broadsheet critic; and apparently contained 4,000 uses of 
“fuck”. Kelman is one of the most influential writers of his generation, 
described byAmit Chaudhuri  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/14/amit-chaudhuri-i-use-real-memoirists-throw-out>
as “the greatest living British novelist”, and an acknowledged influence on 
Alan Warner, Kirsty Gunn and Irvine Welsh; yet questions still abound as to 
whether his literary merit extends beyond the skilful rendering of a Glasgow 
accent.

At 70, Kelman ought surely to be enjoying financial and creative security. But 
he says his wife, Marie, a recently retired social worker, “basically kept” 
Kelman and his two children. And, after praising his new publishers, Canongate, 
for their “tremendous endeavours to market [his new novel] properly”, he adds 
with lugubrious intent: “I’m used to my work disappearing without trace”.

Dirt Road 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14608641.Review_____Dirt_Road_by_James_Kelman/>
, Kelman’s ninth novel, tells the story of a father and son road trip through 
the American south, accompanied by the rhythms of Cajun and Creole music as 
well as Kelman’s more familiar regional lilts. It offers his closest 
examination yet of the father-son relationship, which has been a constant in 
his work, perhaps out of necessity since he examines masculine rituals and 
rhythms as thoroughly as he does their language. After the teenage son’s 
thwarted devotion to his chaotic father inHow Late it Was, How Late, and the 
bigoted, distant dad inKieron Smith, Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/26/featuresreviews.guardianreview28>
, Kelman conveys with great poignancy the intractable silences and clumsy 
negotiations of intimacy between Murdo and his father Tom, both wounded by 
grief and loss following the death of Murdo’s mother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbooks-interview-james-kelman-working-class-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3834c73ad09cafe70675ab29a3b6c957b2c605%2F10_297_1868_1121%2F1868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Kelman%3A%20%E2%80%98Intimidation%2C%20provocation%2C%20contempt%20-%20that's%20the%20working%20class%20experience'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbooks-interview-james-kelman-working-class-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Kelman%3A%20%E2%80%98Intimidation%2C%20provocation%2C%20contempt%20-%20that%27s%20the%20working%20class%20experience%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbooks-interview-james-kelman-working-class-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3834c73ad09cafe70675ab29a3b6c957b2c605%2F10_297_1868_1121%2F1868.jpg>
 Kelman signing books at the Hay festival, 2004. Photograph: David Levene for 
the Guardian 
The novel is told from Murdo’s point of view, and although the publicity blurb 
rather cheekily describes it as Kelman’s “most accessible novel for years”, it 
continues in the tradition that he has made his own: disposing of the 
omnipotence of third person narrative, and offering a demotic and sometimes 
mercilessly mundane stream of consciousness that has attracted comparisons to 
Joyce, Camus and Beckett. According to Warner, another writer who has written 
from the perspective of youthful Scots: “Kelman brings alive a human 
consciousness like no other writer can.”

The story is also partly inspired by Kelman’s own travels around the US as a 
young man. The second of five boys, growing up in solidly working class areas 
of Glasgow, first Govan and later Drumchapel, he left school at 15 to begin an 
apprenticeship as a compositor. But at 17, visiting family who had emigrated to 
the US, he found himself too young to work under the country’s labour laws. 
“All I did for about three to four months was walk about LA.”

He also calls the book “a portrait of a young artist”. Murdo is a budding 
musician; Kelman himself wanted to be a painter before he was drawn to writing 
and, formidably well-read and intellectually agile across a number of art 
forms, he suggests it can be more useful to see writing through the prism of, 
say, music or visual arts.

“I didn’t start writing until I was 21 but I kind of knew I was going to be 
doingsomething. At that age, I read a lot of biographies of artists and that 
took me into literature. An early hero was Cézanne, but he took me to Zola.” 
Kelman went on to read French, American and Russian writers, but “I wouldn’t 
have been reading English literature, because of the class barrier.

“Why would you want to read things that were treating you as an animal? The 
Scottish voice was equated with being working class. If you weren’t working 
class, you would have lost it and assimilated to the bourgeois, as people still 
do whether it’s Morningside or Kelvinside [upmarket areas of Edinburgh and 
Glasgow] – an approximation of Hampstead Heath is what they attempt.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbooks-interview-james-kelman-working-class-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ec51f4bb929c9a6b78ef0996a9692fbdebb5a3%2F0_58_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Kelman%3A%20%E2%80%98Intimidation%2C%20provocation%2C%20contempt%20-%20that's%20the%20working%20class%20experience'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbooks-interview-james-kelman-working-class-experience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Kelman%3A%20%E2%80%98Intimidation%2C%20provocation%2C%20contempt%20-%20that%27s%20the%20working%20class%20experience%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbooks-interview-james-kelman-working-class-experience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ec51f4bb929c9a6b78ef0996a9692fbdebb5a3%2F0_58_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Morningside, Edinburgh. Photograph: Suzanne Plunkett/Reuters 
The limiting conventions of English literature have been felt keenly by Kelman 
all his life: “The problem is that, formally, there’s nowhere to go. The only 
way is to enter from within, and it’s treated as a hostile attack. If you feel: 
‘I need to break down narrative structure here, I need to be involved in 
oratory devices as well as literary devices,’ then right away – as I’ve 
experienced for 45 years, with the Booker and so on – there is utter hostility. 
The red mist descends. Eventually you have to work out why you’re being 
atacked.”

Kelman insists that it was never a choice to be a sweary, unpunctuated breaker 
of literary convention. “Most of my stories were written from within my own 
culture, so you use the language as people use it. If you’re writing a story 
about a man in a pub, why can’t you use the language he speaks? It becomes a 
case that you can’t write that story, or can only write it from the outside, 
and most English literature is from the outside.

“It’s not that you make a decision to challenge convention because it’s really 
irrelevant to you as an artist. All you do is explore, and take it as far as 
you can. And it’s in the act of doing that that someone will say, ‘Well, what 
are you doing here? You can’t use the word fuck.’ So I can’t write about that 
character? That area of male working-class community cannot exist within 
literature?” I ask if he feels there has been any evolution since he won the 
Booker in 1994: for example with the awarding of last year’s prize to Jamaican 
authorMarlon James, whose novel A Brief History of Seven Killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/13/marlon-james-wins-the-man-booker-prize-2015>
 was heavy with patois.

He doesn’t know James’s work, he says, nor will he be drawn on his opinion of 
younger Scottish writers –many of whom credit him as a significant influence. 
As I throw names at him, and he looks blank, I can only conclude that – rather 
than not wishing to play favourites – he simply hasn’t read any. At another 
point, while talking about female and gay writers who have tried to transform 
dominant male values, I expect to hear a name such asJackie Kay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/27/life-writing-jackie-kay>, but 
instead he offers Virginia Woolf and Jean Genet.

I feel that there are all these areas in Scottish culture that are still not 
properly explored

What he will say is that younger writers must discover the distinctive 
Scottish tradition themselves. “Writers like myself or Tom Leonard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/17/poetry-leonard-batchelor-review> 
are working from that tradition, but maybe [younger writers] don’t realise that 
was what it is.” He points out thatJustified Sinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/30/private-memoirs-confessions-justified-sinner>
, for example, the brilliantly eerie but neglected novel by Scottish author 
James Hogg, was published a couple of decades before Emily Brontë’s more 
celebratedWuthering Heights. “I feel that there are all these areas in Scottish 
culture that are still not properly explored.”

One tradition that Kelman has previously been happy to place himself within is 
that of Kafka: in his writing he is drawn to scenarios that depict the petty 
humiliations and frustrations of bureaucracy – in hospital, a job centre, or 
the first day on the factory floor.

“I think that is an essential working-class experience,” he says. 
“Intimidation, provocation, sarcasm, contempt, disgust and so on. You learn how 
to cope with it as a young person, because you see your parents in that 
situation, for example if they’re dealing with the doctor or the headmaster, 
you know they’re watching their Ps and Qs.” We’re sitting in a cafe in Partick, 
which serves a decent egg and chips alongside your skinny latte. “You live in 
Glasgow around here and walk to the cafes across the road,” – Kelman nods to 
the more salubrious environs of Byres Road – “you’ll be aware of the language 
and social bearing that is used to intimidate. Whichkind of tea?”

Theo Tait talks to James Kelman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview22>
Kelman was one of very few senior Scottish creatives not to campaign during 
the referendum of 2014, although he did write in an essay that he cautiously 
supported independence. We met before the EU referendum, but he was keen to 
note that many of those supporting Scottish independence considered themselves 
internationalists rather than nationalists. In terms of an artist’s response to 
the recent upheavals across the Scottish political landscape, he argues that 
“much of the mood for self-determination came about through the work of the 
artists”, and adds, “I think what will happen is more of a resilience and 
awareness of why we’re not nationalists, but why we’re in favour of 
self-determination. So what you will get is an exploration of not so much 
Scottish identity, but the reality of where it is you come from as a Scottish 
person.”

Following their San José sojourn, Kelman and his wife have settled back into 
Glasgow life. They are now grand-parents. He avoids contemporary forms of 
communication, though his family uses Facebook for the usual stuff. He still 
writes every day: “Five o’clock this morning,” he says. “It is second nature 
but it’s also what I’m comfortable doing. Sometimes you would be better talking 
to writers the way you would talk to a musician or a visual artist. You have to 
always be practising, in that sense. You always want to go further than you’re 
going.”

The 10 best Booker prize moments – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2012/oct/13/10-best-booker-prize-moments> 