
“It has been incredible,” Jamie Murray said of the British experience at the 
2016Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> – and, 
he might have added, it could become more incredible.

“Obviously, for Andy [his brother] to get into the semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/andy-murray-downs-david-ferrer-to-advance-to-australian-open-semi-final>
, I guess people are used to that because that is what he has been doing for so 
many years,” Jamie said on the eve of his doubles final,his third in a row in 
slams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/jamie-murray-reaches-australian-open-doubles-final-with-partner-bruno-soares>
, after losingat Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/11/jamie-murray-misses-out-on-second-wimbledon-doubles-crown>
 andFlushing Meadows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/12/jamie-murray-john-peers-nicolas-mahut-pierres-hugues-herbert-us-open-mens-doubles-final>
 with the Australian John Peers.

“But for Jo [Konta] to be in the semis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-kontas-fairytale-australian-open-run-ended-by-angelique-kerber>
 is an incredible achievement. She deserves it all because she works really 
hard and it is not like she has come through this draw beating easy opponents 
and everything has opened up for her.

Jamie Murray reaches Australian Open doubles final with partner Bruno Soares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/jamie-murray-reaches-australian-open-doubles-final-with-partner-bruno-soares>
“Of course she had a great opportunity [against the Chinese qualifier Zhang 
Shuai] but she earned that by winning her four previous matches. I am sure it 
wasn’t an easy situation for her because for the first time she was a favourite 
to win in a grand slam match. There was a lot of pressure to deal with and she 
handled it brilliantly.”

If she did not do likewise in the semi-final, the seventh seed, Angelique 
Kerber, had something to do with that. Murray, however, now has to be a little 
selfish. He has to consign his concerns for his brother and the other Brits in 
Melbourne to the back of his thoughts and look towards the final of the 
doubles, on Saturday.

He goes on court with the experienced Brazilian doubles specialist Bruno 
Soares against the veteran pairing of Daniel Nestor of Canada and the Czech 
Radek Stepanek, who paid no heed to their combined ages of 80 to beat the 
younger 16th seeds, Pablo Cuevas of Uruguay and the Spaniard Marcel Granollers, 
7-6, 6-4.

Murray and Soares, playing together for only the 12th time, made short work of 
the Frenchmen Adrian Mannarino and Lucas Pouille 6-3, 6-1 on Rod Laver Arena 
before rain forced the temporary closure of the roof.

What a time the Scot and the Brazilian have had since teaming up at the start 
of the month in Doha. They have lost only one of 12 matches and secured their 
first title,in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/jamie-murray-wins-sydney-title-bruno-soares>
. Here they have played with such understanding and precision, their 
contrasting skills meshing like a Formula one gearbox, that they might have 
been partners for years.

Peers and Murray played a lot of good tennis but the combination was starting 
to fray by the time it disintegrated in the US Open final and, acting on advice 
from confidants and family, Murray ended it. The decision surprised some, who 
thought the elder Murray brother too polite to make such a quick and clinical 
break, but he has matured into a much tougher competitor over the past couple 
of years.

Peers took it well enough but the Australian knew he had become a liability on 
big points, while Murray had blossomed into a complete player, especially at 
the net.

“I think I know what to expect,” Murray said. “Obviously, I came up on the 
wrong side the last two times I was there but it wasn’t like I played bad 
matches or anything like that. I fully trust myself that I can perform in those 
matches. I believe Bruno can as well.

“I think the kind of mentality we’ve got will bode well, the kind of chemistry 
that we seem to have struck up these last couple of weeks will bode well for 
us. We’ll give it all we’ve got. We know it’s going to be tough.”

As Soares pointed out after their semi-final win: “Especially after Sydney, I 
expected something good here. Tough to say how good. We were almost perfect – 
one more match would have been perfect – but I had a good feeling.

“Sydney plays fairly similar to here and we played a very solid week in 
Sydney. We beat some very good teams, especially in the semis and the final. 
This gives you extra confidence and motivation to come to a slam. Sometimes you 
lose early and then you come with some worries and doubts but, coming off the 
title and especially starting the partnership and having played seven matches 
already, I was feeling good.

“Jamie is really good at the net, really fast, he puts on a lot of pressure. 
One of my abilities is to make balls from the back. When I’m playing well I’m 
quite consistent on returns and second balls, so that allows Jamie to be 
aggressive and play his game really strong, and vice versa.

“He’s got a great serve. He helps me a lot when I serve. I don’t have a big 
serve. I have a decent serve but it’s not a weapon, so I need somebody at the 
net to help me out. So I think it’s basically how we complement each other.”

If form and class count, they will compliment each other, too, at the end of 
the final.
 