
When Jamie Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamie-murray> lands in 
London on Tuesday he will do so with a grand slam doubles trophy to accompany 
his bags. He will also be the world No2 and at some stage in the very near 
future it is likely he could become the world’s top-ranked doubles player.

Jamie Murray wins Australian Open men’s doubles title with Bruno Soares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/jamie-murray-wins-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-bruno-soares>
Murray was back in Rod Laver Arena to watch his brother Andy take on Novak 
Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
 in the singles final, just asAndy had been there at the end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/andy-jamie-murray-support-australian-open-final-singles-doubles>
 to celebrateJamie’s triumph in the doubles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/jamie-murray-wins-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-bruno-soares>
, when he and Brazil’s Bruno Soares beat Daniel Nestor and Radek Stepanek to 
win the Australian Open.

Beating Andy, who has been in nine grand slam finals, to be the first member 
of their family to be a world No1 is something the 29-year-old probably never 
thought possible, especially not when he was considering throwing away his 
rackets a few years ago as the grind of the Tour began to take its toll. With 
the help of a good partner, in the Australian John Peers, and a reunion with 
his old coach, Louis Cayer, he dug himself out of the hole he was in. Last year 
he and Peers reached theWimbledon  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/09/jamie-murray-wimbledon-doubles-john-peers>
andUS Open finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/12/jamie-murray-john-peers-nicolas-mahut-pierres-hugues-herbert-us-open-mens-doubles-final>
 before parting ways as Murray joined forces with Soares, and on Saturday night 
the newly formed pair won their first doubles title together.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20Murray%20and%20Bruno%20Soares%20win%20Australian%20Open%20men's%20doubles%20title%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20Murray%20and%20Bruno%20Soares%20win%20Australian%20Open%20men%27s%20doubles%20title%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights&media=>
Jamie Murray and Bruno Soares win Australian Open men’s doubles title – video 
highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jan/30/jamie-murray-and-bruno-soares-win-australian-open-mens-doubles-title-video-highlights>
“I just think it’s amazing that you’ve got the two brothers sitting at No2 in 
the world,” the GB Davis Cup captain, Leon Smith, said. “It’s quite 
astonishing, particularly from the one family to be in that situation, from the 
one town. It’s an incredible story, it has always been an incredible story, it 
just gets even more incredible when things like that happen. I just think it’s 
astonishing.”

For Smith the progress of Andy and Jamie must be even more startling. When 
Andy was 10 and Jamie 11, Judy Murray employed Smith as an apprentice, teaching 
him the ropes as they travelled up and down the country in a van. Smith has the 
odd flashback when he witnesses the brothers’ success.

“I think we always kind of talk to each other about it,” said Smith, who led 
Britain to theirfirst Davis Cup title since 1936 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/andy-murray-davis-cup-great-britain>
 in November. “We talked about it a lot in the Davis Cup, laughing, saying it 
was actually quite funny that we’re walking out there in GB tracksuits and you 
think back to what it was like 15, 16 years ago.

“They were so young. It’s amazing – you never take it for granted – that 
journey they’ve been on, the way that Judy influenced them all, me as well, the 
whole programme in Scotland. But it’s good to keep reminding yourself about 
that as well.”

Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win the 2016 Australian Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
Jamie Murray in his victory speech recognised the role his family have played, 
in particular that of his wife Alejandra, who has enjoyed the highs but also 
had to put up with the lows.

Murray also singled out Cayer, the Canadian who is regarded as the best 
doubles coach in the world and who always believed the Scot had the talent to 
reach the top even if it took Murray time to buy into it.

“All the work we’ve done together has always been in a process with a view to 
getting to No1,” Murray said. “Whether I believed I could do it I don’t know, 
but he did. I just did what he told me. Almost there. Getting closer.”

Smith said Murray deserves every success. “The speech Jamie did was really 
nice,” he said. “I think that showed a man that’s put his heart and soul into 
trying to get to that point, he’s suffered some disappointments along the way, 
it was nice to see him get there.”
 