
“I relish my smallness. I really like my smallness,” says Jane Horrocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jane-horrocks>. The actor registered about 
5ft 4in when she was in heels for theObserver’s photoshoot, half an hour ago, 
but is a few inches shy of that now as she drinks tea in the aftermath, having 
changed into a favoured pair of brothel creepers. Her whole family is small, 
Horrocks says. Parents, brothers, partner, their two student-age kids. “Little, 
little people. The Horrockses are Borrowers...But,” she adds, in that famous 
see-sawing Lancastrian accent, full of sudden emphases and italicised notes, “of
late, I have been wondering, what would it be like to be really tall?”

It’s a thought experiment at the milder end of the existential-crisis scale, 
and one of many “What ifs?” the actor, 52, has been putting to herself of late. 
For example, when she was younger, was it a mistake to try for a career in 
acting instead of music? Should she have taken more drugs in her 20s? And more 
recently: was it the right decision to appear in a movie version ofAbsolutely 
Fabulous, out next month? Should she do more Shakespeare? Try modelling? Did 
any of the decisions she made really matter? “What’s the point?” she says, 
bringing her shoulders up around her ears. “When you get beyond a certain age. 
What’s thepoint?”

It’s a strange place to have a tortured state-of-my-life chat, in the back 
lounge of an east London studio, a team of photographer’s assistants beside us 
breaking down lighting rigs. But mortality, time running out – they seem to be 
on Horrocks’s mind; especially the gathering of new experiences while she still 
can, something Horrocks describes as collecting “ticks”. “I think as I’ve got 
older I’ve become more and more desperate for challenge. This sounds a bit 
wanky, but something to make life make sense, I suppose.” Before she sat down, 
she mentioned that she didn’t watch TV any more, that she had come to find it 
“samey, unsurprising. I’m not surprised by it,” she said. “And I suppose I’ve 
got to an age where I want to be surprised.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Absolutely%20Fabulous%3A%20the%20Movie%3A%20Edina%20and%20Patsy%20in%20big%20screen%20debut%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fabsolutely-fabulous-the-movie-edina-and-patsy-in-big-screen-debut-video&media=>
 Absolutely Fabulous: The movie 
Horrocks’s hair is shock-blonde, grown out with intentional wildness from a 
sculpted Anna Wintour-like bob she had done for the filming ofAbsolutely 
Fabulous: The Movie, in which she reprises her role as Bubble, goofy sidekick 
to Jennifer Saunders and Joanna Lumley. After that shoot, Horrocks spent a 
month at the Young Vic, performing in a self-conceived production calledIf You 
Kiss Me, Kiss Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/live/2016/feb/29/jane-horrocks-webchat-if-you-kiss-me-kiss-me-young-vic>
, in which she sang songs by Ian Curtis and Marc Almond, and other artists 
she’d admired as a teen. Playing at being a New Romantic pop star was another 
tick. The grown-out Bubble haircut worked pretty well for it, and once the show 
finished in April she decided to keep it, at least until July when she’ll 
perform songs fromIf You Kiss Me, Kiss Me at Latitude.

The prospect of gigging at a festival – another first – terrifies her, she 
says. But terror is kind of the point: “I’m making a conscious effort to 
frighten myself. Really scare myself.” Earlier this year, Horrocks took part in 
a fashion show for the first time, forcing herself down a catwalk at London 
Fashion Week in a dress made by the designersVin + Omi 
<http://www.vinandomi.com/>. She recently agreed to appear in a production of 
King Learat the Old Vic, starting this autumn, after many years of ducking 
opportunities to perform Shakespeare again, convinced she wasn’t much good at 
the language. In Deborah Warner’s production, Horrocks will play one of Lear’s 
daughters, Regan, opposite Glenda Jackson, who is coming out of retirement to 
be Lear. When I ask Horrocks why she said yes to being in a Shakespeare play 
for the first since 1995, she says: “The fact that Glenda is returning to the 
stage at 80 to play Lear – that makes it interesting. And because I’m bored. At 
the moment I’m bored, not in this interview, but with where I am now, in life.” 
She continues: “Because getting older fills me with dread. And I think, to try 
and make life more interesting slightly diminishes that dread.”

Roll the clock back to when she was a teenager and there was no dread, just a 
willed and deeply fashionable angst. Horrocks remembers her 17-year-old self 
with pink hair. She enjoyed hating Margaret Thatcher and shocking her parents 
by wearing moth-eaten ball gowns to parties. She was a child of the post-punk 
era and listened to lots of Joy Division in her bedroom. She was raised with 
two brothers in Rawtenstall, “a very parochial place in east Lancashire, that I 
desperately wanted to break out of in some way,” she says. She loved to sing; 
she found she had a talent for impersonating the artists she liked. “I just had 
a good ear,” she says. “I could mimic people singing. Now I wish I’d have tried 
writing music. I wish I’d had the guts.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8049cb4c11e22f9899b1554f41b540f695a68a0%2F0_1647_3648_2188%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn't%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn%27t%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8049cb4c11e22f9899b1554f41b540f695a68a0%2F0_1647_3648_2188%2F3648.jpg>
 Taking the mic: in If You Kiss Me, Kiss Me, at the Young Vic. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
If she could impersonate singers pretty well, she thought she could probably 
act. After school she applied and was accepted to Rada, making the odd decision 
to defer her place for a year so she could move to London and work as a 
chambermaid. Horrocks explains: “I came from a small village,” she shrugs. “I 
was really green. I thought, ‘I’ve got to get used to London, before I go to 
drama school.’ I thought the two would have been overwhelming in one go.”

The chambermaid job was in a hotel in Marble Arch. Was it good? I ask. 
Horrocks cackles. “I got sacked.” She explains she’d worked before, in a 
factory back in Lancashire packing bedding, where there was a strong union 
presence. When she agitated for something similar at the Marble Arch hotel, 
“they said, ‘We don’t have unions, goodbye!’ Not long after that I went out and 
bought a very expensive leather jacket. So I had to crawl back to the lady who 
managed the chambermaids and ask for the job back. The first thing she said 
was, ‘What have you bought?’”

After graduating at 21, she did a run of plays at the Hampstead Theatre and 
with the RSC, before taking some minor TV roles. It was in the Mike Leigh film
Life Is Sweet that she got her break, playing Nicola, the moody daughter of 
Alison Steadman and Jim Broadbent.

Then in 1992, Horrocks enjoyed what her partner Nick Vivian, a screenwriter, 
now jokingly refers to herannus mirabilis. She was in a hit play, The Rise and 
Fall of Little Voice, which won her an Olivier award for her portrayal of LV, a 
have-a-go singer who, like Horrocks, could do uncannily accurate impressions of 
more famous crooners. ThenAb Fab came along, the first of its six series 
starting that autumn. Horrocks’s Bubble, personal assistant to Jennifer 
Saunders’s Eddie, was enthusiastic, affable and limitlessly thick – immediately 
a beloved sitcom dummy, established in the British comedy firmament alongside 
the Triggers and Pikes and Manuels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb64e16e58a6a5e5aa07877b75ea4dd1c23fd21d9%2F0_193_5724_3435%2F5724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn't%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn%27t%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb64e16e58a6a5e5aa07877b75ea4dd1c23fd21d9%2F0_193_5724_3435%2F5724.jpg>
 Face time: in Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie, with Lulu. Photograph: 
Allstar/Fox Searchlight 
“It was nice,” Horrocks recalls of that big year. “They were both really 
fantastic roles... My fella likes to remind me of all the great music that must 
have passed me by at the time,” she adds, smiling. “Because I was so busy being 
full of myself.”

There was a stumble of sorts when she appeared in Mark Rylance’s Macbeth in 
1995. This was a pretty serious flop (“If the next decade produces a more 
preposterous Macbeth...” Benedict Nightingale began a famous slamming in the
Times). I suggest the production is probably best remembered for a quirk of 
Rylance’s direction that saw Horrocks, as Lady Macbeth, wee a lot on stage 
every night. “I don’t know if I wee’d alot,” Horrocks corrects. “Once I started 
I never knew how much was going to come out.” I ask if that troubled Macbeth 
was the reason why she stayed away from Shakespeare for the next 20-odd years. 
Horrocks says no. She enjoyed working with Rylance and says she learned a lot. 
“I just wasn’t interested in doing more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7021699affa16aa75f4e86a2e5f9df85f9b62a0f%2F0_0_2619_3928%2F2619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn't%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn%27t%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7021699affa16aa75f4e86a2e5f9df85f9b62a0f%2F0_0_2619_3928%2F2619.jpg>
 White noise: appearing on the catwalk at London Fashion Week in February 2016. 
Photograph: Bettina Strenske/Photoshot 
Instead, she did a movie version of Little Voice: released in 1998, it was 
nominated for a Bafta and a Golden Globe. After that there was a run of voicing 
characters in kids’ animations, a few sitcoms and films, and lead roles in 
musicals. In the meantime Horrocks and Vivian raised their children in 
south-west London. Having gone out of her way to shock her own parents as a 
teen, I wonder if the same thing has happened to her as a parent herself. 
Horrocks says no, not really. “I slightly feel sorry for my kids. Y’know, 
there’s sort of nothing really to rail against.” What do you mean? “We were 
railing against our parents. Perceiving our parents as being conventional and 
boring. Whereas nowadays parents aren’t – they do shows likeIf You Kiss Me, 
Kiss Me.”

The constant through her professional life has been Bubble, performed gamely 
and with gusto in 30-something episodes over 24 years; for Christmas specials, 
Comic Relief specials, an Olympics special and now the movie. “I feel a great 
fondness for Bubble, a protectiveness,” says Horrocks. And yet all afternoon 
we’ve circled back in conversation to the actor’s state of restlessness, to her 
desire not to repeat anything already done. Where does Bubble fit in? Horrocks 
nods, hearing this. “I think possibly I did the movie because of loyalty. And 
because it would seem odd and churlish if I hadn’t been part of it.” Making the 
series, particularly in its early days, were some of the most enjoyable times 
of her life, she says. If the movie was less fun, she acknowledges, it was in 
part because of the lack of a studio audience to react to the jokes: “You’re in 
the dark. You don’t know what’s funny. It’s a different experience...”

If she were asked now, after a year of collecting ticks, would she still do 
the movie? Horrocks thinks. She decides that she realised something while doing
If You Kiss Me, Kiss Mein the spring – that, for the first time in her career, 
“I really didn’t care whether people liked what I was doing, or loathed it. 
I’ve gained a confidence in not being a people-pleaser. That’s what it comes 
down to, not being desperate to be loved.” She didn’t perversely seek out bad 
reviews forIf You Kiss Me, Kiss Me (always a problem in the past). And she 
wasn’t too bothered when her kids came to see the show and pronounced 
themselves indifferent. “I was doing the show forme. And I gained a bravery 
from that, a sense of empowerment.”

“But you were asking about Ab Fab,” Horrocks says. “I would feel much more 
confident, now, about saying, ‘Actually I’ve done that. And I don’t need to go 
there again.’ About very politely saying, ‘Thank you. But no thank you.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1cdbef7013c98aa71972d3056a47e7be3a1f256%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn't%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Horrocks%3A%20%E2%80%9CIt%20would%20be%20odd%20and%20churlish%20if%20I%20wasn%27t%20part%20of%20it.%E2%80%9D&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fjane-horrocks-it-would-be-odd-and-churlish-if-i-wasnt-part-of-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1cdbef7013c98aa71972d3056a47e7be3a1f256%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Jane Horrocks.
Shirt, Victoria, Victoria Beckham ( netaporter.com <http://netaporter.com/>) 

Photographer: Chris Floyd 
Photographers assistant: Sarah Brimley 
Fashion editor: Jo Jones 
Fashion assistant: Billie Brand 
Hair and Make up: Juliana Sergot using Nars and Bumble and Bumble 
Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie is released in cinemas nationwide on 1 July
 