
The US has named chimpanzees a fully endangered species, extending greater 
protections to the apes in a decision that primate researcher Jane Goodall has 
hailed as a sign of “an awakening”.


The US Fish and Wildlife Service director, Dan Ashe, announced on Friday that 
chimpanzees will no longer hold their unique “split status” under US law, which 
since the 1990s has protected wild chimps but allowed largely unfettered 
research on captive animals.

Chimpanzee representatives argue for animals' rights in New York court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/27/chimpanzee-animals-rights-new-york-court>
Prompted by the worries of Aids researchers and thinking the special status 
would forestall the exploitation of wild chimps, the US previously classified 
chimps in America as “threatened”.

Ashe said: “That was a well-intentioned decision, but we now realize it was a 
mistake.”

Rather than solve the problem, the dual status “expanded a culture and 
attitude of treating these animals as commodities,” he said.

The decision to provide the full protections of the Endangered Species Act to 
chimpanzees followsyears of research 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/12/us/us-moves-to-declare-captive-chimps-endangered.html>
 by the Fish and Wildlife Service and National Institutes of Health, as well as
years of activism 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/science/unlikely-partners-freeing-chimps-from-the-lab.html>
by the Humane Society and other animal welfare organizations.

The new rules grant new protections to the primates, restrict their commercial 
trade, and will probably most affect biomedical research institutions, which 
will now have to apply for permits in order to perform research on chimpanzees.

Absent permits, the new rule will also ban interstate commerce, and prohibit 
“taking”, a term that could encompass anything that could cause a chimpanzee 
harm or distress, from serious injury to taking blood to harassment.

The federal agency says 
<http://www.fws.gov/home/feature/2015/pdfs/ChimpanzeeFinalRuleFAQs.pdf> that 
“permits will be issued for these activities only for scientific purposes that 
benefit the species in the wild, or to enhance the propagation or survival of 
chimpanzees.”

Researchers would need to show “substantial” contribution to chimpanzees’ 
survival in the wild, Ashe said, either through their scientific research or 
material contributions to support the animals in the wild, such as giving to 
habitat restoration programs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjane-goodall-us-chimpanzees-endangered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38dc94c58c2a8d79f0a31375566c19803d464f82%2F0_62_4008_2405%2F4008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Goodall%20hails%20'awakening'%20as%20US%20labels%20all%20chimpanzees%20endangered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjane-goodall-us-chimpanzees-endangered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Goodall%20hails%20%27awakening%27%20as%20US%20labels%20all%20chimpanzees%20endangered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fjane-goodall-us-chimpanzees-endangered%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38dc94c58c2a8d79f0a31375566c19803d464f82%2F0_62_4008_2405%2F4008.jpg>
 Dr Jane Goodall: ‘I think of chimpanzees as chimpanzeebeings because they’re 
so like us.’ Photograph: Javier Soriano/AFP/Getty Images 
Goodall praised the decision, saying: “There are times in the past when I 
wondered whether this day would ever happen.

“It shows an awakening, it shows a new consciousness. We should all raise our 
glasses tonight.”

Not all scientists celebrated, however, with some arguing that the rules 
threatened vital research that could save lives.

“This new ruling effectively means that biomedical research with the 
chimpanzee model may become difficult, if not impossible, to conduct,” the 
National Association for Biomedical Research (NABR) said in a statement, adding 
that the species’ contribution to medicine “benefits nearly every child born in 
America today”.

NABR said that chimpanzees made it possible to produce vaccines for hepatitis, 
and that the species could help with research in any number of diseases that 
humans suffer from.

“It would be unfortunate, even grave, should an infectious disease outbreak 
occur where human lives are at stake and a chimpanzee model could expedite 
development of life-saving medicines.”

But Wayne Pacelle, the president of the Humane Society of the United States, 
said the decision was “an incredible one-two punch for conservation and 
chimpanzee protection”.

While the old law “reflected some moral confusion” about chimpanzees, he said, 
more Americans now understood that “chimpanzees possess so many qualities that 
we value, the capacity to suffer, to show intelligence, awareness”.

He said the decision heralded “a new era where we treat them with respect and 
show concern for every individual”.

Pacelle’s view was echoed by Goodall.

“I remember so well,” she said, “how the scientific establishment told me that 
chimpanzees couldn’t have personalities, couldn’t have minds, couldn’t be 
capable of any kind of rational thought and certainly couldn’t have emotions, 
because those are unique to the human animal.”

Even within the past two decades “we’ve seen a lot of change,” she said. “I 
think of chimpanzees as chimpanzee beings because they’re so like us.”

Although many biologists and researchers remain wary of anthropomorphizing 
animals, and divided about how to talk about and study animal consciousness, 
research into intelligent and social animals has expanded massively in the past 
30 years.
 REsearch has found evidence that chimpanzees exhibit complex memory, 
emotions, self-awareness and even an awareness of death. Photograph: Juergen & 
Christine SohnsTier Und Naturfotografie J & C Sohns/Getty Images 
The field of animal cognition has boomed alongside neuroscience, geneticists 
have shown that humans share most of their genes with chimpanzees, and research 
has shown evidence that chimps exhibitcomplex memory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/sep/29/chimp-intelligence-aymu-matsuzawa-kyoto>
,emotions 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0063058>, 
self-awareness 
<https://www.uni-trier.de/fileadmin/fb1/PHI/Gordon_Gallup_-_Self-recognition_in_primates.pdf>
, and evenan awareness of death 
<http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/chimpanzees-understand-death/>. 
Greater research also shows quirkier similarities with mankind: 17 years of 
study concluded this month that some wild chimps indulge in regular, habitual 
drinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/10/chimpanzees-bossou-south-eastern-guinea-habitual-drinking>
.

The cultural shift has extended into the public domain: though a chimpanzee 
once starred alongside Ronald Reagan, in May a poll found that nearly a third 
of Americans felt that animalsdeserved the same protections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/19/americans-animals-human-rights-poll>
 as humans, and this year an animal rights campaignwon itself a hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/21/chimpanzees-granted-legal-persons-status-unlawful-imprisonment>
 over partial, legal “personhood” for chimpanzees in New York.

That case could remove two chimpanzees from a research program at Stony Brook 
University in New York.

Ashe said people should not “read anything else” into the new rule except “we 
have learned a lot about the nature of chimpanzees”.

“Some of the things that we thought did not constitute harm or harassment of 
chimpanzees do in fact constitute harm and harassment,” he said, and the rule 
is “in large part in recognition of that”.

Goodall said she hoped the new classification would help counter the forces 
that threaten chimpanzees: habitat destruction by deforestation and encroaching 
humans, diseases, the bushmeat trade, and the “surging demand from Asia” for 
captive animals.

In particular, Goodall hoped the new rules would help end the practice of 
keeping chimps as pets or for entertainment, noting that the animals grow too 
powerful for their owners and suffer “psychological trauma”.

“They’re stuck between two worlds,” she said. “They’ve never learned to be a 
chimpanzee and they can never become a human.”

There are 1,742 chimps in the US <http://www.chimpcare.org/map>, according to 
a project for the Center for the Study and Conservation of Apes at the Lincoln 
Park Zoo: 730 in biomedical labs, 559 in sanctuaries, 265 in accredited zoos, 
and the remainder with unaccredited facilities and private owners.

In 2011, the National Institute of Health found that while chimpanzees had 
research value in the past, medical advances “have provided alternatives 
<http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-12-025.html> to the use 
of chimpanzees”. Two years later, the institutesaid it would retire 
<http://www.nih.gov/news/health/jun2013/od-26.htm> about 300 research 
chimpanzees; to date, only a handful of those animalshave gone to sanctuaries 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/02/06/health/research-chimps-stuck-in-labs/>, a 
process that Pacelle said he wants to see expedited.
 