
Japan running low on workers as proportion of over-65s hits record levels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/30/japan-census-over-65s-record-27-population-immigration>
Tens of thousands of new centenarians in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> will have to make do with a cheaper 
version of a celebratory sake cup traditionally awarded by the government, as 
the country counts the cost of the large number of people reaching the 
milestone.


For 50 years, Japan has honoured centenarians with a silver sake cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/20/japan-cheaper-cups-centenarians-sakazuki>
 and a congratulatory letter from the prime minister.

But the 31,747 people who are eligible for the gift this year – a rise of 4.5% 
from last year – will instead be presented with a silver-plated cup rather than 
the usual sterling silver vessel on Respect for the Aged Day on Monday.

The government reduced the diameter of the cup, called a sakazuki, in 2009 to 
cut costs amid a dramatic rise in the number of people making it to their 100th 
birthday.

Which cities have the oldest residents?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/27/oldest-residents-elderly-ageing>
The decision to impose further austerity on a day of celebration for Japan’s 
oldest citizens <https://www.theguardian.com/society/older-people> came after a 
heath ministry panel balked at the soaring cost of retaining the pure silver 
cups and recommended that they be replaced with a cheaper version.

The measure will reduce the cost of producing a single sakazuki from 7,600 yen 
(£56) by about half, and reduce the overall cost to about 150m yen.

The cost of honouring Japan’s centenarians will continue to rise, however. 
Government statistics released this week showed that the number of people aged 
100 or over rose to more than 65,000 last year, the 46th annual increase in a 
row.

Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> had just 153 centenarians when 
records began in 1963, and as recently as 1998 the number stood at just 10,000. 
It exceeded 30,000 in 2007, rising to more than 60,000 last year.

Japan's dementia crisis hits record levels as thousands go missing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/record-12208-people-with-dementia-reported-missing-in-japan>
Shimane, a largely rural prefecture on the Japan Sea coast, has the highest 
concentration of centenarians, with 96.25 per 100,000 people. Saitama 
prefecture near Tokyo, has the lowest with 30.97 per 100,000.

The oldest Japanese citizen is a 116-year-old woman named Nabi Tajima, from 
Kagoshima; the oldest man is Masamitsu Yoshida, a 112-year-old resident of 
Tokyo.

Demographers predict Japan’s centenarian population will continue to grow as 
the general population ages. More than a quarter of Japan’s 127 million people 
are 65 or older, with the proportion projected to rise to 40% by 2060.

Average life expectancy is 87.05 years for Japanese women and 80.79 years for 
men.
 