
‘Oh God, Jason Bateman. He’s a complete terror,” Michael Cera told me last year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2013/may/21/arrested-development-cast-return-video>
 about his Arrested Development co-star, eyes widening. “The things that come 
out of his mouth …”

Like what?

“Just pure … filth,” Cera said, turning an even more alarming shade of pale.

“Well, he’s a fucking dickhead, isn’t he?” the filth-monster himself responds 
when I tell him of his onscreen son’s verdict.

In person, Bateman has the pleasing facial symmetry of a catalogue model and 
he delivers this damning verdict of Cera in the same nonchalant tone with which 
he talks about his current uncharacteristically swishy hair (“It’s ridiculous 
now; I look like a Bee Gee”) and his memories of working as achild actor in 
advertisements for Honey Nut Cheerios 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/whitneyjefferson/jason-bateman-did-a-cheesy-commercial-for-honey-nu#3yjyr53>
 (“Ahh, I still remember having to follow that fake little bee around with my 
eyes …”). Like most of the characters he has played, Bateman can get away with 
saying terrible things but still be incredibly likable.

Of course, he quickly adds, he loves Cera: “Such a great sense of humour, so 
subtle, even when he was 14. I bet he was a fun interview!”

He was, but nowhere near as fun as Bateman. It is a mystery as baffling as 
what Dorian Grey-like bargain Bateman, 45, struck to maintain such lustrous 
hair (seriously, it puts Kate Middleton’s to shame) that a man who has been 
acting since the age of 13 (in US sitcomsSilver Spoons 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J33wSdizCbc> and Valerie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ca0R6qOwS7Y>), who was, by his own admission, 
a “cut-up” in his 20s with a taste for alcohol and drugs, but is now, via some 
classy supporting roles (Juno <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juno>, Up in 
the Air <https://www.theguardian.com/film/up-in-the-air>), a bona-fide comedy 
leading man (Horrible Bosses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142717/horrible-bosses>, Identity Thief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/151293/identity-thief>) can be so 
darned nice. I don’t mean nice in the “Aw shucks, little ol’ me?”hokey Tom 
Hanks kind of nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/10/tom-hanks-diabetes-captain-phillips-interview>
. I mean, nice the way your fantasy older brother is nice. Funny nice, the kind 
that comes with a pleasing undercurrent of naughtiness. He is utterly lacking 
in preciousness, which is not something that can be said about many in the 
acting profession, and despite having been in the entertainment business for 
nearly his entire life, Bateman is astonishingly lacking in self-promotional 
tendencies. When he wason The Daily Show two years ago to promote The Change Up 
<http://thedailyshow.cc.com/videos/chuwnu/jason-bateman>, Jon Stewart gently 
suggested that the film was a touch derivative.
 Bateman in Arrested Development (2003). Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
“You’re all over it, the film’s crap, the movie’s garbage,” Bateman cheerfully 
announced, and he described the film’s premise as “tired, some would say 
pleasantly familiar”.

That isn’t the usual approach when promoting a movie, is it, Jason?

“Well, an audience knows you’re there to sell a movie so there’s something 
refreshing about making a joke about the film being garbage. It’s always a 
balance, when you’re trying to promote something, not to overly sell it. You 
can always smell it from a mile away when someone’s trying to sell you a bunch 
of garbage, right?”

So even though we’ve met up in a hotel in LA to discuss his two latest films, 
Horrible Bosses 2 <http://trailers.apple.com/trailers/wb/horriblebosses2/> and 
This Is Where I Leave You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/this-is-where-i-leave-you>, he doesn’t seem 
especially interested in discussing either. Bateman is the best thing in both 
of them. The most common refrain in reviews of pretty much every film he has 
starred in over the past decade has been that he is better than the material, 
such asThe Change Up <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143446/change-up> 
(body-swap film with Ryan Reynolds),The Switch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137626/switch> (sperm-swap film with 
Jennifer Aniston) andIdentity Thief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/151293/identity-thief> (identity-swap 
film with Melissa McCarthy). EvenExtract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131769/extract>, the promising-on-paper 
Mike Judge film in which he starred alongside Ben Affleck, Mila Kunis, Kristen 
Wiig and JK Simmons, felt like a film half-written. Is it that hard to find 
good comedy scripts?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412875442091%2Fa1411ca4-b47d-4990-bc84-876ce06cdc9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Bateman%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20dirty%20secret%3F%20Playing%20the%20straight%20man.%20Because%20he%20gets%20to%20be%20in%20every%20scene%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Bateman%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20dirty%20secret%3F%20Playing%20the%20straight%20man.%20Because%20he%20gets%20to%20be%20in%20every%20scene%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412875442091%2Fa1411ca4-b47d-4990-bc84-876ce06cdc9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Bateman in Juno with Jennifer Garner and Ellen Page (2007). Photograph: Snap 
Stills/Rex 
“Yes and no. Look, writing is a very hard thing to do, and writing, even if 
it’s great, might not fit the people in control of it – you might not have the 
right actor or director. It’s all very much in the ether,” he says.

So what does he look for in a script?

“I just look for who’s involved. It’s not about the script: it’s about who the 
director is and who the other people in the cast are. Because you can look at a 
great script and execute it in a very sophomoric way, and you can look at an OK 
script and you can execute it in a very sophisticated way and come out with 
something really good,” he says.

No matter how meh some of Bateman’s films have been, he has always surrounded 
himself with classy actors, and there is no actor with whom he is more closely 
associated than the supremely funny Will Arnett. The two met when they played 
brothers in Arrested Development, and as well as being best friends and regular 
co-stars, they run a production company together called Dumb Dumb.Bateman’s 
Twitter biography <https://twitter.com/batemanjason> is: “Friend of Will 
Arnett’s”; Arnett’s, in return, is: “Jason Bateman’s sponsor 
<https://twitter.com/arnettwill>.”

“Have you met Will? Oh God, you’d love him. If I didn’t know him so well I’d 
be starstruck by him,” Bateman says.

Indeed, he and Arnett looked just that when they were papped last year 
strolling through Greenwich Village in New York,clutching one another’s hands, 
gazing into each other’s eyes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D0ayscI6IeU>, 
before dropping the act and snickering at the photographer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412875625784%2Fd6f122c7-f367-4159-bd55-9f071a23d42d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Bateman%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20dirty%20secret%3F%20Playing%20the%20straight%20man.%20Because%20he%20gets%20to%20be%20in%20every%20scene%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Bateman%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20dirty%20secret%3F%20Playing%20the%20straight%20man.%20Because%20he%20gets%20to%20be%20in%20every%20scene%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412875625784%2Fd6f122c7-f367-4159-bd55-9f071a23d42d-1020x612.jpeg>
 Bateman in This is Where I Leave You. Photograph: Courtesy of Warner Bros. 
Picture/Warner Bros 
“We were just like, let’s give this guy something that’ll sell because how are 
you going to sell a picture of just Will and me walking around?” says Bateman. 
Bateman’s admiration of Arnett typifies what is probably the secret to his 
career resurgence and success. While Arnett’s comedy style is eccentric and 
big, Bateman almost invariably plays the quietly amusing straight man. (In 
reality, though, judging from the manyvideo clips 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xxnn5-itAQE> of them clowning together online, 
it’s Bateman who’s the sharper and quicker of the two.) In his work, he’s the 
bouncing board for the broader performers whom he regularly acts with, and it’s 
a role he played to perfection in Arrested Development, as Michael Bluth, the 
long-suffering younger son. Bateman is an excellent comedic reactor, always 
aware of just how long to pause in a double take or how much to flicker an 
eyelid in order to ramp up the joke.

“These more eccentric characters are – well, it just doesn’t work as well if 
there isn’t something solid for them to bounce off. So in the interests of 
making it work, as funny as they’re being, I have to be equally still, because 
I’m the audience,” he says.

But it must take some generosity to not compete with the screen hogs. He 
shrugs away the suggestion: “They’re doing me a favour, too.”

Also, playing the straight(ish) man means that he gets to be the leading role, 
right?

“Ha! That’s it, right? That’s my dirty secret. People say: ‘Why do you want to 
play the straight man?’ Well,” he drops to a whisper, “it’s because he gets to 
be in every scene. The bad guy is usually in the spice position and that’s fun, 
too, but if you’re in every scene as an actor, you have a lot to do with 
managing the tone of the film or show. When you’re playing a supporting 
character you don’t really have a lot of control of the quality of the film.”

If this makes Bateman sound more like a director than an actor, that would be 
half right. Last year he made his film directorial debut withBad Words 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bad_Words_(film)>, an underrated black comedy in 
which he also starred (“I didn’t want to be in it but we couldn’t get anyone 
who wanted to be in it,” he says with Bateman-esque candour). When we meet he 
has, just the week before, finished directingThe Family Fang 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Family_Fang_(film)>, starring himself and 
Nicole Kidman. Bateman already has a record when it comes to directing: he was 
the Directors Guild of America’s youngest ever director when he directed three 
episodes of a sitcom at 18. Has he been waiting all this time to direct again?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412875735839%2Fe744f508-5115-4d78-8d39-191ea40ba5ac-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jason%20Bateman%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20dirty%20secret%3F%20Playing%20the%20straight%20man.%20Because%20he%20gets%20to%20be%20in%20every%20scene%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jason%20Bateman%3A%20%E2%80%98My%20dirty%20secret%3F%20Playing%20the%20straight%20man.%20Because%20he%20gets%20to%20be%20in%20every%20scene%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F09%2Fjason-bateman-my-dirty-secret-playing-the-straight-man-because-he-gets-to-be-in-every-scene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412875735839%2Fe744f508-5115-4d78-8d39-191ea40ba5ac-1020x612.jpeg>
 Bateman (left) in Horrible Bosses 2. Photograph: Warner Bros 
“Kind of, yeah. My father was a director and producer 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0060809/> so when I was a little kid he would take 
me to movies and show me what’s good and what’s not good and why, and often 
that would take me to a conversation about directing. So it’s been something 
I’ve been wanting to do for a long time and I’m now in the position that I can 
be involved in things from the ground up so they can be tailored more to what I 
do well, so the chance of me doing something that works tonally is increased.” 
Bateman was born in New York and grew up in California. His father worked in 
the entertainment industry and his mother was a flight attendant from, of all 
places, Shrewsbury, England. At 12 he got his first TV role inLittle House on 
the Prairie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i69XFQkRetA> and then his big 
break came when he was cast as a naughty scamp in Silver Spoons. As a teenager, 
he was as much ofa presence in American magazines for teenage girls 
<http://ztams.com/wp-content/uploads/bateman77709.jpg> as Corey Haim and 
Charlie Sheen. Bateman insists that he “loved” working as a child actor and 
that it was the perfect path for someone who was “a disruptive smart ass” at 
school. But he and his older sister, Justine, who was in the US sitcom Family 
Ties, became so successful that they ended up supporting their parents when 
they were still kids. This, he admits, “got a little complicated, a little 
confusing, but ultimately something I turned into a positive”. Bateman then 
took the classic child actor route in his 20s of, as he puts it 
unapologetically, “having a really great time” with what he’s described in the 
past as “booze and some blow”.

“It was like being left home alone, Mom and Dad are away and they’ve left a 
bunch of money. I loved it,” he grins. “And fortunately I got it all out of my 
system before it bit me on the ass.”

Two factors in particular saved him: he was cast in Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> and he got 
married to Amanda Anka – yes, Paul’s daughter – in 2001. Did his father-in-law 
sing at their wedding?

“Yeah, he did,” he smiles. “He sang My Way [which Anka wrote] and he changed 
it to His Way and made it about me.”

He and Anka now have two daughters, Francesca and Maple.

Arrested Development saved Bateman from becoming another child actor hasbeen, 
and he knows it. He never stopped acting in the 1990s, “but I wasn’t exactly 
killing it,” he says. And unless acting in the TV movie Hart to Hart: Secrets 
of the Hart counts as “killing it”, he’s right.

“If people in this city had not liked [Arrested Development], I wouldn’t be 
here today. That’s for sure. Who knows if I’d still be acting? Things could 
have just petered out. But if you do a show that’s embraced by the community 
that hands out jobs, you’re lucky,” he says.

If Bateman can be brutally honest about his career then it’s because he’s 
already been down and nearly out. Everything now, I get the feeling, seems like 
a bonus to him. Things were not supposed to turn out this well for him. But he 
deserves it – he’s really good, and he did it His Way. Now can someone please 
write a good movie for him?

• This Is Where I Leave You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/this-is-where-i-leave-you> is on release in 
the US and opens in Australia and the UK on 24 October

• Horrible Bosses 2 opens in the US on 26 November, the UK on 28 November and 
11 December in Australia
 