
JC Chandor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jc-chandor> makes epic movies 
about fallen heroes, ripping yarns about small defeats. He shoots films in 
which sailors flounder and bankers drown and where there is barely a join 
between the good and the bad, the sea and the sky. He likes observing people’s 
reaction to pressure; the compromises they make in order to stay afloat. The 
director understands these figures and the decisions that they take. He’s been 
in the same boat and very nearly went down.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fa-most-violent-year-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422017236360%2Fcrop_KP_75751_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fa-most-violent-year-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Fa-most-violent-year-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422017236360%2Fcrop_KP_75751_640x360.jpeg>
 Watch a video review 
Now Chandor is riding high, with his head apparently still half in the clouds. 
Newly landed in London after an overnight flight, he guzzles fizzy drinks to 
stave off the jetlag. The more he drinks, the quicker he talks and the louder 
he gets. In person, Chandor is a hearty, garrulous man with a thick mane of 
hair and a disarming habit of booming his answers at me as if we are hiking 
across open moorland, as opposed to sitting in the hushed interior of a hotel 
suite. Time is pressing; he just turned 41. There is just too much ground he 
has to make up before sundown.

Chandor suggests that he writes as he talks: a lot of quiet contemplation 
after which the floodgates bang open. “I recently learned I was an undiagnosed 
dyslexic,” he booms. “High IQ, low-level dyslexia, which is a dangerous 
combination in the public school system because it usually means that you’re 
smart enough to bullshit your way through class and often don’t get the help 
that you need. So they tested me forADHD 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attention_deficit_hyperactivity_disorder>, which 
I didn’t have, or else they thought I was lazy.” He gulps some air. “What I 
mean to say is that I can’t read a 600-page book so well, but that my mind can 
do other things that are kind of supernatural, like keep a whole movie linear 
in my head. And then it’s just transcription or catharsis. The film is pretty 
much complete, there’s hardly any rewriting or revision.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421335273013%2F67ef79b5-fd5e-42db-a437-b0257e41d672-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JC%20Chandor%20on%20A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20more%20villainy%20than%20some%20people%20would%20like%20to%20admit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JC%20Chandor%20on%20A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20more%20villainy%20than%20some%20people%20would%20like%20to%20admit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421335273013%2F67ef79b5-fd5e-42db-a437-b0257e41d672-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jessica Chastain and Oscar Isaac in A Most Violent Year. Photograph: Allstar 
Who cares how he does it: the proof of the pudding is in the eating. His third 
feature may be his most assured yet.A Most Violent Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/07/a-most-violent-year-review-plucky-outsider-draws-blood-in-this-years-oscar-battle>
 sets out in the tailoring of a classic American gangster movie and then starts 
picking at the script, veering off the beaten track.Oscar Isaac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/03/oscar-isaac-most-violent-year> 
plays Abel Morales, the charismatic immigrant businessman who’s not above 
bending the rules to gain a foothold in the cold, harsh climate of early-80s 
New York, when the city pitched towards bankruptcy and the crime-rate 
skyrocketed. The longer we spend in Morales’s company, the more intriguing he 
becomes. Is he intended as a hero, a villain, or as something in between?

Chandor shrugs. “He’s emblematic in a way. He’s the dyed-in-the-wool 
capitalist. The immigrant capitalist. The true believer. Maybe there’s a little 
more villainy than some people imagine, or would like to admit, but he’s a 
blend of elements, good and bad. Maybe that decreases the box office. People 
generally like superheroes or super-villains. But I’m trying to ground the 
characters in the choices I make, you make, we all make in our lives every day. 
The stuff that we do to keep our careers going on.”

His 2011 debut, Margin Call 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/12/margin-call-film-review>, lifted 
the lid on the desperate, last-ditch manoeuvring of a band of investment 
bankers on the eve of the crash. His second,All is Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/26/all-is-lost-review>, was an 
almost wordless disaster movie in which Robert Redford’s imperilled sailor 
tussled with sails, ropes and the howling wind. Now here comes A Most Violent 
Year, with its tale of an immigrant hustler who wants to bring heating oil to 
the suburbs. It strikes me that all three films provide a bizarre, hidden 
parable for the actual business of making movies. First the finance, then the 
nuts-and-bolts production, and finally the knotty issue of distributing the 
product. Chandor roars with laughter and gropes for his can. “You think that 
it’s hidden? It’s probably not hidden.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421335392425%2F3bbc5ea8-0be0-4ce7-a296-aa6a94994511-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JC%20Chandor%20on%20A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20more%20villainy%20than%20some%20people%20would%20like%20to%20admit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JC%20Chandor%20on%20A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20more%20villainy%20than%20some%20people%20would%20like%20to%20admit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421335392425%2F3bbc5ea8-0be0-4ce7-a296-aa6a94994511-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kevin Spacey in Margin Call. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
He was named after his father, Jeff Chandor, an investment banker who rose 
through the ranks at the Morristown, New Jersey branch of Merrill Lynch. 
Chandor Jr grew up in respectable, middle-class suburbia, an hour’s drive from 
New York City but seemingly a thousand miles from the film industry itself. 
After college he took on commercial work, shooting corporate videos, but he 
insists his heart was never in it, which meant his work was middling at best. 
He really wanted to make movies, but the movies weren’t happening. “So I 
struggled for 15 years and I really probably shouldn’t have,” he says. “And at 
some point, if you’re trying that long, there’s something wrong.”

So what was wrong? “A bunch of things. I’ve analysed it. Some of it was ego. I 
had let some opportunities go by because I didn’t think it was a good enough 
job. But there was some poor fortune too. I had a movie that was six days away 
from shooting when they suddenly pulled the plug. The investor was one of those 
Icelandic rich kids who ran their country into bankruptcy. He’s now in jail, 
I’m glad to report.”

At the time, Chandor thought that was that, the dream was over. He had a 
mortgage and bills and a three-year-old daughter. His career had in effect 
amounted to nothing. “As a middle-class kid, I always felt it would work out, 
and I was too stupid to know that it very often does not. But the minute I 
stared down the possibility of it not working out, I concentrated harder than I 
ever had before. I sat down and wrote Margin Call and realised it was the best 
thing I’d ever done.” By that point, he recalls, his wife assumed he had given 
up the ghost and was out looking for a regular job.

Margin Call starred Jeremy Irons as a Mephistophelean banker; Kevin Spacey, 
Zachary Quinto and Paul Bettany as his sweaty subordinates 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xOO1NY6ctYU>. The drama was unveiled at 
Sundance to great acclaim, while the screenplay eventually wound up shortlisted 
for an Oscar. But the whole thing sounds positively Oedipal. Wasn’t this Junior 
making his name by trashing his father’s profession? What, I wonder, did his 
dad make of it all?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421346165250%2Fd9d0dc2d-75c0-4f38-8314-4bf91e95d7fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=JC%20Chandor%20on%20A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20more%20villainy%20than%20some%20people%20would%20like%20to%20admit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=JC%20Chandor%20on%20A%20Most%20Violent%20Year%3A%20%E2%80%98There%E2%80%99s%20more%20villainy%20than%20some%20people%20would%20like%20to%20admit%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjan%2F15%2Fjc-chandor-a-most-violent-year-interview-more-villainy-than-people-like-to-admit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F15%2F1421346165250%2Fd9d0dc2d-75c0-4f38-8314-4bf91e95d7fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Robert Redford in All Is Lost. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Chandor chuckles. There was no problem whatsoever. “My dad, let’s say, is very 
confident in his beliefs. But he had become significantly disillusioned in the 
last seven, eight years of his career at Merrill Lynch. So he was very proud of 
the movie. He felt the industry had lost its way.” By now the chuckle has 
blossomed into a full-blown laugh. “Plus he’s also just thankful that I finally 
got some work for myself. I mean, he’s more than thankful. He wouldn’t have 
given a shit if I had named the Jeremy Irons character ‘Jeff Chandor’, because 
at least I was earning a living. As a middle-class parent, what other dream is 
there, that your kids are able to support themselves?”

Our time’s almost up but I have one final question. It’s about the final shot 
in All is Lost, after Redford’s solitary sailor has weathered all manner of 
hell. Spoiler alert: he either lives or he dies. Chandor shows the man slipping 
under the waves and fighting for breath. Then a light flares on the surface and 
a hand hauls him back up. The scene’s deliberately ambiguous, but what does the 
director think happened?

“Ah,” he says, “I can finally come out and say it now. Well, the intention was 
that you’d feel one of two things. Either it’s a real hand or it’s the hand of 
God. And that’s your part of the movie. And it worked, in that we tested that 
movie and the response was almost exactly 50/50.” He pauses and grins. “But I 
think he died.”

I’m so glad that he says this; I worried it was me being negative. “No, but 
that’s the thing,” he splutters. “I don’t think it is negative. It’s what that 
guy would have wanted by that point of the story. He’d been through so much. I 
think he’d prefer to let it all go and just drift out into the ocean.” In 
Chandor’s shaded moral universe, a seeming defeat can be a victory in disguise. 
Some dreams should be clung to and others cut loose.

A Most Violent Year is out 23 January.
 