
As chance would have it, the week before I interviewed Jeffrey Tambor 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001787/> I spoke to two other actors, both of whom 
brought up Tambor and promptly went gooey-eyed.

“Jeffrey set the tone for the whole of Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development>,” said Tambor’s 
co-star and on-screen son,Jason Bateman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/16/jason-bateman-horrible-bosses>. 
“We all watched him when we filmed on the first day, and he did it totally 
straight. He was so bold and completely unconcerned with being likable. He 
taught me what you can get away with in comedy.”

A few days later, it happened again: “Just watching Jeffrey Tambor on [the 
1980s cult US sitcom] The Larry Sanders Show 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0103466/> taught me everything about comedy,” said 
the second actor, referring to Tambor’s glorious performance as Hank, the 
hard-done-by sidekick to talkshow host Larry Sanders, played by Garry Shandling.
Tambor is, this actor continued, “the master”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/mar/22/jeffrey-tambor-pumps-up-sxsw>

On a rainy Wednesday morning in London, I find the master in a hotel room, 
sipping on a carton of coconut water. “What more do I need?” he asks the room, 
and his look of almost childlike contentment suggests not much. In front of him 
is a table of lavishly topped bagels: “Thank u London. Honored,” he later 
tweets solemnly, attaching a photo of the humbling bagels.

“I have to tell you, did you know that Garry [Shandling] over the weekend 
tweeted ‘Watch Jeffrey Tambor in new TV show Transparent’?” Tambor asks, his 
round eyes getting even rounder. “Garry does not do that! I couldn’t believe 
it!”

Larry would not have done that for Hank, I suggest, and Tambor hoots with 
delight.

“No, he wouldn’t! Oh! Hank was so real to me …” Tambor is so moved at the 
memory that he suddenly seems on the verge of tears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411744550556%2Fc5f79c35-feef-4542-a24c-ee356feee4be-1357x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeffrey%20Tambor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20never%20been%20so%20scared%20in%20my%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeffrey%20Tambor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20never%20been%20so%20scared%20in%20my%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411744550556%2Fc5f79c35-feef-4542-a24c-ee356feee4be-1357x2040.jpeg>
 Tambor as Mort in Transparent Photograph: Beth Dubber/PR 
Tambor is one of the finest American character actors working today, which 
explains why he is working so much – “And at the age of 70! That isn’t supposed 
to happen!” he exclaims, frequently. It is no coincidence that he starred in 
what are widely agreed to be two of the finest American sitcoms of all time – 
The Larry Sanders Show andArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> – because his 
performances in them were as invaluable to their success as the writing and 
directing. It’s often said that the secret to Tambor’s comedy is that he plays 
comedy as seriously as if it was drama, and this is true. But less noted is 
that he takes acting in a sitcom as seriously as if he were playing Chekhov at 
the National. At the risk of sounding pretentious (and Tambor himself can get 
endearingly pretentious when talking about his acting), he completely immerses 
himself in the role.

“You want to feel: ‘I know that character.’ The secret of this game came late 
to me, and it’s that you need to work with people who you get, and Igot Garry. 
That’s my north star,” says Tambor.

Tambor has now taken on a role for which he deserves to win, at last, the 
industry awards that have stubbornly eluded him. InTransparent, a series made 
for Amazon Prime <http://www.amazon.com/Pilot-HD/dp/B00I3MNF6S>, he plays Mort, 
a divorced father of three. In the first episode, he summons his children over 
for dinner and they assume – in classic Jewish family-style – that he’s going 
to tell them that he has cancer. In fact, Mort is transgender and has, for some 
time, been living a hidden life as Maura. “This is definitely the most 
transformative role of my career, and I don’t just mean in the externals,” says 
Tambor. “This was not something I could pull out of my Jeffrey Tambor technique 
bag. I kind of like not knowing how to do something – it’s more exciting.”

Sitting next to Tambor on the sofa is Jill Soloway 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0813561/>, the writer and director of Transparent. 
Soloway is best known in the UK for writing and producing Six Feet Under, but 
she also won the dramatic directing award at Sundance last year for her first 
feature film,Afternoon Delight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/27/afternoon-delight-review-hahn-juno-temple-stripper>
, and founded, back in the 1990s, the now legendaryReal Live Brady Bunch in 
Chicago <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H0oGaVyT_5Y>, in which then struggling 
actors includingJane Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/jan/09/jane-lynch-glee-interview>
 andAndy Richter <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0725200/> acted out Brady Bunch 
episodes. She and Tambor have the gentle ease with one another of a father and 
daughter, frequently referring to each other for backup. Soloway wrote 
Transparent with Tambor in mind: “Everyone knows how funny Jeffrey is, but he 
is also a great actor because he can make you feel.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411747418564%2Fc4a7129b-7560-481f-8737-4c9114b66737-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeffrey%20Tambor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20never%20been%20so%20scared%20in%20my%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeffrey%20Tambor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20never%20been%20so%20scared%20in%20my%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411747418564%2Fc4a7129b-7560-481f-8737-4c9114b66737-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A scene from Transparent. Photograph: Beth Dubber/AP 
The two of them talk at length about the transgender people who helped them 
during the making of Transparent. Thewriter and activist Jennifer Finney Boylan 
<http://www.jenniferboylan.net/nonfiction/> was an especially close guide and, 
because she, like Maura, transitioned relatively late in life, “a lot of who 
Maura became is really informed by Jenny,” says Soloway. Young twentysomething 
artistsZachary Drucker <http://zackarydrucker.com/> and Rhys Ernst 
<http://rhysernst.com/about/> acted as associate producers. “They’re part of a 
newer generation and they introduced us to this civil-rights movement that 
we’re at the beginning of,” says Soloway.

“And,” Tambor adds, “Zachery and Rhys took me on my first field trip. They 
took me to – what’s the name of the club?”

“The Oxwood Club,” Soloway replies, referring to a transgender nightclub in 
Los Angeles.

“They took me to the Oxwood. First they came to the hotel and we talked and 
did the metamorphosis with the wig and the makeup, and I don’t think I’ve ever 
been so scared in my life as I was when I walked through the hotel as a woman. 
It was an epiphany, because I realised, this is how Maura feels every day of 
her life.”

How did he feel in the Oxwood?

“Wonderful! It was revelatory. I walked in, and it was so important to see 
people who were just there and having fun and free and I just relaxed and 
danced – we danced! I got immediately that there are so many different ways of 
doing this [transitioning] and it was like - ” and he collapses with a happy 
sigh against the sofa.

Tambor was born in San Francisco, raised conservative Jewish but grew up in 
what he describes as “a liberal environment”. However, he was, he says, 
“ignorant about [transgender people] with a capital IG. So I went in with my 
eyes wide open. And you know, there’s so much transphobia, so much fear. I’m 
just happy that we can shed – ” and Tambor breaks off, overcome with emotion. 
At times, he seems as delicate as a just-peeled orange, full to bursting with 
emotions.

At the beginning of our time together, I ask Soloway what inspired her to write
Transparent <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent> and she 
talks about how bringing understanding to transgender people is “the civil 
rights issue of our time, and, after Sundance, I was looking around thinking, 
what’s next?” But an hour later, when I ask if there was a human story that 
grabbed her attention she says, “Well, my own parent is trans. They came out to 
me as trans three years ago and pretty shortly after that, the story came to 
me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411744661085%2F4aeb9be3-6cfc-4063-8c36-10565d97c04c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeffrey%20Tambor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20never%20been%20so%20scared%20in%20my%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeffrey%20Tambor%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20have%20never%20been%20so%20scared%20in%20my%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fjeffrey-tambor-transparent-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411744661085%2F4aeb9be3-6cfc-4063-8c36-10565d97c04c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tambor and Transparent director Jill Soloway. Photograph: Linda Nylind 
Soloway wrote the show with her older sister, Faith, who is a lesbian, and the 
older sister on the show, Sarah, played by Amy Landecker 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0484541/>, reignites a lesbian love affair from her 
youth. “There’s a lot of Faith in Sarah, and a lot of me in Ally [the younger 
sister],” says Soloway.

Did she talk to her parent about Maura’s emotional journey?

“Sure. My parent has their own story, and I feel so lucky they allowed me to 
tell this story in that it’s so public and they don’t want to be public in that 
way. I happen to be the person who gets to tell this story and my parent 
happens to be the person who inspired me with their bravery and their break for 
freedom.”

These days Tambor lives in New York with his wife and four young children. But 
he also has an older daughter from an earlier marriage, “and she’s a scholar, I 
care what she thinks”. One day, she came to visit her father on set and sat 
with him in his dressing room while he was made up as Maura.

“And she looked at me and said, ‘Dad. You’re pretty!’ And that, well … ” And 
once again, Tambor falls back into the couch, overcome with happiness.

• Series one of Transparent is available to watch on Amazon Prime Instant 
Video.
 