
We’re about five minutes into our interview when Jennifer Saunders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jennifer-saunders> lets slip the 
N-word. She is sitting in a dimly lit private members’ club off Oxford Street 
in central London. The sofas are grey velvet, the walls are dark and Saunders 
is dressed in floating shades of navy blue: a silky top that billows like 
expensive drapery over her trousers, cropped at the ankle to reveal slip-on 
trainers.

Saunders is friendly but self-contained. Her smile doesn’t linger on her face 
longer than strictly necessary. The first few questions are politely answered, 
but she has a slightly distracted air, as if her mind is on other matters.

When the N-word comes, in the middle of a long explanation about her 
late-flowering love for hip-hop, it is calmly delivered in her clipped, 
well-spoken tones. She is 57, a grandmother twice over, but only started 
listening to hip-hop relatively recently, when putting together the soundtrack 
for the new Absolutely Fabulous film.

“What’s my favourite track?” Saunders muses absent-mindedly. “It’s Jason 
Derulo and Get Ugly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/12/this-weeks-new-tracks> or That 
Ugly or something. I just suddenly starting listening to it and because of that 
I started listening to other bits of hip-hop – Drake and things – and I 
thought: ‘Actually that’s rathernice.’ You know, I’ve always had this kind of 
aversion to it, thinking: ‘What a load of nonsense, saying the word “ho” and 
“nigger” quite a lot, I’m not having any of that,’” she says, all Mary Poppins 
briskness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc94bdcdc2d9b036a46f0e6dd37ab1f5db84fa4b4%2F0_126_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It's%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It%27s%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc94bdcdc2d9b036a46f0e6dd37ab1f5db84fa4b4%2F0_126_2717_1630%2F2717.jpg>
 With Joanna Lumley in Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie. Photograph: Fox 
Searchlight/Planet Photos 
She’s talking contextually, of course, and the anecdote is amusing precisely 
because Saunders is poking fun at her tin ear for rap culture. She’s the 
mistress of the perfectly aimed tease, even when the target is herself. It 
brings me up short, but then she has long been adept at shock presented as 
self-deprecation, acidity cloaked in affection. Her humour has that somewhat 
English sensibility – the sense that, however mercilessly it skewers its 
targets, there is a seam of gentleness running through it.

Saunders started out in the 1980s alternative standup scene with her long-term 
collaborator, Dawn French. It was a boys’ club, but instead of being cowed by 
their difference, the two women celebrated it, calling themselves The Menopause 
Sisters and sewing tassels over their breasts. When they transferred their act 
to the small screen, now calling themselvesFrench And Saunders 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0092355/>, the show’s mix of meta-satire, spoof 
and running gags was hugely popular throughout the late 80s and early 90s. It 
was given one of the highest budgets in BBC history and led to hammy 
re-creations of films such asThelma & Louise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/susan-sarandon-geena-davis-hollywood-thelma-louise-feminist-gender-equality>
,Misery <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0100157/> and Titanic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/titanic>, treading a fine line between 
naturalism and absurdity. Their piss-takes of pop stars including Madonna and 
Kylie were similarly well drawn: whenthey ribbed a Corrs video 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x2zsh_the-corrs-french-an_news>, French took 
the part of the three musical sisters, while Saunders played the overlooked 
brother constantly trying to edge into shot.

“Now, television is so executive-led that you really have to jump through 
hoops to get anything done,” says Saunders. “In our day it was, like: ‘Oh, you 
seem to be doing quite well in the clubs, we’re going to give you a TV show and 
then we’ll give you two seasons to see if you get better.’” French And Saunders 
ran to seven series and was broadcast, on and off, over a 20-year period, 
ending in 2007. The pairwere rewarded with a Bafta fellowship in 2009 
<http://www.bafta.org/television/awards/french-saunders-bafta-fellowship-2009>, 
the first double act sinceMorecambe and Wise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/morecambe-and-wise> to receive the 
honour.

Saunders’ characters (vacuous PR maven Edina Monsoon from Ab Fab, desperate 
talkshow host Vivienne Vyle) tend to be darkly funny but rooted in 
vulnerability; we like them in spite of ourselves. Her influence continues to 
be felt by a new generation of female comedians on both sides of the Atlantic: 
in America,Amy Schumer <http://www.amyschumer.com/> and Lena Dunham 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KPpou8ZK8Ys> (having Saunders on Girls would 
be “the best thing ever to happen to us”) have cited Saunders as an 
inspiration; in the UK, you can see her influence on the work of female comics 
fromJulia Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/julia-davis> to 
Catherine Tate <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/catherine-tate>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc581ebc089dfa34643de48fd7745a288815ce9c7%2F0_0_2175_3072%2F2175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It's%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It%27s%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc581ebc089dfa34643de48fd7745a288815ce9c7%2F0_0_2175_3072%2F2175.jpg>
 With Dawn French. Photograph: Steve Bent/Mail On Sunday/Rex/Shutterstock 
But it was writing the sitcom Absolutely Fabulous 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0105929/> that cemented Saunders’ reputation. She 
also starred as Edina, whose life is a desperate, Bollinger-soaked struggle to 
keep up with the latest fashions. The show won her a Bafta and an Emmy, and 
garnered both Saunders and her co-starJoanna Lumley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joanna-lumley> international acclaim.

The film version 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/absolutely-fabulous--the-movie>, released 
next week, catches up with Edina as she hurtles towards 60. Her innate desire 
to be hip is gradually fading, along with the realisation that “there is a 
point in your life when you just can’t keep the party going”, says Saunders. “I 
think there’s a natural time when you just think: ‘I don’t want to know about 
any new bands. I’m happy, I’ve got my uniform that I wear. I don’t need to know 
about everything that’s happening all the time. In fact it’s just very, very 
tiring.’”

Is that how Saunders feels? “Oh, I try. I really do try,” she replies, with a 
sort of weary determination. She’s only just got on to Facebook, “and I’m 
finding it very useful. It’s the only way I get to see photographs of my 
children. But, you know, I’m sure a whole generation is going to grow up 
thinking this is justbonkers, isn’t it? To expose yourself like that online to 
everybody.”

She says the movie will be “quite different to the TV show, in that if you’ve 
got an hour and a half, you can explore a lot more things. Also, it’s got loads 
and loads of gags and the idea is basically just to be as funny as possible.” 
As part of the writing process, she watched old episodes “to try and get the 
rhythm again. And then I just start writing lines, and then I do a lot of 
Googling – it’s like a little patchwork quilt, and then it all just comes 
together in the end.

“Sometimes, late at night, you’ll find you have the best conversation in your 
head and think, ‘Oh, I’ll have to write that down.’ Often the best stuff comes 
out in a kind of a rant, you know – an illogical rant rather than writing down 
lines.”

So she’s not a tortured writer, anxiously biting her fingernails in front of 
the screen? “Oh, it’s very tortured! I torture myself by not doing it on time 
and leaving it far too late. I do lots of that.”

I wasn’t allowed to see the film before we met, which is usually a worrying 
sign, but there was no shortage of celebrities wanting to be involved – 
everyone fromKate Moss <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/kate-moss> to 
Jeremy Paxman. Moss was “fantastic, funny and professional”. How did Saunders 
persuade her to take part?

“Well, we asked her.” When it’s Jennifer Saunders doing the asking, one 
imagines there aren’t many people who say no. She is forceful in a 
straightforward way, like a seasoned midwife who takes it as read that you’re 
going to give birth and there won’t be any unnecessary fuss.

It has been said that Saunders seeks out the double-act formula (with French 
and then with Lumley) because her partners bring a warmth and likability that 
counterbalance a perceived frostiness. Her friend Ruby Wax, and co-star inGirls 
On Top <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088524/>, the 1980s sitcom centred around 
the adventures of four female flatmates and their landlady, once noted that 
Saunders has “this deadly blank face and she sucks the personality out of 
people and becomes them”.
 With Dawn French in their Silence Of The Lambs, 1993. Photograph: BBC 
It’s true that one can never quite grasp what Saunders might be thinking. Her 
eyes are lively but vague, her smile broad but distant. “I’m not very good at 
doing things on my own,” she admits. “I like to play against things. I need an 
audience, and a double act.”

She says, almost in passing, that she has never once had an argument with 
French. What,never? She nods. What if one of them suggests a bad joke? 
“Sometimes she’ll say something and I’ll just go, ‘Urgh!’ and she’ll go, ‘OK, 
no, we won’t do that.’”

Doesn’t all that unresolved resentment just fester? “Isn’t it better that you 
just get on and do the things that you both love, than fight for something 
that’s going to cause a bit of angst?”

The same rules of non-confrontation seem to apply to her marriage of 31 years 
to fellow comicAdrian Edmondson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/19/ade-edmondson-interview-nevilles-island-rik-mayall>
. The two met as part of the Comic Strip collective, and were friends for six 
years before they fell in love. Saunders thinks that made a difference, because 
“we’re not too complicated about it, you know? I think often people 
over-analyse things. Ade and I argue very little. I think it’s to do with the 
fact that, if you know you’re heading for one, you avoid it and you compromise.”

She can recall only one disagreement she had with her parents; it was about 
her mother not letting her go out at night. “There was no shouting involved. It 
was more a quiet sort of seething.” Saunders has little time for the modern 
mania for individualism, the belief that someone has a right to express hurtful 
feelings simply because not doing so might infringe on their rights.

“Ade and I have, sort of, parallel lives and we come together in the marriage. 
We don’t force something. We don’t say: ‘Oh, you’re denying me my 
individuality.’ I think I’m happy being quite quiet most of my life. And in 
fact Ade said, at first, when he met me, he was put off by the idea that I 
would sit quite quietly if we went out together and not say much. But actually, 
that was me being happy, not unhappy.”

Recently, she’s discovered a new diversionary tactic. “I realised that if you 
ask people questions, then you don’t have to say very much. If you just go in 
and go, ‘Hi, how are you? That’s lovely, where did you get that?’ Dawn’s had 
that for years.”

Saunders has three grownup daughters with Edmondson – Ella (who has two 
children, Fred, four, and Bert, two), Beattie and Freya – whom they raised in 
Devon, before moving back to London a few years ago. They still have a home in 
the countryside and go back frequently. She clearly misses the outdoor life and 
gets a contented, faraway look when she talks about tramping through fields or 
rescuing dogs.

She took up smoking for the first time when she was diagnosed with cancer: 'I 
thought, why not?'

“I just loved nothing better than the sheep and cows and chickens, dogs, 
ducks,” she sighs. “I’m planning that for my retirement, if I ever retire. But 
I would love a menagerie.”

Like the Duchess of Devonshire? “Yes! Honestly, chickens are the best thing in 
the world. You spend hours looking at chickens, it’s like a little soap opera. 
I used to go out in the morning to feed them, take the kids to school and come 
back, and still be out there at about 11.30.”

She compares the exercise to mindfulness, but gets it wrong and calls it 
mindlessness, then laughs at herself. “That’s a joke,” she says, and you can 
see her mentally filing it away for future use.

Saunders grew up with her three brothers. “There wasn’t something that defined 
me particularly as a girl,” she says. “I could do everything they did. I just 
lived outside mainly, with animals. I would fall over and hurt myself quite a 
lot.”

Her father, Tom, was an air marshal in the RAF and her mother, Jane, a biology 
teacher, who taught her the names of all the plants and birds. Her father’s job 
meant the family moved around between bases, before settling in the Cheshire 
countryside in Saunders’ teens. Her autobiography,Bonkers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bonkers-3.html>, relates how she spent much 
of her childhood careening around fields on motorbikes or riding horses. She 
didn’t do a lot of what she describes as “school socialising”: as long as she 
had horses, she was happy.

Saunders’ grandson, Bert, is now similarly obsessed with horses, but when she 
tries to buy him toys “it’s all pink! All girl-orientated! Little ponies with 
rugs and flowers on.” She wishes children’s toys could “go back to [being] 
proper toys that represent proper things, you know? Every toy is a bloody 
dinosaur, every book is about a bloody dinosaur. And they know the names of all 
the dinosaurs, but you point at a badger and a fox and go, ‘What’s that?’ ‘I 
don’t know. Is it a stegosaurus?’ ‘No. It’s a badger and it actually exists.’”

She laughs and her features lose their aloofness. Her forehead is almost 
entirely wrinkle-free and she seems to have become more beautiful with age. 
“You know, I’m not very thin and I do think that makes a difference when you 
get older – if you keep a bit of flesh on.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a34cf0b4b57040cda84efd8b6275a1e03d1c05c%2F0_117_2278_1367%2F2278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It's%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It%27s%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a34cf0b4b57040cda84efd8b6275a1e03d1c05c%2F0_117_2278_1367%2F2278.jpg>
 With her husband, Ade Edmondson, in 2014. Photograph: Dan 
Wooller/Rex/Shutterstock 
Still, she hates being asked for selfies. “It’s just a nightmare. Like, in an 
airport. You’ve got off a plane after 10 hours, looking like shite, and someone 
goes, ‘Can I have a picture?’ And you go, ‘Actually no, you can’t, sorry.’ And 
they look at you like you’re the most disgusting thing in the world: how dare 
you say I can’t have a picture? And then you go, ‘I don’t want to have a 
picture with you. I don’t know you. And you’re going to have a picture of me 
looking shite on your phone. I don’t want that. Why is that so hard to 
understand?’”

Usually, her level of fame is fairly manageable. If someone recognises her in 
the street, “they generally walk by and then I hear them muttering and they 
look back and shake their heads”. She doesn’t think too much about fame, to be 
honest.

Saunders maintains a healthy perspective on most things. You would, I imagine, 
find her making the soup in the event of an apocalyptic nuclear disaster. In 
her career, she has taken the knocks with the same level-headedness as the 
successes.

When something goes wrong – like Viva Forever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/02/spice-girls-viva-forever-close>, 
the Spice Girls musical she wrote, which closed in 2012 after six months and 
some truly awful reviews (“tawdry, lazy and unedifying”said the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/theatre-reviews/9737630/Viva-Forever-Piccadilly-Theatre-review.html>
) – Saunders’ tactic is to “blame everyone else”, she says. “And then just go: 
‘Well, these things happen,’ and move on. But you learn from it. And you learn 
how to do things differently or better. If you don’t learn from it, then it has 
been a disaster.”

When she was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2009, she insisted Edmondson 
complete a panto run while she underwent chemotherapy, because she wanted 
things to stay as normal as possible. She took up smoking, for the first and 
last time in her life, because her body was so full of chemicals already: “I 
thought, why not?”

After chemotherapy, Saunders, like many women, was prescribed the drug 
Tamoxifen 
<http://www.macmillan.org.uk/cancerinformation/cancertreatment/treatmenttypes/hormonaltherapies/individualhormonaltherapies/tamoxifen.aspx>
, which triggered menopause and depression, both known side effects. Does she 
feel she is now “over” cancer? “As a physical experience, yes. You’re never 
quite over it, because I’m going back on Tamoxifen. I came off it after five 
years for a break. I wanted to know what was age and what was side-effect. And 
so I now know how achy I am, generally. If I go back on it, I’ll know what’s 
the drug and what’s me.” There is a small, reflective pause. “But I’m grateful 
for that because, you know, you want to live as long as you can, really.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2516921303df34b533d59a736179214c9e9cc0d1%2F0_701_5478_6603%2F5478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It's%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jennifer%20Saunders%3A%20%E2%80%98It%27s%20still%20easier%20for%20a%20gang%20of%20boys%20to%20get%20a%20TV%20show%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fjennifer-saunders-ab-fab-absolutely-fabulous-not-good-at-doing-things-on-my-own%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2516921303df34b533d59a736179214c9e9cc0d1%2F0_701_5478_6603%2F5478.jpg>
 Jennifer is wearing shirt and trousers (top picture) and blazer (above), all 
by Stella McCartney. T-shirt (above) by Helmut Lang. Photograph: Perou for the 
Guardian. Styling: Hope Lawrie. Hair and makeup: Desmond Grundy at Carol Hayes 
Management 
The prospect of turning 60 doesn’t particularly bother her, mainly because she 
looks atJoanna Lumley <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joanna-lumley> “and 
she’s just turned 70 and she doesn’t seem to have changed at all and I just 
think, ‘It can’t be that bad, can it?’ What you don’t want to be is crippled 
with knee pain and all the rest of it. So it feels like you have to start 
looking after yourself, I suppose.”

Saunders started wearing a Fitbit a few months ago and is very proud of it, 
pulling up her sleeve to show me it. She has set herself a target of 10,000 
steps a day, and likes it because she’s “very competitive. And I do very small 
steps. I’ve realised that because Ade goes, ‘How come you’ve done 10,000 and 
we’ve walked the same amount?’”

Getting older has given her more confidence. It’s not that she was ever 
insecure about her work, more that she cares less what the men in the room 
think. “In the TV world, I think it’s still easier for a gang of boys to get a 
show on than it is for a gang of girls, and I don’t know why that is. I think 
there’s still an expectation that there is women’s humour or girls’ humour.”

She has done more comedy panel shows of late. “I was always so terrified of 
doing Have I Got News For You, and then I did it and didn’t find it terrifying 
at all. I think women should do [panel shows], and the more women that do them, 
the more women-friendly they’ll become.”

She gives a funny account of what it was like filming the sports TV show A 
League Of Their Own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/nov/20/league-of-their-own> and 
being surrounded by young blokes brought to the edge of frenzy by Red Bull and 
cock jokes. “It was quite frightening because it was so high energy,” she says 
drily. “It was ‘GUYS, LET’S DO THIS!’ And I was, like, ‘Hey, I’m trying to be 
high energy, too! Look at me’” She breaks off to do jazz hands. “‘High energy! 
Did you say the word ‘PENIS’? HAHAHAHA. I’m laughing!’”

You just know, as she talks, that she was funnier than any of them without 
even trying. We get up to go and she gives me a hug on the street. I watch her 
walking away, taking very little steps.

• Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/absolutely-fabulous--the-movie> is out on 1 
July.
 