
It hardly looks like an image that shook the world. But this photograph, taken 
in 1987 by John Knoll, could be as central to the modern visual vernacular as
Eadweard Muybridge's shots of galloping horses 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sallie_Gardner_at_a_Gallop> or the first use of 
perspective.

Its subject is Knoll's then-girlfriend Jennifer, topless on the beach in Bora 
Bora <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bora_Bora>, gazing out at To'opua island. 
The young couple worked together atIndustrial Light & Magic 
<http://www.ilm.com/>, Lucasfilm's special-effects company, and were enjoying 
some well-earned R&R after working 70-hour weeks on the filmWho Framed Roger 
Rabbit <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/who_framed_roger_rabbit/>. Looking 
back, Jennifer says: "It was a truly magical time for us. My husband actually 
proposed to me later on in the day, probably just after that photo." Little 
wonder that John would name the photo Jennifer in Paradise.

But the image was to become much more than a record of a perfect moment. At 
ILM, Knoll had encountered a cutting-edge piece of hardware known as thePixar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pixar> Image Computer, one of the first that 
could be used to manipulate images. "I thought it was amazing," he says. "The 
fact that you could take an image from film, scan it in and turn it into digits 
and then manipulate those numbers and put it back out on to piece of film – it 
meant that there was literally no limit to what you could do to it in the 
middle."

The Pixar machine cost hundreds of thousands of dollars and the 
image-processing software was so complex it required a specially trained 
operator. So Knoll was somewhat taken aback when he visited his brother Thomas, 
who was reading for a doctorate in computer vision at the University of 
Michigan, and discovered that he'd developed some similar software that could 
run on a much cheaper Macintosh Plus. Knoll began to chivvy his brother into 
pushing the application further. "It was really just a hobby at first," he 
says, "but I kept asking him to add more features."

Eventually they had something that John believed they could sell. The only 
problem was, with so few digital images available at the time, it was hard to 
demonstrate what their new application could do. Visiting friends at Apple's 
Advanced Technology Group lab, Knoll took the opportunity to use one of their 
flatbed scanners, also rare devices then. The only picture he had to hand was 
that 6in x 4in print of his wife in Tahiti.

In this way, Jennifer in Paradise became the first colour image used to 
demonstrate the software they had started to call Photoshop.

"It was a good image to do demos with," Knoll recalls. "It was pleasing to 
look at and there were a whole bunch of things you could do with that image 
technically." And maybe there was something in it that hinted at the kind of 
more perfect world that Photoshop might reveal. Knoll would leave a copy of the 
software in a package including the picture at the companies he'd visited. 
Often he'd return to find that the programmers had cloned his wife.

To celebrate Photoshop's anniversary, Knoll revisited these early demos in a 
YouTube video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tda7jCwvSzg>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTda7jCwvSzg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTda7jCwvSzg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTda7jCwvSzg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch John Knoll recreate an early Photoshop demo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tda7jCwvSzg>

The idea captured the interest of Dutch artist Constant Dullaart 
<http://www.constantdullaart.com>, who rebuilt the picture from screenshots of 
the video and made it the centrepiece ofhis new London show 
<http://www.carrollfletcher.com/exhibitions/28/overview/>, Stringendo, 
Vanishing Mediators. "Given its cultural significance," he says, "just from an 
anthropological point of view I thought it would be interesting to examine what 
values the image contains. The fact that it's a white lady, topless, anonymous, 
facing away from the camera. And that it was his wife. He offers her, 
objectifying her, in his creation for the reproduction of reality."

Dullaart's work seeks to expose the technological structures that inform 
modern visual culture. For him Jennifer in Paradise is a key artefact, the 
original Photoshop meme. As such, he believes, it belongs in the public domain. 
His misappropriation of it is a protest.

John Knoll seems unconvinced. "I don't even understand what he's doing," he 
says, bristling at the idea of the image being reconstructed without permission 
(ironically using Photoshop).

Jennifer is more sanguine. "The beauty of the internet is that people can take 
things, and do what they want with them, to project what they want or feel," 
she says.

Dullaart's reverence for the picture may be extreme, but it is hard to 
overstate Photoshop's importance. David Hockney, who was invited to test the 
program soon after its release, predicted that it would spell the end of film 
photography. And although, as Knoll is quick to point out, photos were being 
altered long ago in Soviet Russia, it was only Photoshop that democratised that 
ability. In a way Jennifer was the last person to sit on solid ground, gazing 
out into an infinitely fluid sea of zeros and ones, the last woman to inhabit a 
world where the camera never lied.

John Knoll, now chief creative officer at Industrial Light & Magic, is proud 
of the impact that Photoshop has had on the world. "Any tool can be used for 
good or bad," he says. "It's really the ethics of the artist using it."

Asked about Dullaart's dream of taking her and her husband back to Bora Bora 
to recreate the picture, Jennifer laughs. "Oh no, no, no." she says. "That's 
not OK."

• Constant Dullaart: Stringendo, Vanishing Mediators is at Carroll/Fletcher 
<http://www.carrollfletcher.com/exhibitions/28/overview/>, London W1, until 31 
July
 