
Jeremy Paxman stands accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/30/jeremy-paxman-pensioners-virtual-corpses-verge-incontinence-idiocy-mature-times>
 of insulting the elderly and of being in denial about his own status as an 
OAP, after describing old age as “incontinence and idiocy”. In a newspaper 
column at the weekend the former Newsnight presenter, aged 66, said the older 
generation are “virtual corpses’’.

Paxman made the remarks after picking up a copy of Mature Times 
<http://www.maturetimes.co.uk/>, a free publication aimed at people over 50. In 
his column for the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d66086b0-6468-11e6-8310-ecf0bddad227.html>, Paxman, 
wrote: “At the reception desk of a hotel to which I checked in this week was a 
pile of free copies of Mature Times, which calls itself ‘the voice of our 
generation’. Oh God, I thought, the cheeky bastards are including me. Back off. 
For this must be the most unfashionable publication in Britain. Who wants to be 
called ‘mature’, like an old cheese? We all know that ‘mature’ means on the 
verge of incontinence, idiocy and peevish valetudinarianism.”

Paxman: pensioners 'are virtual corpses' on verge of 'incontinence and idiocy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/30/jeremy-paxman-pensioners-virtual-corpses-verge-incontinence-idiocy-mature-times>
In making these remarks Paxman has insulted more than 21 million people 
<http://www.agediscrimination.info/statistics/Pages/CurrentUKpopulation.aspx> 
(yes, that’s how many over-50s there are in the UK) and I’m sure, on reflection 
he may regret offending his peers. At the sprightly age of 66 he is indeed one 
of the11.6 million people over 65 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/bulletins/annualmidyearpopulationestimates/mid2015>
 in this country and he needs to get over it.

Coincidentally, the September 2016 edition of Mature Times marks the 25th 
anniversary of our publication. With a readership of more than 500,000 across 
the UK, we are a campaigning paper and tackle the challenging issues that 
directly relate to older people.

We work with Age UK, Independent Age, Royal Voluntary Service and other 
national charities for older people to address the concerns of our readers, 
including social and hospital care, age discrimination, pension rights, 
loneliness and isolation. Our campaigning style has engendered great reader 
loyalty, as has the fact we are independent in our stance – we cross the 
political divide.

We are proud of our readers and our monthly issues contain stories of their 
amazing exploits, from climbing Everest to wing walking, while raising 
significant funds for charities. We disseminate relevant information, from 
claiming tax rebates and pension credits, to how to avoid financial scams. So, 
Paxman, what is your contribution to positive living? Anyone can chide and 
deride, but how many people’s lives do you enrich?

If he had made his remarks about any other minority group, whether religious, 
ethnic or sexual preference, he would have been shamed into making a public 
apology. So why does he think it is acceptable to use such spiteful language 
against the older generation? It is illegal under theEquality Act of 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/equality-act-2010>, but Paxman’s comments 
prove that such ageism is prevalent and it is shocking that a journalist of his 
standing should stoop so low.

Jeremy Paxman savages a new victim - a ‘dreary’ magazine for the over-50s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2016/aug/30/paxman-old-people-pass-notes-mature-times>
Sixteen years into Mature Times’ age demographic (the over 50s), he is 
behaving in a puerile manner and slinging cheap jibes, albeit using long 
derogatory words such as valetudinarian, to disrespect the millions of us in 
this age bracket. Well, I have a couple of long words for you, Paxman: 
gerascophobia and gerontophobia. He seems to be suffering from both a fear of 
getting old and of older people. With any luck he will live to a good age and 
realise that there are many benefits that come with longevity, but only if he 
accepts that life is there to be enjoyed, not feared.

There are countless examples of older people continuing to contribute to our 
lives, such as Paxman himself, and many of our readers continue to develop, 
challenge and stretch their minds and bodies. Age often brings wisdom and 
experience, which is one of the many reasons why ageism has no place in our 
society. We need to continue to present the positive aspects of ageing and to 
change perceptions of older people by highlighting their real and positive 
contribution to society.

So grow up, Paxman, give the older generation the respect they fully deserve 
and hopefully your life will be enriched by a more positive attitude toward 
ageing well.
 