
Name: Jeremy Paxman.

Age: 66.

Appearance: Easter Island statue meets missing Mount Rushmore head.

I knew it! Emily Maitlis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/emily-maitlis> 
just isn’t cutting it, is she? He’s coming back to Newsnight, riding in on a 
white stallion of hard news and pointless adversariality, if that is indeed a 
word!No, he’s not.

Oh. He’s in a spat with a free newspaper 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/preview/media/2016/aug/30/jeremy-paxman-pensioners-virtual-corpses-verge-incontinence-idiocy-mature-times>
 aimed at the over-50s called the Mature Times.

Paxman: pensioners 'are virtual corpses' on verge of 'incontinence and idiocy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/30/jeremy-paxman-pensioners-virtual-corpses-verge-incontinence-idiocy-mature-times>
Oh crikey. What has he said now? He took issue with an issue he found in a 
hotel lobby andwrote 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d66086b0-6468-11e6-8310-ecf0bddad227.html> that 
“mature” meant “on the verge of incontinence, idiocy and peevish 
valetudinarianism”.

I’ve missed him. And he called it a “dreary publication” full of adverts for 
“hearing aids, reclining chairs, copper insoles, stairlifts, devices to help 
you in and out of the bath [and] cruises somewhere in the company of other 
virtual corpses”, as if this is all older people are interested in.

Are they not? Well, he’s not. You wouldn’t be either, if you conceived of 
other people your own age as virtual corpses on the verge of incontinence, 
idiocy and peevish valetudinarianism.

I wouldn’t want them leaving great patches of peevish valetudinarianism on the 
sofa, that’s for sure. Has the publisher of Mature Times taken this lying down? 
Perhaps on one of his recliner chairs?He has not 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/paxman-told-youre-just-a-dull-clarkson-qtzn5sttn>
. Andrew Silk has come out fighting against the man who suggested the 
publication be renamed “The Surgical Stocking Sentinel” or “Winceyette Weekly”.

Do tell. He likened Paxman to Jeremy Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson> without the charisma or 
money.

Ooh! Sick burn, as I believe the young folk say! It’s pretty good, isn’t it? 
He’s also called on him to apologise to the 21m over-50s in the country.

Oh, can’t they take a joke? Paxo also called them “humourless”.

Ah. And he said there was a good argument for banning them from EU referendums 
and the like: “It’s simply not fair to allow people to vote for a future they 
won’t live to enjoy or endure.”

I miss him more and more. Maybe he will come back to Newsnight yet. 
Semi-retirement does seem to be leaving him with idle hands.

Do say: “I would totally buy Winceyette Weekly.”

Don’t say: “Eh? What? Speak UP, young man!”
 