
Are Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party members reading 
national newspapers, watching TV news bulletins and listening to radio current 
affairs programmes?

If they are, then the majority of them are clearly ignoring the insistent, 
relentless, repetitive messages urging them not to vote forJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> as their next leader.

Similarly, they are discounting the portentous statements made by a string of 
party grandees: Tony Blair, Gordon Brown,Alastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, Alan Johnson, Jack 
Straw, Neil Kinnock, Uncle Tom Cobley and all. New Labour has made it crystal 
clear that it is appalled at the resurgence of old Labour.

It would appear that media reports of speeches denouncing Corbyn’s political 
and economic stance plus every newspaper leading article warning of Corbyn’s 
unsuitability for the job are having the reverse effect.

So much for “the power of the press,” eh? Some publishers and editors may well 
be frustrated by the fact that their readers are failing to heed their advice.

Most, however, like to deny that they wield any real influence over the views 
of their audiences and will therefore see current events as proof positive that 
they lack the potency routinely ascribed to them.


But they, and we, should avoid any simplistic analysis. First off, it would 
seem that the bulk of Corbyn’s support is drawn from the young and it is highly 
likely that they are not mainstream media “consumers.” (However, I readily 
concede that there are many older pro-Corbyn supporters too - seeAengil in the 
thread for polling figures).

As for those who do read papers, whether in print or online, my hunch is that 
the unremitting anti-Corbyn propaganda is being discounted as unwanted advice 
from either “the establishment” or so-called “elders and betters.” In other 
words, Corbyn’s appeal is enhanced by a hostile press.

The young seek change, and even if that change represents a return to a past 
(one which they did not experience themselves), then it is different from the 
status quo. So the negative headlines actually encourage rebellion.

Seen from another perspective, we should not overlook the fact that the 
virtually all the stories and headlines feature the name of Corbyn. His name 
dominates the coverage across the media.

His name has featured in scores of news page headlines (including several on 
front pages) throughout this month. Few commentators have failed to mention 
him. The Sunday and Monday papers overflowed with columns about Corbyn most, 
but not all, unsympathetic.

In the Sunday Telegraph, Corbyn was the subject of the main front page story 
and its leading article. In the Daily Telegraph, he featured again in its 
splash and its leading article 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/11806747/Corbyns-a-dirty-word-for-Labour-grandees.html>
. There were also columns about himby Boris Johnson 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/11806571/We-Tories-are-in-a-state-of-disbelief-about-Jeremy-Corbyn.html>
 andby Dan Hodges 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/11805916/Labour-MPs-are-now-preparing-to-go-underground-to-resist-the-Corbyn-regime.html>
.

In the Times, aside from a news story, Corbyn featured in the cartoon and John 
McTernan argued in his column, with bizarre logic, thatEd Miliband should 
rescue the party from Corbyn 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/thunderer/article4529160.ece>. 

In the Daily Express, Stephen Pollard asked “big questions that Jeremy Corbyn 
will not answer 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/expresscomment/598725/Comment-questions-Jeremy-Corbyn-Labour-leadership-election-Stephen-Pollard>
” while the Daily Mail’s leading article sought to argue that Corbyn’s support 
rested to an extent on concerns aboutthe high salaries paid to chief executives 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3200412/DAILY-MAIL-COMMENT-way-repay-VJ-Day-heroes.html>
 (but not editors).

The Independent’s leading article lamented the likely victory of “the 
socialist MP” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/editorials/labour-pains-jeremy-corbyns-remarkable-rise-has-energised-politics--and-ensured-britain-is-likely-to-remain-tory-10458374.html>
 but rightly identified his appeal to “huge numbers of voters in their 
twenties”. It said:

“He has turned them from a deeply political demographic who felt that they had 
no voice in Westminster to engaged activists who want to participate in our 
democracy... He has done this by providing a clear and coherent alternative to 
austerity.”

And the Indy’s columnist, Yasmin Alibhai Brown, raged against  accusations 
that Corbyn is anti-Semitic 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/fling-mud-if-you-must-but-dont-call-jeremy-corbyn-an-antisemite-10458261.html>
. “This is how low Labour has sunk”, she wrote.


Even though the Daily Mirror <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-mirror> 
is backing Andy Burnham its editorial conceded that “has lit up the contest, 
enthused youngsters and reminded older members why they joined the party.” But, 
it concluded, listen to Brown.

Its columnist, Paul Routledge, thought too few are listening to the former 
prime minister 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/labour-would-wise-listen-gordon-6264395> 
and the other naysayers. And what a great pun: Jerrymiahs!

The Guardian’s splash was also about Brown’s intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/16/gordon-brown-warning-against-jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership>
 while columnist Zoe Williams shrewdly pointed out that some of Corbyn’s 
critics have tended to strengthen his argument that he is “breaking out of the 
limited, unambitious landscape that counts for ‘realism’.

Her piece, incidentally, was headlined Corbynomics must smash this cosy 
consensus on debt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/16/jeremy-corbyn-corbynomics-cosy-consensus-debt-radical-fear>
. Along withCorbymania <https://twitter.com/corbymania15> and Corbynmania 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/2015/07/corbyn-mania>, these neologisms serve to 
confirm the man’s media supremacy.

By contrast, his three rivals – Burnham, Liz Kendall and Yvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper> – have had only walk-on 
roles in the unfolding press drama. That’s quite apart from the fact that, 
unlike Corbyn, their platforms lack the coherence of his simple anti-austerity 
stance, itself echoing the SNP’s successful general election position.

In other words, the power of the press is evident not so much in terms of the 
conscious anti-Corbyn messages they are delivering but at a subliminal level by 
placing the man at the centre of events. In a sense, nodding to the celebrity 
age in which we live, Corbyn has been celebritised.

With Corbyn’s name in so many headlines and columns, broadcasters have – as is 
their wont – followed up the stories and the comments, expanding the man’s 
media image. And it is also significant that Corbyn has been a commanding 
presence on social media.


As I pointed out in the London Evening Standard last week, 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/roy-greenslade-the-power-of-the-press-is-winning-the-labour-leadership-race-for-jeremy-corbyn-a2487706.html>
 “this kind of repetitive wall-to-wall coverage seeps into the public 
consciousness” despite, and arguably because of, antagonistic headlines and 
comments.

It is evident that most Labour members don’t respect the messenger so they are 
hardly likely to heed the message. Remember also that the overwhelming bulk of 
the Scottish press opposed the SNP’s anti-austerity policies, which didn’t stop 
the party from sweeping to victory.

The press, like Labour’s veterans and the majority of Labour’s parliamentary 
party, may huff and puff. But across Britain, the party’s members – in an odd 
alliance with gleeful Tory-supporting newspapers – appear all too eager to 
bring Labour’s house down.
 