
"Before Jerry Lee came along the piano was all Winifred Atwell and Russ 
Conway. A bit polite. I remember him playing on the Six-Five Special and I'd 
literally never seen anything like it. He had that long curly hair andhe was 
playing with one leg up on the piano 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n98Uhgsxqe8>. He looked like a complete punk, 
but really cool at the same time. White shirt, black suit. The coolest. 
Obviously a man with demons, but the fact he didn't seem quite safe to be 
around added to the attraction and the power of the performance.

"That was it. It affected me more than Elvis Presley. I bought High School 
Confidential <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FjOLpNxaupU>, from the movie of 
the same name.

"The first concert I went to was Jerry Lee Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jerry-lee-lewis>, Little Richard and Duane 
Eddy. Both Jerry Lee and Little Richard were doing their extravaganza, but 
somehow Jerry Lee had the edge with the hair and the body language.Again, it 
was something I'd never seen before. Since then, I've seen him play lots of 
times. The last time was at the Festival Hall about six years ago, when he was 
on with Chuck Berry. I think he'd just had a stroke or something and he wasn't 
quite his normal self, but he was still playing great piano.

"It's not obvious, but there is an influence there. There's piano onYou Really 
Got Me and All Day and All of the Night, and most of the time they're doing 
chops with the right hand like Jerry Lee would have done.I've never met him, 
though. I stay away from my heroes, because I want them to stay heroes. After 
all these years, High School Confidential is still my favourite and still seems 
to sum him up: 'You better open up, honey, it's your lover boy, me, that's a 
knockin' - bam, ba-bam!' Genius."

Key recording: Sun Essentials (Charly, 2006)
 