
Ah, the summer of ’04. The sun was shining, the grass was green. The world was 
full of potential and the radios were brainwashing us with Are You Gonna Be My 
Girl by Jet.


I was a mere lustful adolescent. Angst, and a search that never extended 
beyond four bedroom walls dominated my life. But then that bass started 
bouncing along, the drums started shuffling, Nic Cester yelped “Go!” and, at 
least metaphorically, I did.

Maybe it was because the girl I had a crush on told me Jet were cool. Maybe it 
was the Motown drum beat and the rock and roll riff. Or maybe it was just that 
they were everywhere and resistance was futile. In shopping malls, in the car, 
in pubs – you couldn’t escape it. Jet had arrived.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtuK6n2Lkza0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtuK6n2Lkza0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtuK6n2Lkza0&media=>
There was something distinctively Australian about them – the mulletesque 
haircuts, made acceptable by their rockstar statuses and flared jeans. And 
perhaps it was their shameless use of the word “gonna”. Either way, they wrote 
the perfect backyard barbecue song. That tambourine kicked off a sexually 
insinuating, hook-laden rollick that few, if any, resisted. Even your parents 
bobbed their heads along, sausages in hand.

“1, 2, 3, turn your head and come with me.” 

“You look so fine that I really want to make you mine.” 

The questionable, “You don’t need money when you look like that, do you honey?”

“Big black boots. Long brown hair!” 

Not to forget the actual chorus.

The hordes of bands still covering Jet’s most popular song are testament to 
the band’s enduring national identity. A search on YouTube forAre You Gonna Be 
My Girl covers 
<https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=are+you+gonna+be+my+girl+cover> 
reveal more than a million results. Even Delta Goodrem covered it, albeit 
badly, on tour in 2005.

Back in 2004, you knew about Jet. They were touring overseas. They were No 1 
on the Hottest 100. The Arias gave them single of the year. They were No 1 on 
Video Hits, in black and white, rocking out in an empty room. They had a song 
in Spider-Man 2. And they were going to save Aussie rock.


We were excited about what Jet would do next; we were happy with what they had 
done. And we were proud the rest of the world was seeing it too, that an 
Australian rock band reached the Top 40 in the US.

In a way that too few Australian acts ever are, they were being recognised. In 
the lineage of AC/DC (a band also started by two brothers) and Inxs they were 
taking our message to the worldwide masses.

So what if their sound was a direct appropriation of the Rolling Stones, Oasis 
and Bon Jovi? So what if there were accusations that the riff from their most 
played song was lifted from Iggy Pop’sLust For Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jQvUBf5l7Vw>? They were retro. We dug it. 
Besides, that’s why their songs were so anthemic.

What’s happening to Jet now? You might not know that in 2012 they broke up. 
They had three albums to their name, Get Born, Shine On, Shaka Rock, and some 
of the songs were quite good: there wasRollover DJ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SJZghrj-AMU>, Put Your Money Where Your Mouth 
Is <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gX7bUXQsHLY> and Seventeen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2BYMPPm34as>. But at some point their star 
faded.

They never came close to matching the success of Are You Gonna Be My Girl and, 
to be fair, it would have been tough to. Like Silverchair’sTomorrow 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RZD982yrmx4>, their breakthrough song is their 
ultimate legacy, and there’s no shame in that. For decades to come we’ll be 
hearing it on the radio, on backyard playlists, and at gigs.

It will remind us of summer, of friends, and we will always, always sing along 
to it.
 