
“I think,” says Jilly Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jilly-cooper>, 
managing to seem both nervous and delighted, “that people are going to be very 
cross.” The doyenne, as one writer put it, of “sweaty horseflesh, adulterous 
bonking and beautiful people with posh voices” is talking about a significant 
development that occurs towards the end of her latest brick of a novel, the 
breathlessly namedMount!, published this month by Bantam.

For the first time since 1988’s Rivals, her blond-haired, blue-eyed toff 
Rupert Campbell-Black has a starring role in the story, rather than a bit part, 
and Cooper has created some rather unexpected plotlines for the man she 
variously describes as “Mecca for most women” and “as bloody-minded as he is 
beautiful”. It’s not quiteGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, but “it was very 
shocking”, she says, of this particular twist, almost as if it swooped in to 
the novel of its own accord.

Mount! – don’t blame the author for this particular pun, or the exclamation 
mark; she wanted to call it “Leading Sire” – is set in the world of flat 
racing. It is Cooper’s 17th novel, and her 10th “bonkbuster”. Her early works 
had been short romances,Bella, Octavia and the like, written originally for 
teenage magazines. Then, in 1985, came her first doorstopper:Riders, a 
gloriously dirty, sexy, silly, funny romp through the world of showjumping. 
Campbell-Black, shagging his way through horsey wives and hangers-on, was 
based, she says, on four “very, very grand, gorgeous men who I met and thought: 
‘Gosh, I’ll put a bit of that in a book.’” The novel’s success rescued the 
Coopers financially (“The bank manager had said we had to sell the house, we 
were completely broke”) and set light to the publishing world. Jackie Collins 
excepted, there was nothing likeRiders out there.

“A lot of people liked it very much. The editor of Horse and Hound said it was 
a disgusting book,” says Cooper, sitting in the house in the Gloucestershire 
countryside the bank manager had wanted to swipe from under her more than 30 
years ago. “I’d always wanted to write the great showjumping novel. [And] the 
reviews, they weren’t bad ...Jeffrey Archer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/books+uk/archer> and I long for a kind word 
in the Guardian, while literary writers have lots and lots of kind words in the 
Guardian but probably long for Jeffrey’s and my sales. It must be irritating.”

Jilly Cooper's top 10 romantic novels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/dec/10/top10s.romantic.novels> 
Over the last 31 years, Cooper has taken her vast casts through the worlds of 
TV and polo, opera and art, and the reviews have been “getting better”, she 
says. Then, in 2004, she was awarded an OBE for services to literature. 
“Literature!” she snorts. “My bloody brother, my darling glamorous brother – my 
brother is the handsomest brother in the world – he said, ‘Jilly’s got an OBE 
for literature!’ and laughed and laughed and laughed. Horrible man.”

This really is how Cooper talks. Just as in her books, everyone is gorgeous 
and ravishing and wonderful, even those it’s plain to see she dislikes. Now 79, 
she is a small ball of vitality, warmth and gossip, in neon-striped trainers. I 
am given tea, and then wine, and then lunch. Her greyhound, Bluebell, falls 
asleep on the sofa next to me, in a bright living room packed with animal 
paintings and photographs. Every room I see in the old Cotswold-stone house is 
similarly full of memories and possessions, built up over the decades. The loo 
boasts a bestseller list from when Polo went to number one, alongside ancient 
family team sports photographs and a cartoon aboutthe recent controversial 
rejacketing of Riders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/jun/03/cover-jilly-cooper-novel-redesign-riders>
, which shifted the famous hand-on-arse of the 1980s jacket back a few inches. 
(Cooper was “furious” about the change.)

Her gossip ranges from David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> (“The interesting thing 
about Cameron is he’s very good looking in the flesh. But he needs shading. He 
needs a good suntan”) andMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> (“She said she read the 
whole ofKipling <https://www.theguardian.com/books/rudyard-kipling>, which I 
don’t believe. She said: ‘I don’t read for pleasure, I read to activate 
themind.’ But she was a dear”), toWordsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamwordsworth> (“Terrible legs, did you 
know that? Terribly pompous”).

You can’t say anything now. Not that one wants to say people are fat, but mind 
you, they are huge, aren’t they?

Cooper’s books became synonymous with the term “bonkbuster”, but she’s not 
convinced by the description herself. “They’re a bit of everything, really,” 
she says. “And happy endings, too. But if they want to call it bonkbuster they 
can – except it ought to be called ‘shagbuster’ now, bonk is out of date.”

Either way, Mount! appears after more of a gap than the author usually 
troubles her fans with. Her husband of 52 years, Leo Cooper, died in 2013 after 
suffering from Parkinson’s disease. “So I was very slow,” she says.

Born Jilly Sallitt, she grew up in Yorkshire, before her family moved to 
London in the 1950s. She worked for a local paper, the Middlesex Independent, 
for about three years (“heaven, bliss”), but was determined to land a job on a 
national. “I kept writing to people in Fleet Street, these terribly hubristic 
letters, saying ‘I’m 22, quite good-looking, and I would love to come and work 
on your newspaper, you need me.’ None of them did.”

So she went into public relations – “which was a disaster. The boss jumped on 
me in the first month so I gave in my notice.” A series of “endless awful jobs” 
followed – “I was always sacked by Wednesday because I couldn’t type very well” 
– until she met Leo at a dinner party. They’d known each other as children in 
Yorkshire and Leo, now a publisher, directed Jilly towards book publishing. 
She’d always wanted to write, penning “awful Pony Club rubbish” as a teenager 
before moving on to romances. “I had a hero called Marcellus Dagonus – awful 
name, but he was terribly dark and wonderful”.

Cooper’s break came at a crucial moment. Unable to have children, she and Leo 
were in the process of adopting a baby (Felix, followed later by Emily) when 
she met Godfrey Smith, then editor of the Sunday Times magazine, at a dinner, 
and regaled him with the details of life as a young wife.

“I said one went to work, shopped through one’s lunch hour, came back, ironed 
shirts, cleaned the flat, cooked dinner, made love all night, the flat got 
dirtier and dirtier and one died with exhaustion after six months. He screamed 
with laughter and said: ‘Write a piece.’ So I said: ‘All right, I’ll try.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fjilly-cooper-interview-mount%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6620493e005ae0a28d2468b4c0f2a210d6e2447%2F97_258_2903_1742%2F2903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jilly%20Cooper%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20always%20coming%20up%20to%20us%20at%20parties%20and%20asking%20us%20to%20bed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fjilly-cooper-interview-mount%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jilly%20Cooper%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20always%20coming%20up%20to%20us%20at%20parties%20and%20asking%20us%20to%20bed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fjilly-cooper-interview-mount%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6620493e005ae0a28d2468b4c0f2a210d6e2447%2F97_258_2903_1742%2F2903.jpg>
 Photograph: Sam Frost for the Guardian 
It was a huge success, and Cooper was given a weekly column. “We were just 
terribly poor, always, and this was £3,000 a year. Mega money. Extraordinary 
money. So that saved us,” she says. “I just wrote about everything. It was a 
terribly sexy time, everybody was getting off with everybody. People were 
always coming up to us at parties and saying ‘Will you go to bed with us?’ 
You’ve no idea. So I wrote about that a bit. MySpitting Image puppet just said: 
‘Sex sex sex sex sex sex.’”

Her columns were eventually collected into a book, Jolly Super – a title which 
still sums up her approach to life. But before that, in the late 60s, cameHow 
to Stay Married. “It was an incredibly vain thing to do really. I’d only been 
married seven years. But it was fun,” Cooper says. “Leo said it ought to be 
called How to Get Divorced – I was doing the Sunday Times column, had a new 
baby, and this book to write. It was too much, far too much. Anyway I did it. 
Now it’s terribly politically incorrect, the fact you had to cherish your 
husband, run home and cook him dinner, try and work 8.30-4.30 so he wouldn’t 
see you doing housework. But it was the time I was in. It seems awful.”

I always liked those hunky, rather forceful men

Touching on any of the more controversial elements of Cooper’s books elicits a 
similar response – an agreement that it wouldn’t be said today, that we can 
both agree it was “awful” and move on.Men and Supermen is “terribly politically 
incorrect”; the romanceOctavia, which includes a scene in which strapping Welsh 
love interest Gareth spanks the heroine for her bad behaviour at a party, is 
“shocking, shocking ... Gareth, of course, was Leo ... I always liked those 
hunky, rather forceful men.”

Class was published in 1979. “All I could claim was a passionate interest in 
the subject and, being unashamedly middle class, I was perhaps more or less 
equidistant from bottom and top,” Cooper wrote in a later introduction, 
admitting that it caused a “fearful rumpus” at the time.

“It was completely wrong [about class] but I just thought, it was my idea of 
it. People were very cross,” she says today. She’s not up for tackling the 
subject again. “I don’t think so. I don’t like to hurt people. You get a bit 
soft when you get older. It must have changed quite a bit, hasn’t it? But I 
think it’s still there,” she says. “I think people pretend it doesn’t matter 
now. People won’t even discuss it now.”

People not discussing things is an issue Cooper comes back to. “People are 
going to be sent to prison for saying somebody’s common soon, aren’t they? 
Really. You can’t say anybody’s fat, you can’t say anybody’s anything, now. Not 
that one wants to say people are fat, but mind you, they are huge, aren’t they. 
Enormous. Enormous,” she says, marvelling. “I hate people being hurt. But 
nobody can say anything now. Anyway, enough of that.” But it isn’t quite. “And 
all this [anti] wolf-whistling. I love being wolf-whistled at. I’m that 
generation. All contributions gratefully received.”

The dog twitches in her sleep and Cooper quotes Tennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson>: “Like a dog, he hunts in 
dreams.” A passionate animal lover, she plans to get another once she’s over a 
hip operation. “One needs companionship when one works, and she’s so good at 
just lying there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fjilly-cooper-interview-mount%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd90ad13ebb51094bd89e2f138453bb48bf4aba1%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jilly%20Cooper%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20always%20coming%20up%20to%20us%20at%20parties%20and%20asking%20us%20to%20bed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fjilly-cooper-interview-mount%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jilly%20Cooper%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20always%20coming%20up%20to%20us%20at%20parties%20and%20asking%20us%20to%20bed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fjilly-cooper-interview-mount%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd90ad13ebb51094bd89e2f138453bb48bf4aba1%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Photograph: Sam Frost for the Guardian 
Cooper has already started work on her next book, which will take the 
Campbell-Blacks into the world of football, and she is loving the research, 
going to watch her local team Forest Green, sitting next toAlex Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sir-alex-ferguson> (“wonderful”) at 
dinner. “It’s heaven. My grandchildren are transfixed, I can talk for hours to 
them about Chelsea ... And it’s heaven with men. All men have a take on 
football.”

She admits she has to “use a lot of imagination” these days when it comes to 
the sex scenes. “It was such a long time ago. [But then] I always had to use a 
lot of imagination. Everybody used to say they could see steam coming out of 
the gazebo where I worked. But I don’t find [writing about] sex that difficult. 
It’s just the way it always was,” she says. “I just think, why stop at the 
bedroom door? The way people make love and the way people relate to each other 
in bed are interesting too.”

She writes on a manual typewriter, christened Monica. “I feel very guilty 
about not working. I work at weekends. I do like working, and now Leo’s gone 
it’s a good substitute for loneliness.”

The jokes are harder without Leo. “He was such a funny man and I miss it 
terribly now he’s not here. Just for Rupert’s jokes really. Rupert hasn’t got 
any brilliant jokes inMount!, I have to get them better,” she says.

Jilly Cooper: 'I'm a reasonable writer but I'm much too colloquial'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/24/jilly-cooper-jump-interview-elizabeth-day>
Her husband’s death also brought back, in his obituaries, details of the affair
he was revealed in 1990 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/03/leo-cooper> to have had with a 
publisher. “It’s horrid. It was excruciating, but you get over it. It was awful 
for the children.”

“Anyway cheer up,” she adds. “I’m not poor Jilly, I’m absolutely brilliant 
Jilly. I’ve had a stunning life, all the luck in the world, and also he was 
such a lovely man. A man of huge substance.”

In her fresh introduction to a recent edition of How to Stay Married, Cooper 
compares marriage to “two people rowing across a vast ocean in a tiny boat, 
sometimes revelling in blue skies and lovely sunsets, sometimes rocked by 
storms so violent we’d nearly capsized”.

“I always said it’s like building a cathedral – sometimes a bit falls down, 
but it’s lovely, lovely,” she says today. Jolly Super once again.

•To order Mount! for £16.40 (RRP £20) go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mount.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 