
Every time Working Class Man comes on the radio, I want to grab the nearest 
bloke in hi-viz and give him a hero’s shoulder ride down Swanston St. By the 
time the song reaches its epic, fist-pumping conclusion, I imagine thousands of 
us rallying as one, chanting “working classsss, working-class maaaaaaan” while 
Barnesy swings from a crane, wailing “ma, ma, ma,” on repeat.

More than just a national anthem, Working Class Man is probably the greatest 
power ballad this country ever produced (although delivered without the 
overly-dramatic flair common in the genre overseas). What starts with twinkling 
piano chords takes just one verse to unleash a full brunt of hard rock drums 
and guitars. Midway through, it’s been stripped back to Barnesy, before racing 
to its full-blown crescendo in no time.

Few other songs can claim to capture this country’s love affair with the 
heavy-sweating, gold-hearted, knockabout bloke, as Working Class Man does. Yet 
it took an American songwriter, Journey’sJonathan Cain 
<http://www.jonathancain.com/>, to capture those feelings so succinctly in 
words and music. (The song’s entire backing band is also American, includingREO 
Speedwagon <http://www.speedwagon.com/> fret-wizard Dave Amato, who is somehow 
constrained to little more than a few power chords.)

In many ways, Cain delivers a simpler, more wholesome take on the Vietnam vet 
Barnes sang about in Cold Chisel’sKhe Sanh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/28/australian-anthems-cold-chisel-khe-sanh>
. The protagonist there “worked across the country end to end” looking for 
somewhere his “mixed up life could mend”, before jetting off to “hit some Hong 
Kong mattress all night long”, in the hope of finding some solace there.

But while Cain’s returned serviceman is “still mad at Uncle Sam”, he’s also 
working overtime for “a little woman [who] someday he’ll make his wife”. Call 
it a sanitised, mid-80s update on the theme, symbolic of the shifting cultural 
sands since the late 70s. Or maybe just a case of seeing geopolitical conflict 
through the eyes of an Americanyacht rocker 
<http://au.ign.com/articles/2006/05/30/top-10-yacht-rock-songs-of-all-time>. 
Either way, it delivered Barnesy the signature tune of his post-Chisel career.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DerSJGrpfnOI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DerSJGrpfnOI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DerSJGrpfnOI&media=>
The song’s film clip is essentially a series of WorkCover commercial accidents 
waiting to happen. No hard hat, overalls, nor fluorescent vest, just a 
white-singleted rocker with hair in his eyes and a flagrant disregard for heavy 
machinery and steel-melting flames. It starts in the hellfire of a smelting 
furnace and ends with the iconic image of him singing his guts out while a 
blazing Queensland canefield licks at his heels and lights up the night sky. 
One can only assume there’s a half-empty bottle or two of Bundy just out of 
shot.

This wasn’t all for show. Barnesy had started an apprenticeship in an iron 
smelter before his music career took off, though he denies the song was about 
him.“It was actually written about my audience – staunch, honest people, who 
work and who care,” he told Jeff Jenkins in 50 Years of Rock in Australia.

Appropriately, there’s a level of geographical and meteorological ambiguity in 
its lyrics, making it embraceable for both an antipodean and American audience. 
Although talk of our hero finding himself “running like a cyclone, across the 
wild mid-western sky” must sound as odd in Tornado Alley as it does on this 
side of the Pacific. (Western Australia does have a mid-west region, which is 
where cyclones generally run out of puff; but seriously, who knew?)

Barnes, the guy with “blue denim in his veins” was desperate to crack the US 
market with Working Class Man. Yet like Khe Sanh, it never reached the top of 
even the local charts and had to settle for Aussie anthemic status instead.
 