
We have a wireless in the bathroom, and I always put it on while I am doing my 
makeup. Quite often, I just top up the makeup I’ve been wearing in the daytime. 
If I’m going to be seen from far away, I like to have a striking look, a bright 
lipstick in what I call a “Patsy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/dec/11/joanna-lumley-patsy-absolutely-fabulous>
 red”.

I was a model in the 60s, and we had to do our own makeup, even false 
eyelashes. I learned how to do it all, very quickly, and I know what suits me. 
I put on a full face of makeup pretty much every day, because of the ubiquity 
of mobile phones and people asking for selfies. Even if I’m shuffling around 
the supermarket, I wear plenty, so I look nice and don’t spoil anyone’s selfie.

Before I go out, I spend a moment looking through the wardrobe at what I’ve 
got and considering what will suit the occasion. I think generally one bit of 
colour or detail works best. I used to keep things for ever, but now I clear 
out those that don’t work every fortnight, giving them to charity. We’ve all 
kept clothes for “when I’m really thin”. I think to myself, “It’s not going to 
happen, sweetheart.”

How I get ready: Neil Morrissey, actor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/20/how-i-get-ready-neil-morrissey>
I’m 5ft 8in with broad shoulders. I have the advantage of having been a model, 
so I can kind of make clothes look all right, if they’re right for me. Boat 
necks don’t work, but with a V-neck, suddenly my neck looks longer and my 
shoulders don’t look so broad. For 50 years I’ve seen myself on screen and in 
photos, and sometimes I look at photographs with terror. But occasionally I see 
a picture and think, “Ooh, from a great distance, I could almost have been
Brigitte Bardot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2014/sep/20/brigitte-bardot-her-life-and-times-so-far-in-pictures>
.” 

• Joanna Lumley is supporting Marks & Spencer’s Shwopping initiative 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/shwopping> to raise money for Oxfam.
 