
A career in the arts is much sought after. Even if you just consider the film, 
television and gaming industries, the recent BAFTA Career Pathways Survey found 
that57% of the young people have at one time considered working in the sector 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/poor-careers-advice-failing-creative-industries>
.

When BAFTA surveyed their members about their own careers, however, the 
research highlighted a worrying trend – many said there was "no single route" 
into the industry. So whether you're an aspiring painter, a wannabe film 
director or you're trying to get your first acting job, getting that 
much-needed break – or even trying to progress – can be a challenge.

So, if you're thinking about a career in the arts – or you want to know what 
next step you could take – join our live advice clinic onFriday 15th March from 
1pm to 2pm. The Q&A is the last in a series of daily discussions for our Jobs 
Week.

Topics to be discussed will include:

• What roles are available in the arts – and current vacancies

• What skills and experience various employers look for

• Tips for applying to jobs

• Potential career paths

Taking part in our Q&As is easier than ever. You can create a free Guardian 
account, or log in using your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, you 
can tweet us on@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email 
your questions to Martin Williams 
<mailto:martin.williams.casual@theguardian.com>.

Our panel

Will Dallimore is the director of communications at the Royal Academy of Arts 
<http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/>. He has previously worked in marketing 
communications roles at the BFI, ICA and Royal College of Art. His career also 
includes five years as a senior strategist in communications and branding 
agencies.

Jane Malone is training and development manager at the National Gallery 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/>, providing advice and consultancy support 
to management across a range of specialist, operational and visitor services 
roles. She is an active member of the Museum Trainers Network, providing advice 
across the culture and heritage sector on a range of learning and development 
issues.

Jonathan Everall works with arts organisations at Guardian Jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, helping with their recruitment. He works on all 
levels of campaigns across the UK. Previously he has worked as a professional 
fundraiser.

Sam Mitchell is research manager at Creative & Cultural Skills 
<http://ccskills.org.uk/>. Sam's research has focused on the size and shape of 
the creative and cultural industries, the skills needed and issues related to 
it. He has managed research projects looking at future job demand and other 
areas related to arts careers. You can follow them on Twitter here@CCBlueprint 
<https://twitter.com/CCBlueprint>.

Mark Londesborough is secondary and further education programme manager for 
National Theatre Learning 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/discover-more/learning>, creating the their 
programme of work for schools, colleges and teachers. Following actor training, 
he worked as a performer and group worker in prisons and probation with Geese 
Theatre Company, before becoming head of education at Trestle. In April he 
joins the Tricycle Theatre as creative learning director.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Careers 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/>. To get more content and advice like this 
direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update and receive our free 
careers ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>. 
 