
News that men outnumber women by 25 to one on engineering apprenticeships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/apprenticeship-system-gender-inequality-workplace-women>
 and 56 to one on construction apprenticeships is making a mockery of the 
government’s plans to solve the UK skills gap by creating 3m apprenticeships by 
2020.

“We know that for engineering there’s such a massive skills requirement over 
the next few years. Currently one in five schoolchildren would have to become 
an engineer to fill that gap,” says Mark Gale, campaigns manager at Young 
Women’s Trust which this week releaseda report into the problem 
<http://www.youngwomenstrust.org/what_we_do/media_centre/press_releases/398_young_female_apprentices_being_left_behind_says_new_report>
.

The charity found that the number of female engineering apprentices has 
actually gone down from 5% in 2002-03 to 4% now. “So despite all that 
investment in trying to get young women into science, technology, engineering 
and maths workplaces, it’s not really having an impact,” adds Gale. “We want to 
see employers take positive action where they can start to really make inroads 
to drastically increase the numbers of young women in those sectors.”

Being part of a vast minority, whatever the sector, is very challenging.
Carole Easton, CEO, Young Women’s Trust 
But what should this “positive action” look like? Dana Skelley, Transport for 
London (TfL)’s director of asset management, and thefirst woman to be 
recognised as engineer of the year 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2015/december/tfl-s-dana-skelley-recognised-with-an-obe>
 in 2006, believes raising visibility of women in non-traditional roles is 
important for encouraging girls intoapprenticeships 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/corporate/careers/apprenticeships>. The company is running a
celebration of 100 years of women in transport 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/campaign/100-years-of-women-in-transport> and staff also go 
into schools with theStemnet ambassador programme 
<http://www.stemnet.org.uk/ambassadors/> to educate young people about the 
opportunities for girls in the industry.

But Skelley says TfL is not considering women-only apprenticeship programmes, 
even though this is the sort of initiative the Young Women’s Trust recommends.

Gale adds that confusion around equal opportunity legislation means many 
employers are reluctant to target schemes specifically at women. “Some 
employers are so fearful of what they’re allowed to do under the existing 
legislation that they’re taking no action at all,” he says. “They’ve almost 
been paralysed into doing nothing because they’re so scared that they’re going 
to be pulled in front of a tribunal if they make the wrong decision. We’d like 
to see greater clarity from the government in terms of guidance on what 
employers can do.”

Emily Ellwood is an engineering apprentice at PA Consulting 
<http://www.paconsulting.com/>. She believes that to get more girls interested 
in engineering, it needs to capture their imagination from a young age. She 
says she hadn’t considered a career in engineering when she was younger because 
she didn’t have a clear image of what it was.

“At school I had the impression that engineering was all about spanners and 
hammers and getting dirty,” she says. “[But] the whole idea of engineering is 
you have to design aspects of people’s lives to make them better. We could be 
designing a new foetal heart monitor, for example. The buzz we get when we get 
our products to market is incredible, but I would have never known how amazing 
that feeling is if I hadn’t given it a chance.”

What is better for job prospects: university or apprenticeships?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/mar/14/better-job-prospects-university-or-apprenticeships>
She adds that more needs to be done to dispel the myths around jobs in the 
industry to encourage more women to consider it as a career option. “We need to 
get them from when they’re about five – building stuff, taking stuff apart. We 
need to start from primary [school] but it needs to be continued through their 
education.”

Outside the school gates, one of the most immediate influences on young women 
and their careers are parents, who can be an obstacle to a career in a 
traditionally non-female sector. Areport 
<https://www.wisecampaign.org.uk/resources/2014/11/not-for-people-like-me> 
published in 2014 by Women in Science, Technology and Engineering, found that 
“mothers, in particular, need to know their daughters could be happy in a 
career from physics/in engineering, and that the working environment would be 
supportive”.

It’s understandable that parents may feel that a male-dominated industry might 
not be a supportive place for their daughters to work. “Being part of a vast 
minority, whatever the sector, is very challenging,” says Carole Easton, chief 
executive of Young Women’s Trust. “If you are taking that brave step into a 
different world you have to be remarkably tough, and not everybody is, and nor 
should they have to be. We hear that women then get bullied or they get teased 
and it’s very difficult to sustain that if you don’t feel there’s other people 
batting on your side.”

There, therefore, needs to be more action beyond the school visits and 
women-in-white-coats poster campaigns.

“In some more female-dominated sectors like social care and childcare, there 
does seem to be some shift in terms of young men being able to access those 
apprenticeships, which just hasn’t happened in those male-dominated 
industries,” says Gale. “I think that’s a real indication that in order to 
catch up, those industries do need be taking more positive action.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 