
The government would have greeted the release of the pre-election fiscal and 
economic outlook 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Publications/2016/PEFO-2016> 
on Friday with a sigh of relief as the budget deficits were essentially 
unchanged. But the numbers in the Pefo and the commentary by the heads of the 
Treasury and the Department of Finance provide a tough question for the 
government – for all the talk of a plan for jobs and growth, where are the 
signs of either?

The Pefo ended up being released a bit earlier than needed. The Treasury and 
Department of Finance had 10 days from the issuing of writs last Monday; 
instead it was released it within four days. Releasing so early meant the 
departments didn’t need to consider the record low wages growth figures 
released last week. And because the Treasury makes its assumptions on commodity 
prices – such as iron ore – on “an average of the preceding weeks” there would 
be little changed from the budget even with the recent sharp fall in iron ore 
prices.

You're not a 'bludger' if you pay no net tax in Australia | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/12/youre-not-a-bludger-if-you-pay-no-net-tax-in-australia>
And so the upshot is the estimate for the deficit in 2015-16 was changed from 
$39.946bn to $40.047bn and for 2016-17 from $37.081bn to $37.083bn.

You’d have to work pretty hard to suggest an extra $2m was a blowout.

But the Pefo doesn’t exactly paint a wonderful a tale about the economy. 

It notes for example that there is a “significant risk” to the forecasts for 
real GDP growth if the pick-up in non-mining investment, which has been “slower 
to materialise than previously forecast” suffered further delays or was “slower 
than currently estimated”.

The budget (and Pefo) estimate that non-mining investment for 2016-17 will 
grow by 3.5%. Such hope is yet to be supported by a great deal of evidence. The 
first estimate for non-mining capital expenditure for 2016-17 showed a fall of 
1.1% from the first estimate for 2015-16:

The Pefo also continues to use budget figures for employment growth, which 
actually suggest things are about to get pretty bad for those looking for work.

While the Pefo notes that “employment growth is expected to remain solid 
across the forward estimate”, that “solid” growth is just 1.75% in 2016-17 and 
2017-18 before falling to 1.25% in 2018-19, and then improving to a tepid 1.5% 
in 2019-20.

Company tax cuts are not a knight in shining armour to save the economy | John 
Daley and Brendan Coates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/company-tax-cuts-are-not-a-knight-in-shining-armour-to-save-the-economy>
And yet despite that, unemployment is still projected to fall to 5.5% and wage 
growth to rise to 3.25% by 2018-19.

Given wage growth at the moment is just 2% and the outlook for inflation from 
the Reserve Bank of Australia is much weaker than historically has been the 
case, it would be rather odd for wages to rise in a period of weaker employment 
growth.

And the problem is that weak employment growth is already with us.

The latest labour force figures 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/5206.0Main+Features1Dec%202015?OpenDocument>
 released on Thursday showed that annual employment growth is now just 2% – 
down from a high of 2.6% in December. More worrying though is that the growth 
in hours worked has fallen off a cliff:

At the end of last year the level of hours worked was growing by 2.6% – the 
strongest growth since February 2011. Now it is growing by just 0.4%; without a 
quick turnaround it will soon be going backwards – generally the sign of 
recessionary conditions.

Among the reasons is that full-time employment has slowed considerably – 
especially for men:

This is part of the ongoing issue since the global financial crisis where 
part-time employment has been the big driver of employment growth:

Since September 2008 – when the financial crisis started hitting employment – 
there have been 235,400 more part-time jobs created than full-time ones:

While these figures suggest a significant slowing of the employment sector, 
the government has been largely spared any great pain because the unemployment 
rate has stayed steady at 5.7%:

And yet the past few months has certainly been a case of the unemployment rate 
hiding the bad news in the sector.

Since December the participation rate has fallen from 65.2% in seasonally 
adjusted terms to 64.9%.

A dropping participation rate is a function of more people leaving the 
workforce than entering it. This can be because of people retiring or because 
they have effectively given up looking for work – either to stay home raising 
kids or to stay in (or go back to) school/higher education.

In the past six months the fall in participation has been across the board – 
both youth (15-24 year olds) and prime-aged workers (25-64 year olds) – 
suggesting it is not really an ageing population issue.

Had the participation rate stayed where it was in November the unemployment 
rate would not have fallen as it has since then. Rather than being 5.7% it 
would be 6.1%:

That doesn’t mean the current unemployment rate is false, but just that, as 
ever, it is hostage to other aspects which can hide the weakness in the economy.

Similarly the Pefo budget numbers hide the weakness that is clear within the 
actual report itself. The Pefo notes that “the medium-term projections are also 
underpinned by an assumption of annual productivity growth equal to the average 
of recent decades”.

That requires productivity growth averaging over five years around 1.7% 
annually. We’ve been achieving that recently – but for nearly seven years until 
2012 we were well below that level:

Rather interestingly the statement of the secretary of the Treasury and 
Department of Finance suggests that to achieve this growth “continued economic 
reform would be required”.

Just what this “reform” would be is left unsaid, but what is clear is that the 
budget figures, while unchanged in the Pefo, are rather susceptible to being 
knocked.

Whoever wins the election will be unlikely to be using these numbers by the 
time the estimates become actual.
 