
At 10, Judy Fisher Associates is looking for an administrator for an auction 
house 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4368288/fluent-mandarin-english-speaker-administrator-auction-house/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10372>

Going once...going twice... Forgive me, the moment I saw this job was a job in 
an auction house I couldn't resist slipping in that line. The employer is going 
to be sold on a fluent Mandarin and English speaking applicant, who has a keen 
interest in Chinese art and the art market. And, as it's an administrator role, 
applicants are required to have a good working knowledge of Microsoft Office 
including Word, Excel and Outlook.

Rose Recruitment is looking for an art director's assistant 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4358815/assistant-to-art-director-commercial-art-gallery/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10373>
 at 9

Many a graduate has come face to face with the no experience - no job 
conundrum. So it's a welcome sight to see a job ad asking for for arts 
graduates, rather than professionals with years of experience stuffed under 
their belts. Working in a gallery as an art director's right hand man or woman, 
the candidate who gets this jobs will provide assistance in a variety of ways. 
Duties include diary management, organising catering, producing documents for 
meetings and presentations and meeting and greeting clients and artists. 
Unsurprisingly, then, the company wants to hear from well organised people with 
the ability to prioritise effectively. Get your applications in sharpish, as 
this opportunity won't be live on the GuardianJobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/jobs> site much longer.

In at 8, Dulwich Picture Gallery wants an exhibitions assistant  
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4367602/exhibitions-assistant/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10374>

Now, I'm not arty at all, but this still sounds like a fantastic opportunity 
to engage with the works of famous artists. This gallery is packed with such 
works - it has a collection of old masters, including piece by Rubens, Murillo, 
Rembrandt and Gainsborough. The gallery is looking for somebody to assist 
exhibitions officers in planning, organising, executing and archiving a busy 
exhibition programme. It's billed as an "excellent opportunity to learn about 
all aspects of exhibition organisation and registrar responsibilities", so it 
sounds like a great way to progress your career in this area.

7 is a research assistant  
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4365683/research-assistant/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10375>
at Audiences London

Something a little different now. This is a research position with Audiences 
London, a company which helps cultural organisations grow, understand and widen 
audiences. You've probably guessed by now, your role will be supporting the 
organisation in this aim. If you've got experience working with data in various 
formats (something lots of employers are after currently, by the way), either 
as part of degree-level education or as part of a role elsewhere, then you'll 
be suited to this role.

This week's number 6 is a technical manager vacancy 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4367137/technical-manager/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10376>
 at The Plaza Stockport

As we pointed out in a recent theatre careers Q&A 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/theatre-careers?commentpage=all>, there's a 
shortage of skilled technical workers in this industry. The Plaza Stockport, 
which hosts hundreds of cinema, theatre and conference events per year, wants 
to hear from somebody with precisely this sort of knowledge to lead a technical 
team. As you'd expect with the nature of the venue, a flexible approach to 
non-traditional working hours is a must.

Middle of the chart at 5, a gallery administrator and registrar role 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4360348/full-time-gallery-administrator-registrar/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10377>
 from Greengrassi

A job here for those a little further into their arts and heritage career, as 
applicants must have a minimum of two years prior work experience at an art 
gallery, institution or museum. You'll be working for a gallery and it's a 
varied role where it appears no two days will be the same. According to the 
description, you'd be working closely with the director, staff and artists in 
the organisation of exhibitions at the gallery. The successful applicant will 
also be responsible for all accounts payable and receivable and managing 
correspondence. The gallery is looking for people with computing know-how, so 
applicants must know their way around Mac operating systems and be proficient 
in Microsoft Office (Outlook, Word, Excel) and FileMaker.

An assistant editor job 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4367855/assistant-editor/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10378>
 at The National Gallery, at 4

Another role where technical skills are important, but this time it's a 
position within a digital media team. Working for The National Gallery, you'd 
be required to edit, repurpose texts and produce new content. A proven track 
record of writing for the web is required, as well as a good understanding of 
content management systems and how to structure content for both online and 
mobile delivery. It sounds like a good way of combining a love of arts with new 
media skills.

In at 3, Wayne McGregor - Random Dance seeks a creative learning project 
coordinator 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4367892/creative-learning-project-co-ordinator-18-month-fixed-term-contract/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10379>

According to its website, Wayne McGregor - Random Dance's creative learning 
workreaches up to 9,000 dancers and non-dancers each year 
<http://www.randomdance.org/creative_learning>. This role involves supporting 
the department involved in all of this work, and duties include co-ordination 
of projects, workshops, finance and general administration. The advert doesn't 
state if you'll get a chance to strap on your ballroom/ballet/tap shoes, but it 
still sounds like a great opportunity for anybody passionate about dance.

Just shy of the top spot at 2, a collections officer from the National Trust  
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4367341/collections-officer/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10380>

Now, my parents were huge fans of the National Trust when I was young and we 
trailed happily around many of the charity's different UK sites. I can vouch 
personally for the fact they've got some pretty awesome collections of arts and 
cultural artifacts. You'll be working with these historic objects, auditing 
current inventory and making sure all items – from paintings to porcelain – are 
accounted for. Based at Tyntesfield, a mansion and gardens in Bristol, you'd 
lead behind the scenes tours, sharing your understanding of the collection with 
anyone that comes along - perhaps you'll even see my mum and dad there.

And top of the jobs, a textile designer at Artwork Design Ltd  
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/job/4366797/textile-designer/?INTCMP=NECJOBTXT10381>

The Careers team recently got wind of the fact that apparently more than a 
third of art and design graduates are still without a full-time job 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/design-studies-careers> more than 
three years after graduation. So, we've ended this chart this week with a job 
we've plucked out for this very reason. It's a textile designer role with a 
studio which designs for home furnishing markets around the world. They're 
looking for somebody with experience in this field of design with excellent 
drawing skills and/or good computer-aided design (CAD) ability. So, if you 
could see your work gracing everythingfrom rugs to wallpapers 
<http://www.awdesign.co.uk/about/> in living rooms across the land, this might 
be job for you.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox, sign up for ourweekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 