
Government cuts are are changing the public sector fundamentally. From the 
police to the civil service, efficiency is now a central tenet.

You might think that the cuts render the sector an impossible career option. 
Figures from the Office for National Statistics show thatin 2011 more than a 
quarter of a million posts were cut, reducing the workforce by almost 7% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/14/osborne-austerity-270000-public-sector-jobs>
.

But even then, the number of people employed in the sector was 5.94m, and some 
areas of government areactively recruiting after redundancies left them with a 
skills shortage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/local-government-network/2013/mar/04/growing-jobs-in-local-government>
. And because many roles help provide key services to people, a career in the 
sector can be an exciting prospect with very direct results.

But how do you find the best job vacancies? And what skills and personal 
attributes will you need to show?

If you need help finding a job in the public sector, join our live advice 
clinic onTuesday 12th March from 1pm to 2pm. The Q&A is the second in a series 
of daily discussions for Guardians Jobs Week.

Topics to be discussed will include:

• What kind of roles are available

• The key ingredients for a strong job application

• How the recruitment landscape is shaping up

• How public sector changes affect your career prospects and the roles 
available

Our panel

Alan Simmons is a careers specialist at NHS Careers 
<http://www.nhscareers.nhs.uk/>. Alan joined NHS Careers in 1999 after a broad 
background of careers advisory work with clients of all ages and backgrounds. 
In his current role he is the careers information, advice and guidance expert, 
offering specialist advice and support to the NHS Careers Service and the NHS 
Employers organisation.

Dawar Hashmi is the founding partner of executive search firm Peridot Partners 
<http://www.peridotpartners.co.uk/>. With over 14 years' experience in public 
sector recruitment, he heads up Peridot's local government practice. He also 
runs Peridot's social care leadership development programmes and is a trustee 
at Age UK Brent.

Daryl Maitland is senior HR business partner with Cafcass 
<http://www.cafcass.gov.uk/>, a national children's social work organisation 
that is the biggest employer of social workers in England. He has extensive 
experience of recruiting in both the public and private sector, including CV 
and interview coaching for those looking to make the next step in their career 
development.

Tarik Chawdry is assistant director of HR at Birmingham City Council 
<http://www.birmingham.gov.uk/>. His duties include: recruitment policy and 
operations; senior recruitment, pay and progression; performance appraisals and 
monitoring. Overall, Tarik enables and supports people to work well with each 
other, building trustworthy relationships and offering constructive advice.

Tom Storer has five years' experience within the recruitment industry, 
initially working with the third sector and now withGuardian Jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/>. He specialises in public sector recruitment 
with a broad brief across central government, local authorities and public 
facing consultancies.

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article and taking part 
is easier than ever. You can create a free Guardian account, or log in using 
your Twitter or Facebook profiles. Alternatively, you can tweet us on
@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your questions 
to Martin Williams <mailto:martin.williams.casual@theguardian.com>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Careers 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/>. To get more content and advice like this 
direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update and receive our free 
careers ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 