
“Who could expect Johanna Konta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> to be in the semi-finals [of 
the Australian Open]?” Martina Navratilova asked this week. Who indeed? As 
recently as last summer, Konta was grinding out the life of many British tennis 
hopefuls before her, slogging her way through the less glamorous reaches of the 
women’s tour and only just scraping into the ranks of the world’s top 150 
players.

Ten days ago, however, the British No 1 beat Venus Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/britains-johanna-konta-downs-venus-williams-in-australian-open-upset>
 in her opening round of the Melbourne tournament, opening up what would prove 
to be a historic opportunity. If the draw, after Williams’s removal, was 
certainly favourable, Konta made the most of her chance, driving through four 
further rounds before finally beingknocked out by Angelique Kerber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-kontas-fairytale-australian-open-run-ended-by-angelique-kerber>
 of Germany in Thursday’s semi-final, the first British woman to reach the last 
four of a Grand Slam in more than 30 years.

From a world ranking of 146 last July, Konta will begin next week in the top 
30, with many predicting a top 20 or even top 10 place is well within her grasp.

If Navratilova was surprised by Konta’s performance, the player herself, 
hadn’t expected to be staying in Melbourne so long. She may be leaving the 
tournament almost £400,000 ($800,000) better off but, she joked with reporters, 
a chunk of that has already gone in airline fees for pushing back her flights 
soshe could keep playing in the tournament.

Johanna Konta: Golden girl on course to cash in on sudden rise to fame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/tennis-johanna-konta-australian-open>
Flying home after reaching the final four, however, would be “not very 
different” to this time last year, when she exited in qualifying, she said. 
“Both times I was looking forward to going home to see my family ... [and] 
spend some time in my own bed.”

At 24, British sport’s latest darling is a down-to-earth character. It may 
have been the biggest fortnight of her career, but Konta has cut a disarmingly 
cheerful and relaxed figure in Melbourne, sharing restaurant tips with tennis 
correspondents and joking about splitting the domestic chores withher 
boyfriend, former coach Kether Clouder 
<https://twitter.com/WTA/status/479711940508667904>, with whom she rented an 
apartment in the city.

It’s important, she said this week, “not to live and die by your wins and 
losses. It’s very important to take your enjoyment and take your positivity 
from things that you have control over. Otherwise, you come into the danger of 
having very big highs and lows, which is not a nice place to be. Middle ground 
is nice.”

Konta was born in Australia to Hungarian parents; it was tennis that made her 
a Brit. A highly talented if not yet world-beating youngster – she reached No 
11 in the world junior rankings – when she was a young teenager she moved alone 
to train in Spain for 15 months. To be closer to their daughter, her parents 
Gabor, a hotelier, and Gabriella, a dentist, moved the family to Eastbourne, 
leaving Konta’s older half-sister, Emese, in Australia.

“They are really lovely people,” Konta’s former coach Justin Sherring, tennis 
director of Weybridge Tennis Academy 
<http://www.weybridgetennisacademy.com/Coaching_Team>, told the Guardian. “Very 
sweet, very hardworking, very honest people. And they have sacrificed 
everything for Johanna,” he said.

Rather than travelling to Melbourne, the couple have been following their 
daughter’s matches overnight from the UK. Instead, the player has been 
supported on court by Clouder, her older sister, Ava, and her sister’s fiance, 
Shane Mumford, an Australian rules football player for the Sydney Swans.

After six years’ residency in the UK, Konta became naturalised as a British 
citizen in 2012 (she has joked that she is “the Jason Bourne of tennis” because 
of her three passports), but the player insists that the UK is “my home and 
where my heart is. That’s where I grew up, essentially.”

As a strong teenager with a dangerous serve, Konta was “just screaming with 
ability ... an outrageous athlete”, according to Sherring. But despite her 
talent and resilience, especially in hot conditions, she lacked confidence, and 
gained a reputation for on-court wobbles that too frequently saw her lose her 
nerve at big moments.

She had never got further than qualifying in Australia before this year, lost 
in the first round of last year’s French Open, and has lost every match she has 
played atWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> in four 
successive appearances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fjohanna-konta-how-joko-became-the-new-star-of-british-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dea5c82d23541a219ac034fbf4dcdbe01cf7fce%2F98_0_1423_2133%2F1423.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johanna%20Konta%3A%20how%20JoKo%20became%20the%20new%20star%20of%20British%20tennis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fjohanna-konta-how-joko-became-the-new-star-of-british-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Johanna%20Konta%3A%20how%20JoKo%20became%20the%20new%20star%20of%20British%20tennis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fjohanna-konta-how-joko-became-the-new-star-of-british-tennis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dea5c82d23541a219ac034fbf4dcdbe01cf7fce%2F98_0_1423_2133%2F1423.jpg>
 Konta during a news conference after losing her semi-final match in the 
Australian Open. ‘It’s very important to take your enjoyment and positivity 
from things that you have control over,’ she says. Photograph: Jason 
O'Brien/Reuters 
Last year the Lawn Tennis Association, the governing body of British tennis, 
slashed Konta’s funding, in a decision partly related to her age. For Konta, by 
then working with two coaches in northern Spain, Esteban Carril and José-Manuel 
Garcia, it wasa heavy financial blow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/09/tennis-johanna-konta-venus-williams-us-open>
. But the two men chose to stick by her – “They’ve done a lot of pro bono 
work,” she has said – and with the benefit of a settled training and domestic 
set-up, her results, last summer, began to improve dramatically.

The major factor in that surge, however, has been a transformation in her 
mental approach. “In the days when I played with Jo, she used to panic and 
stress a lot more on court than she does now,” saysAnne Keothavong 
<http://www.wtatennis.com/players/player/4441/title/anne-keothavong>, the 
former British No 1 who played in the Fed Cup, the women’s version of the Davis 
Cup, with Konta and was her occasional doubles partner before retiring in 2013.

“She’s always had the ability, she’s got the perfect frame for a tennis 
player, and she’s strong. But over the past year she seems to have blossomed. 
She’s definitely more confident, very self-assured.”

Konta has another Spaniard, her “mind coach” Juan Coto, to thank for the 
mental turnaround. Coto, a childhood friend of Carril who was also a former 
tennis player, is based in Britain and coaches the player by email and phone 
when she is on tour, spending two hours a week with her when she is in the UK.

Explaining a little of his methods, Coto said this week 
<http://sport.bt.com/more-sport-hub/more-sport/mental-coach-juan-coto-reveals-secrets-behind-johanna-kontas-success-S11364035656016>
: “The first thing I work on is to understand what are the thoughts that come? 
You try to find a number of beliefs – I need to win, I don’t want to make 
mistakes, what happens if I lose? – and you replace those with more positive 
thoughts.”

Jeremy Bates <http://www.wimbledon.com/en_GB/players/overview/atpb021.html>, 
the former British No 1 who is now head of women’s tennis at the LTA, said: 
“I’ve known Jo for a long time and she’s always been a worker, completely 
dedicated to the sport.

“But the big difference is that she has matured with being on the tour, and 
she has become an awful lot stronger mentally. That takes time to accumulate, 
because you need experience on the tour, you need more and more matches because 
you can’t replicate the feelings of a match on the practice court.

“Last year, she became more comfortable in herself as a person while 
competing, and because of the work she has put in, she started to believe in 
herself and win matches.”

In June she beat Garbine Muguruza 
<http://www.sportsmole.co.uk/tennis/result/result-konta-adds-muguruza-to-eastbourne-scalps_230042.html>
 – who would go on to become a Wimbledon finalist – to reach the last eight at 
Eastbourne, the tournament that serves as a warm-up for Wimbledon, kicking off 
a run of impressive form that included reaching the fourth round at the US Open 
in September. In her next tournament, the Wuhan Open, shecame back from 1-5 down
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/tennis/34400964> in the final set against world No 
2 Simona Halep to win six consecutive games and clinch victory.

Next in the diary for British tennis’s rising talent is next week’s Fed Cup in 
Israel 
<https://www.lta.org.uk/major-events/international-events/fed-cup/fed-cup-news/2016/judy-murray-names-aegon-gb-fed-cup-squad-for-israel/>
, though Konta has said she will need to check how her body recovers after her 
gruelling fortnight before committing to play.

The music-loving player may also hope to squeeze in a gig (“Would love to go 
to concerts most nights,” reads herwistful Twitter bio 
<https://twitter.com/JoKonta91?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
), or at least a trip to the cinema, after she resisted Clouder’s efforts to see
The Revenant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> in Melbourne in 
case the dramatic film affected her play. Her prize-money, however – boosting
her entire career earnings to date 
<http://www.wtatennis.com/players/player/13120/title/johanna-konta> by about 
60% – will be invested straight back into tennis, she has said.

Konta can no longer expect to approach tournaments as an unknown outsider, and 
maintaining her impressive Melbourne form will not be easy. Win or lose, 
however, the player is confident she will be just fine. “As I’ve got older I’ve 
really had to dig deep and find where my happiness comes from,” she has said. 
“Why do I play tennis? You get a lot of incredible highs but it can be very 
lonely with some dark lows. So the biggest thing I’ve learned is finding the 
reasons for my enjoyment.

“At the beginning of the year I was in the US playing small tournaments and I 
was about 150 in the world and, I thought, you know what, if I stay here for 
the rest of the year I’ll still be really happy. I come out here and there’s 
blue skies, wonderful weather and great food. I broke it down into simple 
pleasures, and that gave me a lot of peace.”

Curriculum vitae

Born 17 May 1991

Age 24

Career Australian-born daughter of Hungarian parents who moved to the UK when 
she was 14, becoming a British citizen in 2012. Overtook Heather Watson as 
British No 1 last year

High point After kicking off an impressive career surge in summer 2015, 
reached the semi-final of the 2016Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, taking her world ranking 
to 28

Low point Her funding from UK tennis authorities sharply cut last year, partly 
because of her age, suggesting expectations at that stage were low

What she says “It’s not like I’ve grown wings or found a cure for cancer. I’ve 
just won a tennis match.”

What they say “She’s unrecognisable from [three years ago]. Now she’s become a 
very dangerous tennis player because the serve is so venomous and she doesn’t 
give anything away emotionally” – Annabel Croft, former UK No 1 turned TV 
presenter
 