
Leaving the best party she has attended was, ultimately, not as tough for 
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> as she or her 
quickly growing band of fans might have imagined.

Certainly, hitting 36 unforced errors in one hour and 22 minutes to give 
Angelique Kerber a 7-5, 6-2 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/28/johanna-konta-v-angelique-kerber-australian-open-semi-final-live>
 in front of a near-full Rod Laver Arena overwhelmingly on her side was not the 
end to the Australian Open she had hoped for. Reaching the semi-finals on her 
main-draw debut, however, was an achievement that gave her comfort and 
encouragement.

Johanna Konta's fairytale Australian Open run ended by Angelique Kerber
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-kontas-fairytale-australian-open-run-ended-by-angelique-kerber>
“Nothing is guaranteed, so let’s not be under the false assumption that, just 
because I’ve done this, it’s going to continue going onwards,” she said. “There 
are always going to be ebbs and flows in everyone’s career, including my own, 
so I’m looking forward to the new challenges that arise and everything that 
will come my way. I will continue working hard on being able to deal with such 
circumstances to the best of my ability because that will give me the best 
chance of playing my best tennis.”

Had she beaten Kerber – which looked possible during a close first set – the 
awesomeprospect of playing Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/serena-williams-demolishes-agnieszka-radwanska-in-australian-open-semi>
 in the final awaited her. That would have been a serious test of her fabled 
equanimity.

Still, she insisted that losing on the biggest stage of her career was much 
the same as losing here a year ago in qualification. It struck an odd note. Not 
many professional athletes would equate two such disparate experiences.

“Not very different,” is how she described her reactions. “Both times I was 
looking forward to going home to see my family. That remains the same. I go 
home to see my parents, spend some time in my own bed. That stays the same.”

The British No1, whose career until last summer consisted of one anxiety 
crisis after another, added: “I was really, really happy with how I felt on 
court in terms of nerves. I felt very comfortable. I went out there with a very 
clear mindset of just trying to compete to the best of my ability.

“She’s one of the, if not the, most consistent player on the tour – and that’s 
no secret. She makes every single ball possible and makes you work for every 
single point. She definitely played with that little bit more experience than I 
did.”

The 28-year-old German left-hander, seeded seventh, did have a little “too 
much game” for the 24-year-old Konta but there were passages of play, mostly in 
a close first set, when there was little between them in the exchanges. Konta 
ultimately suffered for hitting too many loose groundstrokes, a lot of them 
sailing harmlessly long.

Now she sets her sights on the rest of the season and, with a projected WTA 
ranking of 28 – after arriving here at 47 – she is well placed to be seeded at 
the next slam, the French Open, then Wimbledon.

There is no certainty Laura Robson will return from injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/11/laura-robson-australian-open> 
that have proved to be stubbornly difficult to overcome and Heather Watson has
not found enough consistency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/heather-watson-defeat-timea-babos-australian-open>
 to make the impact of which she believes she is capable. So, on availability 
and form, Konta is the one British woman who can give the sport a genuine lift 
this summer – and she is comfortable with that responsibility.

She could afford to lose about 200 points and still make the seedings cut but, 
because of a poor start to 2015, her résumé is not littered with many points to 
defend. If she holds her form, she will be the first British woman seeded at 
Wimbledon since Jo Durie in 1984. The last British seed at a slam was Robson at 
the 2013 US Open.

As a fillip to Konta’s career, Melbourne will provide a bigger boost than even 
the US Open,where she reached the last 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/johanna-konta-andrea-petkovic-us-open>
. Here she became the first British player to reach the semi-finals since Sue 
Barker in 1977.

In defeat, Konta was as measured and polite as she has been throughout the 
tournament, an unflustered, hard-working and talented player who has finally 
found her level in the game. If she never fulfils her childhood dream of being 
No1 in the world, she will certainly give it her best effort.

“I don’t think I missed an opportunity,” she said, when asked if not reaching 
the final was a blow. “I played against a better player today who earned her 
right into a grand slam final. That’s how I view it. She played a really, 
really good match. That’s why she is the winner and I’m not today.

“At this level you’re constantly being tested. Whoever you’re playing, your 
limits are constantly being pushed. I’m really happy how I was able to keep 
pushing my threshold, as well, to keep gaining lots of new experiences.”

She leaves Melbourne to prepare for Great Britain’s Fed Cup Euro/Africa Group 
One round-robin in Eilat next month but, still recovering from her exertions, 
she sounded as if she is yet to fully commit to playing.

“My intentions are still to go,” she said. “Obviously, I need to see how my 
body recovers, how my health is, and then I will make the best decision 
possible. If I do go, I’m going to really enjoy it. I’ve represented Great 
Britain for a number of years now in Fed Cup. I’ve played every single tie in 
every zone or group stage that we’ve had. I’m going to enjoy it. I’m going to 
be surrounded by a lot of good people.”

Among them is the Fed Cup captain, Judy Murray, who temporarily guided Watson 
in Melbourne, and who has supported Konta in every match all the way, before 
having to leave for London earlier on Thursday.

“She kept [her advice] very simple: enjoy the moment, enjoy being here, enjoy 
the battle.”

There are many more to come and, whatever the strength of Konta’s detachment 
from the pressure of expectations, she will have good chances in most of them.
 