
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> calls it “the 
process”. It helps her stay “present”. And, as cold as that sounds and whatever 
it really amounts to and as much as it confounds her inquisitors, the control 
she has wrought over her emotions on the tennis court through the discipline of 
self-knowledge has transformed her as a player – and probably as a person.

Konta’s profile has risen so irresistibly over the past year and during this 
tournament that details of her past remain buried, bad memories never to be 
revisited. To jump from 147 in the world into the low 30s and nearly double her 
career earnings in the space of a year after toiling in minor tournaments in 
front of a handful of strangers for negligible financial reward in the first 
five years of her career has been one of the most remarkable stories in British 
tennis for a long time.

With serendipity – otherwise known as the misfortune of others – she finds 
herself the British No1, ahead of the absentLaura Robson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/15/laura-robson-injury-return> and 
the strugglingHeather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jan/18/australian-open-2016-day-one-in-pictures>
. When she leaves Melbourne to return to the grind of the WTA Tour, her 
reputation will be significantly enhanced and she will head for the second slam 
of the season, at Roland Garros, with every expectation of being ranked high 
enough for a seeding.

That is a launching pad that would not have occurred to her there last year, 
when she went out in the first round to the Czech Denisa Allertova after a 
monumental struggle. When they met in the third round here,Konta was a 
different beast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/johanna-konta-denisa-allertova-australian-open>
. She came through another tough fight and she was on her way, on her debut in 
the main draw.

But not many outside her close circle imagined she would still be in the 
headlines nearly two weeks later.

“I still approach every match exactly the same,” Konta said on Wednesday 
night. “That’s one thing I get very excited about and anxious about: that I 
want to go out and make sure I am able to leave it all out there, whatever 
needs to be done.”

Was she aware of the mounting interest in her exploits at home?

“The UK is thousands of miles away and a completely different time zone, which 
in this case might be quite nice. No, I think whatever pressure or whatever 
buzz there is outside, it only affects me as much as I let it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohanna-konta-bourne-supremacy-australian-open-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a137b93eaea36c1114a20528fecb4b7d3ee03b1%2F0_96_3482_2087%2F3482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johanna%20Konta%E2%80%99s%20Bourne%20supremacy%20has%20been%20an%20action-packed%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohanna-konta-bourne-supremacy-australian-open-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Johanna%20Konta%E2%80%99s%20Bourne%20supremacy%20has%20been%20an%20action-packed%20story&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fjohanna-konta-bourne-supremacy-australian-open-tennis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a137b93eaea36c1114a20528fecb4b7d3ee03b1%2F0_96_3482_2087%2F3482.jpg>
 Johanna Konta celebrates reaching the semi-finals of the Australian Open with 
a television camera for company. Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images 
Expectations have come from all directions for the Sydney-born daughter of 
Hungarian immigrants who first paid for her to train at the famed Sánchez-Casal 
Academy in Barcelona, which was also Andy Murray’s tennis university as a 
teenager.

“Actually I am a tri-citizen,” she said. “I’ve got a Hungarian passport as 
well. Just add that into the mix, guys. I mean, I’m pretty much the female 
version of Jason Bourne. But I definitely belong to Great Britain.”

While she is the first British player to reach the semi-final of this 
tournament since Jo Durie in 1983, a local journalist pointed out she is also 
the first Australian-born woman to get this far since Wendy Turnbull in 1981. 
All of a sudden, everyone wants a piece of Jo Konta, whose affability and 
intelligence make her the most approachable of athletes. She was quick, 
however, to correct the host broadcaster whose commentators had said she had 
been a competitive swimmer and 400m runner when growing up in Sydney. “I had a 
lot of ear infections when I was younger so I didn’t learn to swim until I was 
about 14,” she said. “So definitely false. I was a decent 800m runner, not 400 
– and I’m actually really proud of this: I beat the girls and the boys to win 
my school 800, so it was a big deal at the time; I was about 11. Then I won the 
district and made it to state, but I just never went because I was training and 
tennis was a big part of my life at that point.

Tennis match-fixing allegations leave questions to be answered | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/buzzfeed-bbc-tennis-match-fixing-allegations>
“For me it’s always been tennis. I haven’t really explored any other avenues. 
I played tennis since I was eight years old and I’d run two races at school. 
There is no comparison really.

“When I left Australia I started training in Barcelona. While I was at the 
Sánchez academy, my parents felt that, at 13, 14 years old, they didn’t really 
want to be on the other side of the world. And, because we are Hungarian 
passport holders, European, they decided that they were going to base 
themselves in Great Britain. After a period of time I wasn’t really enjoying it 
in Spain any more and I just moved home with them to the UK. It was their 
sacrifice for me.”

Asked to explain her dramatic improvement, she paused to get the answer right, 
as if serving. “That’s a deep question. I think it really comes down to a 
number of things. I think understanding why I was playing the sport and finding 
my enjoyment within the sport, separating that enjoyment from results, all that 
was a huge factor. Because I think if you live and die with your wins and 
losses, it’s an incredibly tough lifestyle to live. So separating myself from 
that gave me a lot of enjoyment and perspective. Actually, the fact that I hit 
a yellow ball across the net in some lines gave me some peace also, and to 
realise that I am also working on myself for post-tennis.

“There is a whole rest of my life once I retire from tennis, whenever that may 
be – hopefully not for a number of years. Hopefully I stay nice and healthy. I 
want to be honest with myself and put things in perspective. Don’t get me 
wrong. I’m incredibly humble and grateful for the position that I’m in. Trust 
me, I understand how much this means to my family, to the people that have 
stuck by me through years and years and years of ups and downs. But, in terms 
of what it means to me, I’m just so happy that I’m enjoying what I’m doing. 
That is me living my dream. When I was a little girl I dreamt of winning grand 
slams and being No1 in the world. That dream stays the same as long as you’re 
doing the career that you’re on. I think it would be silly for that to change.

“That’s why I started in this sport; that’s why I’m still in this sport. But 
to not live and die by your wins and losses, it’s very important to take your 
enjoyment and take your positivity from things that you have control over, or 
as much control as possible. Otherwise, you come into the danger of having very 
big highs and lows, which is not a nice place to be. Middle ground is nice.”

Deep question, deep answer. You will not get many players relaying those sorts 
of inner feelings. It would seem Britain has acquired a very worthwhile and 
interesting new sports star.
 