
In the next few months, Johanna Konta is likely to find herself in demand – 
from media, sponsors, fans and tournaments all trying to get a piece of her. 
The Briton’s unlikely and brilliant run at the Australian Open ended in the 
semi-finals here on Thursday withdefeat by Germany’s Angelique Kerber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-kontas-fairytale-australian-open-run-ended-by-angelique-kerber>
 but it promises to be just the start for the 24-year-old who must now feel 
like she belongs, even if she will not admit it in public.

It has been a remarkable rise for a player who this time last year was ranked 
almost 150 and seemingly treading water. When the rankings are updated on 
Monday, she will be No28, a position that gets her into all the top events and 
one that, if she can maintain it, will see her seeded for Wimbledon. Heady days 
indeed.

Novak Djokovic foils Roger Federer fightback to reach Australian Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/novak-djokovic-roger-federer-australian-open>
For all Konta’s assertions that she will not be reassessing her goals for the 
year because her goals “are not results orientated”, her life is likely to 
change, at least off the court. How she handles the distractions, the increased 
expectations and attention, especially at Wimbledon, will go a long way to 
showing whether she will be able to repeat or even better her effort of this 
past fortnight.

Recent history suggests she will need a strong mind, something she certainly 
seems to possess. In the past few years there have been many examples of 
players making a breakthrough in a grand slam only to struggle to cope 
thereafter. Pam Shriver, one half of the world’s best doubles pair with Martina 
Navratilova in the 1980s and now an analyst with ESPN, believes the 
distractions will be tough.

“The big question in women’s tennis the last couple of years has been: how do 
you follow up that first big breakthrough?” says Shriver, pointing to Sloane 
Stephens, Eugenie Bouchard and Madison Keys as three who have found it tough to 
live up to the hype.

“Her thing now is going to be: ‘OK, how do I get myself into a state of 
belief?’ and have the backing of her game to know: ‘This is where I belong, I 
belong in the second week of the majors.’ It’s going to be harder – especially 
in two majors from now [at Wimbledon]. That’s where somebody who can help you 
with your head can really be helpful to keep compartmentalising and not let the 
whole thing of Wimbledon [affect her].”

With very few points to defend before June, it seems highly likely that Konta 
will be inside the top 32 come Wimbledon. That brings its own pressures and in 
the glare of the media, where to some every British defeat is akin to a 
national disaster, she will be expected to perform.

The good news is that Konta seems to have a wise head on her shoulders and the 
work she has done with a sports psychologist has taught her to live in the 
moment, not to value one match more than another just because it is a grand 
slam semi-final. That might sound easier said than done but retaining that 
mindset is something Shriver says is imperative in the coming months.

“Whatever she’s been working on the last eight or nine months, don’t change. I 
feel like in women’s tennis, too many don’t stick with the same formula, the 
same structure, the same team for long enough. If she feels settled in, settle 
in. And even if things get a little rocky in the coming months, don’t look for 
answers in your team. The answers are always in yourself. So don’t look for 
blame, look for acceptance and responsibility. I don’t see enough women tennis 
players, except for Serena [Williams], accepting the responsibility, the 
burdens that go with being a semi-finalist, finalist and trying to win a major.”

Britain’s Davis Cup captain, Leon Smith, who worked with Konta when he was in 
charge of women’s tennis at the LawnTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association, agrees. “My advice 
would be to keep doing what you’re doing,” he says. “She’s making such amazing 
progress up the rankings, also emotionally as well, so don’t allow external 
factors to break up what’s really working well. Now everyone will have an 
opinion because there is more interest in you, so keep the inner circle as the 
inner circle. That’s important.”

Smith says Konta should embrace all the endorsements and deals that are likely 
to come her way and believes she is mentally stable enough to cope. “I’m sure 
she’ll stay grounded,” he says. “I certainly think she seems to be really well 
equipped for it because of all the work she’s done off the court with a 
psychologist. Even in the semi-final I don’t think it was any sign of anxiety, 
it was maybe just a bit of nerves, which is totally normal in that situation. 
She’s got a good team around her that are very grounded, they never get 
over-excited. There are so many highs and lows but they’re keeping it neutral. 
I think everything looks in good shape.”

As Smith points out, Konta will now have the luxury of not having to play too 
many lower-level tournaments and she will be a fixture in the biggest 
tournaments. The great thing is that despite reaching a first grand slam 
semi-final, she still has room for improvement. If she can add a few elements 
to her game she could be a regular fixture in the second week of majors, 
something Shriver recognises would be huge for British tennis. “We want to see 
a female good enough to challenge for the second week of majors,” the American 
says. “It’s been a huge void.”

The former Wimbledon champion Marion Bartoli believes the best thing Konta can 
do is ignore the rankings and just stick to what has got her to this point. 
“That would be my advice, never look back too much on what has been great but 
always look forward to new performances, how you can improve or stay there if 
you feel it’s good enough,” she says.
 