
Johanna Konta keeps chipping away at tennis history and a three-set victory 
over the tough Russian Ekaterina Makarova here on Monday evening put her 
alongside Jo Durie, the last British player to make the women’s quarter-finals 
at theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. That 
was 33 years ago, nine years long than the Eastbourne player has been alive.

Konta served for the match twice but steadied her normally reliable serving 
arm at the second attempt to win 4-6, 6-4, 8-6.

Andy Murray eases past Bernard Tomic in Australian Open fourth round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/andy-murray-bernard-tomic-australian-open>
Not many players cite the serve as their favourite shot, especially on the 
women’s Tour, but for Konta the play-starter is her weapon of choice and she 
needed every bullet to beat the 24th seed, for the second time, in four minutes 
over three hours. It was the second longest match of the women’s draw so far, 
12 minutes behind Caroline Wozniacki’s painful exit in the first round at the 
hands of Yulia Putintseva.

“Goodness gracious,” the Sydney-born exile said to her Melbourne audience 
courtside in the Margaret Court Arena immediately afterwards, “there are only a 
few of you in here but you made so much noise.”

A lot of British support, no doubt, were camped in the adjacent Rod Laver 
Arena, watchingAndy Murray playing Bernard Tomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/25/andy-murray-bernard-tomic-australian-open-live>
 for a place in the men’s quarter-final.

Konta was glowing, exhausted and hugely satisfied – as well as proudly 
British, despite numerous attempts by the Australian media to press her into a 
long-lost allegiance to the country of her birth.

“It’s really about just keep walking, just keep breathing,” she said of how 
she came through several ups and downs in a match she might have won in two 
sets. “The fewer thoughts the better. I’m going to eat and sleep, eat and sleep 
and then repeat [ahead of her match on Wednesday night].”

Konta – who will move up to 32 in the world at the very least after this 
tournament – was 3-1 up and cruising in the first set, with a couple of points 
for 4-1. All the confidence she had built up in the first three matches looked 
to be paying a more significant dividend, but she could not get that second 
break, then fortunes shifted back and forth like cargo on a boat in a storm for 
quarter of an hour.

Makarova broke back in the sixth game, double-faulted twice at 4-4, Konta 
missed a forehand to blow a break point and Makarova broke for the set.

But, as is so often the case in the women’s game, the deck chairs pretty 
quickly started sliding the other way and Konta gathered her newly forged 
powers of concentration to break at the start of the second. The pattern of the 
promising start had been resumed, and again the British No 1 went 3-1 up. This 
time, her nerve held – as did her serve.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fjohanna-konta-beats-ekaterina-makarova-to-reach-australian-open-last-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf93695070efd5f0df100138d16934e1c95e33a%2F0_153_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Johanna%20Konta%20beats%20Ekaterina%20Makarova%20to%20reach%20Australian%20Open%20last%20eight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fjohanna-konta-beats-ekaterina-makarova-to-reach-australian-open-last-eight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Johanna%20Konta%20beats%20Ekaterina%20Makarova%20to%20reach%20Australian%20Open%20last%20eight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fjohanna-konta-beats-ekaterina-makarova-to-reach-australian-open-last-eight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf93695070efd5f0df100138d16934e1c95e33a%2F0_153_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Johanna Konta hits a forehand during her epic fourth-round match against 
Ekaterina Makarova at the Australian Open. Photograph: Tracey Nearmy/EPA 
At 5-4 and 40-15 up she served a fault but followed with a strong, deep second 
effort to level at a set apiece. Konta was serving at only 47% of efficiency 
for the match, 52 for the levelling set, but winning just over half the points 
on her second serve, compared with a mere 29% for her left-handed opponent.

Konta was 2-2 against left-handers before tonight, including that breakthrough 
win against the Russian at Eastbourne last year, so the angles do not unduly 
worry her.

Makarova held serve through deuce points at the start of the third and then 
asked for treatment to a blister on her right foot – and Konta was not pleased, 
contending that it might have been a pre-existing injury.

Treatment during the mandated medical timeout must have been good, though; 
Makarova moved well and forced Konta to hold through deuce.

The Konta second serve got her out of trouble again in the fourth game to save 
a break then again hold. Indeed there was not much between her first and second 
serves.

She took new balls at 2-3 and the extra liveliness helped her level, and her 
spirits rose when she broke in the ninth game, forcing a limp forehand out of 
her opponent as the concluding set approached the hour mark.

Serving for a place in the quarter-finals, she charged the net at 15-30 and 
Makarova put a perfect passing shot down the line to grab two break points – 
then absolutely butchered an identical opportunity. The Russian clinched the 
break, though, with a controlled forehand that left Konta helpless on the 
baseline.

Makarova drove her forehand wide to surrender her serve in the 13th game, as 
the match approached minor-marathon proportions, and Konta served for the match 
a second time.

Would her pet shot let her down this time?

This was her best set for serving reliability, and Makarova felt its power and 
precision under the most extreme pressure. A final howitzer wide to the 
Russian’s forehand was too hot, the reply billowed the net and the job was done.

It was Makarova’s 60th unforced error; Konta’s count was 20 fewer. It was a 
good measure of their approach, the British woman striving for consistency, her 
opponent driven to too many desperate corners.

“I definitely left it all out here on court,” Konta said afterwards. “I really 
just tried to hang in there and run after every single ball and just keep 
fighting on every single point because that’s all I can do at the end of the 
day. I feel fortunate enough that I was able to capitalise on some 
opportunities and close it out in the end.”
 