
King John <http://shakespeare.mit.edu/john/index.html> by William Shakespeare

Cardinal Pandulph, the papal legate, is the ultimate wheeler-dealer. He 
arrives from Rome to excommunicate King John for having disobeyed the pope, 
then throws in his lot with the perfidious French. Soon he is egging the 
Dauphin on to invade England, but by the end of the play he is fixing a peace 
treaty between the warring nations.

The Duchess of Malfi 
<http://larryavisbrown.homestead.com/files/Malfi/malfi_home.htm> by John Webster

The Cardinal conspires with his brother Ferdinand to destroy the marriage of 
the Duchess, their sister, to her steward, Antonio. Being a Jacobean cardinal, 
he has a mistress called Julia, whom he murders with a poisoned Bible, but he 
is tormented by inner demons. "When I look into the fish-ponds in my garden, / 
Methinks I see a thing arm'd with a rake, / That seems to strike at me".

The Cardinal by James Shirley

The protagonist of this tragedy is another of those grand sinners that 
17th-century English playwrights loved to imagine. He helps his nephew procure 
the unwilling Duchess Rosaura, whom he later plots to rape. In revenge for his 
nephew's death he poisons her, but is then tricked into taking poison himself.

The Three Musketeers by Alexandre Dumas

Our gallant warriors help save the Queen from public disgrace when the 
Machiavellian Cardinal Richelieu plots to reveal her affair of the heart with 
the Duke of Buckingham. After many scrapes and fights, the cardinal decides 
d'Artagnan is a game chap and offers him a commission in the Musketeers.

Concerning the Eccentricities of Cardinal Pirelli by Ronald Firbank

Firbank's protagonist, Don Alvaro Narciso Hernando Pirelli, is a thoroughly 
idiosyncratic Spanish priest. His eccentricities (which include baptising a 
police dog) lead to him being summoned to Rome by the pope. But before he gets 
there he dies of a seizure while pursuing a choirboy in the nude.

The Thorn Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781844084470/the-thorn-birds>
by Colleen McCullough

In the Australian outback, beautiful Meggie Cleary falls for a priest, Father 
Ralph de Bricassart. They fancy each other like crazy. After many years of 
chastity Father Ralph gives in and Meggie becomes pregnant. Ralph becomes a 
cardinal and an unknowing mentor to his own son. As soon as he finds out that 
he is more than one kind of father he dies in his former lover's arms.

The Island of the Day Before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780749396664/the-island-of-the-day-before>
by Umberto Eco

Shipwrecked, Eco's protagonist Roberto della Griva looks back on his life, in 
1640s Paris. He has worked as a spy for Cardinal Mazarin, who is obsessed with 
finding the secret of calculating a ship's longitude while at sea. He 
blackmails our hero into setting out on a voyage to try new methods of finding 
this, a voyage which is doomed.

The Troublesome Offspring of Cardinal Guzman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780749398576/the-troublesome-offspring-of-cardinal-guzman>
 by Louis de Berni√®res

In an imaginary South American country, the eponymous cardinal lives a 
self-indulgent life, disdaining the poor, in cahoots with the country's 
military regime. With a mistress and a son (hence the title), the cardinal is 
tormented by guilt-induced stomach cramps.

Angels and Demons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780552160896/angels-and-demons>
by Dan Brown

Cardinals aplenty in this slab of hokum, but they are mostly dead. Robert 
Langdon is out to prevent the Illuminati using the terrible powers of 
anti-matter and keeps finding murdered cardinals, all branded with signs 
connected with the four ancient elements.

Wolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780007230204/wolf-hall> 
by Hilary Mantel

Mantel's story of the reign of Henry VIII is told through the eyes of Thomas 
Cromwell, but the early chapters are dominated by Cardinal Wolsey, his tutor in 
the worldly arts of serving a prince. Even Cromwell, the man who will displace 
him, feels sympathy for the cardinal as power seeps away from him.
 