
I am looking at a disturbing self-portrait of John Waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-waters>. He’s wearing a tan uniform and, 
as if that weren’t bad enough, a matching baseball cap and a diabolical grin. 
In one hand, he’s holding a catching pole and, in the other, there’s a 
blameless mutt looking through the grille of its portable prison. The man they 
call the Pope of Trash has become a dog-catcher.

What’s that about, I ask the 69-year-old film director and artist as we stroll 
around the Sprüth Magers gallery, which is hosting his first London exhibition. 
“I wanted to be the most despised person imaginable, like I was when I started. 
I asked myself, ‘Who would that be today?’ The dog-catcher.” Waters spends his 
summers in Provincetown, Massachusetts, America’s most dog-friendly town. It 
was there that he borrowed the dog-catcher’s outfit and a small dog for the 
self-portrait.

“People looked at my early pictures and called them the most disgusting things 
ever and now Hairspray” – his 1988 musical love letter to racial integration 
and his native Baltimore – “is being done at every school in Britain and 
America. So things have changed. But I haven’t. So it’s nostalgia for being 
hated.”

There's no crabs any more because young people don't have pubic hair. They're 
extinct! So I had to bring them back

Did you like being hated? “I built a career out of it. I wasn’t hated by the 
people I wanted to like my work – I was hated by the people it was bait for.” 
He’s thinking, no doubt, of films such as 1972’s Pink Flamingos which, after 
scenes featuring heroin-dealing, cop-murdering, masturbation, singing anuses 
and cannibalism, ends with the heroine (played by drag queen Divine) eating 
dogshit to prove that she’s the filthiest person in the world. Variety called 
it “one of the most vile, stupid and repulsive films ever made”.


“No critic would say that today because they’re too hip,” says Waters. So in a 
way you don’t like being celebrated? “No! I think it’s all delightful. It’s 
like being alive at your funeral. You get to hear the nice things people say. 
It’s great.”


He only wishes his mother were alive to be in London, not just for this debut 
art show but for hisBritish Film Institute retrospective in September 
<http://www.theartsshelf.com/2014/12/19/bfis-2015-highlights/>. “She was a huge 
anglophile. She went to English villages to watch birds and wear sensible 
shoes. She would have loved it. One time when I did The Graham Norton Show, I 
brought my mom over and she had a great time.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjohn-waters-art-lassie-justin-bieber-ansel-adams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435679016894%2F120a1877-462c-4dbe-b142-7593ade46c00-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Waters%3A%20'I%20want%20to%20be%20despised'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjohn-waters-art-lassie-justin-bieber-ansel-adams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Waters%3A%20%27I%20want%20to%20be%20despised%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjohn-waters-art-lassie-justin-bieber-ansel-adams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435679016894%2F120a1877-462c-4dbe-b142-7593ade46c00-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Reconstructed Lassie, 2012, by John Waters. Photograph: Courtesy the artist 
and Sprüth Magers 
 A mood of nostalgia permeates the exhibition. I ask him to explain an image 
of a crab. “There’s no such thing as crabs any more because young people don’t 
have pubic hair any more. So where did they all go? They’re extinct! So I had 
to bring them back.” He stands back from the image to get a better view. “It’d 
take a brave collector to hang that above their couch. I’d rather have crabs 
than bedbugs. You can get rid of crabs in a day.”

Waters is not just nostalgic for being hated then, but nostalgic for old 
school STDs. Another piece called Poultry consists of covers of old gay porn 
novels with the word “chicken” in the title and depicting young, nubile gay men 
in various states of rudery. Each book is from Waters’ extensive collection. “I 
guess nobody says chicken any more in that context,” says Waters wistfully. 
“Now the gay slang is twink.”


And then there’s the stroller I stumbled across when I entered the show. The 
restraining straps look like they’re from a bondage fetishist’s closet, and the 
seat is decorated with the names of gay clubs including The Toilet and Blow 
Buddies, the latter with its striking logo of a penis in mid-ejaculation. If 
only, I think, the gallery had a gift shop, this baby buggy would be a top 
seller.


This stroller, too, is nostalgic. “Those are all real places that existed in 
the 60s and 70s. But today in those neighbourhoods, like the Castro district in 
San Francisco, you see gay couples with strollers with kids. Who’d ever have 
thought it would happen?”Blow Buddies <http://www.blowbuddies.com>, I’m happy 
to relate, still thrives in San Francisco. “So I’m just putting them both 
together to celebrate the gay world and show things change and become even more 
confusing.”


Waters started making art in 1992 and brought to it the black comedy and 
transgressiveness of his film work. When I put this to him, he says: “I didn’t 
even know that word, but yes, I’ve always been transgressive. When I went to 
Catholic high school they would let me read because it would shut me up and 
stop me causing trouble. And I sat there reading Jean Genet. They’d think, 
‘Isn’t it nice he’s reading!’ and I’d be getting even more perverse ideas.”


Another exhibit, incidentally, purports to be a gravestone of his dead hero 
Genet. “The original was stolen the week after he was buried. And it’s never 
been recovered.” He pauses for effect. “And that’s it.” You’ve found it and are 
showing it here for the first time? Oh come on! “That’s what I’m saying.”


In the 60s I got Jackie for $100. [It was a present from a girlfriend.] It was 
that long ago

 Even if he only started making art in 1992, it’s been part of Waters life for 
much longer. “I like art. It’s another way to rebel.” He has always collected 
art. “In the 60s, I got Jackie by Warhol for a hundred dollars.” It was a 
present from a girlfriend, I hear. “It wasthat long ago,” he laughs. One thing 
Waters isn’t nostalgic for is his straight old days.

We study a display of lurid paperback novels alongside their porn versions, 
all from Waters’s extensive library. Next to Chitty Chitty Bang Bang is Clitty 
Clitty Bang Bang. And why does the porn parody of Around the World in 80 Days 
have the same title as the original? “It’s sexual slang now, meaning that you 
lick everywhere,” he explains helpfully. “I believe that you’re never a classic 
in literature until they have done a porn parody. “


Why did he come to photography so late? Waters raises a sceptical eyebrow. “I 
use photography. I wouldn’t call it photography. I’m not Ansel Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ansel-adams>.” What he does, rather, 
is repurpose photography. Adams is a case in point. In the show, there is a 
series of Adams’s sublime nature photographs edited by Waters. In one, an 
airliner is crashing into a lake; in another, a tower block is ruining the view 
of a mountain range; and in a third, there’s a masked weirdo giving the camera 
the finger from a sylvan glade. The title? Cancel Ansel.

 John Waters’s spoof gossip mag National Brainiac. Photograph: Courtesy the 
artist and Sprüth Magers 
But, as with most of the work in this show, the humour is affectionate. “At 
the time these photographs are what made photography considered fine art. Now 
it’s the opposite of what photography is. It’s absolutely not about technique, 
right? So I had to go back to Ansel and make him more contemporary.”


When I suggest that Waters’s art is more like that of an editor, he agrees 
readily. “I wish,” he says, “I had been the editor of a tabloid for 
intellectuals.” In a sense, he has. One piece in the show is the cover of his 
version of the National Inquirer called National Brainiac. “Nude Photos of WH 
Auden Found!” bawls the headline next to a picture of the poet reclining naked 
with a chaste exclamation mark over his manhood. The main cover image depicts 
one of America’s great writers as you’ve never seen her before: “Shocking new 
photos! Joan Didion hits 250lbs!” That really is Joan Didion, buried deep in 
Photoshop,” says Waters. “I heard she laughed when she saw it.” Again, Waters 
insists the satire is affectionate. Really? I can’t imagine Philip Roth 
laughing about the coverline: “Philip Roth Dates 70-year-old Woman! About Time 
say Readers!” “I think he would,” says Waters. He looks at the National 
Brainiac cover one more time, adding: “I love every one of these people.”


As we stroll around the gallery, Waters in his pencilled-on moustache and a 
jacket with a skulls and flowers print motif, we can hear the voices of 
children. They’re coming from an installation called Kiddie Flamingos in which 
some Baltimore children (“They’re not actors, just friends’ kids”), the 
youngest six, sit around a table reading the script of Pink Flamingos. The 
script, like all of Waters’s raw material, has been heavily edited. At the end, 
for instance, the heroine is supposed to eat not dog faeces but dog food. 
“Ewwwww!” howl the pre-pubescent kids as the credits roll over a freeze frame 
of the heroine pretending to eat dog food. “Waters hopes that this defanged and 
desexualised sequel is yet more perverse than the original,” says the press 
release.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjohn-waters-art-lassie-justin-bieber-ansel-adams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435678799765%2Fe2c3965b-e03a-45b7-bc7b-7b9b081692e2-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Waters%3A%20'I%20want%20to%20be%20despised'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjohn-waters-art-lassie-justin-bieber-ansel-adams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Waters%3A%20%27I%20want%20to%20be%20despised%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Fjohn-waters-art-lassie-justin-bieber-ansel-adams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435678799765%2Fe2c3965b-e03a-45b7-bc7b-7b9b081692e2-1020x1020.jpeg>
 Grim Reaper, 2014 by John Waters. All images: © John Waters. Photograph: 
Courtesy the artist and Sprüth Magers 
 Can he imagine doing art that didn’t have anything to do with movies or show 
business? “Yes, but I can’t imagine doing art that didn’t have some kind of 
humour in it.” He thinks he is bringing something new to art. “Can art be 
funny? It can be witty, but can it be funny? I think yes but people are 
nervous. They’re not used to it.” They might also be queasy about Waters’s bad 
taste. In one image, the Kennedys are descending the steps from Air Force One 
on that fateful day in Dallas, 1963. Behind them on the steps is the Grim 
Reaper from Bergman’s The Seventh Seal, scythe aloft. “The people in America 
that might be offended don’t go to my shows. It’s not mean. It’s just a Bergman 
way to look at what happened. I mean Deathwas following them that day.”.

My favourite pieces are three images hung together depicting plastic surgery 
gone wrong. Let me thank you for introducing me to a new experience, I say to 
Waters. “Huh?” I’d never fancied Justin Bieber until I saw your image of him. 
In Justin’s Had Work, he’s Photoshopped plump, Angelina Jolie-esque lips on to 
the pop star and given him stirringly come-hither brown eyes. “His mouth looks 
like an anus,” giggles Waters. “I’m a Justin fan you know.”


Next to Bieber is a Photoshopped Lassie who’s had work on lips and cheekbones. 
And next to Lassie is Waters with, as he puts it, “bad wig, way too much 
velour, trout pout, drawn-on eyebrows. In Beverly Hills, some people would say 
that looks good. Their weird is different from ours.” The image is called, like 
the show, Beverly Hills John. In reality, Waters confides, the only work he’s 
had done is on his teeth. “At my age you can go either fat or gaunt. I’ve gone 
gaunt.”


Why Lassie? “Well, old people and young have work done. What’s the next step? 
Pets.” Probably even now, on some chop shop in Rodeo Drive, a collie is going 
under the beautifying knife.


 One last piece. On the wall is a huge ruler called 8½, measuring out eight 
and half feet. When Waters went to the Baltimore premiere ofFellini’s 8½ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/apr/10/federico-fellini-8-half-trailer-restored-video>
 in the early 60s, the Charles theatre handed out little 8½ inch rulers to 
cinemagoers. He still has the original at home. “I loved that movie. Fellini 
was a little lofty for a teenage boy but certainly he was a huge influence.” 
Why? “We used to watch his movies tripping on acid. Juliet of the Spirits is 
the best tripping film.” Good tip.

“He inspired me because he had a local cast in his movies, people who 
typically weren’t movie stars. That’s what I did too.” He waves his arms around 
the exhibition, like the showman that he is, embracing high art and low trash 
in one gesture. “Fellini, Warhol, Bergman – and nudist camp movies! They’re all 
in here!”


 * Beverly Hills John is at Sprüth Magers, London, from 1 July to 15 August 
<http://www.spruethmagers.com/exhibitions/386>
 