
In the three decades that have passed since he reached the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> Â­final, John Lloyd has 
regularly had to try to explain why no British man has managed it since. No 
more. Lloyd can now compare and contrast, and he admits that Andy Murray's 
progress to Sunday's final is an even more impressive feat than the one he 
achieved in 1977.

Reaching any final of one of the four biggest events in the sport is always a 
great effort but in Lloyd's day few of the top players used to make the journey 
to Australian and the depth of competition was not what it is now.

"It's one heck of an achievement for him," Lloyd says. "He had some tough 
matches in the grand slams last year. This year I think the pressure has been 
on and he's proved he can handle it. It's a huge boost for him and for British 
tennis and I think he's going to go from strength to strength."

In 1977, Lloyd beat the three-times Wimbledon champion John Newcombe, a legend 
in Australia, in the quarter-finals and then battled back from two sets down in 
the final against the late Vitus Gerulaitis, only for the American to run away 
with the fifth set. It was the closest Lloyd came to winning a coveted grand 
slam crown, but he admits that with Bjorn Borg and Jimmy Connors staying away 
from Melbourne for most of their careers Australia did not have the same field 
as the US Open, the French Open or Wimbledon.

"Who knows how many slams Borg could have won if he'd come down here, maybe 
four, five?" Lloyd says. "Jimmy, [John] McEnroe, you go down the list. It was 
just different then because a lot of the players didn't play."

When Lloyd reached the final, the tournament was played at the Kooyong Lawn 
Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Club, set in a Melbourne 
suburb. It was a quaint setting for a grand slam tournament as we know them 
now, with just one main court and the fans spilling on to the road behind the 
railway line. The event was played in December, with players arriving in 
Melbourne at the end of a series of tournaments in Australia and it was not 
really considered on a par with the other grand slam events.

"We were here for the whole month," Lloyd says. "You could spend Christmas 
away and then you'd be ready to play the same. You were here. You worked out 
before you got to Australia and then you had three or four tournaments, they 
were in Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane. Sometimes we were here for six weeks. I 
loved it, we used to spend Christmas here and then you were ready to play on 26 
December."

The tournament moved venues and dates in the 1980s and, 33 years on from 
Lloyd's feat, Murray has reached the final, one win away from ending a wait of 
almost 74 years for a British man to win a grand slam title. Lloyd knows Murray 
well from his role as captain of Britain's Davis Cup team and he has been 
hugely impressed by the performances of the 22-year-old here, not least in his 
ability to change his style of play midway through a match.

"His awareness around the court has been so good," he says. "He's taken his 
opportunities and he's changed his tactics depending on who he has been 
playing. He's been aggressive when he's needed to be. He's been very smart. 
He's always been pretty court-savvy but I think he's taken it to another level 
here."

Murray had to beat the world No2, Rafael Nadal, in the last eight and followed 
it up with victory over the 14th seed, Marin Cilic, when he found a way to win 
after being outplayed and overpowered in the first set. In that match Murray 
produced a number of contenders for shot of the tournament and Lloyd thinks the 
Scot had the look of a champion. "His court coverage movement has been 
excellent," he says. "There's an aura about him, there's a confidence, so that 
when guys look across the net at him, they think, 'That guy's a winner.'"

Lloyd says Murray would have been favourite had Jo-Wilfried Tsonga beaten 
Roger Federer in the second semi-final. The Swiss may be chasing grand slam 
title No16 but Lloyd believes Murray has more than a good opportunity. 
"Federer's the man to beat, as he was at the start of the tournament," he says. 
"But Andy can win it, there's no doubt about it. Federer's not been as dominant 
as the Federer we know and there's a doubt now about him."
 