
John Travolta <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-travolta> has come out in 
support of Scientology after the documentary Going Clear: Scientology and the 
Prison of Belief depicted the church as dangerous.

The actor, who originally converted in 1975, has defended the religion in an 
interview withthe Tampa Bay Times 
<http://www.tampabay.com/things-to-do/movies/john-travolta-says-hes-happy-with-scientology-wont-see-going-clear/2224359>
, saying that he hasn’t watched the film and that he doesn’t “really care to” 
see it.

“I haven’t experienced anything that the hearsay has [claimed], so why would I 
communicate something that wasn’t true for me?” he said. “It wouldn’t make 
sense, nor would it for Tom (Cruise), I imagine.”

Going Clear: Scientology, Hollywood and the Prison of&nbsp;Belief by Lawrence 
Wright – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/02/going-clear-scientology-wright-review>
In the film, directed by Alex Gibney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alex-gibney>, it’s claimed that members of 
the religion were physically abused and that Travolta was made aware of this. 
Instead, he claims that the religion has been an integral and inspiring part of 
his life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Going%20Clear%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F25%2Fgoing-clear-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435231800203%2FKP_325103_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review Going Clear 
“I’ve been brought through storms that were insurmountable,” he said, adding 
thatScientology <https://www.theguardian.com/world/scientology> has “been so 
beautiful for me, that I can’t even imagine attacking it.”

He also believes that it’s allowed him to make life easier for others.

“I’ve helped so many people through hard times,” he said. “Loss of children, 
loved ones, physical illnesses. Through many tough, tough life situations I’ve 
used the technology to support them and help them. It’s always worked.

“So, why would I even approach a negative perspective? That would be a crime 
to me, personally, to do that.”

The church has already denied the claims made about ill-treatment and 
corruption highlighted in the film.

“In two hours this film racks up more falsehoods, errors, embellished tales 
and blatant omissions than were committed by Rolling Stone, Brian Williams and 
Bill O’Reilly combined. By our calculation, the film on average includes at 
least one major error every two minutes,” a letter tothe Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/scientology-final-say-going-clear-781242>
 read last month.
 