
Rupert Murdoch's select committee appearance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/interactive/2011/jul/19/rupert-murdoch-hearing-interactive-presentation>
 last summer produced many surprises, but the big one for my partner – not one 
of Westminster's most assiduous watchers – came when he spotted John 
Whittingdale on the telly. "Hang on, isn't that the bloke I sangBat Out of Hell 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bPgwBhchODY> with in the Groucho club? What's 
he doing there?"

The committee chairman can't have been expecting their random late night 
karaoke – performed with rakish abandon, air guitar and all – to crop up in his 
parliamentary office. But when I ask if he recalls the occasion, he squeals 
with laughter. "Ohyes, that's right – he came to my rescue because, you see, 
that song requires tremendous range. The only one which is worse, which I once 
tried – and never, ever again – is Bon Jovi'sLivin' on a Prayer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lDK9QqIzhwk>. That really is impossible, 
because it goes right up."

The member for Maldon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/constituency/1508/maldon> in Essex does 
not, it must be said, look like your average heavy guitar-rock fan. To be 
frank, he looks like a home counties Tory MP clean out of central casting – 
middle-aged, chinless, with that blend of plummy vowels and flinty eyes 
peculiar to posh hardline rightwingers. Educated at public school, he was 
Norman Tebbit's special adviser at just 23, then worked for Leon Brittan, 
before becoming Margaret Thatcher's political secretary at the age of 29. 
It would be an exaggeration to say he grows misty-eyed at the very mention of 
her name, but only just.

All of which makes him an even more unlikely people's champion. Ever since 
Whittingdale summonedRupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> to appear before the 
culture, sport and media select committee last August, the MP has become a sort 
of global folk hero. "I don't know what the audience was, but I would have said 
it was certainly in the tens – probably the hundreds – of millions," he 
marvels. "It went out live across America, Australia, Canada, China." Passersby 
from London to Sydney stop to congratulate him; one taxi driver wouldn't even 
take his money. "It was almost out of some sort of sentimental rom-com," 
Whittingdale giggles. "He said: 'No fare, just keep up the good work.'"

To everyone enjoying the Murdochs' fall from grace, Whittingdale's work seemed 
particularly good precisely because it must have gone against every partisan 
instinct. Once asked who hemost admired in the media 
<http://www.totalpolitics.com/articles/271992/the-skys-the-limit.thtml>, his 
reply was Rupert Murdoch, and before thephone-hacking scandal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/phone-hacking> blew up he supported News 
International'sbid to take over BSkyB 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/jun/30/rupert-murdoch-bskyb-takeover-price>
. He was even friends withLes Hinton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/les-hinton>, one of the former News 
International executives his committee has now found guilty ofmisleading 
parliament 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/blog/2012/may/01/select-committee-report-james-rupert-murdoch>
. (He was alsoFacebook friends 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2011/07/17/john-whittingdale-denies-_n_900868.html>
 with Rebekah Brooks and Elisabeth Murdoch, though rather too much has probably 
been made of that; as he says: "A friend on Facebook is not, in my view, the 
same as a friend.") Yet throughout the hearings, Whittingdale drew widespread 
respect for maintaining – to coin a phrase – a quasi-judicial approach. If 
anything, he conducted himself more like a civil servant than a party 
politician.

But now the committee's report has been published, and the non-partisan 
consensus has fallen apart 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2012/may/01/phone-hacking-report-select-committee-amendments>
. Its Labour and Lib Dem members outvoted the Tories to include a line 
declaring Murdoch "not a fit and proper person" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/may/01/rupert-murdoch-not-fit-phone-hacking>
 to run a major global company, and they have beensquabbling ever since 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/may/02/phone-hacking-mps-clash-murdoch> 
over who is to blame for their failure to come up with a conclusion upon which 
they could all agree. Whittingdale maintains that the committee had simply 
neither evidence nor remit for reaching such a nuclear verdict, and that while 
some Labour members were "pursuing an agenda to attack Rupert Murdoch", he felt 
the report should have confined itself to conclusions the evidence could 
clearly support. Critics say the truth is that, deep down, he just couldn't 
bear to hurt the Murdochs any more than strictly necessary.

Either way, there is no doubt that the whole affair has been thrilling – the 
biggest deal of his career "by a million miles" – not least because the 
committee has found itself in uncharted waters. "We have been pushing at the
boundaries of select committee powers 
<http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/07/14/confusion-over-parliaments-power-to-compel-murdochs-to-testify/>
 in a way that has not been tested for decades, if not centuries," he says. 
"We did it when I signed the warrants," summoning the Murdochs before the 
committee. He had no idea what he would do if they refused, and was very 
worried that they might.

"Good God, yes. I thought it was a very distinct possibility. We were 
deploying powers which were pretty uncertain as to the efficacy, not just 
against anybody, but against somebody who is, arguably, one of the most 
powerful people in the world. It was quite scary in that sense." There must 
have been an element of fun too. "Well, it's quite scary! I'm in politics and, 
in a sense, all politicians need a profile. But there's profile, and then there 
is," and he starts to laugh, "a kind of spotlight intensity which was unlike 
anything I've ever experienced."

He certainly never expected anything like it back in 2007, when his committee 
wasassured by Hinton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2009/jul/09/what-les-hinton-told-mps> 
and others that the News of the World'sroyal correspondent 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/clive-goodman>, Clive Goodman, was the only 
reporter to have engaged in phone hacking. Whittingdale did think it odd at the 
time that Glenn Mulcaire, the private investigator jailed for supplying 
intercept information, had hacked several phones belonging to celebrities who 
had nothing to do with royal stories.

"It just didn't add up. But then we were told, categorically, that no evidence 
had been uncovered to support the suggestion that anyone else [on the News of 
the World] was involved. I felt people wouldn't deliberately lie to a select 
committee. And we hadn't got any evidence to counter it."

When the infamous "For Neville" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/jul/21/news-world-phone-hacking1> email 
surfaced in 2009, it was, in Whittingdale's words, "the smoking gun – the 
single critical piece of evidence throughout". Andy Coulson, the former News of 
the World editor, was duly called before the committee. Whittingdale had been 
uneasy about Coulson's appointment as director of communications for David 
Cameron, because as far as he could see there had been very little 
investigation into his possible involvement in hacking. "But Coulson said to 
me: 'I had absolutely no knowledge and I condemn phone hacking and absolutely 
swear to you.' And even then, actually, I just could not believe – well, it 
remained my view that I found it very difficult to believe that somebody would 
categorically lie to a select committee. And I still do."

Counsel for the Leveson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/leveson-inquiry 
inquiry> inquiry, Robert Jay QC <http://www.guardian.co.uk/law/robert-jay>, 
looks like a man who might find that easier to believe, but any comparisons 
between the two hearings rankle a bit with Whittingdale. "Well, it is slightly 
irksome when people try to compare the two. We are not a prosecuting counsel. 
We are not QCs. Rupert Murdoch was in front of Leveson for two days; we had him 
for two hours."

I wonder if Whittingdale felt sorry for Murdoch at any point while he was 
giving evidence. "Oh yes,the pie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/jan/13/protesters-jonnie-marbles-rupert-murdoch>
. Oh, I was very upset and angry about the pie." I can see why he'd be upset 
and angry about the security lapse, but as the stunt was generally agreed to 
have backfired and Murdoch came out of it looking brave, I'm not sure why he 
felt sorry for him.

"Well, I felt – well, you have to remember he's an 82-year-old man." Was that 
the only moment? A long pause follows before his reply. "I was a bit worried 
that to subject him to that duration of questioning – I mean, Rupert Murdoch 
had never been subject to hostile questioning in the way that he was when he 
came before us, and we genuinely didn't know how robust he was, and how able he 
was to deal with it."
 Whittingdale flanked by Adrian Sanders and Paul Farrelly at the launch of the 
select committee report into phone hacking. Photograph: Rebecca Naden/PA 
Wire/Press Association Images 
I ask if any part of him suspects Murdoch knew more about hacking that he has 
admitted. "No, what does worry me is that what had been going on at the News of 
the World – not necessarily law breaking – but unscrupulous techniques were 
used, essentially, to destroy people and were truly shocking. Now I doubt that 
Rupert Murdoch personally approved that." Really? You didn't need to own the 
paper to know that was going on – you only needed to read it. "Yeah, exactly. 
So I do think that, at the very least, he can be criticised for allowing this 
culture to develop."

Surely he already knew all of this when he described Murdoch as the man he 
most admired in the media. "Well, actually I didn't." Whittingdale says he only 
realised the paper used"very aggressive techniques" 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/News-World-Sheikhs-Royal-Trappings/dp/1903070724> when 
he read a book about it in 2008.

There is something both rather touching and impressive about Whittingdale's 
aversion to any opinion that cannot be substantiated by hard evidence. You 
might imagine such scrupulousness would come across as pomposity, but nothing 
could be further from the truth. Funny and relaxed, and great company, he 
doesn't appear to take himself anything like as seriously as he does his work. 
Politicians who have worked alongside him confirm that he is strikingly 
even-handed and generous-spirited, respectful of parliamentary protocol without 
getting too grand or pedantic. His chairmanship of the committee could be 
described as an advert for all that is best about our parliamentary democracy.

That said, all deference to evidence seems to go out the window the minute the 
committee chairman's hat comes off, and he starts talking as a Tory 
backbencher. Whittingdale thinks his party did badly in the local elections 
because it isn't being rightwing enough. He was "very unhappy about some 
measures in the budget", his chief complaint being the 50p tax cut – but only 
because he wanted it cut to 40p instead of 45p.

I tell him I have read very little evidence to suggest the tax cut's 
unpopularity came down to any public perception that it was still too unfair on 
the rich, yet Whittingdale steadfastly insists "we are all in it together", on 
the basis that rich people still pay more tax than poor people. "I recognise 
that there are some groups who have been reliant on benefits, who are going to 
feel the pain," he adds, as if oblivious to all the evidence that it's 
middle-income earners whose standard of living is plummeting. He sees 
"absolutely no alternative" to the austerity programme, despite the fact that 
it has plunged us back into recession. In fact, he thinks it should go even 
further. "The way in which you stimulate growth is by cutting taxes."

Why aren't we seeing a private sector-driven recovery? "I think we are." We 
are? "Yeah. There's no question that the private sector is creating a huge 
amount of jobs."

Elected in 1992, having been a backroom wonder boy in the 80s, Whittingdale 
committed Westminster career suicide by rebelling against the Maastricht 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/dec/09/euro-20-years-old-maastricht> 
treaty. A glimmer of rehabilitation came under Iain Duncan Smith, who appointed 
him to the shadow cabinet – but since losing his place after the 2005 election 
he seems reconciled to the role of senior influential backbencher, high profile 
and publicly loyal, but in private not entirely happy with his party's 
direction.

Is Cameron, I ask, One Of Us? After a long pause he laughs. "Well, it depends 
on what you mean by 'one of us'." Is he a Thatcherite Tory? Another long pause, 
while he wrinkles his nose and exhales heavily through this nostrils. "In some 
areas – but I doubt he would describe himself as such." Had Cameron won an 
outright majority Whittingdale "hopes" he would have been a very different 
prime minister, but when I ask if he thinks he would, he says, "I don't know." 
I've got a feeling that's a No. He laughs. "It's a Don't Know."

He thinks Boris Johnson is "a hugely talented person", but when I ask if he 
would make a good leader, there is another long pause. "That's a theoretical 
question." Yes, but if Whittingdale were hit by a bus and duly emerged from a 
coma to find Johnson in charge of the country, would he be happy? "I wouldn't 
be appalled at the prospect. But I don't know whether Boris would be a good 
prime minister." This seems curiously tepid, given that, as he says himself, 
"there are many issues in which I very much agree with Boris". So why wouldn't 
he be delighted? "Boris used to work for me," he volunteers. Tell me more, I 
say. "Well, I love Boris dearly. He's done a very good job as mayor. But he's 
not the mostorganised person I've ever come across. Boris needs strong 
support." Which is interesting to hear – and I bet he wouldn't have said as 
much a fortnight ago. Is he trying to point out that the jobs of mayor and 
prime minister are not analogous? "They are certainly not analogous," he agrees 
wholeheartedly.

I'm pretty sure Whittingdale feels he would have made a good secretary of 
state for culture, and his personal tastes are certainly catholic. I ask if his 
legendary love of heavy metal has been overstated, and he giggles. "Er, well, 
no. Though I do like going to the ballet, and I like classical music too. And I 
was," he adds, bursting out laughing, "a punk – for a time." Are there 
photographic records of that phase? "Happily not! But I saw all sorts of bands, 
such as Sham 69, the Buzzcocks. The Stranglers are still a great love." The 
last concert ticket he bought was for Deep Purple last year. What did he wear? 
He starts to grin. "I do still have one of those waistcoats with patches all 
over it, and a Motörhead skull on the back. But I don't wear it now. Mainly 
because there would be people like you lurking everywhere. So no, I wear a pair 
of jeans and an open-necked shirt. I think I may have been known to wear an 
Iron Maiden T-shirt," he adds coyly. "It has been known."

It is of course possible that the post of culture secretary 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/apr/26/jeremy-hunt-pressure-ministerial-code>
 may become vacant before too long, but Whittingdale is very careful to offer 
Jeremy Hunt his support. "Do I think his special adviser behaved badly? Yes, 
plainly. Do I think Jeremy was personally aware? If he says no, well personally 
I would believe him if he tells me."

He seems an unusually credulous person, I suggest. "Well, I know Jeremy, and 
Jeremy is actually a very straight person." Would he say he is generally 
disposed to be trusting? "Yes," he agrees firmly and happily. "I mean, 
I genuinely believe, if someone tells me something – well, I like to believe 
that people are generally truthful unless I get evidence that proves something 
differently."

I suspect Whittingdale's critics probably have a point when they say his 
credulousness and exactingly high standards of evidence are applied more 
selectively than he would like to think. That these instincts were generously 
extended to Murdoch, but do not apply to ordinary people's complaints about 
unemployment and poverty, cannot be entirely coincidental. But I also think his 
inclination towards the benefit of the doubt may come down to something quite 
simple. Would it be fair to say that the instinct comes from being congenitally 
jolly? He thinks for a moment.

"I have my tortured moments. But people have always said I'm quite cheerful. 
So yes, I think that's right," and he lets out a great hoot. "I dolike people."
 