
He was on the pitch for only the final 27 minutes but Jermain Defoe stole the 
show with two stunning goals last night and inadvertently caused his manager, 
Martin Jol, yet more embarrassment.

In fact, Jol may be secretly wishing he had not sent on the England striker as 
a 63rd-minute replacement for his captain, Robbie Keane, because the 
substitute's exquisite cameo performance indicated how wrong the Dutchman has 
been to have omitted him from all Tottenham Hotspur's starting line-ups this 
season.

Defoe was probably relieved to have made it even on to the bench last night 
after being left out of Jol's first 16 altogether for the 3-1 home defeat by 
Spurs' arch rivals Arsenal on Saturday.

Despite sealing this comfortable victory with two brilliant long-range 
strikes, however, he can expect to be among the substitutes again - at best - 
when Tottenham travel to Bolton Wanderers for their Premier League fixture on 
Sunday.

"It was the type of game for him to come on and score," Jol said. "That's the 
eagerness we have to keep locked up so he can do it in the next game. But 
Robbie Keane could have scored three goals, so there are no guarantees. I will 
look at each game separately."

The Spurs manager added: "If Jermain would have started I'm sure Robbie would 
have come on and scored a couple of goals. If Robbie hadn't scored I may have 
had a problem, but he did score."

Younes Kaboul, the France Under-21 defender, headed Tottenham ahead in the 
fifth minute and victory was assured by three more goals in three minutes 
before the interval. Kaboul's central defensive partner, Michael Dawson, made 
it 2-0 from close range in the 40th minute and Keane drilled in the third from 
20 yards moments later before Darren Bent, the club's Â£16.5m signing from 
Charlton, took advantage of Lambros Lambrou's terrible back pass to slide 
Spurs' fourth into an empty net two minutes before half-time.

As the goals dried up, the crowd chanted Defoe's name and moments after 
replacing Keane he made it 5-0 with the goal of the night, a sublime chip from 
outside the penalty area.

Anton Zlogar grabbed a consolation goal for the visitors with a low shot nine 
minutes from time and was then promptly substituted for his trouble.

However, Defoe restored Tottenham's five-goal advantage - and possibly his 
reputation - with another long-range effort in injury-time to complete the 
rout. He will undoubtedly be able to savour the two strikes when he is sitting 
on the bench in the coming months.
 