
The paintball episode put Community over the edge. For the past few months, 
NBC's sitcom about a lawyer sentenced to attend a shambolic community college 
in order to get the degree he pretended to have, has been steadily improving. 
In its formative episodes, the focus was mostly on establishing leading man 
Joel McHale as the wisecracking ringleader of an oddball-packed Spanish study 
group. McHale's amoral Chevy Chase-esque shyster never bothered to mask his 
feelings of superiority to his dysfunctional study buddies: "You remind me of 
myself at a young age," sighs the class's bewildered senior citizen (played by 
Chevy Chase!). "I deserve that," winces McHale. The only light in his grim 
horizon is his attraction to Britta Perry (Gillian Jacobs), the icy blonde 
moral beacon in his group.

But it didn't take long before McHale was revealed as every bit as desperate, 
hopeless, needy and borderline-unhinged as Chase's moist-towelette millionaire, 
as the over achieving high-schooler who overdosed on prescription pills, the 
unblinking Arab kid who is only able to converse in pop-culture references, the 
oblivious former football hero and the ever-smiling Christian single mom. It 
took even less time for the icy blonde with whom he shared zero onscreen 
chemistry to be kicked off her pedestal and revealed as a phony liberal hipster 
twit. Once it established its ensemble as a gang of crabs trapped in the same 
adult-education barrel, Community suddenly developed a case of vaulting 
ambition. It threw out dance-based episodes, music-based episodes, an 
increasing number of episodes designed to strip the well-defined McHale down to 
his underwear, an episode about the chicken fingers in the canteen that 
skilfully evolved into a extended GoodFellas parody complete with camera angles 
and voiceover. And then there was the paintball episode.

The story starts with McHale hearing rumours of a possibly mythical 
certificate that allows selected students an infinite number of free periods. 
He falls asleep and when he wakes up he finds himself alone in a 
paint-spattered campus where the sense of foreboding is almost palpable. Then 
the first paintball narrowly misses him. Imagine I Am Legend and Die Hard and 
Mad Max and Hard Boiled and every other notable action movie from the past two 
decades. Now imagine them within the confines of a 21-minute sitcom in a world 
where everyone is driven to acts of unimaginable savagery not because of 
illness or war but the promise of free periods. And with paint. I'm going to 
say Community is the best comedy of its kind sinceArrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arrested-development> and, much as I 
revere the memory of that show, I'm not sure it ever managed a single episode 
as astonishing as the paintball one.
 Alexis, star of Pretty Wild. 
The first time I saw the E! reality series Pretty Wild, I didn't know if it 
was supposed to be a parody. It seemed a lot like E!'s flagship show, Keeping 
Up With The Kardashians. An insane mother encouraging her gaggle of 
scatterbrained fame-whore daughters to wallow ever deeper in the debaucheries 
of LA nightlife. But the Kardashian ladies were not home-schooled by a former 
Playboy lingerie model whose specialist subject is the teachings of the 
bestselling self-help book, The Secret. And whose other specialist subject is 
pole-dancing.

Halfway though the first episode of Pretty Wild, mom pretends to be concerned 
as her daughters flutter off to spend the night auditioning to be scantily-clad 
accessories in a probably non-existent rock video. My remote-control 
trigger-finger was itching. But this was one time being too lazy to even move 
as much as a limb paid off big time. The morning after the girls got back from 
their night on the town, the cops showed up. The daughter known as Alexis had 
been captured by surveillance cameras. In the home of Orlando Bloom. Helping 
herself to his belongings. That is correct. Alexis was part of the notorious
Bling Ring 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/17/bling-ring-los-angeles-hollywood>
: a small group of LA scenesters resentful of the fact that their lack of 
earning power denied them the material possessions of people they deemed their 
peers. So they broke into Paris Hilton's house. Twice. (She left the key under 
the mat both times.) And a bunch of other houses. Alexis wasn't part of the 
gang on those other occasions. She chose to make her criminal debut ON THE 
NIGHT HER REALITY SHOW BEGAN SHOOTING. And so, what was shaping up to be 
another pinheaded E! show â€¦ well, it remained another pinheaded E! show. Except 
it was a pinheaded E! show that had no choice but to acknowledge the elephant 
in the room.

The Pretty Wild girls went through the same dating problems and shopping 
sprees as the Kardashians. But Alexis also had to hire a lawyer and she had to 
be seen not to be acting like a scatterbrained fame-whore. And that drove her 
nuts. In the most memorable episode to date, she was interviewed by Vanity Fair 
about her involvement in the Bling Ring. Through sobs, Alexis proclaimed not 
only her innocence but that she was a wholesome, studious, charitable, 
brilliant future world leader. When the VF story hit the racks, Alexis was 
characterised as showing up to court wearing six-inch heels. Alexis hit the 
roof. "THEY WERE FOUR-INCH HEELS!!!" she shrieked. Despite her veneer of 
wounded innocence, it was increasingly obvious Alexis was revelling in the 
attention. Whether she was playing the martyr to the paparazzi or going on 
talkshows to declare "The truth will come out and my name will be cleared", she 
was carving out a niche for herself as the designer martyr. Then the trial date 
grew closer. And Orlando Bloom declared himself willing to testify. Alexis's 
lawyer pleaded no contest and she begins an 180-day jail sentence in June. 
There's no way the E! cameras won't be waiting for her the second she gets out.
 