
A Burmese court has freed dozens of jailed students after Aung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> pledged to make releasing 
activists and political prisoners the first priority of her new government.

There were jubilant scenes at the sweltering central Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> courthouse in Tharrawaddy on Friday 
as a judge told young activists they could go home, more than a year after they 
were arrested over an education protest that police violently crushed in March 
2015.

The township judge Chit Myat told the 69 activists they were freed from the 
case without charge, although at least three of the group will remain in prison 
because they face hearings in other courts.

Myanmar's ex-president Thein Sein becomes Buddhist monk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/myanmars-ex-president-thein-sein-becomes-buddhist-monk>
Myanmar has scores of political prisoners languishing in its jails and 
hundreds of detained activists awaiting trial, despite reforms in recent years 
as the military loosened its grip on power following half a century of 
repressive rule.

Aung San Suu Kyi said on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/aung-san-suu-kyi-mass-amnesty-political-prisoners-myanmar>
 that she would prioritise releasing activists. It is an issue laden with 
significance for herself and scores of MPs in her party who were jailed for 
democracy activism during the junta era.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fjubilant-scenes-in-court-as-myanmar-frees-scores-of-jailed-students%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06c448d8e356d9102e809dfc8673b2ac37d55d70%2F0_47_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jubilant%20scenes%20in%20court%20as%20Myanmar%20frees%20scores%20of%20jailed%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fjubilant-scenes-in-court-as-myanmar-frees-scores-of-jailed-students%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jubilant%20scenes%20in%20court%20as%20Myanmar%20frees%20scores%20of%20jailed%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fjubilant-scenes-in-court-as-myanmar-frees-scores-of-jailed-students%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06c448d8e356d9102e809dfc8673b2ac37d55d70%2F0_47_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Family members welcome a student protester as she arrives for the hearing in 
Tharrawaddy. Photograph: Ye Aung Thu/AFP/Getty Images 
The statement was not followed by an official amnesty notice from President 
Htin Kyaw, but families nevertheless crowded at prison gates around the country 
from early in the morning hoping to be reunited with their loved ones.

Those gathered in Tharrawaddy’s dusty courtroom erupted into cheers and song 
after the judge delivered his statement, while dozens of police looked on. 
Tearful parents gripped their children in emotional scenes before hurrying to 
the nearby prison to collect the detainees’ belongings.

Some students stopped at a cemetery to pay their respects at the graves of 
other activists who died in the country’s decades-long democracy struggle.

“Our release showed that we didn’t commit any crime. We suffered in prison for 
more than one year. We are happy but we want the new government to release all 
political prisoners immediately,” Ei Thinzar Maung, 20, said after her release.

Yangon's circular railway – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/mar/28/yangon-circular-railway-myanmar-in-pictures>
Court officials said they had begun preparing to release the students shortly 
after Aung San Suu Kyi’s statement, which said her government would try to free 
detainees still on trial by asking the state prosecutor to drop the charges.

Human Rights Watch (HRW) welcomed the students’ release but urged Aung San Suu 
Kyi and her National League for Democracy (NLD) party to amend the laws used to 
imprison peaceful protesters.

“They have to release political prisoners but they also have to do away with 
these rights-abusing laws. The NLD has an absolute majority in both houses of 
the national assembly. They can do this,” said Phil Robertson, HRW’s deputy 
Asia director.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fjubilant-scenes-in-court-as-myanmar-frees-scores-of-jailed-students%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90ded5c5fd7ae495d76d38943cce34d071e328d%2F0_48_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jubilant%20scenes%20in%20court%20as%20Myanmar%20frees%20scores%20of%20jailed%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fjubilant-scenes-in-court-as-myanmar-frees-scores-of-jailed-students%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jubilant%20scenes%20in%20court%20as%20Myanmar%20frees%20scores%20of%20jailed%20students&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fjubilant-scenes-in-court-as-myanmar-frees-scores-of-jailed-students%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90ded5c5fd7ae495d76d38943cce34d071e328d%2F0_48_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Relatives of the released prisoners wait in front of the jail. Photograph: 
Xinhua/REX/Shutterstock 
Aung San Suu Kyi spent about 15 years under house arrest and more than 100 
current NLD MPs served time in prison under the junta.

The quasi-civilian government that replaced the junta in 2011 freed hundreds 
of political detainees but oversaw the detention of scores more, particularly 
activists involved in land and education protests.

Prior to Friday there were about 121 political prisoners held in Myanmar’s 
jails and a further 414 awaiting trial, according to the Assistance Association 
for Political Prisoners. The majority were arrested before last November’s 
landmark elections, which the NLD won in a landslide.

Aung San Suu Kyi made the prisoner release announcement in her broadly defined 
new position of state counsellor, which she was given despite vehement 
opposition from the still-powerful military whose charter bars her from the 
presidency.
 