
Anita leaning across the lunch table to examine what was on my plate: “How is  
that?” she asks, and then, with one of her broader, more expectant smiles: 
“Disappointing?” Anita telling me that she had just completed a novel, dropping 
her voice to add, in a low, confidential tone, “It’s about … a lonely woman.” 
Anita, who was always in situ, however early I arrived, greeting me with her 
usual unsettling opener: “So, what have you got for me?” Lunch never took 
longer than 75 minutes; she usually ordered fish, then black coffee, with which 
she would smoke two cigarettes. (For quite a while these were Sovereign, a sort 
of low-rent Benson & Hedges: it was the only less than stylish accoutrement I 
ever noted about her.) Anita telling me that she had just completed a further 
novel, and with that off her desk she was now free to do whatever she wanted. 
“Well, in your case,” I said, with joke-jocularity, “That probably means 
rereading Proust.” There was a slightly alarmed silence: “How did you guess?” 
At fairly regular intervals, she would ask me how old I was. I would tell her, 
and she would respond, with a kind of enthusiastic melancholy, “Another 10 good 
years.” Over the next couple of decades, the same question was repeated, and 
exactly the same response to my reply; though as time passed, I couldn’t help 
noticing that the enthusiasm diminished into a kind of sympathetic hopefulness.

No one else had the same effect. I found myself punctuating my own 
conversation – putting in semicolons, for God’s sake

She was witty, glitteringly intelligent, reserved, and unknowable beyond the 
point she herself had already decided upon. I can’t think of a novelist less 
likely to write an autobiography. She was fiercely moral without being 
moralistic, and fiercely truthful. I once went into a London local radio 
station for an interview and the team there were still in a state of shock from 
having had Anita in for a (very rare) appearance the previous day. I asked what 
had happened. “She answered every question truthfully,” they replied. Indeed; 
and not what they were used to. I knew her – not well – for 30 years. There was 
no one remotely like her, and no one whose presence had anything approaching 
the same effect. I was not the only one to find that my conversation changed 
when sitting opposite her. Vocabulary and grammar were self-scrutinised in the 
microsecond before they emerged from my mouth; I even found myself punctuating 
my own conversation – putting in semicolons, for God’s sake. She herself would 
remain calm, amused, in control. And then you might say something like, “What 
do you think of Boucher?” (or any one of a thousand painters), and she would be 
transformed, more alive than at any other time. She would answer precisely, 
intensely, at length, with great passion, eyes aglow, and even occasionally 
letting drop some personal detail. She once told me that the happiest time of 
her life was when she was in France doing her doctorate on Greuze, and 
travelling round provincial art galleries by bus, in fog. The fog was very 
important to the happiness, you felt.

And, lest we forget, she spent far longer teaching, thinking and writing about 
art than she did as a practising novelist. If we were not lamenting “Booker 
prize-winning author Anita Brookner”, we would be remembering more fully one of 
the most luminously perceptive writers on art in recent times, and a teacher 
who inspired lifelong devotion. Eighteenth and 19th-century French art were her 
main concerns: she wrote brilliantly on Watteau and David, and with equal 
insight into the two mutually repelling poles of mid-19th century French art – 
Delacroix and Ingres. Her art writing is academic in the best sense: 
high-minded, compact, the result of deep study, yet fully available to the 
general intelligent reader. Her rigour is as compelling as her prose, and her 
judgments, when negative, are astringent. Thus she decries “the deathless and 
morbid imprint” that Baudelaire tried to leave on Delacroix; and is unforgiving 
about “the protective coating of infantilism” assumed by William Blake and 
others. Her criticism, like her world-view, was grown up. One sentence from her 
hilariously cogent review of a new edition of the Book of Job: “Bildad the 
Shuhite is also of the tedious opinion that suffering enobles.”

Anita Brookner obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/15/anita-brookner-obituary> 
We met in 1984, having both been shortlisted for the Booker prize. When our 
mutual editor Liz Calder rang her up to report the news, Anita replied, “I 
think I shall go out and get a pair of shoes resoled. That will help me keep my 
feet on the ground.” When she won, she went up to the dais, received the 
cheque, turned to the audience with immaculate poise, and began: “Usually, when 
I stand up, I go on for about 50 minutes” – then a pause of perfect length, 
before she added – “with slides.” Afterwards, Malcolm Bradbury (whom I had 
never met before) came up and slung a consoling arm around my shoulder, “Well,” 
he said, “I don’t think you should have won. But I don’t think you should have 
lost tothat book.” This was an ignoble remark, but mildly prophetic. The 
(mainly male) press dubbed her “Modest Anita” and – ignoring her stellar career 
as an art historian – decided to pigeonhole her as a lonely spinster whose life 
had not worked out and who therefore consoled herself by writing novels, once a 
year, as a regular act of comfort, like a posh version of buying herself a box 
of Quality Street. They took as autobiographical the first line of her first 
novel,A Start in Life: “Dr Weiss, at 40, knew that her life had been ruined by 
literature.” But Dr Brookner’s life had not been ruined by literature. At 40, 
Dr Brookner had just become the first female Slade professor of art at 
Cambridge. Literature had helped explain the world to her, and continued to do 
so. And later, when she herself took to fiction, literature gave her a second 
helping of renown, of a different kind.

She often kept the world at bay, but that didn’t make her lonely. She was over 
40 when she finally escaped the emotional pandemonium of life with her parents 
(whom she loved “painfully”); and after that she lived, I believe, exactly as 
she wished to. I do not mean she never had emotional buffetings; rather that, 
insofar as we can ever decide our own way to live, she did. If she didn’t want 
to do something, she declined. She thought it her social duty to go to certain 
parties, but her technique was to arrive punctually at the start, do a quick 
tour, thank her hosts, and leave just as the main gang of roisterers were 
arriving through the door. She once agreed to come in to our joint publishers 
and sign her latest novel. Unthreateningly, they had laid out a pile of 100 
copies. She sat down, took out her pen, signed 25, and said, “I think that’s 
enough, don’t you?” And then she left. I used to send her art postcards from 
foreign trips until I realised that their arrival was never mentioned; so I 
stopped, and the stopping equally went unmentioned. Once, I saw an announcement 
of an evening at the National Film Theatre that seemed made for Anita: an 
assemblage of the very earliest film footage shot in and around Paris. I rang 
her, and was a quarter of the way into my excited proposal when she cut in 
with, “No, I think not … ” I felt clumsy, blundering, as if I had crossed some 
social line. I had; and never made such a suggestion again. Lunch once a year; 
dinner occasionally; and that was it. A friend of mine once took a camera crew 
to her flat in Elm Park Gardens. It was sparsely furnished, with a lineup of 
potted plants on the windowsill. A nervous PA, seeking a form of social entry, 
tried, “What beautiful flowers, Miss Brookner!” – only to receive the silencing 
reply, “They’re all new.” Anita wouldn’t have meant to be crushing, I am sure; 
but she did mean to indicate clearly the nature and remit of what she 
considered appropriate conversation.

The five best Anita Brookner novels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/19/the-five-best-anita-brookner-novels>
Her novels often feature lonely spinsters, who seem to do little except return 
their library books, visit tea rooms, and reflect on unlived lives. But she was 
no more her female protagonists than John Updike was Rabbit Angstrom. (She 
liked smart places – we used to lunch at the Caprice or at Durrants Hotel – but 
also quite liked being let down by them. On one occasion she had just come back 
from Paris. “I stayed at the Crillon,” she reported. “They put me in a maid’s 
room.”) Her prose was as impeccable and structurally balanced as her speech; 
indeed, so close to it that I doubt examination of her manuscripts would show 
much rewriting. There is often a moral antithesis in her fiction, opposing 
those who are virtuous, truthful, genteel and stylish, to those who are monied, 
coarse, and careless. The latter have happier lives than the former, since they 
lack both moral integrity and the capacity for self-awareness or self-doubt. In 
Brooknerland, the hare always beats the tortoise, and it would be sentimental 
to believe or expect otherwise. This view of life was steady and unwavering. 
But any biographer or critic tempted by the notion thatAnita Brookner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anita-brookner> was somehow, at some level, 
calling out for our sympathy, would be daftly mistaken. She was about the most 
unself-pitying person I have ever met. She knew the world to be unfair, and 
thought it naive of anyone else not to see that. She was, in her deepest self, 
a stoic. And she took that stoicism to the level of nobility. She would 
probably be appalled by that statement; but many who knew her would agree with 
me.

She read Proust; she read Simenon – preferring the romans durs to the Maigret 
stories (her favourite, she once told me, was Chez Krull); in later years, she 
would annually review the entire Goncourt prize shortlist in a thousand or so 
words for the Spectator. But I don’t think of her fiction as having much French 
influence. She seemed to me more Euro-British. And while she swam in 
literature, she had little interest in the literary life, let alone the 
remotest kind of careerism. You would not catch her on the circuit of literary 
festivals, or dashing in to the Front Row studio. She was pleased with her 
success, but did nothing to encourage or discourage readers except by doing 
what counted: writing another novel. I am convinced that if she had published a 
book every two years instead of annually, her reputation would now be twice as 
high. I am sure she would have found any such calculatingness vulgar. 
Nevertheless, it remains, I think, the case. She never moaned about her 
sometimes patronising treatment by domestic reviewers. But occasionally it 
would come out obliquely. Once I reported to her on a recent bout of book 
promotion in Paris. “Yes,” she commented, “They areinterested, aren’t they?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjulian-barnes-remembers-anita-brookner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a1bab91262cdda320cdffd947722be2838e3f4c%2F0_113_2372_1423%2F2372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Barnes%20remembers%20his%20friend%20Anita%20Brookner%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20was%20no%20one%20remotely%20like%20her%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjulian-barnes-remembers-anita-brookner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Barnes%20remembers%20his%20friend%20Anita%20Brookner%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20was%20no%20one%20remotely%20like%20her%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjulian-barnes-remembers-anita-brookner%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a1bab91262cdda320cdffd947722be2838e3f4c%2F0_113_2372_1423%2F2372.jpg>
 Anna Massey in a BBC adaptation of Brookner’s Hotel du Lac. Photograph: 
www.ronaldgrantarchive.com 
Her novels were what they were; they played to her strengths, of clarity, 
irony, wit, insight. Her voice was recognisable from the opening line. (Take 
the first three words ofLatecomers: “Hartmann, a voluptuary, ...” No one else 
would have written that.) What she did less well, she didn’t do at all. Most 
writers are aware of their weaknesses, or over-characteristics, and try to 
fudge things along; Anita never faked anything in her writing. Or perhaps it 
would be truer to say that in her fiction, as in her life, she rarely did 
things she didn’t want to. One summer, my wife and I took her latest novel to 
France on holiday. I read it first; the next morning, my wife settled down to 
it beneath the shade of a tree. After about an hour, there was an explosion of 
disbelieving rage – and I already knew exactly what it was about. “I’m on page 
35,” she called across, “and I’ve just reached the first line of dialogue –and 
it’s in French!” In one of Anita’s later novels, the female protagonist, when 
having supper alone in her flat, regularly has a glass of white wine. Being 
interested in wine, I couldn’t help noticing that each time supper occurred, 
the wine was different: first a chardonnay, then a pinot grigio, then a 
sauvignon, and so on; but the last wine to be drunk in the book was, 
unexpectedly, sweet – a sauternes. I wondered if such changingness might be 
significant, intended perhaps as an emblem of the protagonist’s volatility. At 
lunch I mentioned this theory, and referred to that puzzling late switch from 
dry to sweet. “Oh no,” replied Anita unconcernedly, “I just went into a shop 
and copied down the names.”

In Brooknerland the hare always beat the tortoise. She knew the world to be 
unfair and thought it naive not to see that

I last saw her in the summer of 2010, when the publisher Carmen Callil brought 
her to lunch. She was frailer, and needed a stick. I had made potted crab, to 
which she said she was allergic, to my embarrassment (should I have known?). 
Instead she took a little cheese, some green salad and a roast tomato; she 
declined the beetroot. We asked about her life. She said that she went out 
early every morning to her Sainsbury’s Local for “a croissant, a petit pain and 
a loaf”. “Every day, Anita?” “I eat a lot of bread.” She had been rereading 
Stefan Zweig and applauded that most Brooknerianly-titled novelBeware of Pity. 
She agreed with Carmen that the one advantage of age was that the trials of the 
heart were behind you. She stated that she had no religious feelings or beliefs 
at all. She still rented her television (no digibox or Freeview), and still 
smoked eight or 10 cigarettes a day. “Do you have your first after breakfast, 
Anita?” “Ofcourse.” She had the Times delivered, but when she went out for her 
hamper of bread she also bought the Independent, Mail, Guardian and Telegraph. 
She read them all, which took until 10.30. “There’s never anything in them.” I 
suggested that perhaps she could in future buy just one newspaper, but could 
tell she was not open to changing her ways, or her expectation of life, at this 
stage. (“How are the newspapers, Anita?” “Disappointing”).

After she left, I felt exhausted – by the desire to get it right. When Carmen 
got home, she had to have a lie down. But Anita was indomitably looking forward 
to the Spectator party that evening – ready to give it her full 20 minutes, I 
would guess. Though I missed seeing her thereafter – she declined to come out 
again – and worried about her, I worried less than about others in similar 
situations. I felt sure that her stoicism and mental strength would see her 
through. I did not expect her to be afraid of death’s approach; her full 
understanding of the world included an understanding of death, and I imagined 
the terminus failing to unsettle her. I do not know if this proved the case; 
but I feel as confident about it as about anything else.
 