
Jury selection for the trial of the Texan financier Allen Stanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/allen-stanford> will begin on Monday.

Stanford, a one-time cricket mogul and unofficial knight of Antigua is, 
according to the US government, the author of one of thebiggest Ponzi schemes 
of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/19/allen-stanford-arrested>.

The long-delayed case is scheduled to start in Houston, Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, with Stanford accused of 
orchestrating a $7.2bn (Â£4.6bn) fraud in order to fund a lavish lifestyle of 
yachts, a private island, jets and his own cricket team.

Stanford, the largest private landowner in Antigua, was known as "Sir Allen" 
after being knighted by the island's former prime minister.

The US justice system will also be in the dock. Stanford has been in prison 
since he was arrested on grounds that he was at risk of fleeing in 2009.

A series of lawyers have delayed the case by arguing that their client is 
incapable of standing trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/22/allen-stanford-deemed-fit-trial> 
as a result of a prison beating he received in 2009.

An altercation with another prisoner over a telephone call left him unable to 
recall his own name, according to reports filed in court. After the attack, he 
was prescribed powerful anti-anxiety medicine that doctors claimed contributed 
to "extensive retrograde amnesia".

In court papers, Stanford's lawyers claimed family members had to "educate" 
him about his previous life and said he was "completely amnestic to his life 
prior to the assault".

As well as his private life, prosecutors said Stanford told prison doctors 
that he had forgotten "details of his business and banking operations".

Prosecutors suggested he was faking, arguing that his alleged condition was 
incredibly rare and there was no evidence of a brain injury that would prevent 
him standing trial. Last December, Judge David Hittner said the trial should 
proceed.

Stanford was once one of the most influential men in cricket, and set up a 
series of $20m tournaments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/feb/03/ecb-allen-standford-faces-legal-action>
 in 2008. He announced his deal with the England and Wales Cricket Board by 
landing a black helicopter at Lord's and was photographed with England cricket 
stars standing by a huge, clear box apparently full of money.
 