
Police opened fire to disperse protesters trying to scale the walls of the 
presidential palace in Kabul on Wednesday, as anger grew over the decapitation 
of seven civilians in southern Afghanistan by militants believed to be loyal to
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>.

Officials said seven people had been injured when shots were fired into the 
air as thousands gathered in the Afghan capital to call for the resignation of 
the country’s president,Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>.

In a sign of growing violence between the Taliban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> and self-proclaimed Isis militants, 
the decapitated bodies of seven Hazaras, a Shia minority, were found on 
Saturday in Zabul province. The victims had been taken hostage about a month 
ago on the road from Jaghori district in Ghazni province to Kandahar.

The Hazaras have historically suffered persecution, and many protesters on 
Tuesday and Wednesday demanded an end to what they called targeted killings. 
“The government is not taking the protection of Hazaras seriously,” said 
Mohammad Jawad, 29.

Afghan Hazara asylum seekers to be forcibly deported from Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/07/afghan-hazara-asylum-seekers-forcibly-deported-australia>
In the wake of the largest protests In Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> since Ghani came to power last 
year, he addressed the nation in a televised speech on Wednesday. He encouraged 
people to calm their emotions, and promised that the government would not rest 
until the perpetrators had been punished. “The nation’s pain is my pain,” he 
said.

He also tried to downplay the ethnic element of the killings, blaming the 
“enemies of Afghanistan” for trying to foment sectarian hatred.

The demonstrations began on Tuesday when relatives of the victims brought the 
seven coffins to a Hazara neighbourhood in the capital. The coffins arrived in 
Kabul in the evening, draped in green cloth to the sound of wailing and 
thunderous shouts of “God is Great” from hundreds of mourners. One of the 
coffins, ferried on the hands of a group of crying women, carried nine-year-old 
Shukria, the youngest victim.

Mourners beat their chests and chanted “death to the Taliban” and “death to 
Ashraf Ghani”. As the evening wore on, the families’ grief became collective 
and their private cries were transformed into broader demands for protection 
and justice.

Afghan exodus grows as Taliban gains ground and hope for future diminishes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/29/afghan-exodus-grows-taliban-gain-ground-refugees>
By Wednesday, as the protesters marched on the palace, the crowds had swollen 
to many thousands, including members of other ethnic groups. A man said to be 
Shukria’s father banged his fists against the palace gates, and his head 
against his daughter’s coffin.

As was the case after the March mob murder of Farkhunda Malikzada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/06/farkhunda-malikzada-murder-protests-kabul-death-sentences-quashed>
, women were at the forefront of the demonstration. In addition to Shukria, two 
women were also among the victims.

“Being a woman in Afghanistan is dangerous, but being Hazara is even more 
dangerous,” said Leila Mohammadi, 28, who helped carry the coffins. “These 
women were completely innocent,” she said.

“There have been many incidents against women in Afghanistan,” said Maryam 
Shahi, another protester. “But nothing like these beheadings.”

The demonstrations were comparable in size to the mass rallies during last 
year’s contentious election. As Afghanistan becomes increasingly unstable, 
disillusionment with the government is driving large numbers of young Afghans, 
many of them Hazaras, to seek a better life in Europe.

For Hazaras, the brutality of the murders chime with traumatic memories of a 
violent past. They were often persecuted under the Taliban. In 2001, the 
Taliban executed several hundred Hazaras in Bamiyan, in one of the single worst 
incidents of targeted ethnic killings in recent Afghan memory.

Afghan refugees in Iran being sent to fight and die for Assad in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/05/iran-recruits-afghan-refugees-fight-save-syrias-bashar-al-assad>
Travel has been particularly fraught with danger for Afghanistan’s Hazaras in 
recent years. People have been kidnapped and murdered on the country’s roads. 
“Kabul has become like a prison for us,” said Ali, a protester who only went by 
one name.

Other protesters warned against fuelling sectarian tensions by focusing on the 
ethnic aspect of the killings.

“Every day Daesh [Isis] and the Taliban kill,” said Mohammad Mustafa, 22, a 
Tajik university student. “Today does not belong just to the Hazaras. It 
belongs to all people in our country.”

New splinter groups within the insurgency have pledged allegiance to Isis, but 
few if any have shown signs of links to the organisation in Iraq and Syria. 
They have, however, sought to match their namesakes in brutality.

Additional reporting by Mokhtar Amiri
 