
Afghan insurgents appeared to continue their assassination campaign against 
key public figures on Wednesday with the killing of the mayor of Kandahar.

Ghulam Haider Hamidi was targeted by a suicide bomber who got into the 
municipality compound in Kandahar City with explosives concealed under his 
turban. The technique was first used earlier this month in a mosque in the city 
during a memorial service forAhmed Wali Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, a regional strongman and 
half-brother of the president.

Abdul Manan, a municipality employee, said the mayor had emerged from his 
office into the garden, where he made a call on his mobile phone.

The assassin grabbed him and detonated the bomb.

"I rushed outside and saw the mayor was lying still on the ground," said 
Manan. "Another headless body was next to him and the mayor had deep wounds on 
his face and chest.''

The death of Hamidi will raise further concerns about whether military gains 
by the US military in the Kandahar region, particularly in districts adjoining 
the city, will be undermined by the remorseless killing of top public figures.

The death comes weeks after the killing in their homes of two powerful 
politicians in the south: Ahmed Wali Karzai and Jan Mohammad Khan, an ally of 
the Karzai family and a key figure in neighbouring Uruzgan province. In April, 
Kandahar's police chief was killed by a suicide bomber who entered police 
headquarters.

A recent UN report said "targeted killings" had increased in the first half of 
2011 from an already high level. Assassination attempts had caused 43 injuries 
and 190 deaths â€“ a 5% increase on the same period in 2010.

"Every death piles on top of the other and leads to a sense of demoralisation, 
that nobody is safe," said Martine van Bijlert, co-director of theAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> Analysts Network.

"Previously these attacks were carried out when the targets were on the move, 
either in their cars or on the way to the mosque or somewhere else where they 
were vulnerable. But now we have this recent development where assassins are 
able to enter secure areas and target people there."

Hamidi, an Afghan-American who worked as an accountant in the US for 20 years, 
was nowhere near as politically important as Ahmed Wali Karzai. Although Karzai 
held an elected position as the head of the provincial council, he was a 
powerbroker who wielded enormous power through his control of the war economy.

US strategy in the south has been to try to build the influence of formal 
institutions and government officials against such informal "malign actors". 
Hamidi held an official position but was also very much part of the Karzai 
family network in the south, to which he owed his job. It had been rumoured 
that he might take the lead role in the province after the killing of Ahmed 
Wali.

As well as being a target of insurgents attempting to weaken the government in 
any way possible, Hamidi had made plenty of enemies among businessmen and power 
brokers who felt excluded from war economy contracts, projects and other 
get-rich schemes that have largely benefited the extended Karzai family and its 
tribal allies.

The fact that the Taliban's spokesmen were relatively slow to claim credit for 
the assassination prompted speculation that his killing could be the result of 
a personal grudge.

Hamidi was attacked in some quarters over the Aino Minna development, a 
somewhat surreal US-style suburb on the edge of Kandahar City. In part 
developed by Mahmoud Karzai, one of the Afghan president's controversial 
brothers, the scheme has been criticised for being built on land once owned by 
the ministry of defence that was sold cheaply after intense lobbying, some from 
Hamidi.

At the time of his assassination Hamidi's office was surrounded by around 100 
protesters, furious at the municipality's destruction of houses built illegally 
on government land in recent days in the Loy Wala area of Kandahar.

One protester, Hajji Lal Mohammad, said the mayor had sparked outrage in the 
community where the houses were destroyed, apparently killing two children.

"They destroyed 200 houses and two children were killed," he said. "When I saw 
the bulldozers I also wanted to kill the mayor."

The governor of Kandahar, Toryalai Wesa, warned the "land mafia" who illegally 
occupy land that "you might be happy that the mayor is gone but we will stand 
and we will destroy illegal houses".

Although a statement by the governor's office seemed to suggest that the land 
issue was the reason the mayor had been killed, the governor said it was too 
early to say who was responsible and that the killing was being investigated.
 