
A suicide bomber has killed three people at a Kandahar mosque during a 
memorial service forAhmed Wali Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ahmed-wali-karzai>, the Afghan president's 
brother who was assassinated earlier this week.

The attacker was 15 or 16-year-old boy who had a bomb concealed in his turban, 
the Kandahar governor said.

Zalmai Ayoubi, a spokesman for the governor's office, confirmed three people 
were killed and 15 were wounded in the attack. However, witnesses said five 
people had died and more than 25 were injured.

"The suicide attacker entered the mosque. One of the people who died was 
Maulawi Ekmattulah, the head of the local ulema shura [the provincial religious 
council]," Ayoubi said. The identity of the others killed has not yet been 
confirmed.

Haji Padshah, who had been paying his last respects to Karzai at the service, 
said: "I was on the other side of the mosque when I heard the bang. It deafened 
me. I could not hear anything but I saw everyone running around."

Speaking from the hospital where he had been taken, Padshah said he saw five 
dead bodies and more than 25 injured survivors.

Ahmed Wali Karzai was shot by his personal bodyguard on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/12/ahmed-wali-karzai-killing-sparks-fears>
 and was buried at the family gravesite in the village of Karz.

The funeral was attended by the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamid-karzai>, politicians, dignitaries and 
thousands of other mourners. Islamic custom dictates the deceased must be 
buried within 24 hours of death.

Thursday's memorial service was planned to allow those travelling from further 
afield who would not arrive in time for the burial to pay their respects.

The police have launched an investigation into the killing of Karzai as it is 
unclear why a trusted aide would murder him. The Taliban claimed responsibility 
for the assassination but a personal conflict has not been ruled out. Hamid 
Karzai was not at today's memorial service, having already returned to Kabul.

The burial of of AWK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/13/afghanistan-karzai-brother-funeral-taliban>
, as he was known, passed without incident amid tight security provided by the 
Afghan national security forces. However, Helmand's governor, Gulab Mangal, was 
targeted by a remotely detonated roadside bomb in Maiwand district of Kandahar 
as he travelled to the funeral. No one has claimed responsibility for the 
attack.

Taliban spokesperson Qari Yosuf Ahmadi said he did not have any information 
about the attack.
 