
The UK Athletics performance director, Neil Black, insists he is unconcerned 
that two of his brightest young prospects, the heptathleteKatarina 
Johnson-Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/katarina-johnson-thompson> 
and the sprinter Adam Gemili, are still without coaches as they begin their 
preparations for the 2017 world championships in London.

Johnson-Thompson parted with her coach, Mike Holmes, after a disappointing 
Olympics where she finished sixth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/jessica-ennis-hill-to-decide-on-future-after-claiming-silver-in-heptathlon>
, while Gemili left Steve Fudgeafter missing out on a 200m medal in Rio by 
three-thousandths of a second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/usain-bolt-jamaica-200m-gold-medal-olympic-rio-2016>
. Both are understood to have been searching for replacements, with 
Johnson-Thompson considering whether to stay in the UK or move to the 
Netherlands or the US and Gemili understood to be favouring relocating to the 
US.

Black, who on Wednesday announced which British athletes would be funded by 
lottery money in 2017, said he hoped the pair would make up their minds sooner 
rather than later. “It’s a very difficult thing finding a coach who’s got the 
right background, skill set, environment, personality – and the chemistry 
between the athlete and coach has to be exceptional,” he said. “We are working 
with both Adam and Katarina to explore their options and we hope they make good 
decisions as soon as they can.”

Black also denied that with Jessica Ennis-Hill having retired, Mo Farah saying 
that 2017 would be his last year on the track, and Greg Rutherford turning 30 
this month, that the next generation of British athletics would struggle to hit 
the same heights. “We all know how closeAdam Gemili 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adam-gemili> and Dina Asher-Smith have been 
to the podium, and we also have Katarina, Laura Muir, Zharnel Hughes, Nethaneel 
Mitchell-Blake and Sophie Hitchon to mention but a few,” he said. “I’m not 
concerned at all. We just have got to get converting top-eight finishes to 
medallists. I’m excited about what the future looks like.”

Black defended his decision to strip a number of athletes of lottery money, 
including the 100m sprinter James Dasaolu, the 1500m runner Laura Weightman and 
the former 400m hurdles world champion Dai Greene – as well as the decision not 
to reward Eilish McColgan, who made huge strides in the women’s 5,000m, 
finishing 13th in the Olympic final and lowering her personal best by almost 40 
seconds.

The 800m runner Michael Rimmer suggested that UK Athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> had wrongly decided that McColgan 
was “past it at 25” while McColgan’s mother, Liz, the 10,000m world 
championship gold medallist in 1991, attacked the sports governing body, 
tweeting: “If I were London marathon I would pull out of the UK endurance 
programme and fund their own. UKA have the talent but lack the leadership.”

Black defended his decisions, saying: “This programme has an emphasis in 
winning medals at the Olympics and the Paralympics. That’s its primary goal. In 
this next year in particular, there’s an interest in the world championships 
and the IPC worlds at London 2017. That’s what we’ve got to focus on.”
 