
Early in 2013, Kate O'Flynn hit the Lyttelton stage at the National Theatre in 
London with hurricane force. As Rachael inSimon Stephens's Port 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/03/port-lyttelton-simon-stephens-review>
, she grew from a mouthy 11-year-old to a downtrodden but resilient 24-year-old 
– and in the process transformed from a relative unknown to a star in the 
making. It helped, says O'Flynn, that she had spent the years before Port doing 
a lot of temping and wondering if acting really was a viable career option. "I 
don't think I would have been able to do it straight from drama school," she 
says. "I don't think I would have had the life experience, or the hunger – 
that real hunger – for it."

Now she's back at the same stage playing another awkward, mouthy, resilient 
young northerner: Jo, the pregnant teenager in Shelagh Delaney's 1958 hitA 
Taste of Honey <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/a-taste-of-honey>. At 28, 
O'Flynn squawks with appalled laughter at the prospect of playing a 15-year-old 
– but Jo is another role that needs a bit of life experience, and a bit of 
hunger, to get right. O'Flynn describes her, and the character's lascivious, 
blowsy mother, Helen, as "uncontained life forces who aren't bound by what's 
expected of them. Their behaviour is exciting – they go to extremes."

It's known as a taboo-buster of a play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/shelagh-delaney-taste-honey-writer-dies>
: Delaney, 18 when she wrote it, described the mother as a "semi-whore" and 
saddles her teenager with an unholy trinity of sins. Jo becomes pregnant by a 
black sailor, decides to keep the child although unmarried, and sets up home 
with a male friend who is gay. But, O'Flynn argues, "that taboo-busting 
reputation sort of masks the play. To me, the central thing is the 
mother-daughter relationship. Working out that relationship is the hardest 
thing, because it's quite extraordinary: sometimes they're like sisters, 
sometimes Jo is the mother; but they're both totally brilliant women who are 
doing their own thing and living their own lives. It's a really female play."

By neat coincidence, Lesley Sharp, who plays Jo's mum, Helen, has also 
appeared at the National in another powerful Simon Stephens role, that ofHarper 
Regan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/apr/27/theatre1>, a seemingly 
ordinary working mum who disappears for a lost weekend in Stockport. It's been 
useful to compare notes, says O'Flynn, because although Port and A Taste of 
Honey are superficially similar – "two northern working-class young women with 
a restlessness about them, who both find it difficult to deal with people 
loving them, even though they're looking for that" – there are subtle but acute 
differences in register. "Both texts have a musicality about them, a real 
rhythm. But there's so much subtext in Stephens' writing, so many things you 
have to work out before you understand why someone is saying something. Whereas 
with A Taste of Honey, it's more on the page: people say what they think."

O'Flynn comes across as similarly straightforward and no-nonsense. She's loved 
acting since childhood, "but I was a bit embarrassed about it, because loads of 
people say they want to act". She grew up in Bury with a dentist father and a 
French teacher mother, who was fond of amateur dramatics – and doing 
impressions of her students. As a teenager, O'Flynn attended the youth theatre 
at the Royal Exchange in Manchester. She became so absorbed in the world – 
attending free performances, meeting stage and lighting designers – that by the 
time she was 18, there was nothing else she wanted to do but go to drama school.

Her first job after leaving Rada was in Mike Leigh's Happy-Go-Lucky as one of 
the central character's sisters. "The most important thing he said to me was, 
'You've got to be in the real world, not just talking about acting and being 
boring all the time.' In drama school, you spend three years talking about 
acting, talking about yourself, navel-gazing, and you have absolutely no 
perspective when you come out." (In another neat coincidence, Sharp also worked 
with Leigh early in her career –his advice to her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/apr/15/lesley-sharp-this-much-i-know>
 was: "The thing you have to remember as an actor is that there is no such 
thing as a career.")

Until Port, however, O'Flynn was beginning to feel she was in the real world a 
bit too much. Every time she wondered what else she could do, she became stuck 
on one question: "What are my skills? I'd just gone straight from school into 
it. I was thinking maybe an agent, but I'd be an appalling agent." Unlike her 
Rada classmate Phoebe Waller-Bridge – who won a Fringe First in Edinburgh and 
the Critics' Circle most promising playwright award for her debut playFleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/21/fleabag-edinburgh-festival-2013-review>
 – O'Flynn can't take her career into her own hands by writing. "It's 
difficult, you're totally dependent," she says. "But everyone's jobs are hard 
in different ways. It's just life."

• 'Tough and tenacious': Michael Billington reviews A Taste of Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/19/taste-of-honey-review>

• Kenneth Tynan's 1958 review of A Taste of Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/07/kenneth-tynan-a-taste-of-honey-shelagh-delaney>
 