
After following the fortunes of bluetits on Springwatch and rutting deer on 
Autumnwatch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/autumnwatch>, Kate Humble 
is turning her attention to the lambing season in a new live show for BBC2.

Humble will follow the life-and-death drama of lambing week on a 900-ewe sheep 
farm in south Wales in the series, Lambing Live, to be broadcast in March.

She will be joined by Countryfile presenter and sheep farmer Adam Henson on 
the show, unveiled today as part of BBC2's winter and spring 2010 season of 
programmes.

Humble "will be getting her hands dirty from day one" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2009/nov/11/kate-humble-ram-balls>
, according to the BBC, as the farm's Beavan family teach her the essential 
skills to help during lambing season.

As well as live coverage of the lambing in March, the show will feature the 
back story of the breeding process, between the lambs' conception this autumn 
and birth in the spring.

Springwatch and Autumnwatch are two of BBC2's most popular shows. The first 
Springwatch aired in 2005, co-hosted by Humble and Bill Oddie, wholeft the 
series this year to be replaced by Chris Packham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/may/26/springwatch-bill-oddie-chris-packham-kate-humble>
.

Traditionally stripped across the week, Autumnwatch changed its format this 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2009/oct/01/autumnwatch-new-schedule>
, switching to a weekly show broadcast on Fridays and repeated the following 
day.

"With millions of lambs born every year in the UK, the birth of a new 
generation of lambs is one of the most important events in the farming year," 
said theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> today.

"Lambing is a test of skill and endurance and Kate will be getting her hands 
dirty from day one. Throughout the series, Kate will reveal the compelling 
back-story of the crucial six months between the lambs' conception and birth."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 