
Staff of the Guardian and Observer have voted in favour of Katharine Viner, 
the current editor-in-chief of Guardian US, in an indicative ballot on who 
should be the next editor-in-chief whenAlan Rusbridger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger> steps down after 20 years 
this summer.

Some 53% of those who voted backed Viner with a first-choice vote of 438. In 
second place was Emily Bell, director of the Tow Center for Digital Journalism 
at Columbia University and a non-executive director of Guardian-owner the Scott 
Trust with 188 votes. Janine Gibson, editor-in-chief oftheguardian.com 
<http://theguardian.com/>, was in a close third place, with 175 votes. Wolfgang 
Blau, GNM’s director of digital strategy, received 29 votes.

All core editorial staff at GNM – which publishes the Guardian and Observer 
newspapers andtheguardian.com <http://theguardian.com/>, Guardian US and 
Guardian Australia websites – were able to vote in the union-organised ballot, 
whether or not they are union members, including freelancers who earn the bulk 
of their income from the newspaper group.

In all, 964 people were given the opportunity to vote using the single 
transferable vote system and the turnout was an impressive 87%. The vote makes 
the Guardian one of the few newspapers around the world to allow its staff any 
sort of say in who does the top job.


The successful candidate is guaranteed a place on the shortlist of three that 
will go forward to the next round of interviews conducted by the Scott Trust, 
the ultimate owner of the Guardian. The appointment will be announced later 
this month.


Following the vote, Brian Williams, father of the chapel of the National Union 
of Journalists, said: “The journalists have had their say, now the ball is in 
the Scott Trust’s court. However, we are confident they will recognise the 
importance of the editorial staff’s opinion and give full weight to our choice.”

 