
A bright, bright day and I’m standing in the middle of the Isle of Portland 
thinking about nothing. It is nothing that I’ve come to see, really. Or at 
least, the stuff that surrounds nothing. Portland is near Weymouth, in Dorset. 
It’s a small piece of land – six miles long, 1.5 miles across at its widest 
part – in the shape of a comma or a lamb chop. Once, the only way to get to it 
from mainland England was to walk along Chesil Beach, the 18-mile strip of 
shingle that curves along the Dorset coastland past Abbotsbury. Now, there’s a 
causeway for cars. The island is a popular tourist destination in summer, 
especially its tip, Portland Bill, which boasts a lighthouse and beautiful 
views. Tourists come in buses, trundle to the Bill, eat their sandwiches and 
leave.

This means they miss certain aspects of the island, including its 14 quarries. 
Portland stone is white, and, due to its formation, is packed with shells and 
fossils, some from as far back as the Jurassic period. Its purest form, the 
whitest version of the stone, called basebed, looks like luminous chalk (it’s 
actually limestone, which means it’s easy to cut and carve) and has been used 
to build many fine buildings and monuments across the world: the Tower of 
London, St Paul’s Cathedral, part of Buckingham Palace, the British Museum, the 
Cenotaph, two of Liverpool’sThree Graces, Manchester’s central library, the UN 
headquarters in New York… and the BBC’s Broadcasting House, in Portland Place. 
The stone has been quarried here since Roman times, but things really got going 
in the 17th century, after the Great Fire of London: Portland stone was Sir 
Christopher Wren’s preferred building material.

As well as the quarries, there are now mines under the ground, so that the 
stone can be extracted without disturbing the surface, or knocking down parts 
of Portland’s villages. Underneath us, the island is disappearing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429878031164%2Ff271136c-d569-4448-83b8-20fa0f8554cf-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429878031164%2Ff271136c-d569-4448-83b8-20fa0f8554cf-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The Loss Adjusters’ office in the village of Easton: the first location on 
Palmer’s audio walking tour. Palmer lived in the flat above the shop while she 
was writing the piece. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
I am here to talk to Katrina Palmer. Palmer is an artist, a sculptor who 
builds sculptures using words. In 2013, she was one of two people (the other 
was film-maker Ben Rivers) whose proposals were picked as thewinners of Open 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/about_us/open/selected_artists_2013>, a competition 
run by BBC Radio 4 and Artangel, the arts organisation that helps artists to 
stage ambitious works outside galleries. Open invited artists living and 
working in the UK to submit “groundbreaking site-specific proposals, bold ideas 
that will transform the UK’s cultural landscape”. There was a pot of money, up 
to £500,000 per project, for whatever it would cost for the art to be realised. 
(Palmer’s work cost a good deal less.)

Artangel has run Open before – winners have included Michael Landy’s Breakdown 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/2001/break_down> and Jeremy Deller’s The 
Battle of Orgreave 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/2001/the_battle_of_orgreave> – but the 
collaboration with Radio 4 is new. The BBC has recently been positioning itself 
as more than just a commissioner of TV and radio programmes: it wants to become 
a commissioner of art. This began with the head of Radio 4, Gwyneth Williams, 
saying in 2010 that she wanted to hear more artists’ voices on the network, and 
has been strengthened by Tony Hall, the new director general, announcing that 
the BBC is making “the greatest commitment to arts for a generation”. Hall made 
it clear that he wanted the BBC to showcase art practitioners, rather than 
journalists, as artists live and breathe art and so know more about what art 
(or music, theatre, film) is and does. Partly, this is fantastic stuff. Partly, 
this is James Corden “interviewing” Gary Barlow.

Anyway, there were lots of applications for the BBC/Artangel Open – about 
1,500 – and the judges (mostly artists, and one BBC representative, Tony 
Phillips, a Radio 4 commissioner) picked a 100-strong longlist, which you can 
see on theArtangel <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artangel> website. 
There are a lot of groundbreaking, site-specific, 
cultural-landscape-transforming ideas out there.

Phillips told me that Palmer stood out: “She was compelling.” And as soon as 
Palmer knew she’d got the commission, she moved to Portland. It was winter, and 
she was determined to live in a hut on the beach at West Weares. This proved 
impractical: there were no amenities and “I would have gone insane”. So she 
cast about for another place to live, somewhere she could write and people 
could visit. In Easton, a village in the centre of the island, she found a 
small empty office with a shopfront and a flat above it, which used to be an 
insurance broker’s. Since then, she’s been splitting her time between Easton 
and London, where she lives with her husband and daughter. She’s been tramping 
Portland’s pathways, thinking about its history. And here is what she’s created.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429878633736%2F7bb26d9e-1cc6-412e-866a-fefe7b84e882-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429878633736%2F7bb26d9e-1cc6-412e-866a-fefe7b84e882-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Different layers of stone are visible in the walls of Bowers quarry on 
Portland. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
There’s a book, End Matter. Actually it’s a non-book, consisting of 
appendices, acknowledgements, an epilogue, an index, a map, some postscripts… 
all the written notes and paraphernalia that surrounds a written work, but not 
the actual main body text. There’s also some audio, sections ofEnd Matter 
brought to life, which you can either listen to online, or as you take part in 
a site-specific walk around some of Portland.

The audio-walk is called The Loss Adjusters and takes you from the empty 
office (also called The Loss Adjusters), a tatty, claustrophobic space 
containing too many photocopiers, around the west side of Easton. You pass two 
quarries and a graveyard, and you walk through a space filled with enormous 
cubes of Portland stone. It’s like another graveyard, for the stone.

On three occasions, as you walk, you’re asked to stop and listen to the audio 
through headphones. What you hear is a story, but not quite. It’s an oblique 
narrative that seems to focus on the edges of something. You can also hear a 
version of it in the form of a Radio 4 feature, calledThe Quarryman’s Daughters
, which will be broadcast on 5 May at 11.15pm (be warned, the BBC explains too 
much, and Palmer’s audio has become much more specific).The walk 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/projects/2015/end_matter/audio/the_loss_adjusters> 
is due to open today.

The easiest way to get to grips with Palmer’s story-sculpture is to read End 
Matter. In it, elements of truth combine with elements of art. The time span is 
uncertain: we seem to jump from the 1600s to the present day. The characters 
are real and unreal. One is the Court Leet, a type of local mayor (the court 
leet still exists in parts of Dorset), who has power over a diminishing, yet 
valuable, flock of Portland sheep, which produce exceptionally sweet meat. Two 
more are sisters, Celestine and Hazeline, who decide to live on two different 
sides of the island. Then there are the Loss Adjusters, sad, ghostly officials 
whose job is to make sure that any disappearance, any loss, is compensated for 
by the addition of something. They’re quite metaphysical, the Loss Adjusters: 
they record evidence like bureaucrats but they muse on the meaning of absence. 
There’s also a writer, hidden away in the flat above The Loss Adjusters’ 
office. And another character: a young man, an ex-con. There are two prisons on 
Portland (there used to be another, a boat that squatted out in the harbour, 
but that was decommissioned in 2006).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429797990401%2F94552720-06a1-4922-90cd-2b5bda25306c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429797990401%2F94552720-06a1-4922-90cd-2b5bda25306c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Artist Katrina Palmer amid the huge blocks of stone on Portland, part of her 
walking tour with audio commentary. Photograph: Sophia Evans/Observer 
One of the prisons, the one still used for young offenders, can be seen on the 
second stopping-and-listening point of the walk. It’s an impressive, country 
house-style building with chimneys, a long way off. If you stop and look east 
over a graveyard, adjust your eyes for the distance and the sun, you can see 
the prison on the horizon. It peeks out over the gravestones.

'I wish we could have taken people down the mine on the walk'

‘This is a very important spot for me,” says Palmer. We are doing the walking 
tour together. She’s already shown me Jordans quarry, which was quiet except 
for a buzzing, whirring noise. This, it turned out, was the air con; beneath 
the ground is a fully working mine with lorries and JCBs thundering around a 
maze of roads. “I’ve looked around it, it’s amazing,” said Palmer. “I wish we 
could have taken people down there on the walk, but the miners weren’t keen. 
They’re working, you know?” We saw a cage on the side of the rock, the entrance 
to the mine; we contemplated a lone yellow digger sitting in the bowl of the 
quarry, and imagined its friends busily clattering around under our feet.

Now, a little way on, we are standing on a narrow path that runs alongside a 
small church with the graveyard; as we walk forward, the landscape suddenly 
falls away and we almost fall into another quarry, Bowers, much more open and 
impressive. It’s a bit like stumbling across a mini Grand Canyon.

Bowers quarry, too, has a couple of cages: entrances to mines that are soon to 
be opened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429878474307%2F61ec3edc-d78f-470b-812e-dd5b178703fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katrina%20Palmer%3A%20the%20artist%20who%20has%20mined%20a%20rich%20seam%20of%20nothingness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fkatrina-palmer-artist-mined-nothingness-artangel-open%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429878474307%2F61ec3edc-d78f-470b-812e-dd5b178703fb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 St George’s churchyard, on the route of the walking tour. ‘I like the idea of 
the big hole and then all the little holes of the graves,’ says Palmer. 
Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
“They’ve applied to dig under the graveyard,” says Palmer. “But they’ve not 
been allowed so far.” The sides of the quarry show the stripes of different 
quality stone. The basebed is the whitest.

Palmer points out details in the landscape. The way the gravestones all face 
away so we can’t see the inscriptions; the line of terraced houses that seem to 
top the quarry’s far side. “I like the idea of the big hole and then all the 
little holes of the graves.” The mine will stretch a long way, under the 
terraced houses, under a school’s playing field.

Palmer came to sculpture relatively recently. She did a philosophy and English 
literature degree at Sussex University and then worked in the publishing 
industry for a decade. I assumed she’d been an editor, but no, she was in 
charge of production. She left in her 30s and went to Central St Martins to do 
a sculpture BA, then an MA at the Royal College ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>. “My BA show was pretty awful,” 
she says, “but it had some of the themes I’m still interested in. It had a clay 
figure with some water dripping on its head until it gradually dissolved.”

Palmer is a quiet woman who finds it hard to talk to people. Sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture> studios are noisy: “They 
can be quite macho, lots of power tools…” In her MA studio, she gradually built 
a makeshift space, a structure, and would sit inside it writing about the found 
objects she’d used to make it: a cupboard, a table. “I was always asking myself 
questions about what sculpture is,” she says. “How weird it is as an art form, 
because it’s so hard to define. It’s not painting – which has got to be paint – 
or photography – it’s going to be a photograph; it could be anything. It can be 
impermanent. A sculpture doesn’t even have to be altered by the artist, we know 
it can be found, or indicated…

“Anyway, I spent a lot of time thinking about this and making things that were 
really fragile or falling apart, at the edge of material presence. But then I 
found that I could articulate these problems, these questions, better in 
writing. And I also realise d that in writing you can conjure objects up. 
Objects that have a really weird materiality to them. I still don’t really 
understand what that is, the way words work in your head so you can really see 
things… ”

Palmer regards this Loss Adjusters project as working with a found object. She 
wants to point up the holes in Portland, the gradual absence of the stone, a 
beautiful, natural, sculptural material. The island itself is being hollowed 
out. It’s being sculpted from within.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fsoundcloud.com%2Fartangel-2%2Fsets%2Faudio-walk-the-loss-adjusters&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsoundcloud.com%2Fartangel-2%2Fsets%2Faudio-walk-the-loss-adjusters>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsoundcloud.com%2Fartangel-2%2Fsets%2Faudio-walk-the-loss-adjusters&media=>
Palmer’s art is difficult to pin down. It’s hard to transfer to radio, and 
Radio 4 has killed much of its elusive beauty. It doesn’t have the full effect 
if you’re not in Portland’s strange moonscape land, I don’t thinkin my opinion. 
And it’s uncompromising. There’s a description of group sex which might trouble 
some people, though Tony Phillips points out thatRadio 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4> audiences can deal with anything, 
“as long as it’s contextualised”.

I listen to the group sex part as I stand up close to the enormous cubes of 
Portland stone. (The most beautiful are the least pure: they’re spotted with 
twirly shells and sparkly fossils.) I’ve read the sex scene in End Matter, and 
it seemed odd to me then, out of place. But when I hear it as I look at the 
stone, I realise that the careful annotation of the placing of limbs, the 
central woman’s constant contact with the rock, is important: the description 
is of a living bas-relief, like the saucy sculptures you get on Indian temples 
or the priapic scenes on Roman pots.

There’s a section in the audio that tells of a large stone rolling away, 
falling from a cliff and rolling into the sea, killing someone in the process. 
The dead body is absorbed into the stone, squashed hard so the corpse and rock 
become one. This is, of course, exactly what has happened to the animals and 
trees in the Portland stone. It’s what happens to us all in the end, unless 
we’re cremated. We disappear, our vital lives becoming part of the earth, 
compacted into bedrock, to be mined or quarried, or left alone.

Katrina Palmer: The Loss Adjusters opens today. The Quarryman’s Daughters is 
on Radio 4 on 5 May.Click here for details 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk//projects/2015/end_matter/about_the_project/end_matter>
 