
Kell Brook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kell-brook> will not make the 
same mistake as the man from whom he took the IBF welterweight title when he 
fights in Sheffield on Saturday night, according to his trainer Dominic Ingle.

Brook faces the Canada-based Romanian Jo Jo Dan in a fight that bears all the 
hallmarks of a triumphant homecoming before the 28-year-old sets his sights on 
much more lucrative 147lbs assignments.

He had himself been considered a convenient underdog when he went to 
California last August and surprised the champion Shawn Porter to wrest the 
belt by split decision. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/kell-brook-shawn-porter-ibf-title-amir-khan-awaits-boxing>
 His extraordinary recovery following alife-threatening stabbing while on 
holiday in Tenerife a month later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/05/kell-brook-ibf-welterweight-champion-stab-wound>
 has left Brook in no mood to make assumptions about how his first bout in his 
home city since October 2013 is going to end.

Ingle said: “Shawn Porter underestimated Kell Brook and believed his own hype 
and then he was forced to admit he had overlooked him. There is no danger of 
Kell overlooking Jo Jo in the same way. Jo Jo has got into the mandatory 
position and he wants to win that title. Kell is looking for big fights ahead 
but Jo Jo sees no reason why he shouldn’t get them too.”

Brook’s long recovery since the unprovoked stabbing incident has left Ingle 
convinced the fighter will step into the ring on Saturday in the shape of his 
life – even if his long slog to fitness did come at a price. “It’s been a long 
camp and it’s sometimes been boring and a bit like groundhog day but he’s done 
all the work and the result is that his fitness is through the roof,” Ingle 
said.

“Because of the injury he has mentally overcompensated and he has really had 
to kick up a gear to get himself fit. It has been 30 weeks since he started 
rehab but he is fitter now than he was for the Porter fight. He is fighting on 
his home ground and that will improve his performance by another 10 or 20%. But 
the fact Jo Jo has come over to take his title will raise his game as well.”

Meanwhile, Audley Harrison <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/audley-harrison>
, the 2000 Olympic super-heavyweight champion, has retired for a second time 
because of problems associated with head injuries.

Harrison was flattened in 70 seconds by Deontay Wilder in April 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/27/audley-harrison-crumbles-defeat-70-seconds>
 and confirmed he was hanging up his gloves a matter of days later only to make 
a U-turn soon after. However, Britain’s first fighter to win Olympic gold in 
the heaviest weight category has not fought since, despite hints on social 
media that he would resume his career. “My boxing career has come to an end,” 
the 43-year-old said. “I am no longer a professional boxer.”

Harrison’s decision has been prompted by research into head injuries he has 
suffered as a result of the punishing blows he took during his 38-bout 
professional career. “I looked at the latest research into concussions and 
traumatic brain injuries [TBIs]. After years of denial and sticking to my guns, 
I’m finally getting out of my own way. As tough as it is to say this ... it’s 
time to stop.

“I’ve suffered a few TBIs and will have to work hard to reverse some of the 
effects taking punches to the head has brought about to my overall health. I 
have vision problems, vestibular injuries that lead to balance disturbances, 
and have bouts of serious irritability and moodiness that comes with TBI 
recovery.”

Harrison did not translate his standout amateur career into success in the 
paid ranks, although he captured the European heavyweight title andfought 
fellow Londoner David Haye for a world title in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/nov/13/david-haye-audley-harrison-live>
, when he was stopped inside three rounds. He retires with a record of 31 wins 
and seven defeats.
 