
Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> has vowed to close the world’s 
biggest refugee camp within a year and send hundreds of thousands of Somalis 
back to their war-torn homeland or on to other countries, a plan decried by aid 
and human rights groups as dangerous, illegal and impractical.

Kenya says it needs to close the sprawling Dadaab camp, home to 330,000 mostly 
Somali refugees, to protect the country’s security after a string of terror 
attacks by al-Shabaab.

The Somalia-based militant group was behind the massacre of nearly 150 students
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/02/kenya-minister-says-70-dead-in-al-shabaab-attack-on-university>
 at a university last summer and theWestgate mall siege in Nairobi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/20/westgate-attack-nairobi-al-shabaab-kenya-traders-tourists>
 in 2013, as well asother deadly attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/23/kenya-bus-attack-survivor-tells-how-gunmen-selected-their-victims>
.

If settling refugees beyond camps is best for them, why are they still 
struggling? | Emily Troutman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/09/refugees-settling-beyond-camps-struggling-emily-troutman>
The Kenyan interior minister, Joseph Nkaissery, said al-Shabaab fighters used 
the camp as a base for smuggling weapons.

“For reasons of pressing national security that speak to the safety of Kenyans 
in a context of terrorist and criminal activities, the government of the 
Republic of Kenya has commenced the exercise of closing Dadaab refugee 
complex,” he said at a news conference in Nairobi.

“The refugees will be repatriated to their countries of origin or to 
third-party countries for resettlement.”

Kenya’s second-biggest camp, in Kakuma, which largely houses refugees from 
South Sudan, appears to have been spared for now, although earlier government 
announcements had said all refugees would be told to leave. Those at Dadaab 
have been given until the end of May 2017 to depart Kenya.

The United Nations and aid groups have said 
<http://www.unhcr.org/57308e616.html> the closure of one or both camps could be 
devastating, and said that even if Kenya tries to push ahead, it may not be 
possible to force large numbers of people over the border into a country where 
a war is still raging.

William Swing, director general of the International Organization for Migration
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration>, said: “It’s very difficult to 
send people back to Somalia. We’ve done some returns there, [people] who wanted 
to go back, but there are only certain areas they can go back to.”

When asked if there was a precedent for forcibly removing refugees on such an 
immense scale as from Dadaab, he said: “I haven’t seen large numbers.”

Human Rights Watch said it feared that a government desperate to empty the 
camps might resort to abuse and violence. Gerry Simpson, a senior researcher 
and advocate for the refugee programme, said such tactics wereused three years 
ago <https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/05/29/kenya-police-abuse-nairobis-refugees> 
when the Kenyan government decided to move refugees from scattered lives in 
cities into camps.

“Do they have buses to take 350,000 people across the border? No, so I think 
the aim of sowing fear though abuses and harassment is likely to be the 
strategy,” he said. Simpson cited rape, extortion, fear, beatings and arbitrary 
detention among the abuses that pushed Somalis to flee the Kenyan capital, 
Nairobi.

“Back in 2013, that strategy was pretty successful – thousands of Somalis left 
because of the overall level of abuse against the community,” he added.

It is questionable whether there will be any security improvements. The border 
is porous and people pushed back across it might return again to Kenya. Without 
food or shelter, they could be easier recruits for extremist groups in both 
countries.

 “Refugees in the country have fled the very violence the authorities say they 
are trying to combat,” said Kate Allen, the director of Amnesty International 
UK. “If the closure of the camps goes ahead, it will have devastating 
consequences for the hundreds of thousands of refugees.

“Forcing them back to violence and persecution is as immoral as it is 
unlawful, and risks increasing instability and displacement in the region.”

More than a dozen aid groups who work in the camps, including Oxfam, Save the 
Children and the International Rescue Committee, have called on the Kenyan 
governmentto reconsider the move 
<http://www.rescue.org/press-releases/media-advisory-government-kenya-reconsider-intended-closure-refugee-camps-30899>
.

“Shutting down the refugee camps will mean increased protection risks for the 
thousands of refugees and asylum seekers – [the] majority of who are women, 
children and unaccompanied minors,” they said in a joint statement.

Life in Dadaab: three generations of refugees isolated from Kenyan society
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/life-dadaab-three-generations-of-refugees-isolated-from-kenyan-society>
“The current humanitarian situation in Somalia and South Sudan remains dire 
and fragile.Somalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> is faced with 
drought and other security risks that are likely to see an increase in 
displacement and vulnerability.”

Kenya has previously threatened to close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/14/kenya-garissa-dadaab-scapegoat-al-shabaab>
 its camps, but has always backed down. This time, however, the government 
appears to be more serious, having set a timeline and budget, and disbanded the 
Department of Refugee Affairs.

That has left refugees and the humanitarian organisations that work with them 
in administrative limbo, unable to get travel passes that they need to move 
around Kenya for studies or urgent medical treatment.

Kenya may be willing to back away from the plans if it receives more 
international support, aid groups say. The government has been increasingly 
frustrated by what it sees as tepid backing for a voluntary resettlement 
programme returning refugees to Somalia.

The refugee population has decreased, but not quickly enough for the Kenyan 
government, which is worried that militant violence has sown fear and damaged 
the economy, perhaps especially so with anelection on the horizon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/kenya-dadaab-closure-refugees-caught-up-in-cynical-electioneering>
.

Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> organisations and the 
IOM are calling for greater support for Kenya and neighbouring countries that 
have provided refuge to hundreds of thousands of people fleeing the conflicts 
in Somalia, South Sudan and other parts of the region.

Swing said: “The refugee camp situation in Kenya is complicated because, like 
many of its neighbours in east [Africa] and the Horn ofAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, Kenya has looked after large 
numbers of refugees and is host to the largest refugee camp in the world.”

Europe’s refugee crisis and the fallout from the war in Syria are absorbing so 
much aid and international attention that other emergencies are being 
neglected, he suggested. “These countries which carry the burden of hosting 
refugees on a scale far higher and for far longer than anything experienced in 
Europe today must not be left in the lurch.”
 