
Authorities in Somalia have denounced the way refugees are being repatriated 
from neighbouring Kenya, after the Kenyan governmentannounced it would close 
Dadaab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/11/kenya-close-worlds-biggest-refugee-camp-dadaab>
, the world’s largest refugee camp, by the end of 2016.

Over the past five months, makeshift camps in Somalia’s southernmost border 
state have been swelling with families as thousands of refugees are repatriated 
as part of a UN scheme.

But Jubaland state authorities have now suspended the returns process, saying 
local services are overwhelmed and the repatriation process amounts to the 
“dumping of human beings in an undignified way”.

With Kenyan elections approaching and anti-refugee rhetoric spurred on by the 
fear of the Somali Islamist group al-Shabaab, the government announced in May 
that it would permanently close Dadaab – home to more than 320,000 Somalis 
spanning several generations – and send all Somali refugees home by the end of 
the year.

In May the Kenyan interior minister, Joseph Nkaissery, claimed al-Shabaab 
fighters were using the camp as a base for smuggling weapons. “For reasons of 
pressing national security that speak to the safety of Kenyans in a context of 
terrorist and criminal activities, the government of the Republic ofKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> has commenced the exercise of closing 
Dadaab refugee complex,” he said.

The United Nations and other aid groups have 
<http://www.unhcr.org/57308e616.html> criticised the move, suggesting it may 
not be possible to force large numbers of people over the border into a country 
where a war is still raging.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkenya-accused-of-dumping-somali-refugees-back-over-the-border-with-no-support%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22c223a2191a0d591db4965bf660d29f5cab427e%2F0_65_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kenya%20accused%20of%20'dumping'%20Somali%20refugees%20%E2%80%8Bback%20over%20the%20border%20with%20no%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkenya-accused-of-dumping-somali-refugees-back-over-the-border-with-no-support%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kenya%20accused%20of%20%27dumping%27%20Somali%20refugees%20%E2%80%8Bback%20over%20the%20border%20with%20no%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkenya-accused-of-dumping-somali-refugees-back-over-the-border-with-no-support%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22c223a2191a0d591db4965bf660d29f5cab427e%2F0_65_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 The majority of people being returned are women, children, old or disabled, 
according to the American Refugee Committee. Photograph: Ashley Hamer/Refugees 
Deeply 
The programme to repatriate the refugees was first launched after an agreement 
<http://www.refworld.org/pdfid/5285e0294.pdf> was signed between the Kenyan 
government, United Nations refugee agency (UNHCR) and the Somali federal 
government in December 2013.

Between December 2014 and the end of September 2016, 30,731 Somali refugees 
from Dadaab were repatriated. Most of them – 24,630 refugees – returned to
Somalia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia> in 2016, amid mounting 
pressure from the Kenyan government to clear Dadaab.

However, over the past few months, since the announcement to expedite the 
closure of Dadaab, the UNHCR and its partners say they have been transporting 
up to 400 people a day across the border intoSomalia 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/somalia>. 

Story of cities #44: will Dadaab, the world's largest refugee camp, really 
close?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/17/story-of-cities-44-dadaab-kenya-worlds-largest-refugee-camp-closed>
Officials in the port city of Kismayo said the returnees are essentially 
“squatting” on land that has not been officially set aside for them.


Many returners have reported poor conditions. Outside Kismayo, some 16,000 
newly arrived refugees are camped in overcrowded and unsanitary conditions in 
shelters that they built themselves, with little access to medical care and no 
schools. Camps have few decent running water sources or latrines, leaving 
thousands of people at risk of disease.

Some families who arrived in Kismayo this year said they chose repatriation 
because they could no longer feed their families in Dadaab. Others said they 
feared being forced to leave Kenya without any UN support at all if they didn’t 
leave now.

The majority of people being returned are women, children, elderly or disabled 
– “the most vulnerable sectors of society,” according to the American Refugee 
Committee, an aid group providing healthcare and child protection in the camps.

Hubi Abdullahi Aden, a 44-year-old mother who managed to raise and educate 
seven children in Dadaab, said: “In Somalia, there’s no water, no schools … 
despite the promises they made, the UN backtracked from them. The house you see 
there I built myself.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkenya-accused-of-dumping-somali-refugees-back-over-the-border-with-no-support%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3b2bdc1fcdfb8dd7ab4b31ff4eba69f0426d4d0%2F0_0_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kenya%20accused%20of%20'dumping'%20Somali%20refugees%20%E2%80%8Bback%20over%20the%20border%20with%20no%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkenya-accused-of-dumping-somali-refugees-back-over-the-border-with-no-support%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kenya%20accused%20of%20%27dumping%27%20Somali%20refugees%20%E2%80%8Bback%20over%20the%20border%20with%20no%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fkenya-accused-of-dumping-somali-refugees-back-over-the-border-with-no-support%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3b2bdc1fcdfb8dd7ab4b31ff4eba69f0426d4d0%2F0_0_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Hubi Abdullahi Aden, 44, returned to Kismayo in March. She had fled Somalia’s 
civil war in 1991 and raised seven children in Dadaab refugee camp. Photograph: 
Ashley Hamer/Refugees Deeply 
Aden, like many others who have returned to Kismayo, fears an impending onset 
of violence. Kismayo was only liberated from al-Shabaab in 2012. A fragile 
peace is maintained by local security forces, but outside the city much of 
Jubaland state remains an inaccessible battleground, with the danger of 
violence spilling over to other parts of the country.

I grew up in the world's biggest refugee camp – what happens when it closes?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/kenya-dadaab-refugee-camp-what-happens-when-it-closes-asad-hussein>
The Kismayo area is already sheltering some 40,000 people displaced internally 
by conflict between al-Shabaab militants and the western-backed African Union 
and Somali national forces, and the services available are barely adequate to 
support a vulnerable local population.

Contrary to the terms they accepted when signing the repatriation agreement, 
instability means the federal government of Somalia cannot always access 
semi-autonomous Jubaland to support and resettle the returners, according to 
Jubaland state’s justice minister, Adam Ibrahim Aw Hirsi.


“On one hand we are [...] fighting al- Shabaab, and [on] another we are 
dealing with returning refugees and the IDPs [internally displaced people] that 
were already here, and our own communities. We don’t have the financial and 
human capacity to deal with all of this,” he added.

Meanwhile, a central condition of the repatriation package is that people give 
up their refugee status in Kenya. If violence worsens in Somalia, they will be 
unable to return to Dadaab, adding to the more than1.1 million people who are 
internally displaced. 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/somalia/somalia-displacement-crisis-daynile-idp-settlements-overview-mogadishu-banaadir>

This article originally appeared on Refugees Deeply. Read the original version 
here 
<https://www.newsdeeply.com/refugees/articles/2016/10/11/somali-refugees-decry-empty-promises-on-return-from-dabaab>
 