
On a cold January evening, journalist Yassin Juma was walking to his local 
pharmacy when he was stopped by four men from the Kenyan police.

They escorted him back to his house, where he found 14 people ransacking the 
place in front of his wife and children. “They were looking for electronics, 
for laptops,” Juma recalls.

A veteran investigative journalist known for his reports on the war against 
al-Shabaab, theSomalia-based Islamist militant group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab>, Juma was arrested for posting 
information 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/news/Detectives-grill-Yassin-Juma-KDF-attack/-/1056/3047064/-/a50fgp/-/index.html>
 about a recent attack on the Kenyan Defence Forces (KDF) on his social media 
accounts.

Al-Shabaab militants storm Somalia base used by Ethiopian troops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/al-shabaab-somali-militants-storm-base-ethiopia-troops>
On the 18 January, he revealed on Facebook and Twitter that a credible source 
within the KDF had confirmed to him that 103 soldiers had been killed in an 
attack on the Kenyan army base in El Adde just three days before.

But the KDF denied his report, and Joseph Nkaissery, the cabinet secretary for 
the interior and a retired general, made a public announcement warning that 
anyone who circulated information about the attack would be arrested for being 
“sympathetic to al-Shabaab”.

The basis for this threat was section 29 of the information and communication 
act, which prohibits the “improper use of a licensed communications system” and 
which activists say hasincreasingly been used by the Kenyan authorities 
<https://www.article19.org/data/files/medialibrary/38167/FOR-WEB-LAUNCH-2-11-Kenya_monitoring-_violations_report_PDF.pdf>
 to prohibit the publication and circulation of online information.

Juma was charged for the “misuse of a telecommunication gadget”, with police 
making clear they were particularly unhappy that he had shared a Facebook post 
by the brother of a dead Kenyan-Somali soldier “without the permission of the 
KDF”.


On the 19 January, blogger Eddy Reuben Ilah was also arrested and charged 
under section 29 for sharing images of KDF soldiers killed in El Adde on 
WhatsApp.
Yassin Juma (@Yassinjuma) 
Quick recovery my friend n colleague @MOALIMUU <https://twitter.com/MOALIMUU> 
#Bbc <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Bbc?src=hash> #Somalia 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Somalia?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/QZZfbLRKsP 
<https://t.co/QZZfbLRKsP>
 <https://twitter.com/Yassinjuma/status/690266245996879872> January 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Yassinjuma/status/690266245996879872> 
Unconstitutional

For many Kenyan journalists like Juma, who has 19,000 Facebook followers, 
social media has become a key instrument in their reporting arsenal, allowing 
them to bypass traditional outlets and connect directly with readers.

Freedom of expression must be enjoyed in a responsible manner
Joseph Nkaissery, cabinet secretary 
During the El Adde attacks, Juma says “the public was anxious to know what was 
going on”, yet mainstream media channels were not covering the incident. 
“Social media gave me an opportunity to give information to the families and 
the public.”

The Kenyan government has denied that it is seeking to intimidate or silence 
journalists. Interior secretary Nkaissery told the current affairs website
African Arguments that the government respects 
<http://africanarguments.org/2016/02/02/kenyas-under-fire-journalists-refuse-to-be-cowed/>
 independent media and freedom of expression, though added that this “freedom 
must be enjoyed in a responsible manner”.

But after several major terror attacks by al-Shabaab, Kenya’s efforts to 
combat the security threat has,according to Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2016/country-chapters/kenya#37d3fe>, been 
“marred by ongoing patterns of serious human rights violations by Kenyan 
security forces, including extra-judicial killings, arbitrary detentions and 
torture.”


Henry Maina, a director for free speech at the Kenya-based NGO Article 19, 
says that his organisation has documented a sharp rise in the threats and 
attacks on journalists.

From January to September 2015, the NGO recorded 65 individual cases were 
journalists and social media users were threatened with either physical 
violence, threats by phone and text, summons by police or and legal 
restrictions. Of these incidents, 22 cases related to journalists covering 
corruption, 12 to protests, and eight to terrorism and crime stories.

Maina adds that only three of the 42 cases have been investigated and the 
perpetrators taken to court. That’s a 7% rate, which he said, is “an 
unacceptably high level of impunity regarding attacks on journalists.”

But in April, after widespread international criticism of section 29, the 
Kenyan High Court did finally rule thatthat it was in fact unconstitutional 
<https://www.article19.org/resources.php/resource/38343/en/kenya:-win-for-freedom-of-expression-as-repressive-law-declared-unconstitutional>
.

“A number of bloggers and social media communicators who were facing charges 
under the impugned section have had those charges dropped and where there was 
no other evidence to enable the prosecution to charge them with other offences 
they have been acquitted,” Mains says.

Africa targeted once more as rivalry between Islamic militants grows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/africa-targeted-once-more-as-rivalry-between-islamic-militants-grows>
“Given our legal system, all similar cases will be dropped when they are next 
scheduled for hearing. No new cases of bloggers and journalists charged under 
section 29 have been recorded.”

But ruling came too late in the year for Juma, whose experience at the hands 
of the police have left their mark. From his home that January evening, he was 
taken to Muthaiga police station, where he was questioned about his reporting.

“They had my phone, they wanted to know my contacts in Somalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>,” he said. He was held for two 
days, before an officer came into his cell and announced: “There’s been a 
change of plans.” Shortly after, he was released without charge.

Fearing his reports may once again anger the authorities, Juma has since taken 
his family and gone into hiding. “This is the first call I am making,” he says 
from his self-imposed exile. “We’ve gone underground.”

This is an edited extract from the forthcoming 250th issue of Index on 
Censorship <https://www.indexoncensorship.org/> magazine, focusing on the risks 
facing reporters around the world
 