
England have hit back in the previously one-sided war of words over their 
decision to sack Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/04/kevin-pietersen-england-ecb>, 
enlisting the support of the Professional Cricketers' Association to confirm 
that he had been released because they could not be confident of his full 
support for the captain Alastair Cook.

There was no direct criticism of Pietersen in a statement released after 6pm 
<http://www.ecb.co.uk/news/articles/ecb-and-pca-statement>, at least three 
hours after it had been expected, because "both parties remain bound by 
confidentiality provisions". But there was little doubt to whom the ECB and PCA 
were referring in complaining about "a breach of trust and team ethics" that 
has led to savage criticism of Cook, his Test vice-captain Matt Prior and 
former team director Andy Flower in recent days.

"The England team needs to rebuild after the whitewash in Australia," said the 
statement, which was unattributed. "To do that we must invest in our captain 
Alastair Cook and we must support him in creating a culture in which we can be 
confident he will have the full support of all players, with everyone pulling 
in the same direction and able to trust each other. It is for those reasons 
that we have decided to move on withoutKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen>.

"Following the announcement of that decision, allegations have been made, some 
from people outside cricket, which as well as attacking the rationale of the 
ECB's decision-making, have questioned, without justification, the integrity of 
the England team director and some of England's players. Clearly what happens 
in the dressing room or team meetings should remain in that environment and not 
be distributed to people not connected with the team. This is a core principle 
of any sports team, and any such action would constitute a breach of trust and 
team ethics. Whilst respecting that principle, it is important to stress that 
Andy Flower,Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> and 
Matt Prior, who have all been singled out for uninformed and unwarranted 
criticism, retain the total confidence and respect of all the other members of 
the Ashes party. These are men who care deeply about the fortunes of the 
England team and its image, and it is ironic that they were the people who led 
the reintegration of Kevin Pietersen into the England squad in 2012."

Prior was drawn into a row on Twitter with Piers Morgan, the former Mirror 
editor who has long been Pietersen's highest-profile backer, on Thursday after 
being accused of "backstabbing" following a team meeting in Melbourne. Morgan 
had already described Cook as "a repulsive little weasel".

It was those comments about two of their members which led to the PCA joining 
theECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> in condemnation.

Meanwhile the ECB and James Whitaker, the national selector whose inability to 
explain Pietersen's omission from the World Twenty20 squad on Friday led to an 
excruciating Sky Sports News interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/06/kevin-pietersen-dropped-explanation-james-whitaker-england>
, have both received apologies from the broadcasters for screening the 
interview as live â€“ thereby embarrassing Whitaker as he received a call on his 
mobile, understood to be from the ECB chief executive David Collier, halfway 
through.
 