
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> has 
claimed that the former England coach Andy Flower had it in for him from the 
day he took charge in 2009, adding that he felt he was bullied during his time 
in the national set-up.

Pietersen, England’s highest ever run scorer, who was sacked in February by the
ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb>, five days after Flower resigned, 
also added that he still does not know why he is no longer part of the 
international side.

“Flower had it in for me ever since he took over,” Pietersen told BBC 4’s 
Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/cricket/29512517>. “The ECB 
needed a scapegoat.

“When they sacked me they never gave me any reasons. I still don’t know right 
now why I’m not playing for England. The ECB needed someone to walk, to depart 
from the team.”

Pietersen’s sacking included a confidentiality agreement, covering all 
concerned parties, but that expired at the end of September and the South 
Africa born batsman’s new book, ‘KP: The Autobiography’, is released on 
Thursday.

Pietersen does not hold back in the book, attacking the wicketkeeper Matt 
Prior and Flower, who he describes as “contagiously sour, infectiously dour” 
and that “95 per cent of the time he was fucking horrendous” to work with, 
adding: “He could walk into a room and suck all the joy out of it in five 
seconds.”

Earlier this week in an interview with the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/>, Pietersen told how Flower, his coaching 
staff and the senior England players oversaw “a bullying culture” within the 
dressing room and on Tuesday he reiterated the point, saying: “In the England 
dressing room I felt isolated, I felt like I was being bullied.”

Flower resigned as England coach in the aftermath of the 5-0 Ashes defeat to 
Australia last winter after almost five years in the role. Pietersen’s sacking 
followed imminently after a meeting with the captain, Alastair Cook, the 
chairman of selectors, James Whitaker, and the ECB managing director, Paul 
Downton.
 