
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> has 
alleged that England’s cricket team suffered from a “horrendous” bullying 
culture and accused the former head coach, Andy Flower, of “ruling by fear” 
during the Ashes tour.

Nine months after he was controversially sacked in the aftermath of England’s 
5-0 whitewash in Australia, Pietersen also implicated the wicketkeeper Matt 
Prior in a campaign to undermine him but praised England’s captain,Alastair Cook
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook>, in his first interview to 
promote the release on Thursday of KP: The Autobiography.

The South African-born batsman also reiterated his desire to represent his 
adopted country again despite falling out with Flower and Paul Downton, the 
managing director of the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board.

“Horrendous. Hugely disturbing,” Pietersen told The Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/cricket/kevinpietersen/11142212/Kevin-Pietersen-exclusive-interview-The-truth-about-Englands-bullying-culture.html>
 when asked to describe the culture of bullying which developed under Flower.

“I brought it up. All throughout my reintegration meetings [after he was 
suspended for sending text messages to South African players in 2012] I brought 
it up on numerous occasions. I told [Andrew] Strauss about it. I told Cook 
about it. It was a huge thing.”

In particular the bowlers Graeme Swann, Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad are 
singled out for “running the dressing room”, with fielders routinely forced to 
apologise for errors and dropped catches.

“The bowlers were given so much power. They were doing really well,” he said. 
Swanny [Graeme Swann] was winning game after game for us. Broady [Stuart Broad] 
was contributing. Jimmy [Anderson] was contributing. We always had a third or 
fourth seamer that was there or thereabouts. But these guys ran the dressing 
room.

“The thing that horrified me the most was when Andy Flower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-flower> and Andrew Strauss in Bangalore 
before the one-day internationals said: ‘Guys, we’ve got to stop this. It’s not 
right for the team. There are guys that have come to [us] that are intimidated 
to field the ball.’

“And they [the bowlers] had the audacity to stand there and say: ‘No, if 
they’ve fucked up we deserve an apology.’ It’s the most angry I ever got in 
that dressing room. I thought, I reckon I could hit these guys. Who do you 
think you are, to ask for an apology from someone who’s trying his heart out, 
who’s playing for his country, who’s making a mistake?”

Despite those accusations Pietersen says his relationship with both Broad and 
Anderson is “fine”, while describing Cook as having been put in “an incredibly 
difficult situation” over the manner of his sacking. Yet there is no such 
sympathy for Flower, who left his post in January to take up a new role as 
technical director of elite coaching, or Prior.

“He stayed a selector until he sacked me and now he’s got some cushy job where 
he’s looking after younger players at the academy,” Pietersen says of Flower. 
“Are you crazy? When he was selected as the England A coach this summer I 
thought: ‘Oh, my days. Poor youngsters.’ ”

Prior’s own international career is on hold after being dropped at the start 
of the summer but it is the wicketkeeper who comes under the most criticism.

“I went after Prior and said Prior shouldn’t be in that side because he’s a 
bad influence, a negative influence – he picks on players – and I’ve questioned 
Flower and the way he ran the team. Flower and Cook would have said [in 
response] ‘you’ve got to get rid of this guy [Pietersen]. He’s back-stabbing, 
he’s horrendous, he’s bad for the environment’.

“It’s only Prior that I’d seriously have real issues with, because of how he 
was portrayed as a team man, the heart and soul of the dressing room, when he 
was getting up to the stuff he was getting up to.”

“He wanted to start a media campaign to stop me getting the vice-captaincy. 
That’s what I took him up on in January when I got sacked. Is that seriously 
the heart and soul of the dressing room? This big team player?”
 