
The fragile public truce between Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> and at least one of his 
former England team-mates would appear to be over after he took to Twitter to 
respond to implied criticism of his attitude by the Test vice-captain Matt 
Prior.

Prior was quoted, during a question and answer session in Dubai, as saying the 
England dressing room would be a better place without Pietersen.

Pietersen has been mostly restrained, even on Twitter, since he was dumped by 
England two weeks ago, presumably happy for the likes of the TV presenter Piers 
Morgan to argue his case, which he has done do vigorously. But on this occasion 
he could not resist hitting back, albeit in a subtle and grammatically 
impressive manner.

"Fewer Q&A's, more Sussex nets methinks, @MattPrior! #josbuttler 
<https://twitter.com/KP24/status/439316971885436928>" Pietersen tweeted, 
referring to the pressure on Prior for his Test place from the one-day 
wicketkeeper after a disastrous Ashes series, when Prior was dropped after 
three Tests.

That provoked the inevitable range of responses, including "showing your class 
again Kevin ... idiot" and "that will be why KP isn't in the England set-up any 
more". Again, Pietersen could not help himself, tweeting "neither is The Big 
Cheese Prior!" – a reference to the nickname the wicketkeeper has held, and 
apparently relished, in the England dressing room since his brash early days.

Another Pietersen-baiter pointed out "At least they're 1st division nets 
Kev!!" Prior's county, Sussex, are in Division One of the County Championship 
whereas Surrey, with whom Pietersen has signed a new contract, were relegated 
last season. "they county nets!" he responded. "Not where the 'Big Cheese' 
wants to play his cricket!"

Pietersen and Prior have plenty of previous. It was Prior who made a telephone 
call to Pietersen trying to resolve the gulf that had opened in the England 
dressing room during the stormy summer of 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/14/matt-prior-kevin-pietersen>, 
when Pietersen was accused of sending derogatory text messages about the then 
England captain Andrew Strauss to the touring South African party. But the 
wicketkeeper was dragged into the public row over Pietersen's future whenMorgan 
accused him of stabbing Pietersen in the back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/05/matt-prior-kevin-pietersen-ngland-row>
 during a team meeting in Australia – an allegation Prior angrily denied, again 
on Twitter.

On this occasion the problems seem to be of Prior's own making. When asked in 
Dubai whether the dressing room would be a better place without Pietersen, he 
reportedly said "yes, it will", going on to explain: "One of the biggest things 
the ECB want to rediscover is the value of playing cricket for England. The 
honour and the pride you need to show as an England cricketer.

"And they only want people in that dressing room that are going to be 
passionate about England winning and performing."

Giving his opinion on the spat, former England spinner Graeme Swann told BBC 
radio: "I think Matt's been a bit naive doing a Q&A in Dubai ... you're never 
safe in these things. But Kevin has come back in a fairly childish way. I'm 
sure he [Pietersen] has still got his [Prior's] number and could have rung him."
 