
Kids Company has emerged as the biggest beneficiary of furniture from a 
clearout of part ofBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Television 
Centre, snapping up more than 250 items including everything from the offices 
of children’s news programme Newsround.

The controversial and now defunct charity, of which BBC creative director Alan 
Yentob was chairman, received more than 60% of the more than 400 items of 
furniture that were donated to charities following a clearout of the east tower 
and drama building at BBC Television Centreahead of redevelopment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/08/buyers-snap-first-batch-bbc-television-centre-homes>
.

Clearance Solutions <https://www.clearancesolutionsltd.co.uk>, which 
specialises in getting further use from items by selling or donating them, won 
the tender to undertake the clearance of that portion of BBC Television Centre 
in about 2011.

The BBC was not involved in choosing where the items went. 


The company sent out an email newsletter promoting the work, in which Kids 
Company was singled out as the biggest winner.

“The BBC was keen to ensure good causes such as charities benefitted by 
receiving furniture donations,” said the company in an email newsletter seen by 
the Guardian. “We managed to donate a considerable amount to charity, with the 
largest single reciprocant being Kids Company. Kids Company received over 250 
items of furniture, including all the furniture from the Newsround offices. 
Overall charities were donated over 400 items.”

The newsletter contains a testimonial quote from the charity’s former chief 
executive, Camila Batmanjhelidjh, thanking the “lovely people at the BBC for 
all the furniture you delivered to us”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fkids-company-bbc-clearout%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04a27752bb34a20f578c286b790b877e1432fba1%2F20_0_1465_879%2F1465.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20Company%20received%20more%20than%20250%20items%20of%20furniture%20from%20BBC%20clearout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fkids-company-bbc-clearout%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20Company%20received%20more%20than%20250%20items%20of%20furniture%20from%20BBC%20clearout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fdec%2F18%2Fkids-company-bbc-clearout%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04a27752bb34a20f578c286b790b877e1432fba1%2F20_0_1465_879%2F1465.jpg>
 Clearance Solutions’ website, featuring a quote from former Kids Company chief 
executive Camila Batmanjhelidjh 
She added at the time that the charity, whose recent closure followed “serious 
concerns” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/kids-company-founder-camila-batmanghelidjh-confirms-charity-closure>
 being raised about its finances, that it had “struggled to be able to afford 
even basic furniture until now”.

Rufus Hirsch, the founder of Clearance Solutions, said that the BBC did not 
exercise any influence over which charities received furniture and that Kids 
Company had been apartner since 2009 
<https://www.clearancesolutionsltd.co.uk/our-reuse-and-recycling-success-as-green-as-it-gets/>
, several years before the one-off BBC contract was won.

Hirsch said the contract was won through Johnson Controls, which then handled 
the BBC’s facilities management services, and there had not been “direct 
contact” with any senior officials at the corporation.

He added that one reason why Kids Company got so much of the furniture was 
that it had proved extremely difficult to find a home for the Newsround items.


“The Newsround furniture was all different multicoloured stuff which was 
impossible to give to anyone,” he said. “Kids Company were like the only place 
on earth where it had a chance of being reused. It was quite a result. First 
you try and sell it. It was too old and no one wanted to buy it. Then you try 
and donate it. But no one wants a mauve couch next to an orange chair and a 
green desk.”

A BBC spokesman said: “The BBC had absolutely no involvement in this contract.”

Earlier this month, Yentob announced he would stand down from his senior 
management role at the BBC, saying that the media coverage of the Kids Company 
scandal had become a“serious distraction” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/alan-yentob-steps-down-bbc-kids-company>
.


Yentob has been accused of a conflict of interest after making a phone call to 
Newsnight before a report on Kids Company, as well as accompanying 
Batmanghelidjh to an interview on Radio 4’s Today programme.

The corporation has said it does not believe that Yentob abused his position 
by influencing the BBC’s news coverage of the charity.

The BBC Trust, the corporation’s governing body, has said it would not launch 
an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/yentob-wont-face-bbc-trust-probe-over-kids-company-as-he-has-quit>
 into the allegations.

The trust said it had listened to the specific programmes Yentob is accused of 
attempting to influence and found no evidence that the output had been affected.

 In addition, the trust said that now Yentob has stood down it would “not be 
proportionate, appropriate or cost effective” to launch an investigation.
 