
It is painful to read the drama surrounding the collapse of Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/04/kids-company-row-reveals-charity-charisma-leader>
 and realise how much it embodies the divisive cultural issues in our society: 
head v heart, state provision v voluntary, and the unpalatable gap between 
instinctively wanting to help poor children and the ability to pay for it.


Despite the charges of excess and irresponsibility laid against Kids Company, 
Camila Batmanghelidjh <https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh>
, the charismatic founder and chief executive of the campaign (after all we 
have read I hesitate to call it an organisation), still gets a pretty good 
press – even in newsrooms you might expect to be more hard-nosed, such as the 
Financial Times or Sunday Times.

That must be because, as Gaby Hinsliff noted in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/06/left-right-loved-kids-company-camila-batmanghelidjh-charity-unorthodox>
, she appeals to Tories as a “big society” figure, stepping in to mother 
children neglected by their parents and the state. She is obviously a 
remarkable third-way provider with a talent to extract donations from wealthy 
people who are guilty about the source of their own money for the usual reasons 
(Luck? Inheritance? Criminality?).

Why left and right loved Kids Company | Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/06/left-right-loved-kids-company-camila-batmanghelidjh-charity-unorthodox>
Back in 2010, it suited David Cameron to embrace her as an embodiment of 
compassionate conservatism, just as it had previously done Gordon Brown, an 
instinctive statist whose head told him that here was a big heart worth 
backing. Good for them both, we might say.

Except it wasn’t quite right. All sorts of people, not all frustrated 
directors of finance or back-covering senior civil servants, were waving red 
flags over Kids Company’s rapid expansion, its low levels of reserves and poor 
internal structure, its heart-over-head tendency to always say “the kids must 
come first”.

We can all see the dilemma. Some of the stories that Batmanghelidjh’s 
defenders offer are heart-rending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/15/without-it-i-would-have-given-up-three-women-on-how-kids-company-helped-them>
; some uplifting too. When so many children are at risk from bad parents, when 
state agencies, overworked and underfunded, can’t cope, who could turn away a 
small boy or girl in distress?

The need is close to bottomless, but the bank account isn’t. By general consent
Kids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> got into the 
habit of assuming that government would bail it out, that Batmanghelidjh – or 
possibly the chair of trustees, BBC suit Alan Yentob – would pull some strings 
at No 10 or the Treasury (perhaps over that unpaid employment tax bill?) to 
keep the show on the road. It sounds a bit like banking: “Too noble to fail.”

We have to ensure that Kids Company’s work carries on | Jessie Jacobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/11/kids-company-closure-work-carry-on-vulnerable-children>
This summer, Oliver Letwin and Matthew Hancock, two supposedly hard-headed, 
pro-market ministers, overruled their officials with the taxpayer’s chequebook 
rather than upset Cameron. What on earth did Batmanghelidjh have on Dave? 
Compromising photos? There again, Letwin was the man wholet a burglar into his 
house <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/1742011.stm> (“I just want a pee, 
guv”) at three in the morning. He took his wallet.

And until recently the mixture of charismatic do-goodery and emotional 
blackmail worked. None of what economists call “moral hazard” (paying the price 
of risk and failure) for people clearly bent on doing good. At a stretch it 
could sound like the banks, with vulnerable children instead of junk bonds as 
the collateral.

'Without it, I would have given up': three women on how Kids Company helped 
them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/15/without-it-i-would-have-given-up-three-women-on-how-kids-company-helped-them>
But, as with the bankers’ debt mountain, the yellow brick road was bound to 
run out sooner or later. When private concerns about Kids Company’s accounts 
finally spilled out into the open, more bubbles burst. Allegations surfacedof 
envelopes of cash given to some children 
<http://www.itv.com/news/update/2015-08-06/kids-company-boss-each-child-was-given-up-to-20-cash/>
, who could then spend it on whatever they wanted;of sexual abuse allegations 
not investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/30/met-police-launch-inquiry-into-kids-company-over-child-abuse-claims>
; of extravagant salaries and nepotistic habits.

Batmanghelidjh was forced to deny a claim in the Daily Mail last week that her 
personal driver was on a salary of up to £40,000, with his daughter’s school 
fees also paid. Fashionable donors fell awayand the business crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/childrens-charity-kids-company-close-financial-concerns>
.

True or false, this is all detail really. If you employ 650 people in three 
cities with a £20m turnover, the bottom line always has to be money. The 
charity’s chair of trustees,Alan Yentob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> – a highly paid BBC executive 
who makes sycophantic programmes about famous people – should have known 
better, even if the BBC’s own budget has until recently been rare proof of the 
tree-grown theory of money.

Instead, Yentob used his heft to intervene in the BBC’s reporting of Kids 
Company, for which offence alone he should be dispatched to start counting his 
remarkable £6m public sector pension pot. No wonder he didn’t get to grips with 
Batmanghelidjh’s budgetary weakness. Batmanghelidjh herself, of course,tours 
the media circus blaming everyone else 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/aug/06/kids-company-founder-says-abuse-allegations-are-invalid-video>
. Yentob makes a perfect targetfor Beeb-bashers 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3187501/Such-profligate-luvvie-Charity-scandal-raises-troubling-questions-BBC-boss-loves-spending-money-GEOFFREY-LEVY.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fkids-company-shows-how-charitable-hearts-can-rule-heads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f3b4d431ce23941857bc9ecf1fe0d3d8a5fd461%2F190_72_2420_1451%2F2420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20Company%20shows%20how%20charitable%20hearts%20can%20rule%20heads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fkids-company-shows-how-charitable-hearts-can-rule-heads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20Company%20shows%20how%20charitable%20hearts%20can%20rule%20heads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fkids-company-shows-how-charitable-hearts-can-rule-heads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f3b4d431ce23941857bc9ecf1fe0d3d8a5fd461%2F190_72_2420_1451%2F2420.jpg>
 Camila Batmanghelidjh with Alan Yentob, Kids Company’s chair of trustees. 
Photograph: Simon James/Getty Images 
This is going to end badly for all concerned, except probably Nigel Farage and 
Nicola Sturgeon, who can both usually turn any passing tragedy to partisan 
advantage. Labour leadership contenders – I name no names – should ponder the 
awkward truth that good intentions are not enough. Tories might ponder the cuts 
they inflict on local authority social services, alongside ever heavier burdens.

We should all ponder these dilemmas. But we might also consider how Britain’s 
well-meaning but ramshackle charity laws should usefully be reformed, both to 
make charities more effective and more focused on services that justify the 
heavy taxpayer subsidy they enjoy.

Multiple mergers of tiny bodies that duplicate each other’s services, real or 
vestigial, would be a good start. Next would be a cull of charities that should 
not enjoy such a status. You might want to start with a few animal charities – 
why do we need six to protect the red squirrel? – or you may prefer to make 
Eton fend for itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fkids-company-shows-how-charitable-hearts-can-rule-heads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d7859a56044f12078e81d435089260af46cac96%2F584_0_4504_2703%2F4504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kids%20Company%20shows%20how%20charitable%20hearts%20can%20rule%20heads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fkids-company-shows-how-charitable-hearts-can-rule-heads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kids%20Company%20shows%20how%20charitable%20hearts%20can%20rule%20heads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F11%2Fkids-company-shows-how-charitable-hearts-can-rule-heads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d7859a56044f12078e81d435089260af46cac96%2F584_0_4504_2703%2F4504.jpg>
 There are six different charities dedicated to protecting the red squirrel in 
Britain. Do we need them all? Photograph: Mark Hamblin/Rex 
Subject them all, arts projects and donkey saving alike, to freedom of 
information requests so we can see if those cancer research donations are being 
spent on cancer research, not on fat salaries. Does Oxfam need to spend £20m a 
year on political campaigning? Perhaps it does, but let’s ask.

After all, we’re talking proper money here. Gift aid tax deductions, relief on 
business rates, profits and VAT (which so enrages small shopkeepers next to 
slick charity shop chains), stamp duty relief, inheritance tax relief, 
corporate tax relief on donations to their favourite opera house, it adds up to 
billions – about £4.5bn a year, according toone recent estimate in the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/01c7a2b0-3ce3-11e5-bbd1-b37bc06f590c.html#axzz3iVZlE3T4>
.

Add to that the direct government aid to some of Britain’s 200,000 charities, 
ones like Kids Company (another £2.2bn according to the National Council for 
Voluntary Organisations), and the taxpayer is contributing nearly £7bn a year 
to charities. Oh, I almost forgot that the government in various guises pays 
another £11bn a year to third sector (ie charitable) bodies for the services 
they provide.

Many of them are wonderful, we rightly love and admire them and the thousands 
of volunteers who sustain them. But “charity” can also be one of those words 
that turns our brains to mush. Among the saints, some hardened rascals live 
well on that assumption.
 