
Kids Company founder Camila Batmanghelidjh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh> has claimed 
“malicious and untrue allegations” of child abuse against the charity were 
orchestrated to fatally damage it and were directly responsible for its closure.

In unpublished evidence to an MPs committee, seen by the Guardian, 
Batmanghelidjh said the charity’s demise has left thousands of at-risk former 
clients without support, with some clients returning to prostitution, drug 
dealing and drug use.

Kids Company leaves an honourable legacy | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/02/kids-company-leaves-an-honourable-legacy>
Batmanghelidjh’s claims came as the Metropolitan police revealed that an 
inquiry begun last summer into reported sexual and physical assaults at the 
charityfailed to uncover any evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/28/police-drop-kids-company-abuse-investigation>
 of criminality or failures of safeguarding.

The Met said their investigation by the child abuse command into abuse 
allegations supplied by a journalist had found the reports were in most part 
third-party hearsay that were “vague in detail”.

Batmanghelidjh, who said she “burst into tears” with relief when the police 
told her no charges would be made against the charity, told the Guardian on 
Thursday that she was angry at the “betrayal of children, staff and donors”.


She said that powerful interests in Whitehall and local authorities had been 
determined to shut downKids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> because the charity was 
“telling the truth about what is really going on, which is that the child 
protection system is deeply in trouble”.

In her evidence to MPs, she wrote that the charity was “an exemplary 
organisation” that struggled financially because it was “overwhelmed with 
demand” from children who failed to get support from cash-strapped local social 
care and NHS services.

The charity has gone, the vulnerable children and families remain
Camila Batmanghelidjh 
“The charity has gone, the vulnerable children and families remain. The 
problem will not disappear, however much the political system may want to magic 
it away.”

The Met said on Thursday that detectives had identified 32 pieces of 
information or intelligence relating to a period between 2008-15 involving 
reports relating to allegations about children and staff. “However the majority 
were third-party reports which were vague in detail,” police said.

“Officers carried out detailed and extensive inquiries to establish the 
veracity of the information, speaking to a number of individuals connected to 
the charity. No one was arrested or interviewed under caution in connection 
with the investigation.”

They said there was “no evidence of criminality within the 32 reports” that 
would reach the threshold to justify referral for charging to the Crown 
Prosecution Service.

“Nor have we identified any failings by the charity in respect of … their duty 
to safeguard children or vulnerable adults,” Scotland Yard said. The police 
investigation has now concluded.

MPs are also preparing to publish 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-administration-and-constitutional-affairs-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/whitehalls-relationship-with-kids-company/>
 what is expected to be a highly critical report into the running of the 
charity, which received £46m of public money during its lifetime.

Alan Yentob <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob>, the BBC executive 
and former Kids Company chair, said the police findings were a “complete 
vindication” of the charity. “We never believed any of the allegations were 
true. It is clear Kids Company closed because of these allegations and that 
thousands of children have lost their future as a result. It is a travesty.”


The charity said that it supported 36,000 children, adults, parents and 
carers, with varying degrees of care and assistance, including 16,000 high risk 
cases. It employed some 650 staff, supported by 300 mentors and 10,000 
volunteers.

However, the charity’s workload was questioned by David Quirke-Thornton, 
strategic director for children’s and adults’ services at Southwark council, 
who saidin evidence to MPs 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/public-administration-and-constitutional-affairs-committee/kids-company/written/25929.html>
 that “the number of cases handed over to local government [after closure] 
suggests that they [the charity] were working with considerably fewer clients 
than they repeatedly stated”.

Batmanghelidjh has called for an independent inquiry into the circumstances 
surrounding the closure of the charity, which shut its doors last August, five 
days after the abuse allegations were first published by BBC Newsnight and 
BuzzFeed.

The former Kids Company chief executive said trustees had been forced to shut 
the charity because the reputational damage caused by the high profile abuse 
allegations turned the charity overnight “from an organisation which protected 
children into one which was perceived as abusing children”.

At the time of the abuse allegations were made Kids Company had agreed a 
restructuring package with the Cabinet Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/03/camila-batmanghelidjh-to-leave-kids-company>
, which would see the £23m charity halve in size and Batmanghelidjh relinquish 
the chief executive post. But trustees and some key philanthropic backers 
believed that the allegations made the charity financially unsustainable,” she 
said.

She said she believed that both the Cabinet Office and local authority sources 
actively and inappropriately briefed the media against the charity, and that 
stolen files relating to the confidential care packages of some Kids Company 
clients were leaked.

She and Yentob appeared before a confrontational and bad-tempered hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/15/kids-company-chiefs-deny-cash-willy-nilly-camila-batmanghelidjh>
 of the the parliamentary administration and constitutional affairs committee 
(Pacac) in October. The committee was examining the relationship between the 
charity, senior ministers and Whitehall departments.

The pair defended the charity against allegations made at the hearing that it 
had been financially mismanaged, despite revelations that the Cabinet Office 
had raised concerns that a further£3m grant to the charity did not represent 
value for money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/29/kids-company-tim-loughton-blames-david-cameron>
.

An investigation 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Investigation-the-governments-funding-of-Kids-Company.pdf>
 in October by the National Audit Office found that officials had repeatedly 
expressed concerns about Kids Company – six times between 2002-15. Officials 
cited “uncertain cash flows and poor financial management”, the NAO said, as 
reasons for not funding the charity further.

However, over the years senior politicians including David Cameron, Ed Balls, 
Michael Gove, David Blunkett and Oliver Letwin hadintervened to support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/29/kids-company-ministers-warnings-david-cameron-charity>
 Kids Company though there was no evidence they acted inappropriately or beyond 
their powers.

Both Cameron and Gove showered praise on the charity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/14/cameron-and-gove-showered-praise-on-kids-company-in-18-months-before-its-closure>
. In a letter written just over a year before the charity closed, Gove said the 
“inspirational work that Kids Company do with young people in our cities is a 
credit both to them and our country”.

In her written evidence to the Pacac inquiry, submitted in December, 
Batmanghelidjh was scathing of the conduct of the committee, which she claimed 
set out to rubbish the work of Kids Company and “failed to conduct an 
investigation with an open mind”.

Addressing the committee chair Sir Bernard Jenkin directly, she wrote: “As 
chair of the committee you suggested that Kids Company is a failed charity 
because it went ‘bust’. We would not have gone ‘bust’ if the unfounded sexual 
abuse allegations had not been strategically engineered just as we were 
restructuring.”

She also hit out at “comments that belong to the middle ages” made by MPs 
investigating the charity who implied, she said, that Kids Company’s success in 
winning government grants was based on her “mesmerising” hold over senior 
politicians.

“When clinical models of delivery which are acknowledged across the world are 
dismissed as ‘voodoo’ and ‘psychobabble’ it doesn’t bode well for the 
intellectual ability of the MPs involved,” she wrote.

Batmanghelidjh rejected claims heard by the inquiry that the charity could not 
provide robust evidence that its work made a difference, and argued there was 
little evidence that cash payments made by the charity to young clients were 
spent on drugs.

She said that a number of at-risk former clients of Kids Company are now 
unsupported, despite a number of local authorities being tasked to look after 
them. In her evidence she wrote: “We have evidence that the most serious cases 
were not picked up, especially of young people who present with significant 
risk. Consequently, some have gone back to prostitution, drug dealing and have 
come to harm.”

 