
This July, at the Theakstons Old Peculier Harrogate crime writing festival 
<http://harrogateinternationalfestivals.com/crime/>, I’ll be talking to the 
acclaimed comedianEddie Izzard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/05/eddie-izzard-force-majeure-tour-paris>
. In fact, there is something of a comedy/crime theme running throughout the 
festival this year, withLee Child <https://www.theguardian.com/books/lee-child> 
interviewed by Rory Bremner and Fred MacAulay in conversation withMC Beaton 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/mc-beaton-mastermind-of-a-cotswold-crimewave-8200569.html>
. So why this comedy/crime overlap? What is the connection between the two? Is 
it just that a lot of comedians are fans of crime fiction, and crime writers 
like to take some time away from all that blood and bad behaviour to watch 
standup?

Having worked professionally as both a standup comedian and a crime novelist, 
my own theory is that writing crime fiction and performing comedy have far more 
in common than might first appear. While the subject matter of my novels could 
not be further removed from the stuff I used to trot out at theComedy Store 
<http://thecomedystore.co.uk/>, the delivery of the material employs many of 
the same techniques.

Whether your audience is in a sweaty basement club or nestled in a favourite 
armchair, attention has got to be grabbed

A strong opening is, of course, crucial. That first gag has got to be a 
cracker if the crowd is to trust you and relax into your material. Ditto the 
readers of your book. Whether your audience is in a sweaty basement club or 
nestled in a favourite armchair, good money has been paid and attention has got 
to be grabbed if you are not to be heckled off the stage or find your novel 
discarded in favour of the latest volume of Fifty Shades of Whatever. The same 
applies to the climax of your act/novel. Whether your loose ends are to be tied 
up or left dangling, whether you leave the audience on a shaggy dog story or a 
song, a bang is always preferable to a whimper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcrime-writing-comedy-share-secret-weapon-harrogate-festival-mark-billingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434551534208%2Fabb36e44-5968-406a-93ba-afcea7ed5343-2060x1304.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Killer%20timing%3A%20why%20comedy%20and%20crime%20writing%20share%20a%20secret%20weapon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcrime-writing-comedy-share-secret-weapon-harrogate-festival-mark-billingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Killer%20timing%3A%20why%20comedy%20and%20crime%20writing%20share%20a%20secret%20weapon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcrime-writing-comedy-share-secret-weapon-harrogate-festival-mark-billingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434551534208%2Fabb36e44-5968-406a-93ba-afcea7ed5343-2060x1304.jpeg>
 Knock, knock: Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling in the film version of The 
Silence of the Lambs. Photograph: Allstar/Orion Pictures 
The most striking similarity between the two forms is the use of the “reveal”, 
or – to give it its full name – the “pull back and reveal”. In joke terms, this 
is the moment when it becomes clear that you have been led down one path only 
for the punchline to come rushing up the other and smack you in the face. This 
usually involves phrases along the lines of “and that was just the 
receptionist!” or, in the case of a popular gag involving a frenzied bout of 
onanism and a dirty magazine, “and then they threw me out of the newsagent”. 
Much the same technique is used by crime writers. The best example I can think 
of comes fromThomas Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/19/fiction.thomasharris>’s The 
Silence of the Lambs in which, as the Swat team prepares to descend on the 
killer, Clarice Starling is tying up a few loose ends of her own. Clarice rings 
a doorbell, the reader turns the page and – in a heartstopping reveal – 
realises that Clarice is actually the one at the killer’s door.

Crime or mystery fiction uses moments such as this all the time. The reader is 
manipulated artfully until the writer chooses the most effective moment to 
reveal key information. This is often a clue, though the biggest reveal of all 
is usually the identity of a killer. In the case of whodunnits, it might be 
said that the whole book is one extended pull back and reveal. The fact is that 
most crime novels contain a good many punchlines. They are just rather darker 
than the ones you might hear in a comedy club.
 Val McDermid and Mark Billingham host a quiz at the Theakstons Old Peculier 
crime writing festival in Harrogate. Photograph: Fen Oswin 
There are, of course many differences between writing crime fiction and 
performing standup. Writers don’t get heckled (though some might say that’s 
basically what critics do) and comics don’t get advances (most of them would 
fail to turn up if they did). The most obvious difference, though, is in terms 
of reaction. The comic knows instantly if a gag works or, more painfully, does 
not. A book, on the other hand, is just … out there, and one can never be sure 
whether it is being enjoyed or thrown across a room.


Having worked as both comedian and crime writer, the one thing I know is that 
both involve the delivery of a performance. Entertaining an audience is what I 
do now, and all I ever tried to do as a standup, though the stories were 
shorter and the only person likely to die was me. In fact, when it comes to 
death, abuse and sheer, naked terror, comedy trumps crime fiction every time.

 * Mark Billingham joins special guests including Lee Child, Rory Bremner, Ann 
Cleeves, Arnaldur Indriðason, Eddie Izzard, Val McDermid, Sara Paretsky and 
Sally Wainwright at theTheakstons Old Peculier crime writing festival, at The 
Old Swan Hotel, Harrogate, from 16-19 July 
<http://harrogateinternationalfestivals.com/crime/>
 