Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ft6i4XR5Z4lU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ft6i4XR5Z4lU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Ft6i4XR5Z4lU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view <>

If the stories are true, and the experience of death really is twinned with 
the sensation of life flashing before your eyes, I can only hope my terminal 
clip reel will be as concise and perfunctory as the average Hollywood biopic. 
This week, Kill Your Darlings does forAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/allen-ginsberg> and his fellow Beat poets 
what Lovelace did for Linda, Jobs did for Steve, and The Iron Lady did for the 
political landscape of the 1980s, condensing their details and nuances down 
into an easily digestible series of sketches, designed to deliver maximum 
feeling in minimum time. After all, the real Ginsberg lived for somewhere in 
the region of 36m minutes; nowadays, you're lucky if an audience will sit still 
for 90. And so, while Ginsberg and his contemporaries most likely devised their 
"New Vision" of American poetry over the course of countless days and nights, 
here the idea comes together during a single whiskey-fuelled conversation in a 
Harlem jazz club. Where the resistance faced by the group during the 1940s was 
wide-ranging and defined by a number of conflicting interests, here their sole 
detractor is a stuffy Columbia professor with an unshakeable hard-on for metre 
and form. The result is an exhilarating but distinctly silly approximation of a 
key chapter in the history of American literature.

The best Beat movies take a step back from the heady thrills – not to mention 
dodgy racial and gender politics – of the scene, in search of a more balanced 
perspective. Walter Salles's On The Road was wise to undercut the rebellious 
behaviour of its protagonists with a glimpse into the broken lives of those 
left in their wake. Kill Your Darlings makes no such efforts, instead twisting 
each and every plot development into a moment of triumph, vindication or, at 
very least, dramatic irony ("You'll never get anywhere in this town, Ginsberg" 
etc, etc) This bite-sized version of events isn't just history flashing before 
our eyes, it's history through rose-tinted, black-rimmed glasses.

Blu-ray & DVD, Universal

Also out this week

Seven Samurai Kurosawa classic looks magnificent on Blu-ray. 

The Secret Life of Walter Mitty Ben Stiller leaves his humdrum life behind.

Bloodsucking Freaks Campy 70s gorefest is finally uncut.
 