
SXSW <3 kittens

 Midnight screenings are commonplace at film festivals, largely to the ire of 
sleep-deprived film journalists. Probably realizing they faced an uphill battle 
in revving up the crowd assembled forthe world premiere of Keanu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/13/keanu-review-key-and-peele-disappoint-sxsw>
, which screened well past midnight on Saturday (due to daylight savings, the 
film didn’t let out until 3.30am), sketch comedy duo Key and Peele came armed 
with a surprise: a crate-load of stuffed kittens.

 Before the comedy – about a cat named Keanu that goes missing, prompting Key 
and Peele to dive into Los Angeles’ criminal underbelly to rescue it – the pair 
took to the stage at the Paramount Theater to toss the furry critters into the 
pit. Everyone collectively lost their minds – think back to how Oprah Winfrey’s 
audience behaved during herFavorite Things episodes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G38I4xjYgac> and you get the picture. Even the 
sleepy critics got in on the action, jumping like giddy children for the toys 
as they flew past.

Sausage Party is sizzling hot
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc7fP9q_LyDc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc7fP9q_LyDc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc7fP9q_LyDc&media=>
 Sausage Party, the first animated film from This is the End collaborators 
Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/15/sausage-party-seth-rogen-animated-sxsw-film-festival>
 rode into Austin as a total question mark. No footage had premiered ahead of 
its “work in progress” debut – Sony had only released one still image. All that 
was known about the release was that it centered on a hot dog named Frank, and 
featured the voices of Rogen and Kristen Wiig.

Seth Rogen's animated film Sausage Party is provocative food for thought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/15/sausage-party-seth-rogen-animated-sxsw-film-festival>
There was intense secrecy leading up to its SXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> premiere, but it’s a hilariously 
profane and inspired animated comedy, the likes of which Hollywood hasn’t seen 
since Team America: World Police. The audience went wild.

 Shortly after the film wrapped, the first trailer popped up on the internet 
and the response was just as enthusiastic: it went instantly viral. Deadpool 
recently proved that R-rated entertainment can perform on par with PG-13 
blockbusters. Given all the buzz now surrounding Sausage Party, it looks sure 
to become a cultural sensation when it opens wide in August.

 Hardcore Henry shoots for glory
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D96EChBYVFhU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D96EChBYVFhU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D96EChBYVFhU&media=>
When The Blair Witch Project became a bonafide phenomenon in 1999, it forever 
changed the horror industry, inspiring a whole new subset of spooky found 
footage films, including the Paranormal Activity series. With found footage now 
on the decline (the last Paranormal Activity installment, Ghost Dimension, was 
the lowest-grossing of the franchise), it was only a matter of time before a 
new and innovative trend of film-making emerged.

Enter Hardcore Henry (it debuted at the Toronto international film festival 
tilledsimply Hardcore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/toronto-film-festival-2015-full-lineup>
), a jaw-dropping action spectacle shot entirely from first-person perspective. 
It wowed SXSW, where it made its US premiere glossed up with updated special 
effects completed for its impending worldwide release.

Hardcore Henry’s barebones plot doesn’t even merit mention: Russian 
writer-director Ilya Naishuller could care less about telling a good story; his 
chief intent is to pummel your senses into submission. And he hits it out the 
park.

Naishuller’s wildly ambitious endeavor is sure to lure in gamers curious to 
see their favorite pastime brought to life on the big screen – but it’s sure to 
also appeal to mainstream audiences curious to know what all the fuss is about. 
If it’s indeed a hit, expect Hollywood to produce a slew of copycats to mimic 
its success.

 Comedy comes home

 In introducing Sausage Party, Rogen praised SXSW for being the only film 
festival that treats comedy on an equal playing field as drama. He has a point. 
For years, SXSW has become known as the prime destination for mainstream 
comedy. Four of the most critically acclaimed studio comedies to come out in 
the last decade – Bridesmaids, Trainwreck, Neighbors and Spy – all screened at 
the event before going on to become blockbuster-level successes.

Meanwhile, comedy powerhouse Lena Dunham has SXSW to thank for launching her 
career: her debut feature,Creative Nonfiction,  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KcYrT1-SnJg>screened at the festival, as did 
her follow-upTiny Furniture <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1570989/reference>, 
which won her the top narrative award, effectively putting her on the path to 
Girls, which she unveiled at SXSW a few years later.

 This year, on top of Rogen’s raucous Sausage Party and Key and Peele’s Keanu, 
SXSW also previewed the latest Pee-wee Herman adventure, Pee-wee’s Big Holiday.

The Arbalest and Tower take top prizes at 2016 SXSW film festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/16/sxsw-film-festival-awards-the-arbalest-tower-2016>
 This year’s discoveries weren’t up for awards

 Short Term 12, the indie drama that put Brie Larson on the map before Room 
won her an Oscar, the award-winning family tragedy Krisha (which opens on 
Friday) and Tiny Furniture all have one thing in common: they won the narrative 
grand jury prize at SXSW.

 This year’s winner, The Arbalest 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/markets-festivals/the-arbalest-review-sxsw-1201730494/>
, received less than praise-worthy notices before going on to net the top 
honor, and is therefore unlikely to follow in the footsteps of the 
aforementioned successes. In fact, the general consensus coming out of SXSW 
seemed to indicate that the strongest films in the lineup weren’t in the 
competition program, making them therefore ineligible for awards.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTLspHA8m6Ac&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTLspHA8m6Ac>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTLspHA8m6Ac&media=>
 Standout world premieres included The Trust, featuring Nicolas Cage at his 
wacky best, Long Nights Short Mornings, a gorgeously realized drama starring 
Shiloh Fernandez as a New Yorker seemingly incapable of settling down, the 
revisionist teen horror I Am Not a Serial Killer, and Don’t Think Twice, from 
comedian Mike Birbiglia. Curiously, they all screened in non-juried sections.

Everybody Wants Some!! is going to make stars out of its cast
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy6raUs0CiCQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy6raUs0CiCQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy6raUs0CiCQ&media=>
Following his defining opus Boyhood, Richard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater> cut loose to deliver his 
most purely pleasurable effort since 1993’s Dazed and Confused, Everybody Wants 
Some!!, which opened SXSW. Fittingly, he’s billed his latest as a “spiritual 
sequel” to that classic high school comedy.

And like Dazed and Confused, Everybody Wants Some!! is all but certain to make 
starts out of its principal players. Matthew McConaughey, Parker Posey and Ben 
Affleck all have Linklater to thank for launching their careers – before 
appearing in Dazed and Confused they were complete unknowns. The male cast that 
heads Everybody Wants Some!! are largely unfamiliar to audiences (save for 
Scream Queens star Glen Powell).

Linklater’s subtly incisive screenplay makes the baseball players that 
populate the film distinctive from one another, allowing his cast to 
individually shine. There’s no bad seed in the bunch, with particular standouts 
including Tyler Hoechlin and Wyatt Russell, son to Kurt Russell and Goldie 
Hawn. Its lead, Blake Jenner, was in contention to play a young Han Solo for 
Disney.

 Austin parties hard

As a city that lives by the motto “keep Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> weird”, Texas’ coolest destination 
has a reputation for being a party town even when SXSW isn’t occurring. During 
the event, the fun-loving atmosphere only intensifies as the city closes down 
its main drag, Sixth street, to let the party spread onto the street.

 On top of attracting film lovers, Silicon Valley’s finest flock for the 
growing interactive section of the event, while the music industry transplants 
itself to Austin for the popular music portion. SXSW’s three disparate 
communities combine in Austin, resulting in a festival that goes hard well into 
the morning.



 