
A Russian court gave Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny> a suspended sentence on 
Tuesday for embezzling money but jailed his brother for three and a half years 
in a case seen as part of a campaign to stifle dissent.

Navalny led mass protests against the Russian president, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, three years ago, when tens 
of thousands took to the streets in Moscow and St Petersburg to protest against 
corruption in Putin’s government and inner circle. Opposition figures say 
jailing Navalny risked a new wave of protests and so it was decided to punish 
him by jailing his brother instead.

The Navalny brothers were accused of stealing 30 million roubles (about 
£334,000 under the current exchange rate) from two firms, including an 
affiliate of the French cosmetics company Yves Rocher, between 2008 and 2012.


Tuesday’s ruling will come as a relief for Navalny’s supporters after 
prosecutors asked that he be imprisoned for 10 years. The Kremlin denies 
allegations that it uses the courts to persecute opponents.

Officials have taken few steps to investigate Navalny’s corruption 
allegations. He claimed there was mass embezzlement, including in state bank 
VTB and pipeline monopoly Transneft, run by close allies of Putin.

“Aren’t you ashamed of what you are doing?” Navalny told the court and judge 
Yelena Korobchenko.

“Why are you putting him [my brother Oleg] in prison? To punish me even 
harder?”

Currently under house arrest, Navalny is serving another suspended five-year 
jail term for a separate conviction last year, which critics also called a sham.

“The authorities are torturing and destroying relatives of their political 
opponents. This regime doesn’t deserve to exit, it must be destroyed,” Navalny 
told reporters outside the court as he was escorted in a car for prisoners.

The feminist punk band Pussy Riot released a new video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9-IEfKLkL1w&feature=youtu.be> urging people to 
protest against the sentence later on Tuesday. They called on demonstrators to 
gather at 7pm local time (4pm GMT) in Manezh Square, directly in front of the 
Kremlin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9-IEfKLkL1w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9-IEfKLkL1w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9-IEfKLkL1w&media=>
 A video released by Pussy Riot urging people to protest against the sentencing 
of Alexei Navalny 
The video features Pussy Riot’s Nadya Tolokonnikova and Masha Alyokhina 
dressed in 1920s costumes, cleaning the Moscow snow using Harry Potter-style 
brooms. A pounding soundtrack has the lyric: “Clean … honest … word … deed.” 
The video ends with Pussy Riot flying magically over the Kremlin’s impenetrable 
walls.

The announcement of the verdict had been abruptly brought forward from next 
month after Navalny’s supporters announced plans for a large protest on 15 
January.

Hugh Williamson, Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and 
central Asia director at Human Rights Watch, said the sentencing might have 
been designed to warn off other Putin critics.

 “The sentence, and the imprisoning of his brother, Oleg Navalny, seems aimed 
not only at punishing Alexei Navalny himself and stopping his anti-corruption 
work, but also intimidating other critics of the government,” he said.

 “The Kremlin seems to be telling independent voices to expect a harsher 
crackdown in 2015. Many factors point to political motivations in the case 
against Alexei and Oleg Navalny.

“By moving up the verdict, the Russian authorities apparently sought to 
diminish planned demonstrations. They also pushed those planning to protest 
[against] a guilty verdict to the margins of the law, by denying them enough 
time to comply with local regulations.”


 