
"Almost from the time I was even halfway serious about doing this for a living 
I knew who Kris Kristofferson was. His name turned up on country records, but 
it also cropped up inRolling Stone and Creem as well. I became aware of him and 
Townes van Zandt almost at the same time, the difference was that Townes was 
there in Texas and I managed to track him down. When I went to Nashville in1974 
Kris was gone but everyone I knew, my whole crowd, was there because of him. We 
became songwriters because of Bob Dylan, but we went to Nashville because of
Kris Kristofferson <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kris-kristofferson>. His 
existence told us that we might be able to make some sort of a living from 
writing songs.

"I made a huge connection with Johnny Cash singing Sunday Morning Coming Down 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_RLiuPRMJy8>, but the first song of Kris's that 
I heard him sing before anyone else covered it was probably Loving Her Was 
Easier; Why Me, Lord was a really huge hit, too. I bought those when they came 
out, butJesus Was a Capricorn [1972] is the seminal one for me. It's one of 
those records I picked apart and tried to learn how to write songs from.His 
songs are very plain-spoken <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=45-6duFvfuI> in 
their approach, but he's so literate that there's this innate grace to them.

"He was successful as a recording artist, arguably more successful as an actor 
<http://www.tcm.com/mediaroom/index.jsp?cid=138593>, then went through a period 
where he started becoming interested in making records again and saying certain 
things in those records. He and Jackson Browne were out there taking all of the 
shit in the 80s when the US was behaving really fucking badly all over the 
southern hemisphere, and I really admired that.

"I didn't get to know him until the very late 80s or early 90s. I was playing 
in Santa Barbara; he lived around there and popped up with some Indian 
activist! It blew my mind, Kris Kristofferson knocking on the door of my bus in 
some parking lot in California. We survive and we evolve because of people in 
our midst who just get it, and he's definitely one of those guys. It's a big 
deal to me that he even knows who I am, because he was what I wanted to be when 
I grew up: a hyper-literate hillbilly."

Key recording: Kristofferson (Monument, 1970)
 