
Civil disobedience is a way of expressing political opposition that pushes 
beyond what the law allows you to do, in terms of resistance. It is an act that 
says "we are deliberately breaking an unjust law." We often talk about it as a 
problem. In fact, I would argue that our problem is civil obedience. People too 
readily accept governments that do not hold to their promises.

My first brush with civil disobedience was when I was 15 and in the years 
since, I've learned a few things about its power, and its limitations. Here's a 
few of my lessons:


1. Nothing important comes without sacrifice

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402495408849%2F6c00e252-e4b7-4533-bc46-b34808f3ef90-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402495408849%2F6c00e252-e4b7-4533-bc46-b34808f3ef90-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Protesters in Fordsburg, South Africa. Photograph: Getty Images 
I was one of thousands of young people in South Africa that joined the 
national student protests against inequality in apartheid education. At that 
age, you don’t always understand the wider context of your actions. The slogan 
at the front of the march was “we want equality”, and at the back it was “ we 
want a colour TV”.


Despite this, what we were doing was important: we were resisting by refusing 
to go to classes and challenging the law that legally prohibited more than four 
people to march in the streets together. It was only here that I discovered 
that Nelson Mandela actually existed, and learned about the bigger picture of 
apartheid in South Africa. The media were restricted in how much they could 
report on him and so I had never seen his picture.

Following this I led a protest in my community with between 3,000-4,000 
people, where the police charged at us with tear gas. The experience of 
participating in these acts early on affected me in a very direct sense. They 
taught me the important lesson that nothing important will come without 
sacrifice, commitment and courage.

2. Stay positive: first they will fight you, but then you will win

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402481530480%2Faeb3a535-d79b-45ba-bdba-15f494c4b7c0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402481530480%2Faeb3a535-d79b-45ba-bdba-15f494c4b7c0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mahatma Gandhi leading the Salt March in protest against the government 
monopoly on salt production. Photograph: Central Press/Getty Images 
South Africa has a strong connection to Gandhi. It was during his time there 
that he learned his politics, and honed hisSatyagraha 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satyagraha>, which means passive resistance or 
civil disobedience as we now tend to call it.

There was always a photo of Gandhi in my family home and he was an influential 
figure for me as I was growing up. I developed a strong adherence to his notion 
of "soul force". For me, this translated as the importance of being willing to 
take the violence of the state. The moral authority to take this stance means 
that ultimately you will succeed in your mission.

My favourite quote is from Gandhi and it is one that is so relevant to civil 
disobedience today: “First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they 
fight you, and then you win”. If you look at the situationGreenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> is in, they are fighting 
us really hard in the courts, they are invading our privacy and preventing our 
actions. But Gandhi's philosophy makes me optimistic that this is a positive 
indication that we are closing in on the changes we are campaigning for.


3. When governments respond with force, they help to grow the movement

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402499366764%2F417e3b1e-2ab9-478b-8926-2890ac24f166-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402499366764%2F417e3b1e-2ab9-478b-8926-2890ac24f166-2060x1236.jpeg>
 One of the Arctic 30, makes the victory sign as he is released on bail in St 
Petersburg. Photograph: Olga Maltseva/AFP/Getty Images 
The power of civil disobedience as a strategy lies in its moral authority. If 
you have numbers, diversity of voices, and are able to maintain a peaceful 
event, then it can be immensely powerful. It speaks to the oppressed and the 
oppressor in different ways. To the oppressed, or the people affected, it gives 
them strength to continue their struggle. To the oppressors, exceptional acts 
of moral courage force them to listen.

The recent Arctic 30 campaign 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/climate-change/arctic-impacts/Peace-Dove/Arctic-30/>
 and the arrests it incurred on many activists,myself included 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jun/17/greenpeace>, is a good 
example of this. It is clear that when I was up a rig on the oil ship being 
bombarded with water for 15 hours, I wasn’t doing it for selfish reasons, and 
nor were any of the Arctic 30 doing it for personal gain. It was remarkable how 
many heads of state then came out and called for the release of the arrested 
activists. Governments badly miscalculate when they respond to civil 
disobedience by throwing activists in prison and assuming this will terrify the 
public. In fact, the effect is always the opposite: it helps to grow the 
movement. It forces those in power to recalibrate and recognise the democratic 
intent of what activists are trying to achieve.


4. Be patient, failure is integral to the path to progress

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402485662642%2F51981a8e-5deb-4c04-91cf-980a7a8b1dc9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402485662642%2F51981a8e-5deb-4c04-91cf-980a7a8b1dc9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Civil rights leader Dr Martin Luther King on the fourth day of their march 
from Selma to Montgomery. Photograph: Ben Martin/Time & Life Pictures/Getty 
Image 
You could say most acts of civil disobedience fail because they don’t get 
results immediately. In the case of Arctic 30 they failed because oil was 
eventually drilled and removed from the area. But on the flipside, we now have 
more than 10 million people campaigning to have the Arctic declared a global 
sanctuary with no industrial activities. It is important to remember that not 
everything that counts can be measured.

We can learn from those who have engaged in civil disobedience in the past 
that it wasn’t their first action that delivered their result. For Martin 
Luther King or Rosa Parks, it was an accumulation of lots of different actions 
over a long time.

5. Explore the potential of digital civil disobedience

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402495647211%2Fc25a6989-40e3-485d-9a49-2aed8b1df904-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kumi%20Naidoo%3A%20my%20five%20lessons%20in%20civil%20disobedience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fjun%2F11%2Fkumi-naidoo-lessons-in-civil-disobedience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F11%2F1402495647211%2Fc25a6989-40e3-485d-9a49-2aed8b1df904-2060x1236.jpeg>
 How has technology and social media changed the way civil disobedience is 
expressed? Photograph: Indranil Mukherjee/AFP/Getty Images 
Wikileaks and the Edward Snowden NSA revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/05/what-snowden-revealed-changed-nsa-reform>
 created an opportunity for people to know what governments were hiding from 
them and have changed the whole debate around privacy. These are good examples 
of digital civil disobedience.

I think the social media space has thrown up a lot of possibilities for civil 
disobedience, protest and the strengthening of civil society generally. When 
you look at resistance during the Arab spring, people used Facebook to spread 
the word, Twitter to tell people where to be when, and YouTube to document and 
share what they experienced and what they achieved. The question is what laws 
do you break online in terms of pushing that space? At Greenpeace we are trying 
to make sense of this new area but the future looks promising.

Today, unlike 50 years ago there are lots of forums for engagement between 
civil society and those in business and government. This is evident at UN 
meetings, where national civil society groups are invited to take part of the 
consultative process. I think we’ve long chased after some sort of explosion of 
democracy, and the idea that success would be when governments wanted to talk 
to us. But I think we should beware of the value of some of these engagements. 
Sometimes they are more insults than anything else, just a box-ticking 
exercise. We may need a different measure of meaningful progress.


Read more stories like this: 

• Are NGOs fit for the purpose of advocacy and campaigning? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2013/mar/26/world-social-forum-ngos-fit-for-purpose>

• Advocacy: the dark art of influencing policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2013/jun/28/advocacy-how-to-influence-government-policy>

• #fastfortheclimate: gimmick or powerful climate change campaign? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/may/09/climate-change-yeb-sano-fasting-campaign>

Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox


 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/may/09/climate-change-yeb-sano-fasting-campaign>

 