
Kylie Minogue’s signature tune Can’t Get You Out of My Head is one of those 
rare moments in pop: sleek and chic and stylish and damnably danceable, but 
with a darker element hidden in plain sight.

There’s nothing second-hand about it: the restraint Kylie exercises in the 
vocal serves the music and the sentiment of the lyric well.As Guardian critic 
Dorian Lynskey suggests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/31/kylie-minogue-cant-get-you-out-of-my-head>
, it feels like the single-minded pull and sway of Kylie’s obsession – “I can’t 
get you out of my head/La la la/La la la la la”, she repeats over and over – 
goes beyond simple lust. It could well be aimed at the forbidden fruit; a 
one-night stand, a cheat – real or imagined – on her full-time lover.

Despite the simplicity of its lyric, the darkness contained within the locked 
grooves and velveteen robo-disco of Can’t Get You Out of My Head is very far 
removed from the upbeat bounce of Kylie’s late 80s and 90s output, when she was 
mainly known for the pop fluff of songs like her 1988 debut singleThe 
Loco-Motion <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lZAhzVvgY-c>. 

On early Stock, Aitken and Waterman forays such as I Should Be So Lucky 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GEYxJdEDjX8>, Kylie famously plays the 
wide-eyed ingénue with alacrity. There’s no such optimistic looking to the 
future here: she knows this obsession she has with her mystery lover is 
unhealthy, and that ultimately it could destroy her if she allows it. But she 
can’t get it (you) out of her head. It’s a desire that is wholly dependent on 
her own self-control. So she performs her dance of seduction, while 
subcutaneously giving off signals that emphasise her unavailability (giving off 
an aura of ‘purity’ while performing in a plunging neckline).

Some academics have suggested that the measure of restraint and unavailability 
that Kylie exhibits in the retro-futuristic video to Can’t Get You Out of My 
Head is indicative of a wider dance of control that hyper-sexualised white 
female pop stars perform in the public arena.

In a 2005 essay entitled Naughty Girls and Red Blooded Women (Representations 
of Female Heterosexuality in Music Video) 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/14680770500058207>, academics Diane 
Railton and Paul Weston compare and contrast the videos to Beyoncé’s 2003 single
Baby Boy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ucz_pm3LX8> and Can’t Get You Out of 
My Head <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IFx3WX4DES0>. The first, the pair 
suggest, is representative of a certain "natural" black female sexuality that 
traces back its pattern of raced representation to colonial times: the black 
female body portrayed as “primitive, feral, uncontrolled and uncontrollable” – 
indicative of a (pop music) culture that often prefers to portray the black 
woman as sexual predator.

In marked contrast, Kylie’s performance is seen as “pure, restrained and 
controlled” – an idealised trope for white female sexuality that also has its 
roots in Victorian and colonial discourse. Both women perform a dance of 
seduction through their videos (and songs), but where Beyoncé "represents a 
universal availability”, Kylie's availability "is always provisional, 
restricted, and contingent”.

Written by Cathy Dennis and Rob Davis, Can’t Get You Out of My Head was 
originally intended for S Club 7 – whose manager Simon Fuller rejected it. (
Sophie Ellis-Bextor <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BsISfQAXE60> also turned 
it down, perhaps surprisingly. It seems perfect for her brand of lustrous 
manufactured pop.) The song was then passed along to Kylie’s A&R exec: 
supposedly, Kylie agreed to record it after hearing just 20 seconds of the demo.

The single was immediately popular on its release in September 2001. It 
reached No 1 in around 40 countries, including Australia (and every European 
country, barring Finland) – and has reportedly gone on to sell over 6m copies 
worldwide. It also denoted a cementing in the change in the marketing and 
public perception of Kylie, which began with the release of the 
sexually-charged video toSpinning Around 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=blJbs98dWVE> in 2000: wherein she transformed 
from the homely girl-next-door, soap opera star Charlene – so loved by the 
Australian public – into a much more flirtatious, sophisticated persona.

Can’t Get You Out of My Head predated the vast commercial and critical success 
ofDaft Punk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h5EofwRzit0> by several years. In 
many respects, it was one of the points where (as the BBC suggested 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/5H7CKB79bl5p1PBmVfHRD2B/cant-get-you-out-of-my-head>
) manufactured pop gained a new postmodern respectability. It marked a clear 
shift in attitude towards pop music among the "serious" rock critic fraternity: 
the idea that (manufactured, female) pop music might well be the equal of 
(organic, male) rock music after all, that each has their high points and their 
low. It didn’t hurt that you could trace the beat back to similar (male) 
critically-praised grooves from New Order and Kraftwerk: but this was as much 
about the refined, populist 70s disco ofRodgers and Edwards 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rTusMLs9SJE> and Giorgio Moroder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PE1lzqJCeJ0> as anyone.

And it was by Kylie. Australia’s own Kylie. 
 