
Labor says Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> needs to take 
concrete action to assure himself that the former trade minister Andrew Robb is 
not in breach of the ministerial code of conduct.

The shadow special minister of state, Don Farrell, wrote to the prime minister 
late on Thursday asking that he take steps to assure himself that the former 
trade minister was in compliance with the rules.

Andrew Robb takes role with Chinese company that operates Darwin port
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-chinese-company-operates-darwin-port>
The prime minister said this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-did-not-tell-prime-minister-about-role-with-chinese-company>
 Robb had not talked to him before taking on a newrole as an economic 
consultant with the Chinese company that now operates the Darwin port. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-chinese-company-operates-darwin-port>

Landbridge signed a $506m agreement with the Northern Territory government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/13/chinese-company-secures-99-year-lease-of-darwin-port-in-506m-deal>
 in October last year for a 99-year lease of the port. Landbridge announced on 
2 September that Robb had joined the company as a consultant.

Robb retired from politics at the July election, after a stint as the 
government’s special trade envoy. He retired as trade minister in February 2016.

The ministerial code forbids ministers from lobbying or advocating with the 
government for 18 months after their political retirement. The code also says 
ministers should not take personal advantage of information to which they had 
access in their ministerial role.

Farrell says in the letter to Turnbull the prime minister needs to write to 
Robb seeking clarification “to address public concern on this matter”.

Andrew Robb did not tell prime minister about role with Chinese company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-did-not-tell-prime-minister-about-role-with-chinese-company>
“In addition, I ask that your letter make clear to Mr Robb that the 18-month 
period commences from the point at which he ceased his role as special envoy 
for trade, and not at the point at which he ceased being minister for trade,” 
Farrell said.

Farrell says a special envoy would have access to confidential information and 
be privy to sensitive government decisions, and it would clearly be “against 
the spirit of the document” to give Robb a leave pass.

He also asks the prime minister to seek assurance from his ministers “that 
they have not had professional dealings with Mr Robb since his resignation from 
parliament”.

Robb this week dismissed questions about whether he was in breach of the 
government’s rules. He said he had no intention of breaching the 
responsibilities set out in the code.

“Why am I challenged? Just because it’s political, I suppose, but I don’t care 
really, I’m going to go ahead and develop the relationships, there’s always 
people who want to put a slur on what others are doing,” Robb told reporters.

“The US and Europe have gone protectionist, what’s opening up the region is 
opening up so I make no apology for looking to build relationships so we can 
increase trade and investment with our neighbours,” he said.

“Australia has to realise that our future depends very, very heavily on the 
countries around us in this region and I am going to spend as much time as I 
can developing those relationships for the benefit of Australian businesses and 
our community.”

Robb was also defended this week by the current trade minister, Steve Ciobo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/andrew-robbs-work-for-chinese-company-backed-by-steven-ciobo>
, who said it made sense to have former ministers working to secure 
opportunities for Australian businesses.

 