
The major parties have spent much of the second day of the close-run election 
campaign accusing each other of cosying up to the Greens.

And the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, insisted the hardline bipartisan 
stand on asylum seekers would not change, whileMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> used revelations 
that Labor candidates have argued for a more compassionate stance to raise what 
he said was a “horror” prospect of a future Labor government easing the policy 
under influence from the Greens.


Today's campaign: first leaders' debate set as focus turns to economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-briefing>
Turnbull has refused to rule out preference deals that would help the Greens’ 
chances of winning inner Melbourne seats, even as the minor party gears up for 
a potentially pivotal role in a close election. The VictorianLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> director, Michael 
Kroger, had earlier released a statement that strongly implied such deals were 
under contemplation.

The Coalition circulated on social media a photograph posted on Facebook by 
Labor’s candidate in Herbert, Cathy O’Toole,standing outside the office of 
local LNP MP Ewen Jones 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-labor-candidate-cathy-otoole-hit-by-questions-over-old-protest-photo-20160510-goqhrd.html>
 with a sign that said “let them stay” and “be fair to refugees”.

“On Friday morning I stood with my Amnesty International Australia 
<https://www.facebook.com/AmnestyOz/> friends peacefully demonstrating in 
support of a humane policy for refugees,” O’Toole wrote of the protest urging a 
change of policy on the267 asylum seekers presently in Australia for treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/10/let-them-stay-australia-backlash-267-asylum-seekers-island-detention-camps>
.


O’Toole’s post did not directly contradict Labor’s policy but Turnbull leapt 
upon it –and positive remarks by the Greens lower house MP Adam Bandt about the 
last hung parliament from 2010 to 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/greens-may-push-voters-back-to-polls-in-event-of-a-hung-parliament-bandt-says>
– as evidence that Labor would water down its asylum policies under Greens’ 
influence.

Labor’s policy is that no asylum seekers who arrive by boat will be settled in 
Australia and boat turnbacks should be used when it is safe to do so.

“We’ve heard from Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> from the Greens that 
he’s looking forward to a hung parliament,” said Turnbull.

“He said the three years between 2010 and 2013 were effectively a golden era. 
He looked back to that with affection. Most Australians look back to it with a 
degree of horror, let’s face it.

“What will be the price of the Greens’ pending deal with Labor, which they’ve 
been promoting? It will be much higher taxes ... a relaxation of our border 
protection rules so we’ll have the people smugglers back in business and of 
course he wants even higher carbon taxes thanBill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> is proposing.”

Campaigning with Shorten in Herbert, O’Toole insisted she was 100% behind 
Labor’s policy.


Bill Shorten makes education a priority as Labor 'underdogs' hit campaign trail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/labor-bill-shorten-election-campaign-education-priority-campaign-trail>
“I have been a member of Amnesty International for many years,” O’Toole said. 

“What I was saying at that point in time is very clear: I support the humane 
treatment of people regardless of whether they’re refugees or not.

“We treat people humanely. I do not support people making extreme amounts of 
money by extortionate measures and risking people’s lives.”

Shorten said Labor would be “compassionate” but would never allow the 
reopening of the “dangerous seaways” between Indonesia and Australia.

“We will support boat turnbacks where the border forces deem it appropriate,” 
he said. “It is part of our general plan. We will, after 2 July, if elected, 
keep the people smugglers out of business.

“We will be compassionate in the way we treat refugees in this country but 
what we will never do is allow the opening of the dangerous seaways between 
Java and Christmas Island.”

But Liberal strategists believe raising doubts over Labor’s stance on asylum 
have given them a strong start in the marathon campaign and Labor campaigners 
are concerned they have been on the defensive over the issue.

At the same time, Turnbull refused to rule out recurring reports that his own 
party has done a deal to direct preferences to the Greens in the Victorian 
seats ofBatman <http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/vic/batman.htm> and Wills 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/vic/wills.htm> in return for the Greens not 
preferencing the ALP in a clutch of outer-suburban marginal seats, a move that 
would give the Liberals a stronger chance of winning them.

Turnbull insisted the matter would be determined by his federal director, Tony 
Nutt.

“If you’re asking about preferences, the federal director will decide how 
preferences are allocated,” the prime minister said. “Obviously when we know 
who’s nominated. That will be done in the usual way, in consultation with the 
organisation.”


Nutt issued a statement which also avoided ruling out the option. He said 
“various parties” always “had discussions” but it was wrong to say that a deal 
had been done.

Preference decisions would be made after the close of nominations “consistent 
with the electoral interests of the party, our values, principles and 
priorities and the best interests of the Australian people in having an 
effective national government,” Nutt said.


“At the appropriate time the Liberal party will publish its recommendations 
and they will then decide what choice to make.”

The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, has used a 
similar formulation, insisting preference arrangements are a matter for local 
campaigns and it was possible some would decide to run “open tickets” and not 
direct preferences to either major party.


But the Victorian Liberal president, Michael Kroger, suggested a deal was in 
the offing, telling Sky News his party was “not running a charity” for Labor 
although no decision had yet been made to preference the Greens.


Shorten said the Liberal-Green deal showed that Labor was in the centre of the 
Australian landscape.

Malcolm Turnbull says we must respect women while washing his hands of a Nauru 
rape victim | Duncan Fine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/10/malcolm-turnbull-says-we-must-respect-women-while-washing-his-hands-of-a-nauru-victim>
“You’ve got the Greens on the extreme left, and you’ve got Mr Turnbull’s 
Liberals on the extreme right and they are proposing to preference each other 
which basically means if you are a Liberal party voter in the city your vote 
will be going to the Greens,” Shorten said.

“If you are a Greens voter in the suburbs and regions of Australia when you 
vote Green your vote will be going to the Liberal party.

Both Turnbull and Shorten ruled out forming government in collaboration with 
the Greens.


“There is absolutely no chance – yes we can rule out any collaboration with 
the Greens to form a government but I can tell you Labor won’t and Labor can’t 
and if they did no one would believe them,” Turnbull said.


Asked whether he would consider forming a coalition with the Greens in a hung 
parliament for minority government, Shorten said “no I wouldn’t”.


“Can I put it another way to Mr Bandt and the Greens – tell ‘em they’re 
dreaming,” Shorten said. “No deals with Labor about forming a coalition.”

But Bandt countered that, saying “Bill Shorten can say that we’re dreaming, 
sometimes dreams come true. And if the Australian people decide that they want 
a parliament where there are more than two voices who largely say the same 
thing then the obligation is on all of us to work together”.

 