
Labor and the Greens have locked in behind the tribunal which sets minimum pay 
rates for truck owner-drivers, setting the scene for a stoush with the 
government when parliament is recalled and during the election.

On Tuesday evening Guardian Australia reported the government would bring 
forward legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/12/coalition-pushes-for-immediate-abolition-of-truck-driver-pay-tribunal>
 to abolish the road safety remuneration tribunal in the week parliament is 
recalled on 18 April, instead of attempting to abolish it after the election.

Coalition pushes for immediate abolition of truck driver pay tribunal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/12/coalition-pushes-for-immediate-abolition-of-truck-driver-pay-tribunal>
On Wednesday the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, and the 
employment minister, Michaelia Cash, formally announced the government would 
bring on two bills: one to abolish the tribunal; and a second bill to delay its 
minimum pay order as a fallback.

“Tens of thousands of owner truck drivers, many of whom have taken out 
mortgages to buy their trucks, face being driven out of business by the 
[tribunal],” they said in a statement. “Any threat to the industry will have 
large flow-on effects on consumers.”

On Wednesday Greens industrial relations spokesman, Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt>, said it would “not be 
party to the government’s push to make the roads less safe”.

“If the government believes that the only way of dealing with any problems 
[arising from the] tribunal’s order is to abolish the legislation then it’s 
clear what the government’s true motives are,” he said.

“Faced with one small group of people who complain about now potentially 
having to pay fair rates of pay to the people who work for them, the 
government’s response is to strip people’s rights at work and attack safety on 
the roads. That gives you an indication of what’s coming up at this election.”

Labor truckie proposal 'colossal admission of fault', Malcolm Turnbull says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/11/labor-truckie-proposal-colossal-admission-of-fault-malcolm-turnbull-says>
Opposition leader, Bill Shorten, backed setting minimum pay rates because if 
pay is too low “you increase the chances for fatalities and serious injuries in 
the heavy vehicle sector”.

“The government wants you to believe that somehow owner-drivers who, on 
average, receive $32,000 a year compared to employee drivers on $56,000 a year, 
that they want to keep getting $32,000 a year,” he said.

Shorten questioned if Turnbull was prepared to scrap the independent tribunal 
and truckies’ minimum pay orders, whether he would use it as a precedent if the 
fair work commission increased penalty rates or shift loadings.

“Labor sees the case that if there’s real angst in the community amongst 
customers and some of the long distance trucking companies, there’s always [the 
possibility of] compromise,” he said. Shorten repeatedLabor’s offer to consider 
a compromise on the time taken to roll out minimum pay rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/11/labor-truckie-proposal-colossal-admission-of-fault-malcolm-turnbull-says>
.

“You look at the industry submissions, look at the evidence, look at 
legitimate concerns about the rollout of a minimum wages order ... That’s the 
Labor way, common sense, middle grounds.”

Malcolm Turnbull using truck drivers ‘as pawns’ in election strategy, say 
crossbenchers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/10/malcolm-turnbull-using-truck-drivers-as-pawns-in-election-strategy-say-crossbenchers>
The comments from Labor and the Greens mean the government will probably need 
more crossbench support to abolish the road safety remuneration tribunal.

The government originally proposed to delay the pay order and abolish the 
tribunal after the election.Senator Glenn Lazarus forced the issue by calling 
for the immediate abolition of the tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/10/malcolm-turnbull-using-truck-drivers-as-pawns-in-election-strategy-say-crossbenchers>
, which was backed by Jacqui Lambie.

So far five of eight crossbench senators have expressed support to abolish the 
tribunal. Senators Dio Wang, Ricky Muir andJohn Madigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-madigan> have not supported 
abolishing it, instead favouring delay of the pay order.

The government also announced a temporary financial counselling hotline to 
provide advice for owner-drivers who have been negatively affected by the 
payment order.
 