
“Any employer who sacks a worker for not coming in today is a bum.”

In the wake of Alan Bond’s death, it’s worth thinking about Bob Hawke’s famous 
declaration at the America’s Cup victory party at the Royal Perth Yacht Club in 
1983.

Alan Bond: the rise, spectacular fall and rise again of the America's Cup hero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/05/alan-bond-the-rise-spectacular-fall-and-rise-again-of-the-americas-cup-hero>
Hawke’s quip comes from a live interview with Channel Nine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BFw7iIvCFpo>, a segment that captured the 
hysteria that the cup win engendered. In the footage, Hawke himself seems to be 
in a state of something approaching ecstasy – perhaps not surprising, given 
that he’d been personally leading the pre-dawn party, conducting the crowd in 
choruses of Waltzing Matilda and spraying them with booze.

“It’s indescribable. I’m drowned in champagne,” he shouts into the camera.

Nearly half the population of Perth came onto the street for the America’s Cup 
victory parade, an enthusiasm that, while undoubtedly genuine, was turbocharged 
by a media coverage that in retrospect seems slightly unhinged.

Consider Piers Akerman’s icky description of the winning yacht’s famous winged 
keel in his cash-in book, The Cup Comes Down Under.

“Bond’s face shone ecstatically,” Akerman wrote, “as he swung his arms upward 
and Australia II was slowly raised on a huge yellow-and-black striped hook. 
Then he swung his arms outwards and there was the keel, dripping wet, its 
gentle curves feminine and sweetly turned.”

Not everyone found Bond’s boat this arousing but, in the midst of cup fever, 
few were prepared to put the sporting victory into any sort of perspective. In 
his biography of Bond, Paul Barry notes:

If Australia had put a man on the moon, the excitement could hardly have 
matched it. No-one could say it was only a yacht race. Nor did anyone point out 
that the ‘we’ who had won the Cup was a little-loved millionaire from Western 
Australia.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBFw7iIvCFpo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBFw7iIvCFpo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBFw7iIvCFpo&media=>
 Bob Hawke celebrates at the Royal Perth Yacht Club, 1983. 
In the obituaries for the late tycoon, it’s been customary to distinguish 
between two Alan Bonds: the bad Bond who was a shonky bankrupt jailed for 
criminal business practices and the good Bond, who did Australia proud at 
Newport.

In reality, of course, the two Bonds were one and the same, not least because 
the America’s Cup made Bond’s dodgy financial empire possible.

“Banks from across Australia and around the world … shower[ed] money on Bond 
Corporation and Dallhold for investment,” Bond wrote.

“Their feeling was that if you could win the America’s cup then nothing was 
impossible. There was to be a period of five years where the money was there to 
do whatever project we wanted – loan money, long-term loan money, short term 
loan money – you name it. The banks were knocking themselves over in the rush 
to make sure they had one of my companies in their portfolio.”

As one Perth businessman cheerily explained: “It’s about to become 
un-Australian not to invest in Bond and his cup.”

But the ALP’s infatuation with such an obvious rat with a gold tooth stemmed 
from more than a desire to bask in Bond’s reflected glory, though that was 
evidently a part. In Australia, as elsewhere, the 1980s were a decade defined 
by the efforts of the political and economic elite to respond to the social 
transformations of the 60s and 70s.

In the US and Britain, this meant something akin to an unabashed 
counter-revolution carried out in the name of Reaganism and Thatcherism 
respectively. Australia, however, was slightly different. Hawke had led the ALP 
to a massive win in 1983. As a result, the market reforms that overseas were 
pushed through by governments of the hard right were introduced here by social 
democrats.

Malcolm Fraser might have instigated the “Razor Gang” but it was Hawke and 
Keating who popularised (the now almost forgotten) neologism “economic 
rationalism”.

To put it another way, in America and Great Britain, the neoliberal turn 
depended on huge industrial confrontations. In Australia, it arrived with Hawke 
proclaiming the virtue of consensus.

The cultural difference in the two approaches can be seen in a comparison of 
80s iconography in the US and Australia.

In 1980, when Time magazine declared Ronald Reagan Man of the Year, it 
explained admiringly how “intellectually, emotionally, Reagan lives in the 
past”. Regan’s attack on union power and the social movements was thus 
presented as a restoration, a return to America’s former greatness.

In his book Back to the Future, David Sirota identifies the reactionary mood 
in American culture at the time – in particular, its obsession with the 1950s:

There were retrospectives such as Diner, Stand By Me, and Peggy Sue Got 
Married and biopics of fifties icons such as The Right Stuff, La Bamba, and 
Great Balls of Fire! There was Hoosiers, with its bucolic small towns, its 
short shorts, and its non breakaway rims. There were Broadway plays such as 
Brighton Beach Memoirs and Biloxi Blues, commemorating the honor, frugality, 
and innocence of the World War II years. And there was a glut of new Eisenhower 
biographies.

There’s a lot of sloppy talk going around this country that there should be no 
place ... for the Alan Bonds
Bob Hawke 
Even those 80s cultural productions that weren’t actually set in the 50s often 
invoked that decade’s atmosphere: think of the return of rockabilly, the 
renewed popularity of Superman, the endless remakes of West Side Story.

Moreover, the invocations of the 50s usually accompanied a denunciation of the 
60s, a period invariably presented as a regrettable era of self-indulgence and 
excess. Sirota cites the Michael J Fox sitcom Family Ties as paradigmatic: a 
show based on the contrast between the preppy young conservative Alex P Keaton 
and his gormless ex-hippie parents. Not surprisingly, Reagan declared Family 
Ties his favourite program – even offering to appear in an episode.

In Australia, a Labor government could not invoke nostalgia in quite the same 
way (not least because the 50s were seen to belong to Menzies and the Liberal 
party, as John Howard later showed). Instead, the Hawke-Keating government 
employed a rhetoric not of the past but of the future. They were “reformers”; 
theirs was, they said, a program of modernisation rather than restoration.

Bond’s entrepreneurial dynamism mirrored the ALP’s political and economic 
vision. It was, in turn, facilitated by it – with the extraordinary expansion 
of his business empire the product of Keating’s deregulation of the banking 
sector in 1984.

That year, Hawke hosted a lunch for a body named the John Curtin Foundation, 
an organisation created to foster big business support for the ALP. Ina photo 
from the foundation’s inaugural meeting 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Curtin_Foundation#/media/File:Curtin_Foundation.jpg>
, Bond stands beaming in the back row, directly above a smiling prime minister 
who himself sits next to WA Premier Brian Burke.

At the time, Hawke made no apologies for his infatuation with Bond. “There’s a 
lot of sloppy talk going around this country that there should be no place in 
the concerns of a federal Labor government for the Alan Bonds of this world; I 
want to repudiate that nonsense unequivocally,”he said 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/archive/news/business-and-labor-at-the-birth-of-wa-inc/story-e6frg6no-1225759205812>
.

But how to sell a program of wage restraint and tax reduction and free market 
economics to the ALP’s traditional supporters, who might be understandably 
suspicious of a Labor prime minister cozying up to the wealthy and the powerful?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Flabors-embrace-of-alan-bond-was-grotesque-but-at-least-it-wasnt-bland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe878c9c8acca06a185dedcd7641b1131077985b8%2F0_0_4176_2508%2F4176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labor's%20embrace%20of%20Alan%20Bond%20was%20grotesque.%20But%20at%20least%20it%20wasn't%20bland%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Flabors-embrace-of-alan-bond-was-grotesque-but-at-least-it-wasnt-bland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labor%27s%20embrace%20of%20Alan%20Bond%20was%20grotesque.%20But%20at%20least%20it%20wasn%27t%20bland%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fjun%2F08%2Flabors-embrace-of-alan-bond-was-grotesque-but-at-least-it-wasnt-bland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe878c9c8acca06a185dedcd7641b1131077985b8%2F0_0_4176_2508%2F4176.jpg>
 (L-R) Former Australia II skipper John Bertrand, Alan Bond and Bob Hawke 
during the 30th anniversary of Australia’s win at America’s Cup, September 
2013. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
One reason the neoliberal project so wrongfooted its opponents was that many 
failed to recognise the disruptiveness that lay at its core. By unleashing the 
dynamism of the market, the economic rationalists of the 80s relentlessly 
dissolved established traditions and old hierarchies, a destruction that 
sometimes enabled a faux neoliberal populism.

The quintessential entrepreneurs of the 80s were, after all, self-made men, 
new money types who embraced the libidinal energy of the market and delighted 
in appalling their more genteel competitors. The ALP’s embrace of the market 
could therefore be presented, with a certain credibility, as an attack upon Old 
Money and the Big End of Town.

The America’s Cup illustrates how effectively Hawke seized on that trope. 
Bond, of course, might have been a millionaire but he had, as his admirers 
never tired of explaining, once worked as a sign-writer. He liked his beer and 
his tucker; he was ordinary-sounding bloke who seemed more at home in the front 
bar of his local than in a ritzy uptown club. Like Hawke himself, Bond was an 
ocker’s ocker, a man who called a spade a bloody shovel, and who paraded his 
earthiness at every opportunity.

Bond was at least as wealthy as his America’s Cup opponents (there aren’t too 
many poor people involved in international yachting). But in the symbolic realm 
he represented the plucky underdog – the simple house painter teaching those 
snobby Yankees a thing or do. In bringing the cup to Perth, Bond had cocked a 
snoot at the elitists of the New York Yacht Club, thus striking a blow for the 
working-class everyman.

Donald Horne captures the contradiction nicely: “The America’s Cup becomes not 
only a celebration of wealth in a millionaire’s sport: bizarrely, it also 
becomes a symbol of ‘free enterprise’ so … we can dream again of pioneers and 
battlers and little men in corner stores.”

Australia II might have been funded by corporate high-flyers who would go on 
to leverage their win into further self-enrichment (and, in Bond’s case, 
outright criminality) but in his Channel 9 interview Hawke could still denounce 
as “bums” those snooty bosses incapable of appreciating the common man’s 
delight in Bondy’s success.

Throughout the 70s, Bond’s sympathies had always been with the Liberals – he’d 
campaigned against Gough Whitlam, for instance. But, by 1983, the ALP seemed a 
more natural home for him, thanks to Hawke’s efforts to rebadge 
entrepreneurship as the method by which ordinary blokes made good in the face 
of the condescending patricians of the Liberal party.

This was never a strategy that could last. In 1996, Howard invoked a very 
similar free market anti-elitism to defeat Paul Keating in that year’s election 
and deployed it with devastating effect in the culture wars that accompanied 
his long reign. His success left the Labor party facing a dilemma that still 
haunts it today.

Alan Bond obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/05/alan-bond> 
Hawke, a former ACTU leader who’d become a national figure during the great 
strikes of the seventies, could draw upon the Labor tradition (the John Curtin 
Foundation, no less) to present a pro-market persona that was markedly 
different from that offered by the Liberals. Fairly obviously, Malcolm Fraser 
could never have presided over the revels in the Royal Perth Yacht Club in the 
same way that Hawke did.

Yet, with the ongoing collapse of the infrastructure of Laborism (both the 
union movement and the Labor party’s own organisation), it’s equally impossible 
to imagine an ALP leader resuscitating the strategy of 1983. Today, Labor’s 
free market policies seem more-or-less identical to those presented by the 
Liberals – and, as a result, Bill Shorten appears a colourless imitation of 
those he ostensibly opposes.

Labor’s embrace of Alan Bond was always grotesque – and seems even more so in 
retrospect. But, to give him his due,Bob Hawke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bob-hawke> was never bland. The 
same cannot be said of Shorten.
 