
If you laughed at Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/10/unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-tina-fey-triumphs-again>
, were intrigued by House of Cards and missed sleep to race through season 
three of Orange is the New Black, you’re going to want to watch what Netflix 
does next. Arguably the most exciting of the upcoming shows it has announced in 
the past week is a comedy calledLady Dynamite 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/maria-bamford-goes-invisible-girl-lady-dynamite-ne-221105>
, conceived by Arrested Development creator Mitch Hurwitz and US comedian Maria 
Bamford. Bamford will play the eponymous heroine, and (fingers crossed) this 
could be the star vehicle her unique talents deserve.


If you know who she is, it is most likely from her two appearances 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/tv_club/features/2012/louie_season_3/week_4/louie_season_3_daddy_s_girlfriend_recap_maria_bamford_on_working_with_louis_c_k_.html>
 on Louie or her turn as DeBrie Bardeaux, the butter-chomping addict who 
beguiles Tobias in the fourth season of Arrested Development. But while “the 
Bammer” is frequently – and justifiably – cast as an oddball, she is much more 
than just another quirky actor. She has had a long career in the States, where 
she began standup 25 years ago, temping at the same time. She appeared on the 
Comedians of Comedy tour (and in the accompanying documentary) alongside Patton 
Oswalt and Zach Galifianakis in 2005. She has performed on the Tonight Show, 
Late Night with Conan O’Brien, and the pre-James Corden Late Late Show. She 
appeared on the WTF podcastway before President Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/22/barack-obama-n-word-racism-marc-maron-interview>
, was the first female comedian to have two Comedy Central specials and has 
lent her voice to dozens of cult cartoons, most recently Adventure Time and The 
Legend of Korra. But what makes her stand out is also what has often made her a 
mismatch for mainstream roles: she is weird.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyFHmNrxkuFU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyFHmNrxkuFU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyFHmNrxkuFU&media=>
Is Adventure Time the weirdest kids' TV show ever?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/sep/07/adventure-time-weirdest-show-ever>
 In her act, she pulls faces, does voices and takes off on surreal flights of 
fancy. If that sounds twee and wacky, it isn’t: she talks a lot about her 
experiences of mental illness and is one of the few people to make truly dire 
life experiences not only funny but lacking any trace of self-pity. Bamford has 
struggled with anxiety, compulsive thoughts and depression, including feeling 
suicidal, and was diagnosed with bipolar II (“the new gladiator sandal”) during 
the first ofthree stays at a psychiatric hospital in 2011 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/20/magazine/the-weird-scary-and-ingenious-brain-of-maria-bamford.html>
.

Such openness is rare and stigma-busting, and she is undoubtedly a comfort to 
other people with mental health problems. Addressing depressed people’s 
tendency to beat themselves up for past mistakes, she advises: “Google it. 
There are seven billion of us. Somebody has done exactly what you have done and 
is currently on a book tour.” While her comedy is sharp, she often delivers it 
in a chipper tone, more wry than ranting. (“L’Oreal. Because I am worth it. And 
because holding myself to an impossible standard of beauty keeps me from 
starting a riot.”)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSb5E1vx961o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSb5E1vx961o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSb5E1vx961o&media=>
She is at her best when she is defying convention, such as in her 2012 comedy 
special, The Special Special Special!, which she performed in her living room 
in front of an audience of two: her parents. (She included her impressions of 
them, naturally.) Her tour de force was her 20-episode 2007 YouTube series, The 
Maria Bamford Show, which she made in her bedroom at her parents’ house in 
Minnesota while recovering from a breakdown. With the exception of her ageing 
pug Blossom, Bamford plays all the characters, from her family to the men she 
dates, and it is funny, moving and deserving of much wider recognition.

Arrested Development creator Mitch Hurwitz's guide to getting a sitcom 
cancelled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/feb/12/arrested-development-mitch-hurwitz-sitcom-cancelled>
That is why her new show is so exciting – something based on Bamford’s own 
life is bound to be more interesting than anything a showrunner (even one as 
inventive as Hurwitz) could dream up. According to the press materials, it will 
“tell the story of a woman who loses – and then finds – her shit”. The fact 
that it is on Netflix means she won’t have to constrain her offbeat 
sensibilities to fit the expectations of network executives, and can let her 
freak flag fly. Sure,season four of Arrested Development was an acquired taste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/may/26/arrested-development-recap-season-four-1-5>
 (one that eluded many reviewers), but that was less about it being on a 
streaming site than because the original cast were too busy to reunite in one 
room at the same time. As long as this show shares a sensibility with Bamford’s 
previous work, and Hurwitz doesn’t give it a narrative format so complicated 
you’d need a chart to keep it all straight, Lady Dynamite should be a blast.
 