
The wall and gates of Lance Armstrong's home in north-west Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin>, among a hilly community of 
millionaires, are not quite large enough to obscure the opulence of his vast, 
Spanish-style villa. Long before Oprah, it's where he went through an earlier 
process of revelation and apology.

In 2008, it was discovered that he was a champion water-consumer, using 
330,000 gallons on his grounds that July alone; more than almost anyone else in 
one of the United States' most eco-conscious cities. Armstrong said sorry and 
vowed to do better.

Armstrong's present problems make that flood look like a trickle. In a hotel 
room in Austin, the former cyclist confessed to Oprah Winfrey last Monday that 
he used performance-enhancing drugs during what was once regarded as an 
illustrious career, for an interview that will be broadcast on Thursday and 
Friday nights.

The reasons for the confession have been picked over at length. But whatever 
the fallout, his association with this part of the US will be hard to erase.

He is tattooed on Austin's landscape in three places. On Sixth Street, once 
you pass the Soho-esque crumple of bars and clubs and find yourself in the 
gentrifying residential area that an estate agent would term "diverse", you 
find Livestrong's headquarters, a stylishly re-built 1950s warehouse.

There was bad news to spin from headquarters this week from the improbable 
location of Kansas City, where the Major League Soccer club Sporting Kansas 
City said they were banishing the first word from the name of their stadium, 
Livestrong Sporting Park.

Robb Heineman, the team's chief executive, claimed in a statement that 
Livestrong was "utilising aggressive tactics designed to force us into an 
unsatisfactory arrangement" and "our faith and trust in this partnership have 
been permanently damaged." According to ESPN, the charity said that they had 
initiated the split because the club had paid only a quarter of the $1million 
it owed Livestrong for last year as part of a donation agreement.

If the timing of the rupture seemed masochistic in this of all weeks, it 
represented a way for Livestrong to sever a link with professional sport, and 
by extension Armstrong. But references to the charity's founder are still 
visible on motivational slogans daubed on its office walls. In a statement on 
Wednesday, Livestrong said they "expect Lance to be completely truthful and 
forthcoming in his interview and with all of us in the cancer community."

Near the core of the city is Armstrong's bike shop, Mellow Johnny's. The name 
is a pun on "maillot jaune", French for yellow jersey. Decorated with Tour 
memorabilia, it is part store, part shrine.

Attached is the Juan Pelota cafe: Spanish for "one ball", a phrase with 
special resonance for the testicular cancer survivor. A block away stands La 
Zona Rosa, a nightclub where Armstrong had a slanging match with a bouncer in 
2008 after leaving holding a drink, against city regulations. In 2004, after 
his sixth Tour de France victory, he invested in a bar in the Warehouse 
District called Six Lounge.

The Lance Armstrong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lance-armstrong> 
Bikeway begins to the west. This riverside trail through downtown opened in 
2009 and showcased the city's growing enthusiasm for cycling, a trend prompted 
by Armstrong's influence, environmentally-aware residents and because the city 
has grown so fast in the past fifteen years that the traffic is now dreadful.

On Tuesday, an art installation of twelve big rectangles signifying yellow 
wristbands wobbled in the wind, their protective coating warped and peeled by 
sunlight. Graffiti on a bridge barked a message Armstrong would approve: "NEVER 
QUIT". New condominium buildings cluster in the background and speak of the 
city's boom. Many joggers but few cyclists passed on a freezing afternoon. One, 
Tom, talked cautiously and declined to give his surname, as one might if 
fearing reprisals when discussing a mafia don.

"I think the general community in Austin still looks at him as a pretty 
accomplished athlete regardless," he said. "I'm proud to have him here in 
Austin - why not?" Tom did not want to say whether he felt the Bikeway should 
be renamed, but the city's mayor, Lee Leffingwell, is not so reticent.

"Lance is not only a friend to me, but also a friend to Austin, and a friend 
and hero to millions of cancer survivors and their families around the globe. 
As for the Lance Armstrong Bikeway, it is a symbol in the fight against 
cancer," he said in a statement on Tuesday. "It's a path toward healing and 
reminds us, as Lance Armstrong does, that cancer is a struggle we can overcome. 
I've heard no call from the Austin community to rename it and have no plans to 
do so."

This refusal to backpedal would have more credibility if Armstrong's own 
charity had not decided to make him an unperson because the association with 
him was hurting their work. He resigned as chairman last October. But, even as 
the world's media bellows its outrage and lawyers limber up to fight over his 
fortune and his future, Austin itself seems reluctant to kick up a stink about 
its resident liar â€“ whether from pragmatism, loyalty or embarrassment.
It is as if to judge him harshly would be a form of self-criticism. For a 
while he seemed the archetype of what this one-time quiet university city 
wanted to become: business-savvy, internationally-renowned, cool yet 
commercial. A leader (Austin styles itself as "the live musical capital of the 
world").

Five years ago, while he was dating the actress Kate Hudson, he even hinted he 
was considering running for political office. The previous year he went on a 
bus tour as he lobbied successfully forTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> voters to back state funding for a 
$3 billion cancer research institute that is presently mired in controversy 
about the integrity of its grant-awarding process.

This is not to say he is universally popular, or was even before this scandal. 
But there appears greater relish for the debate - the polarising drama of 
guilt, shame and possible forgiveness - from out-of-towners, those who know 
Armstrong as a star they see on television rather than a man they might pass in 
the street.

On October 21 last year, Armstrong addressed the crowd at Austin's annual 
Livestrong Challenge benefit ride, which attracted a record 4,300 riders. The 
next day, the InternationalCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
Union stripped him of his seven Tour de France titles. He is from Plano, a 
Dallas suburb, which helps given the sense of solidarity many Texans feel for 
each other in this most stubborn and independent of states.

"We're not going to give him up." said Fred Meredith, editor of Austin Cycling 
Quarterly. "No matter what they say we all know who came in first in all of 
those Tours and we know he wasn't the only person who was hedging his bets.

"I'm a firm believer that even seemingly negative things at critical mass 
eventually promote cycling because they cause the public to be more aware," he 
added. "It's like working this whole thing out in increments and this is the 
next increment. It almost demanded that he deny it for a certain amount of 
time, to let people down gently.... sure, we're disappointed. [But] the fault 
is as much the lack of policing by the association and letting it get so far. 
He denied it longer than anybody else but he's not the only one who denied."
The cycling scene, he said, has "outgrown our dependence on Armstrong. This 
city's not going to stumble on this, it's going to keep moving."

Armstrong's status has adjusted since the revelations: from a celebrity whose 
presence in Austin helped author its recent success story to something more 
like a boil on the city's handsome face. Not unlike the dozens of hard-line 
Republican politicians who govern Texas from the capitol building here in the 
state's most liberal and bohemian city, he is in Austin, but not of Austin; 
integral, but detached.
 