
The Los Angeles Police Department is not investigating the actor Brad Pitt for 
child abuse, a spokesperson confirmed on Thursday. Seeking to debunk rumours 
that the actor’s recently announced divorce was linked to an outburst against 
his children earlier this month, Sergeant Barry Montgomerytold the Hollywood 
Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/lapd-brad-pitt-not-investigated-931773> 
that no investigation was underway.

“We understand how rumours get spun up,” he said, “and hopefully we can put a 
few of them to rest. We have no criminal investigation that we are actively 
pursuing.”

Montgomery added that, to his knowledge, Pitt had never spoken to police about 
such an issue. “And right now, that is where our office is. We are not 
investigating any case, nor do we have any allegations against Mr Pitt.”

Earlier on Thursday, TMZ reported 
<http://www.tmz.com/2016/09/22/brad-pitt-child-abuse-investigation/> that Pitt 
spoke to police following an incident on a private jet in which he was verbally 
and physically abusive to his six children. They also alleged that the LAPD and 
LA County Department of Children and Family Services were pursing the charges. 
Multiple other outlets published the story.

Jolie issued  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
divorce proceedings against Pitt on Tuesday, citing irreconcilable differences. 
The couple married in 2014, having already been together for a decade. They 
have six children.

On Wednesday, Pitt’s co-star, Marion Cotillard, attacked “media and the 
haters” for speculating that she had had a relationship with the actor which 
contributed to his separation.Writing on Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/22/marion-cotillard-issues-statement-denying-role-brad-pitt-angelina-jolie-divorce>
, Cotillard denied such a relationship and said she was “not used to commenting 
on things like this nor taking them seriously but as this situation is 
spiraling and affecting people I love, I have to speak up”.
 