
Having turned his back on speaking in public, controversial director Lars von 
Trier <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lars-von-trier> is briefly turning his 
back on film-making as well. The Danish provocateur’s next project will be an 
ensemble TV series entitled The House That Jack Built, shot in English and due 
to air in 2016.

Speaking at the Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>, von Trier’s producer 
Louise Vesth would not be drawn on the series’s plot details. “Lars has a great 
idea, which I can’t tell you about,” she told reporters. “From what I’ve heard, 
it’s something you have never seen before and will definitely never see again.” 
She confirmed that the director wanted “a huge cast” for the show.

The House That Jack Built is not von Trier’s first foray into long-form TV 
drama. In the mid-1990she devised and directed The Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/jul/07/lars-von-trier-the-kingdom>
, an absurdist eight-part miniseries set inside a decaying Danish hospital. 
Since then he has gone on to make films such as Breaking the Waves, Dogville 
and Antichrist.

Over the course of a 25-year career, von Trier has been praised and derided in 
equal measure. While the director has won plaudits and awards for his work, his 
public behaviour has frequently courted disaster. In 2011 he wasexpelled from 
the Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/19/cannes-film-festival-2011-lars-von-trier-banned>
 after publicly joking that he was a Nazi and that he “sympathised with Hitler 
a little bit”.

Despite taking a “vow of silence” in the wake of this scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/oct/05/lars-von-trier-cannes>, von Trier 
did see fit to make a virtual appearance at the Venice press conference - 
abruptly materialising via a live feed to a laptop which had been placed on the 
table. It was another example of the irreverent showmanship which his fans find 
bracing and his foes see as puerile.

Ahead of this unannounced audience, the delegates had witnessed the 
unexpurgated director’s cut of von Trier’s 2013 filmNymphomaniac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nymphomaniac>. The new version runs nearly 
five-and-half hours, as Charlotte Gainsbourg’s character recounts her life of 
sex addiction, at some length, to Stellan Skarsgard’s lonely father-confessor. 
The film contains added sex and additional dialogue scenes. But it also 
includes an explicit abortion scene which did not appear in the film’s original 
cut.


The film-makers explained that the abortion scene had initially been removed 
to ensure wider distribution. “It was important to distribute the film in the 
whole world,” Vesth explained. “Because of different censorship rules, this was 
the scene that was a problem in different territories.”


“It’s one thing showing a film like this in Scandinavia,” added the actor 
Stellan Skarsgard. “It’s different showing it in Kabul or in Salt Lake City.”


In the meantime, von Trier played the role of Skarsgard’s “phone-a-friend” - 
to be called on the phone whenever the actor was stumped by a reporter’s 
question. Speaking from the safety of his laptop hide-away, the film-maker 
described himself as a masochist and insisted that making Nymphomaniac had 
taught him nothing new about the knotty subject of female sexuality.

“Have I learned anything about woman?” the director said. “No, I knew 
everything about women already.”

 