
Touring is an essential step in the development of any emerging young company. 
It helps our work mature, introduces us to new venues and audiences and, 
perhaps most importantly, shows us how different theatres work across the 
country – where our work sits in a national context. Performances of the same 
show can feel completely different, depending on where we are and who is 
watching. Playing a Quaker House inDarlington 
<http://www.jabberwockymarket.org.uk/content/29680/home/about/about_us> can 
turn out to be just as enjoyable as playing a more prestigious venue, and can 
be more enlightening in terms of how the piece works. It’s about who turns up, 
not the space we’re playing in.


Our company, Bucket Club <http://www.bucketclub.co.uk/>, is currently touring 
our first show with the help ofFarnham Maltings <https://farnhammaltings.com/>. 
Lorraine & Alan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/12/lorraine-and-alan-review-edinburgh-festival-2014>
 is a modern retelling of the Selkie myth, a Scottish story about a fisherman 
who falls in love with a seal-woman. In our version, the fisherman is a 
23-year-old marine biology graduate living with his parents in North Norfolk 
and working as a seal tour guide. He falls in love with the mysterious 
Lorraine, and they are happy, for a while – until the call of the sea proves 
too strong.


Perhaps our most enjoyable shows have been those that we’ve performed as part 
of theCollaborative Touring Network 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/34201/see_whats_on/whats_on/our_shows_elsewhere/collaborative_touring_network_ctn>
 – run by Battersea Arts Centre – where independent producers inareas of the UK 
with little arts infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/13/doorstep-arts-theatre-local-communities-torbay>
 mount festivals of local work and shows programmed by BAC. Following 
performances, we’ve been to lock-ins and parties with local people; after our 
show in Brixham, the technicians simply set up the lights and sound in the hall 
we performed in for a post-show disco. It’s how touring should be. Shows are 
most satisfying when our relationship with the people and the place extends 
past our hour-long performance. We don’t just hit and run.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Fnew-theatre-company-first-tour-bucket-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431343698797%2F98fe2a9a-54a4-4a4c-a916-13e0eebd48de-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Late-night%20discos%20and%20lock-ins%3A%20a%20young%20company%20takes%20their%20show%20on%20the%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Fnew-theatre-company-first-tour-bucket-club%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Late-night%20discos%20and%20lock-ins%3A%20a%20young%20company%20takes%20their%20show%20on%20the%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F11%2Fnew-theatre-company-first-tour-bucket-club%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F11%2F1431343698797%2F98fe2a9a-54a4-4a4c-a916-13e0eebd48de-1020x612.jpeg>
 Lorraine & Alan at the 2014 Edinburgh festival. Photograph: Richard Davenport 
In Hull, audience members on the front row gave a running commentary of the 
show during the performance (“ooh, she’s got a tin of tuna”). In Darlington, 
people came up to us after we finished offering their interpretations of what 
they’d seen (and of the actors’ looks – “no offence Katie, but you look a lot 
plainer on stage than you do in real life”). Hull gave us audible oohs and aahs 
that we’d never expect from a more knowing and theatre-savvy London audience. 
Interpretation of the show and what people find funny is surprisingly different 
depending upon venue and audience: school groups applauded our cheapest visual 
gag and cheered when Lorraine and Alan kiss. One woman in Edinburgh read the 
show as being about eating disorders. Getting these different reactions 
reinforced something we already sensed, that the work only fully exists in 
collaboration with the audience and that what we present to an audience is only 
half-formed until they watch, react to and digest it.


Because of the subject matter and the impact of place on performance, we’ve 
been particularly excited to visit seaside venues. We’ve been to Torbay (where 
we could hear seagulls outside during the performance) andMargate 
<http://www.loopingtheloopfestival.org.uk/about.html>, and in May we’re heading 
toGreat Yarmouth <http://www.seachangearts.org.uk/event/-in-here-festival> and 
Brighton. Like all Selkies, Lorraine must eventually return to the sea, and 
having it so tantalisingly close gave the performance an added urgency. We 
finish the tour in July at theHolt festival <http://www.holtfestival.org/> – 
just a few miles from where the play is set. We reckon it’ll be a good one.

Touring has been a huge step for Bucket Club, which is still very much an 
emerging company. We’ve built new relationships with venues and producers, and 
had a glimpse into how theatre is received in different parts of England. But 
in a 30-date tour, it was the shows with the Collaborative Touring Network that 
perhaps we learned most and felt we were most engaging with local audiences. As 
a new company performing in towns where we’re unknown, it can be hard to find 
our audience or to connect with a place. Schemes such as CTN, which encourage 
venues to collaborate with their communities and across regions, offer a very 
rewarding structure. For us, it feels like touring is at its most sustainable 
and satisfying when conversation between venue, performers and audience extends 
out and around the performance itself.

 