
On 30 November Laurent Gbagbo, the former Ivory Coast president, woke up in a 
cell at the International Criminal Court in The Hague.He had arrived there by 
plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/29/laurent-gbagbo-hague-icc-custody>
 the previous day.

Gbagbo is being prosecuted on four counts of crimes against humanity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/30/laurent-gbagbo-charged-ivory-coast>
: murder, rape and other sexual violence, persecution and other inhuman acts, 
between 28 November 2010 and May this year. "There are reasonable grounds to 
believe that a plan existed between Mr Gbagbo and his inner circle [his 
co-perpetrators]," according to his arrest warrant. This plan allegedly 
targeted civilians. "There is a sufficient basis to conclude that the 
pro-Gbagbo forces that put the policy into effect did so by almost automatic 
compliance with the orders they received," the prosecutors said. If the court's 
pre-trial chamber confirms these charges, Gbagbo will be the first former head 
of state tried by the ICC.

In 2003 Gbagbo asked the court to investigate crimes committed during the coup 
attempt on 19 September 2002 and the ensuing rebellion in northern Ivory Coast 
led by Guillaume Soro. Eight years later the same rebels broughtAlassane 
Ouattara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara> to power, after 
five months of violence orchestrated by pro-Gbagbo forces, culminating in a 
two-week battle for Abidjan.

In the following weeks the former rebels continued their exactions in 
pro-Gbagbo districts with widespread looting. For his own safety, the former 
head of state was moved to Korhogo in the north, guarded by UN peacekeepers but 
also by a rebel chief, Martin Kouakou Fofié, who has also been accused of human 
rights abuses.

This situation prompted concern about victors' justice and the risk of 
compromising national reconciliation. Ouattara ruled that leading figures of 
the former regime should be prosecuted by the ICC. In early May he wrote to the 
court explaining that his country's legal system was not equal to the task of 
prosecuting the most serious crimes of recent months. National courts have 
focused on acts of violence and economic crimes allegedly committed by the 
previous regime. On 18 August Gbagbo himself wascharged with "aggravated 
corruption" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/19/ivory-coast-charges-laurent-gbagbo>
.

On 3 October the ICC authorised prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo to investigate 
alleged crimes against humanity by the Gbagbo camp since November 2010, but 
also those perpetrated by pro-Ouattara forces – in particular, Soro's troops – 
between 25 February and 6 May. The judges have also asked for additional 
information on crimes committed since September 2002 and may decide to extend 
the scope of their investigation.

During a visit to Abidjan, Moreno-Ocampo said he planned to prosecute a group 
of three to six people. Their number is thought to include Simone Gbagbo, the 
ex-president's wife, but according to other sources, Soro and other rebel 
commanders as well.

A general election will be held on Sunday, the first vote since the conflict. 
Gbagbo's party, the Ivorian Patriotic Front (FPI), will be boycotting the poll, 
having demanded their leader's release as a prerequisite. This may have been a 
decisive factor in his sudden transfer to The Hague.

This article originally appeared in Le Monde <http://www.lemonde.fr/>
 