

It is just two years since Laura Robson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-robson>, still a teenager, reached the 
fourth round at Wimbledon and became the first British female tennis player to 
earn a top 30 ranking since 1987.

 Robson will return to Wimbledon as a wild card entrant on Monday against the 
Russian Evgeniya Rodina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/25/heather-watson-miami-open-evgeniya-rodina>
, without a world ranking, after spending the past 18 months battling a 
frustrating injury to her dominant left wrist.

Since winning the junior Wimbledon title as a remarkably assured, unseeded 
14-year-old in 2008, Robson’s star rose steadily. She won Olympic silver in the 
mixed doubles alongsideAndy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> in 2012, and there were growing 
signs the following year – when she reached the fourth round at both the US 
Open and Wimbledon – that she had added enough consistency and big game 
temperament to her natural power and shot-making ability to start making 
serious inroads into the second week of grand slam tournaments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Flaura-robson-wimbledon-tennis-elite-plead-patience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435326488568%2F80d3c892-c3ec-4594-ba45-bf168188aefb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Laura%20Robson%3A%20Wimbledon%20wildcard%20aiming%20to%20get%20career%20back%20on%20track&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Flaura-robson-wimbledon-tennis-elite-plead-patience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Laura%20Robson%3A%20Wimbledon%20wildcard%20aiming%20to%20get%20career%20back%20on%20track&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Flaura-robson-wimbledon-tennis-elite-plead-patience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435326488568%2F80d3c892-c3ec-4594-ba45-bf168188aefb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Laura Robson and Andy Murray win silver in the 2012 Olympic mixed doubles. 
Photograph: Luis Acosta/AFP/Getty Images 
When she returned to the court at Eastbourne last week, Robson, who was born 
in Melbourne but moved to the UK via Singapore at the age of six, showed she 
had lost none of her sense of humour, even if regaining the form that caused 
five-timeWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> champion 
Serena Williams to once mark her out for the very top might take longer than 
expected.

“My coach made a joke when I came off. He said: ‘I’m so proud you played a 
match and are back in the tournament,’” said Robson, after losing 6-0, 6-1 to 
the world number 41,Daria Gavrilova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/laura-robson-daria-gavrilova-eastbourne>
, in less than an hour. “Then he said: ‘There is just one little thing we need 
to work on: everything.’”

“I totally agree [with him],” she added. “It’s the timing, the match rhythm, 
hitting from the back, reading shots that before I wouldn’t even think about 
and now I’m not sure where it’s going to land. It’s a completely new start but 
a very exciting one.”

Robson, now 21, first started playing at six. By the age of 10 she had been 
signed by sports marketing giant Octagon and a year later signed her first 
Adidas contract. Aged 14, she won the girl’s title at Wimbledon and in an 
endearing post-match interview revealed she had invited her hero – the Russian 
Marat Safin – to the champions ball but he had politely turned her down.

Middle England reacted in traditionally measured fashion, with the Mail on 
Sunday christening her “the new Queen of Wimbledon”. There were high hopes, 
too, at the perennially under-fire LawnTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Association that Robson and Heather 
Watson could lend depth to a British tennis scene that had relied on lone 
standard bearers like Tim Henman and now Murray.

While Murray flourished outside the tennis establishment in Scotland and Spain 
(though still funded by the LTA), Robson grew up five minutes from the All 
England Club in Wimbledon with her father Andrew – a Shell executive whose job 
brought the family to England and now Greece – and her mother Kathy, a former 
professional basketball player.

Will Wimbledon be step or stumble on Serena Williams’ historic march? | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/26/serena-williams-wimbledon-grand-slam>
Friends, former players and rivals have warned that it will take time for 
Robson to work her way back to form and fitness and not to expect too much of 
her in the Wimbledon hothouse.

“You don’t expect to play your best when you first come back,” said former 
British number oneAnne Keothavong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anne-keothavong>. “It takes a long time. It 
might even take six months or a year before she even feels like she is playing 
half-decent tennis.”

Murray, too, knows a thing or too about overinflated hopes and has urged 
caution. He said Robson will have to deal not only with the physical side but 
also the “mental baggage” required to trust her body to play at the very top 
level again.

“She’s an unbelievably talented woman. I have known her since she was about 14 
and she has a lot of potential. She trains hard, surrounds herself with the 
right people and does all the right things,” said Murray, who had his own wrist 
problems in 2007.

“She can have a fantastic career, but it’s going to take time for her to come 
back from this. If she does do it quickly, that would be awesome, but I 
wouldn’t expect that.”

If Robson sometimes appears to have a poise beyond her years, she also 
possesses a feisty determination and has not been shy of letting the mask slip 
at times. At 17, she caused a minor flurry when she wore a rainbow hairband at 
the Australian Open on the Margaret Court Arena in the wake of protests from 
gay rights activists at the homophobic views of the former 
player-turned-evangelical Christian preacher after which the arena is named.

“It was just a rainbow-coloured hairband,” Robson said. “I wore it because I 
believe in equal rights for everyone. That’s it.”
Laura Robson (@laurarobson5) 
When the ticket lady at the cinema asks you why you're alone so much. #juststop
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/juststop?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/laurarobson5/status/563455515879960576> February 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/laurarobson5/status/563455515879960576> 
It might not seem much, but in the risk-averse arena of modern sports stars it 
amounted to a significant stand.

Marketing experts have commented on the way in which she has cannily used 
Twitter and Instragram to bond with fans and relieve the sometimes sterile 
routine of the professional sportswoman.

“When the ticket lady at the cinema asks you why you’re alone so much. 
#juststop,” was a typical tweet during her recovery. She also posted videos of 
her wrist rehab on Instagram.

From the Gangnam-style video she made on tour in 2012 with one-time close 
friendEugenie Bouchard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/04/wimbledon-finalist-eugenie-bouchard-reveals-rift-british-no2-laura-robson>
, the Canadian who reached the Wimbledon final last year and prompted headlines 
when she revealed the pair had fallen out, to the “Laura the Explorer” travel 
blog she launched during her rehabilitation, she has revealed herself to have 
the same preoccupations as her peers, including an addiction to Game of Thrones.

She caused a minor silly season storm during her run to the fourth round two 
years ago when she joked about attracting the ire of One Direction fans because 
Harry Styles had sent her good luck messages.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gGfIwM38xI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gGfIwM38xI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gGfIwM38xI&media=>
Of late she has toned down her social-media musings and avoided speaking to 
the press as she attempts to get her career back on track. Alongside her 
rehabilitation from the injury to her left wrist, there have been three other 
big shifts off court. She swapped Octagon for the even bigger sports agency IMG 
and the agent Max Eisenbud, who looks after Maria Sharapova and Li Na. “I think 
she’s a special girl on and off the court,” said Eisenbud.

Robson also switched Adidas for Nike and has swapped coaches with regularity. 
Since last March she has been working with the Colombian Mauricio Hadad.

Greg Rusedski <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/greg-rusedski> also pleaded 
patience and highlighted the technical issues that a wrist injury can cause in 
an era when players are hitting the ball harder and with heavier spin than ever.

“You need to adjust your rackets, you need to adjust your string, you need to 
adjust your grip, you have to do everything you humanly can to want to get 
back. That’s where drive comes in. Sometimes drive – depending how serious the 
injury is – won’t come back,” Rusedski said.

“That’s what the very best players do and find a way,” he said. “You have to 
make decisions when you have a wrist injury. There is a fear factor and 
trepidation, that’s normal.”

Nick Bollettieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/sep/14/heather-watson-us-open-junior-champion>
, the veteran American who has coached a string of top players, has said that 
if Robson can physically recover then the break could motivate her.

“I think this time off is going to be an asset for her … When you take 
something away from someone, it can make them think, holy mackerel, I have 
another chance,” said Bollettieri. “If she can come out and play loose as a 
goose, then she can do well.”

Jeremy Bates, the former British men’s number one and now the LTA’s head of 
women’s tennis, said both Robson and Watson had been desperately unlucky with 
injury and illness but that both were still very young.

“With Laura, it’s tragic what has happened to her but that’s professional 
sport. To me it’s a huge test of mental strength. Injuries are character 
building because you have to be so dedicated to the rehab,” said Bates. “She’s 
practising, she’s been training. She’s ready to go. It’s more of a mental 
challenge to start competing again.”

In the round of media interviews to which players are subjected, Robson – win, 
lose or draw – usually comes across as grounded and good-humoured. IMG, 
however, have of late tried to throw a protective cloak around her in the run 
up to Wimbledon for fear of jeopardising her comeback.

That will prove impossible from Monday and she will need plenty of the 
patience that Murray preaches if she is to fulfil the predictions of two years 
ago.

“If you look at when Laura was at the peak of her game, the majority of her 
big performances were in the grand slams. She likes the stage, she likes the 
big court, she’s got a big serve and a big forehand. She is primed to perform 
on that stage,” said Bates.

“That said, she has played two sets of tennis in 18 months. There are no 
expectations. It’s about rebuilding the trust in her body. The good thing is 
she seems to have a smile on her face.”


Potted profile
Born 21 January 1994

Career Moved to the UK aged six and turned professional aged 14 after winning 
junior Wimbledon in 2008.

High point A career-high ranking of 27 after reaching the fourth round at both 
Wimbledon and the US Open in 2013. Olympic silver medal in the mixed doubles 
alongsideAndy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> in 2012.

Low point The wrist injury sustained in a first-round match at the Hobart 
International tournament that flared up again during the 2014 Australian Open. 
She only began training again in October and missed this year’s Australian Open 
and French Open as a result.

What she says “Stepping out on to centre court is amazing. It’s kind of 
surreal. You go past all the famous quotations on the walls and can see all the 
trophies. It’s incredible.”


What they say “She has an unbelievable game. She’s so powerful. She’s so 
positive. She’s just so good... those are all the qualities it takes to be a 
top player.”Serena Williams

 