
Laura Robson has opted not to play at the Australian Open while Kyle Edmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/06/kyle-edmund-john-mcenroe-andy-murray-tie-break-tens-final>
 has missed out on direct entry for the new season’s first grand slam next 
month.

Robson could have used her protected ranking of 58, the place she occupied 
before the wrist problems that derailed her career at the start of 2014 and 
from which she is still working her way back.

Laura Robson adjusts to life out of the spotlight as she battles back from 
injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/24/laura-robson-comeback> 
The 21-year-old made a belated return last summer but played in only eight 
tournaments, winning three matches, and is currently ranked 555th.

Instead of targeting Australia, she will aim for Indian Wells in March having 
not played since September, with a series of niggles prompting her tobring her 
comeback season to a premature end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/13/laura-robson-withdraws-2015-events-wrist-injury>
.

Because she used her protected ranking to enter the US Open, she only has the 
option of using it for one more grand slam.

Robson, who reached a high of 27 in the rankings in 2013, is now likely to 
return at smaller events on the second-tier ITF circuit.

Edmund had looked to have done enough to gain direct entry into a slam for the 
first time following his victory in a Challenger tournament in Buenos Aires 
last month, which earned him a Davis Cup debut for Great Britain in the final.

But, because five male players have used protected rankings, Edmund’s ranking 
of 102 puts him three spots out.

Likely withdrawals mean the 20-year-old still has a good chance of making it 
without having to go through qualifying.

Britain has four players who have secured direct entry for the tournament, 
which starts on 18 January – Andy Murray, Aljaz Bedene,Johanna Konta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/johanna-konta-venus-williams-wuhan-open-tennis>
 and Heather Watson.

Among those players using his protected ranking is the American Brian Baker, 
who has not played since the US Open in 2013.

The 30-year-old finally showed his potential after a career wrecked by 
injuries with a dream season in 2012, reaching the fourth round of Wimbledon, 
only for knee problems to strike once again.

Baker told the ATP website: “I know I’m not going to be at my best in the 
early part of the year but, as long as I’m feeling strong and healthy, my game 
will come around.

“As I’ve shown over the years, I’m definitely prone to injury. It’s just a 
matter of being smart about it. Hopefully, I can learn from my mistakes and 
just get lucky.”
 