
It's November 1981, and a strangely mesmeric experimental track called O 
Superman has somehow climbed to No 2 in the UK singles chart. With no 
promotional video to accompany it, Top of the Pops has enlisted its in-house 
dance troupe,Legs and Co <http://www.bbc.co.uk/totp2/trivia/legs_and_co/>, to 
provide a "sensitive interpretation" of the song. As Laurie Anderson sings 
through a robotic vocoder about the slow death of civilisation, millions of 
teatime TV-viewers will watch women in space-age costumes emerging from the 
kind of glowing pods you seein Woody Allen's Sleeper 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t1shIHF0KJs>, while a bespectacled dancer 
goose-steps among them wearing judge's robes. It's all sandwiched between 
performances by Dollar and Altered Images, creating one of the most baffling 
moments in the TOTP archive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdjyusgCuUiI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdjyusgCuUiI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdjyusgCuUiI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Amazingly, Laurie Anderson's own shows have been even more surreal. In the 
early 1970s, not long after she had arrived in downtown New York as afluxus 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluxus>-inspired sculpture student, Anderson 
started assembling works that sound like Pythonesque parodies of conceptual 
art. There was a symphony for car horns and autoparts entitled An Afternoon of 
Automotive Transmission. There was O-Range, in which 10 people gathered in a 
stadium to shout stories through megaphones. There was The Life and Times of 
Joseph Stalin, a 12-hour audio-visual interpretation of the dictator's life. 
And then there was a show where Anderson stood on stage, wearing skates frozen 
into large blocks of ice; it ended when the ice melted.

Such delightfully bonkers ideas still persist in her shows. In 2010 she 
unveiledMusic For Dogs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=38g4VzkIf14>, an 
"inter-species social gathering" featuring a piece of high-frequency electronic 
music that was only audible to Laurie's canine friends (the music had, 
apparently, been thoroughly road-tested on Lolabelle, the rat terrier that 
Anderson owns with her husband, Lou Reed).

But it was Anderson's 1975 piece As:If that set the tone for what we would 
eventually recognise as aLaurie Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/laurie-anderson> performance: a mixture of 
William Burroughs-inspired short stories, minimalist music and technology. "I 
think I'm more of a spy," she said. "That's really what I do. I look at the 
stuff in other people's lives."

By the next decade, she had perfected her form with United States I to IV, a 
mammoth, eight-hour "solo opera" – including the totemic O Superman – that 
mixed synth songs, visual projections, violin solos and bizarre soliloquies. 
That show appeared to comment on Ronald Reagan's America and the effects of 
technology, although no one really knows what's going on in Anderson's shows, 
least of all Anderson herself. "I'm never that interested in plot," she told 
The Wire in 1992. "I think plot is something that takes all the boring days out 
and leaves the exciting ones in. Most real things unravel in a much more 
textured way."

It's this woozy, fragmented, dreamlike storytelling style that has become one 
of her trademarks. Even her 1999 tribute to Herman Melville – an avant garde 
opera calledSongs and Stories from Moby Dick 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7oMmdgQSchc> – was an idiosyncratic, personal 
odyssey that bore little relation to the novel.

Since then, her stage shows have lurched between the fascinating and baffling. 
There was 2003's Happiness, a piece of standup philosophy that ditched singing, 
save for a curious version of I'm a Little Teapot. In2005 came The End of the 
Moon <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2005/may/03/popandrock1>, a depressing, 
candlelit meditation on 9/11 – apparently based on her experiences as Nasa's 
artist-in-residence. It was made all the worse by Anderson's wretched scraping 
on the viola. In 2008 we hadHomeland 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/may/04/popandrock3>, a rather more 
charming 100-minute musical show that looked at the Iraq war, state-sanctioned 
torture, billboard advertising and underpants. The next year she teamed up with
Lou Reed at the Manchester international festival 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jul/20/laurie-anderson-lou-reed-review> – 
him on guitar, her on violin and electronics – proving that marital bliss 
doesn't always lead to an effective musical partnership. Her last appearance, 
in 2010, was a show calledDelusion 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/apr/15/delusion-review-laurie-anderson>, 
apparently inspired by the death of her mother; Anderson's whimsical 
storytelling was accompanied by baritone sax and Gypsy fiddle.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHc7WAMKssP8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHc7WAMKssP8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHc7WAMKssP8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
You'll often find O Superman crowbarred into her shows – it's Anderson's 
Stairway to Heaven, her Wonderwall. Perhaps she thinks that audiences will be 
disappointed not to hear it. You're also guaranteed to see some novel gadgetry, 
such as her own invented musical instruments. There's her Tape Violin – a 
proto-sampler that she developed in the 70s by stretching a two-foot section of 
magnetic tape across a bow, which is rubbed against a tape head on the bridge 
of a violin. There's her Talking Stick, a long paddle that emits samples of 
prerecorded sounds (seagulls, ships, bagpipes). There's Head Music, in which 
Anderson places contact microphones around her skull, amplifying internal 
sounds – breathing, gnashing teeth, grinding jaws, clicking tongues – that are 
usually only heard internally. There's the suit which turns movements into 
patterns on a drum machine; and there's the table that enables you to hear 
speech silently through your bones.

Where it all leaves us is unclear. Her music is hypnotic and her ululating 
voice is oddly comforting, like that of a children's TV presenter, but the 
random ideas she expresses can be disconcerting. Familiar phrases are twisted, 
while she juxtaposes images, words and music that clash violently with each 
other. Even at her worst, Anderson's shows have the power to surprise you. "I 
would like to be a voice in the dark," she says, "pointing at something over 
there, saying 'look behind you!'"
 