
The killing of at least 18 people and a fresh wave of violence, lawlessness 
and looting has underlined the challenge facing Ivory Coast's newly installed 
president .

Alassane Ouattara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alassane-ouattara> sat 
calmly as five generals – formerly diehard loyalists of his rival, the deposed 
Laurent Gbagbo – pledged their allegiance to him one by one in the unlikely 
surroundings of the Golf hotel in Abidjan.

But hopes that Gbagbo's arrest would put an end to the murderous chaos in 
Abidjan were soon dashed. At least 18 people were killed on Monday night in the 
predominantly pro-Gbagbo suburb of Yopougon, where almost a quarter of 
Abidjan's 4 million residents live.

Militias took to the streets as news spread of Gbagbo's arrest and fired in 
the air to express their anger. "The militias are breaking down doors of people 
who they suspect of being Ouattara supporters, and they steal and kill 
whichever way it pleases them," a local official said.

"It's a bit like an urban guerrilla war. This is happening in a particular 
area called Niangon. I spoke to two witnesses who managed to escape this 
morning. They say at least 18 people were killed, most of them men, but 
probably more. I've also had a report in from a different area where a man was 
dragged out of his house and killed for his alleged political sympathies."

The lagoon-side Golf hotel remained an oasis of calm. It has been home to 
Ouattara since the election crisis began four months ago, with UN peacekeepers 
pitching their tents on its lawns encircled by razor wire.

In a simple ceremony, General Philippe Mangou, once the defiant chief of 
Gbagbo's army, saluted Ouattara and referred to him as president. In a message 
on Ouattara's TV station, Mangou said "all the generals of the ground, air and 
navy forces" had declared their loyalty to the new leader.

It was likely to have been an uncomfortable night for Gbagbo, even though he, 
his wife and entourage reportedly spent it in a suite at the hotel following 
his flushing out from the presidential bunker on Monday. Other Gbagbo officials 
were sealed inside the bar – with its disco floor, mirrors and glitterball – 
Doh Ouattara, a member of hotel security, told Associated Press.

Gbagbo met UN mission chief Choi Young-jin on Tuesday and was assured the UN 
would contribute to his protection and ensure he is treated in a "dignified 
manner". He was then moved out of Abidjan.

UN spokesman Farhan Haq did not give his new location, although officials had 
said he would be transferred north, which is Ouattara's stronghold. Ouattara 
has said he will be put on trial and a truth and reconciliation commission 
established.

But it will take more than symbolism to calm the fears of reprisal killings, 
violent criminality and Gbagbo loyalists who refuse to surrender. The streets 
were still littered with burnt bodies, broken glass, tyres, discarded furniture 
and burning rubbish

on Tuesday.

On a French military patrol, the Guardian encountered a frantic group of 
civilians claiming that about 300 militia members were close by. "They are at 
the end of the road," one said. "Every day they come and harass us for food and 
water."

In another relatively peaceful neighbourhood, residents told how a Lebanese 
man had been carjacked on his way to the airport. "They took his car, luggage, 
everything," said Ali Gandour, 45, a timber factory worker. "He came walking 
back with nothing."

Gandour said he did not share others' optimism about post-Gbagbo Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ivory-coast>. "I'm scared. Most people felt 
happy when they heard the news but I didn't because we just don't know what's 
going on. You can see on the street, people going all around the place and 
stealing.

"We hope things will settle down but so far, we don't see much peace. We'll 
have to wait and see."

Two British journalists were attacked by six men at a hospital in Abidjan 
while making a documentary for Channel 4. Seyi Rhodes, 32, said: "We'd been 
interviewing patients for about 20 minutes when a group of five or six big guys 
walked in. You can see in the footage how the interviewee's face goes from 
passive to absolutely petrified.

"They grabbed the cameraman's headphones. The cord wrapped around his neck and 
they dragged him against a wall and held him there and slapped him a couple of 
times. I tried to intervene but they dragged me by the hair against a wall as 
well and slapped me a bit as well.

"It continued to get more and more aggressive. The only thing that saved us 
was the nurses, mainly women, who put themselves between us and the men. If 
they hadn't intervened it could have been a lot worse; they could have killed 
us. It was terrifying."

Ouattara used his first speech after Gbagbo's arrest to urge Ivorians to 
refrain from vengeance attacks and pledged to bring to justice those on both 
sides responsible for a civilian death toll which has surpassed 1,500. "Our 
country has turned a painful page in its history," he said, urging the youth 
militias to lay down their weapons and promising to restore security to the 
divided nation.

But his appeal for reconciliation fell on deaf ears in Gbagbo strongholds such 
as Yopougon. Sporadic gunfire and the launch of at least one mortar could also 
be heard near the French military base.

A steady flow of hundreds of Abidjanais seen heading north out of the city in 
cars and minibuses on Tuesday suggests that few believe peace will come quickly.
 