
Laura Robson is out of the doubles, but seeing double in the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. In front of a smattering 
of spectators on Show Court Three Robson, locally born and irritatingly for 
locals not an Australian anymore, advanced to the final of the girls' singles 
by beating Kristyna Pliskova 6-3, 6-1.

And there she will meet Pliskova's twin sister, Karolina, the sixth seed who 
beat Hao Chen Tang of China, 2-6, 7-6, 6-2 in the other semi-final. "That will 
be interesting!" she said later.

Robson, who lost in the final here last year, had an easy time reaching this 
year's showpiece.

Justine Henin's coach, Carlos Rodr√≠guez, dropped in briefly to watch her, but 
left when it was clear there was little resembling a contest going on. Robson, 
whose game is getting stronger by the month, did as much as she had to. Her 
forehand was sharp and court presence flawless.

"I have good phases and phases which could be better," she said, "but I am 
getting more confident. Coming into this tournament, I didn't really have any 
goals. I was just going to see how it went, really. But I'm sure I will sit 
down with my coach and discuss what we're going to do."

Robson headed off for a quick dinner in fashionable St Kilda before returning 
to her hotel to watch Roger Federer and Jo-Wifrield Tsonga's semi-final. "I 
thought [Andy Murray] played really well [against Marin Cilic in the first 
semi-final]. He hit some ridiculous shots."

She was reluctant to be drawn on what impact a Murray win would have on 
British tennis. "If Andy wins there will be more kids playing tennis but I 
think if it was Wimbledon it would be [even bigger].

"[During the tournament] he says, 'Well done,' and I say, 'Well done,' things 
like that."

She said she has learned a lot from Murray. "For a start, he's a lot faster 
than me. It's a good example to follow."

Oddly, she was unsure if she would watch the final courtside. "I don't know. 
We'll see."

She seems more relaxed than when losing here last year. "I was really nervous 
going into it," she said. "I didn't really feel comfortable playing against the 
girl I did [the Russian Ksenia Pervak] but hopefully this year it will be 
different."

She has had warm support from locals here, but will be greeted with even more 
enthusiasm back in the UK if her game continues to improve at this rate, making 
her a candidate for honours at Wimbledon.

Success there for Robson and Murray would be a double even the biggest 
flag-waver would have thought impossible until recently.
 