
Alexandre Dumas, who went bankrupt building the Chteau de Monte Cristo on the 
outskirts of Paris, was welcomed back yesterday by other writers and artists to 
his former home - his penultimate resting place on the eve of a lavish reburial 
ceremony.

The author of The Three Musketeers is due to be laid to rest today at the 
Pantheon, the Left Bank monument in Paris reserved for the remains of France's 
national heroes.

The chateau at Port Marly, an eccentric mixture of architectural styles, was 
about to be pulled down 20 years ago after being abandoned by its last tenants, 
the British School.

It was restored after a popular appeal, but Dumas, born 200 years ago, would 
have preferred to stay in his birthplace, the northern town of 
Villers-Cotterets.

After a long struggle to keep his ashes in the family tomb built for his 
father, who commanded Napoleon's cavalry in Egypt and Italy, Villers-Cotterets 
overruled the writer's own will and gave in to demands by President Jacques 
Chirac, a fan of the 19th century writer.

The Pantheon ceremony will seal long-overdue recognition by the French 
cultural establishment.

Because of his mixed blood, rebellious political views and criticism of his 
popular literature, only his friend,Victor Hugo, born in the same year, opposed 
Dumas's exclusion from the French Academy. No author since Hugo's own state 
funeral in 1885 will have been transported to their last resting place in such 
style.

Last night writers and artists kept watch on his coffin, covered with blue 
velvet inscribed " Tous pour un, un pour tous " [all for one, one for all], at 
the chateau and the adjoining Chteau d'If, Dumas's private study where he wrote 
some of his 86 novels during his two years at Port Marly.

Today, the coffin will be escorted to the Senate in Paris by the mounted Garde 
RÃ©publicaine, before being carried to the Pantheon by four musketeers, dressed 
in costumes designed by Jean-Charles de Castelbajac, a Gascon, like Dumas's 
D'Artagnan.

The ceremony will redress the balance between Dumas and Hugo, who was taken to 
the Pantheon more than a century ago. Dumas, who died in 1870, created more 
than 37,000 main characters for historical novels dating back to the Roman 
empire.

Today's ceremony, presided over by Mr Chirac, has revived memories of the 
novelist's political battles including opposition to the restoration of slavery.

His grandmother, born in Haiti, was a black slave and he used her name rather 
than his father's title of Marquis Davy de la Pailleterie. The historian, Alain 
Decaux, who formed a committee to save the Chteau de Monte Cristo, recalled 
Dumas's militancy: "He was present at every European insurrection to defend the 
cause of the people."
 