
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> is facing renewed calls 
for a federal investigation from more than a dozen US cities, boosting senator 
Elizabeth Warren’s efforts to force the popular home-sharing startup to release 
data on its affordable housing impact.

A coalition of American lawmakers, including leaders from New York, San 
Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>, Seattle, St 
Louis and Portland, urged the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) on Thursday to 
“help cities to protect consumers” and “study the extent to which the 
[short-term rental] industry is facilitating commercial operations”.

Elizabeth Warren takes on Airbnb, urging scrutiny of large-scale renters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/elizabeth-warren-airbnb-government-investigation>
The joint letter 
<http://www.forworkingfamilies.org/sites/pwf/files/documents/FTC%20Short-Term%20Rental%20Letter_0.pdf>
, first reported by the Guardian, marks an escalation of a growing national 
campaign to force Airbnb to eliminate illegal hotels and large-scale commercial 
businesses that city leaders say are contributing to affordable housing 
shortages and urban displacement.

The push comes months after Warren – the progressive senator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/us-money-blog/2016/sep/17/elizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj>
 from Massachusetts and a high-profileHillary Clinton supporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/17/elizabeth-warren-bernie-sanders-donald-trump-bigotry>
 –urged the FTC to examine Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/elizabeth-warren-airbnb-government-investigation>
, an unprecedented step in US lawmakers’ scrutiny of the booming “sharing 
economy”.

The San Francisco-based startup is currently engaged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/29/airbnb-lawsuit-san-francisco-regulation-internet-porn>
 in contentiouslegal battles 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-airbnb-anaheim-20160728-snap-story.html> 
with citygovernments 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-airbnb-lawsuit-santa-monica-20160903-snap-story.html>
 across thecountry 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/29/technology/airbnb-sues-san-francisco-over-a-law-it-had-helped-pass.html?_r=0>
, and has become one of the most high-profile California tech companies to 
dramaticallydisrupt a longstanding industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/airbnb-valuation-500-million-funding-round>
, raising complex challenges for regulators.

Opponents have increasingly pushed for tighter restrictions on the $30bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/22/airbnb-valuation-500-million-funding-round>
 company, which allows hosts to rent their homes to strangers. Although the 
firm markets itself as a third-party “sharing” platform for “short-term” 
rentals, reports have suggested that many are using the site for hotel-like 
businesses and long-term leases – takingmuch-needed affordable housing off the 
market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/02/airbnb-san-francisco-headquarters-occupied-housing-protesters>
 while often avoiding traditional taxes and regulations.

Airbnb, which has developed a powerful lobbying 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2016/10/11/airbnb-bulks-up-lobbying-presence-as-lawmakers-increase-scrutiny-of-sharing-economy/>
 arm, has argued that it is notlegally liable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/29/airbnb-lawsuit-san-francisco-regulation-internet-porn>
 when its users post listings that violate city housing laws. Local efforts to 
tighten restrictions and force the company to disclose uniform statistics have 
led to litigation and political fights.

“This is a national problem, and it needs a national response,” New York City 
council member Helen Rosenthal said in an interview. “It all comes back to 
Airbnb not having to take responsibility for the actions of its hosts.”

Local jurisdictions don't have the resources to go up against this corporate 
giant ... It’s going to take the government
David Campos, San Francisco supervisor 
Rosenthal and other co-authors of the letter to FTC chairwoman Edith Ramirez 
urged the agency to determine the number of “commercial” rentals and their 
revenues for Airbnb and its competitors VRBO, HomeAway and FlipKey. The letter, 
also signed by advocates in Los Angeles, Oakland, Denver and Boston, argued 
that the companies have opposed efforts toincrease transparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/27/airbnb-panel-democratic-national-convention-survey>
, have releasedmisleading data <http://projects.sfchronicle.com/2016/airbnb/> 
and continue to allowadvertisements 
<http://www.geekwire.com/2016/airbnb-vrbo-respond-seattles-proposed-regulations-short-term-rentals/>
 for illegal rentals even when cities ban commercial operations.

A 2015 report 
<http://www.laane.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/AirBnB-Final.pdf> from Los 
Angeles opponents alleged that nearly 90% of Airbnb’s revenues there came from 
“commercial” listings – people renting entire homes or leasing companies 
renting multiple units, the letter noted. A recentSeattle report 
<http://www.pugetsoundsage.org/downloads/PSS_ShortTermRentals.pdf> found that 
the city could lose more than 1,600 long-term housing units to short-term 
rentals in the next three years.

Rosenthal argued that if Airbnb eliminated the roughly 8,000 listings 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/26/nyregion/airbnb-and-the-battle-of-suitcase-alley.html>
 in New York City that appear to be “commercial”, it would reduce the company’s 
revenue by millions, but could make a huge difference for the city’s housing 
shortage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fairbnb-cities-urge-government-crackdown-elizabeth-warren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7824130f5e1d34315d4d800235f06ef9c51c91fd%2F0_153_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lawmakers%20join%20Elizabeth%20Warren's%20call%20for%20US%20to%20'step%20in'%20on%20illegal%20Airbnb%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fairbnb-cities-urge-government-crackdown-elizabeth-warren%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lawmakers%20join%20Elizabeth%20Warren%27s%20call%20for%20US%20to%20%27step%20in%27%20on%20illegal%20Airbnb%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fairbnb-cities-urge-government-crackdown-elizabeth-warren%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7824130f5e1d34315d4d800235f06ef9c51c91fd%2F0_153_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Opponents of Airbnb rally outside city hall in New York in 2015. Photograph: 
Shannon Stapleton / Reuters/Reuters 
Airbnb has often <https://www.airbnbaction.com/airbnb-and-housing-in-seattle/> 
disputedstatistics 
<https://www.airbnbaction.com/the-airbnb-home-sharing-activity-report-seattle/> 
from opponents, releasingads <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TkfWypk4wfo> that 
present their service as a financial boost to middle-class people who want to 
occasionally rent a spare room.

FTC intervention could help resolve data discrepancies by requiring 
standardized disclosures, critics said.

“These platforms are collecting a lot of data from us as users,” said Nikki 
Fortunato Bas, executive director for the Partnership for Working Families, an 
advocacy group that organized the letter. “We won’t be able to monitor or 
enforce … policies until the platforms share data.”

Warren, who has repeatedly raised concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/20/elizabeth-warren-uber-lyft-gig-economy-workers>
 about the lack of regulations in the “gig economy”, said she is continuing to 
urge the FTC to move forward with collection of “reliable, unbiased data” on 
Airbnb and other platforms.

“Technological advances can help create new wealth and increased GDP,” she 
said in a statement. “But it is policy – rules and regulations – that 
determines who will have a meaningful opportunity to share in that new wealth.”

How a failed attempt to get porn off the internet protects Airbnb from the law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/29/airbnb-lawsuit-san-francisco-regulation-internet-porn>
David Campos – co-signer of the letter and a supervisor in San Francisco, 
which Airbnb recentlysued 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/airbnb-sues-san-francisco-to-block-rental-registration-law-1467081805>
 – said it was critical for cities to join together in their fight against the 
company.

“I just don’t think that local jurisdictions have the resources needed to go 
up against this corporate giant,” he said. “It’s going to take the federal 
government to step in for the right thing to be done.”

In a statement, Airbnb said the company’s representatives have “participated 
in meetings with the FTC and discussed how Airbnb fights hotel price gouging 
and are eager to work with lawmakers and regulators at any level of government 
who want to learn more about how home sharing helps the middle class”.

The spokesperson further noted that Airbnb hosts keep 97% of the cost of their 
listing and claimed that “many depend on this extra income to help make ends 
meet”.
 