
Breast the brow of Stockton Street in North Beach, San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/sanfrancisco>, and the bay opens up before 
you, framed by the cream-white clapboard buildings that predominate in this old 
Italian neighbourhood. The island ofAlcatraz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/picture/2014/mar/21/alcatraz-photography> 
prison is visible just across the water. Turn right and in a few hundred yards, 
on a corner, is an unprepossessing three-storey house. Press the middle bell 
and be prepared to wait. The occupant is old: 96. A slow footfall, and there he 
stands, still erect and tall:Lawrence Ferlinghetti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/17/lawrence-ferlinghetti-publish-travel-journals-beat>
, publisher to the Beats, poet laureate to his home town.

He directs me upstairs to the kitchen of his second floor apartment, past a 
scrappy unframed poster of Vladimir Mayakovsky taped roughly to the wall. “It’s 
a real Italian building,” he says. “The kitchen is the entire width of the 
house.” Ferlinghetti has lived here, on his own, for more than 30 years. I’m 
here to talk to him about a confluence of significant events: the 60th 
anniversary of the company he founded,City Lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/25/san-francisco-city-lights-bookshop-beats>
, publishers of a celebrated poetry list that includesAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/allen-ginsberg>’s “Howl” and an extensive 
range of titles in radical politics and offbeat fiction; the appearance later 
this year of a collection of his correspondence with Ginsberg, and a 
compilation of his own travel writings; and another anniversary, that of the
International Poetry Incarnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2005/jun/13/photography-poetry>, held 
in the Albert Hall in London 50 years ago this summer. There, followed by Beat 
poets Ginsberg andGregory Corso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jan/20/guardianobituaries.books1>, he 
read to an audience of 7,000 at an event billed as Britain’s first “happening”.

Walking the Beat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2005/jun/11/sanfrancisco.unitedstates.culturaltrips>
We begin with the Albert Hall event. I point out that, on the evidence of 
Peter Whitehead’s darkly atmospheric film of the proceedings,Wholly Communion, 
the crowd seemed pretty stoned that night. The readings were interrupted at one 
point by a young man mesmerically chanting the word “love” at the top of his 
voice. “It wasn’t just the audience,” Ferlinghetti chuckles, “most of the poets 
were on something, either just grass, more likely LSD … But I was totally 
straight. I was probably the only straight man on stage.”

He appears to relish his reputation as the abstemious one. “Somebody had to 
mind the shop,” he tells me, enjoying the literalism (City Lights is also a 
world-famous bookstore). Everything is relative, however: compared to Ginsberg, 
who rarely encountered a drug he didn’t want more of, orJack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac>, who was notorious for drinking 
heavily with his mother in the house they shared, Ferlinghetti seems a paragon 
of restraint. But in his travel writing from Andalucia, where he lived in the 
spring before the Albert Hall gig, he is regularly on the lookout for “kif” 
and, on one occasion, recounts being so drunk that he tumbled into a patch of 
tomatoes in the garden, where he lay unconscious until his wife found him.

If Ferlinghetti’s sobriety was only relative, it extended to the use of swear 
words. Though the poem with which he opened at the Albert Hall was titled “To 
Fuck Is to Love Again”, he is quick to point out that it’s “the only poem of 
mine which had a four-letter word in it. Generally, dirty words divert the 
attention from what you’re trying to get across.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjWdYrd_UH9E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjWdYrd_UH9E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjWdYrd_UH9E&media=>
I suggest that the performances of the American poets that night – himself, 
Ginsberg and Corso – looked more self-assured than those of their British 
counterparts, among themChristopher Logue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/christopher-logue>, Adrian Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/adrian-mitchell>, Tom McGrath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/01/obituary-tom-mcgrath-poet> and 
Michael Horovitz <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-horovitz>. “The 
thing about the British poets was that though they looked like Beats, when they 
opened their mouths, out came these beautiful Oxford accents. It sort of 
destroyed the image.” So were the Beats in America more working class? “Gregory 
certainly was, he had a strong New York accent. Allen was from Jewish 
intellectuals in Newark who were old communists and identified with the 
workers’ movement.”

Given those family politics it seems an irony that Ginsberg arrived in London 
having been expelled from communist-run Czechoslovakia. The authorities there 
had taken possession of a notebook that, according to its owner, included 
“descriptions of sex orgies and ecstasies in intimate detail”. Ferlinghetti 
smiles and removes his glasses to dab eyes now afflicted with glaucoma: “Well, 
Allen made the most of being kicked out of Prague. He was leaving anyway. 
Besides being a genius poet, he was a master publicist and showman.”

Anyway, the communists, the official ones at least, had little truck with the 
Beats. “The Russian poetAndrei Voznesensky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/03/andrei-voznesensky-obituary> was 
at the Albert Hall but the Soviet embassy wouldn’t let him read. They didn’t 
want him to associate with dirty beatniks. He was on the front row but the 
audience didn’t even know he was there.”

Voznesensky was a recent friend. “The following year we appeared together in 
San Francisco. I set up a big a reading for him, just as we’d done with 
Yevtushenko.” The event is described in Ferlinghetti’s travel journals. It took 
place atthe Fillmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/11/top-10-live-music-venues-san-francisco>
, the cavernous music venue run by Bill Graham. The plan was to follow the 
poetry with a live band but Voznesensky objected: “When he first got a look at 
the hand bill he called me up … ‘Lawrence, what is Jefferson Airplane?’ [After] 
I told him it was a rock group … he said ‘Lawrence, just you and me. No 
Airplane.’” Persuaded later to change his mind, Ferlinghetti records, the 
Russian watched the band from the balcony, sitting with the man running the 
light show. “He did dig it, after all.”

Ferlinghetti included Voznesensky in City Lights’ anthology of Eastern 
European poetsRed Cats (title courtesy of Ginsberg) and the conversation turns 
to his role as a publisher. I suggest that his correspondence with Ginsberg 
traces a relationship drifting gradually from the informality of friends to 
something much more businesslike, as the two men established their respective 
careers. Ferlinghetti demurs. “It’s true we had no contracts, including for 
‘Howl’. But Allen never really included me in his inner circle. I wasn’t one of 
his in-group. I was always his publisher.”

Ferlinghetti became aware of the power of Ginsberg’s most famous poem when, 
alongside a boisterous Kerouac, he heard“Howl” read for the first time at the 
Six Gallery in North Beach during October 1955. The next day he sent a telegram 
to Ginsberg, who was living nearby at the time: I GREET YOU AT THE BEGINNING OF 
A GREAT CAREER. STOP. WHEN DO I GET MANUSCRIPT OF HOWL? The poem was soon on 
the presses at Villiers Publications in Britain, contracted by Ferlinghetti 
because their production was superior to anything available in the US: “The 
first printings were handset in old-fashioned type and thread sewn. John 
Sankey, who owned the press, had a very expensive sports car, a Jaguar. He 
drove me up to his factory an hour north of London at enormously high speed.”

The books were shipped to America through San Francisco. On arrival, the 
customs announced they would be seized for obscenity. They were eventually let 
through, but not without repercussions: “In the end it was the juvenile 
department of the police who charged us. I was in Big Sur at the time, and 
Allen was in Morocco. But our bookstore manager was dragged off to jail.”

The subsequent trial lasted months. Ginsberg, writing from Tangier where, 
between hanging out withFrancis Bacon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bacon> and Paul Bowles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/nov/19/news.obituaries>, he was 
assistingWilliam Burroughs <https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamburroughs> 
with the editing ofNaked Lunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/apr/16/naked-lunch-william-burroughs>
, was evidently concerned about its outcome. Characteristically, though, he 
struck a defiant note: “I guess this is more serious than the customs seizure … 
I’m really sorry I’m not there ... I never thought I’d want to read“Howl” again 
but it would be a pleasure under these circumstances. It might give it a 
reality as ‘social protest’ I always feared was lacking without armed bands of 
outraged Gestapo.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F04%2Flawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435853178589%2F24830776-6a1f-48e0-8769-a6111677084f-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lawrence%20Ferlinghetti%3A%20%E2%80%98Most%20of%20the%20poets%20were%20on%20something%2C%20but%20somebody%20had%20to%20mind%20the%20shop%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F04%2Flawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lawrence%20Ferlinghetti%3A%20%E2%80%98Most%20of%20the%20poets%20were%20on%20something%2C%20but%20somebody%20had%20to%20mind%20the%20shop%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F04%2Flawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435853178589%2F24830776-6a1f-48e0-8769-a6111677084f-2060x1373.jpeg>
 City Lights, North Beach, San Francisco. Photograph: Wendy Connett/Wendy 
Connett/Robert Harding World Imagery/Corbis 
Ferlinghetti remained sanguine and, like any good publisher, saw opportunity 
alongside the risk. “I wasn’t worried. I was young and foolish. I figured I’d 
get a lot of reading done in jail and they wouldn’t keep me in there for ever. 
And, anyway, it really put the book on the map.” He had sent the poem to the 
American Civil Liberties Union prior to publishing it “to see if they would 
defend us if we were busted. And they did – successfully as it turned out.” The 
not-guilty verdict heralded a new freedom in American letters. “After that the 
floodgates were opened. People like Barney” – Barney Rosset at Grove Press – 
“were able to publishLady Chatterley’s Lover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/05/lady-chatterleys-lover-obscenity-trial-1960>
,Henry Miller’s Tropics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/03/100-best-novels-tropic-of-cancer-henry-miller>
,Jean Genet <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jeangenet>, and so on.”

At City Lights we didn't call the police for thieves. Our manager once took 
down a guy’s pants to retrieve some books

The trial also launched Ginsberg’s career on a meteoric trajectory. The 
letters chronicle an increasingly confident young poet, never backward at 
coming forward, placing ever greater demands on his publisher, not least the 
repeated insistence that a variety of acquaintances be added to the City Lights 
list. “It seemed like half the people Allen recommended were current or 
ex-boyfriends. Some of them would never have gotten published if it hadn’t been 
for him.” In fact, Ferlinghetti remained coolly impervious when Ginsberg’s 
entreaties didn’t accord with his own interests and tastes. In declining to 
take onNaked Lunch he wrote to Ginsberg and Burroughs, then living together in 
Paris: “Anyone that published it as is would be indulging in pure and sure 
premeditated legal lunacy.” According to Paul Yamazaki, who has been the buyer 
for City Lights bookstore for more than four decades, this is just part of the 
story. “Lawrence didn’t care much for Burroughs’s writing untilSoft Machine 
came out a couple of years later.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F04%2Flawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435853659567%2F05ecb6c1-4f20-46c7-9302-d2bf2e0a1c30-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lawrence%20Ferlinghetti%3A%20%E2%80%98Most%20of%20the%20poets%20were%20on%20something%2C%20but%20somebody%20had%20to%20mind%20the%20shop%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F04%2Flawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lawrence%20Ferlinghetti%3A%20%E2%80%98Most%20of%20the%20poets%20were%20on%20something%2C%20but%20somebody%20had%20to%20mind%20the%20shop%E2%80%99%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F04%2Flawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435853659567%2F05ecb6c1-4f20-46c7-9302-d2bf2e0a1c30-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Lawrence Ferlinghetti in November 2014. Photograph: Chris Felver/Getty Images 
As the publisher at City Lights, dealing with pushy and sometimes outrageously 
obstreperous writers went with the territory. Another of his poets, Corso, once 
broke into the bookshop and emptied the till. Ferlinghetti relates the events 
of that night: “The people in the Vesuvio bar next door saw him do it. We had a 
policy at City Lights never to call the police. We even had a sign up that 
said: ‘We will not call the police for book thieves. But they may be publicly 
shamed.’ Our bookstore manager once literally took down a guy’s pants to 
retrieve some stolen books.” But, in Corso’s case, it was the bar that summoned 
the cops, who arrived and dusted the till for fingerprints. “When we heard 
about it we went round to Gregory’s house. It was three in the morning. We told 
him the police had his number and he better get out of town. He left 
immediately for Italy. Didn’t return for two years.” Did Ferlinghetti ever 
retrieve the stolen money? “Well, we just took it out of his royalties. It 
seemed like the civilised thing to do.”

I’ve been advised prior to the interview that Ferlinghetti is essentially a 
private person, something that can easily be mistaken for aloofness. This 
characteristic is simultaneously underscored and belied by the direct way 
he brings our conversation to a close. “You seem to have quite a lot now,” he 
says, gesturing to my tape recorder, “and I want to watch the Giants game.”

Before leaving I ask if he is working on anything. He says he is collaborating 
with an Italian journalist who lives locally on the translation of a book by 
the poetCarmelo Bene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/mar/18/artsfeatures2>. “We hope to 
have it finished within a year or two.” And does he go into City Lights these 
days? “Not really. Elaine [Katzenberger] is running things there. She’s an 
excellent editor – tough, and sometimes very funny. And it’s harder for me to 
get about now. I was just invited to a poetry reading in Norway but had to turn 
it down. Such a shame,” he adds ruefully, “they were going to pay business 
class. Do you know how rare it is for a poet to get business class?”

• I Greet You at the Beginning of a Great Career: The Selected Correspondence 
of Lawrence Ferlinghetti andAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/allen-ginsberg>, 1955-1997 will be published 
by City Lights later this month.Writing Across the Landscape: Travel Journals 
1960-2013by Lawrence Ferlinghetti will be published by Liveright in September.
 