
If there is an afterlife and theatre reviews are published there, the spirits 
ofAnton Chekhov <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/chekhov> and DH Lawrence 
will be bemused to read about productions of plays they didn’t know they’d 
written.

At the National Theatre, director Marianne Elliott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/20/national-theatre-50-marianne-elliott>
, withBen Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/24/ben-power-national-theatre-hush>
, who is credited as an “adapter”, have taken three Lawrence one-act plays set 
in different terrace houses at separate times (The Daughter-in-Law,The Widowing 
of Mrs Holroyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/11/widowing-of-mrs-holroyd-review-dh-lawrence-orange-tree-richmond>
 and A Collier’s Friday Night) and knocked them through into the single-story 
premise ofHusbands and Sons 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/husbands-sons>, a drama that makes the 
three groups of characters neighbours in a Nottinghamshire pit village in 1911.

Husbands and Sons review – Anne-Marie Duff shines through violation of DH 
Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/28/husbands-and-sons-review-anne-marie-duff>
 And David Hare has constructed for the Chichester Festival theatre Young 
Chekhov <https://www.cft.org.uk/young-chekhov>, a trilogy consisting of three 
of the writer’s early plays: Ivanov, The Seagull and, surely most to the 
surprise of the original writer, Platonov – a production sculpted from seven 
hours of Chekhov’s untitled, unperformed material.

 Lawrence acknowledged the example of Chekhov’s portraits of Russian rural 
communities on his own stories and dramas about Midlands colliery life, so 
there is already a link between the writers. But they are now united as case 
studies in the debate about how much leeway a theatrical adapter should be 
allowed.

 My Guardian colleague Michael Billington has already stepped forward as chief 
prosecutor of Husbands and Sons, giving the production one of his rare two-star 
scores, and describing Elliott and Power’s decision to turn three unlinked 
one-act dramas into a new two-act evening as “an indefensible violation of 
authorial integrity”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d14b8d1e691266db8ad7ef2e5a8dcfa79fdc743%2F154_259_3689_2212%2F3689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lawrence%20and%20Chekhov%3A%20reimagined%20or%20violated%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lawrence%20and%20Chekhov%3A%20reimagined%20or%20violated%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d14b8d1e691266db8ad7ef2e5a8dcfa79fdc743%2F154_259_3689_2212%2F3689.jpg>
 Remains true to the conception and concerns of the original plays … Martin 
Marquez (Charles Holroyd), Anne-Marie Duff (Lizzie Holroyd), Philip McGinley 
(Blackmore) in Husbands and Sons. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
 Let me, though, in respectful disagreement, mount the defence. It is true 
that Husbands and Sons takes a form that Lawrence never imagined, but, while 
structurally revisionary, the new work remains true to the conception and 
concerns of the individual plays, deepening through counterpoint the writer’s 
obsessive consideration of the ways in which education and desire shake the 
chains of class and community.

 It seems to me significant that two of Elliott’s name-making productions were 
War Horse <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/war-horse> (with co-director Tom 
Morris) andThe Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/13/curious-incident-dog-night-time-review>
, theatrical adaptations of well-known novels by Michael Morpurgo and Mark 
Haddon. With this Lawrentian mash-up, Elliott seems to be contending that a 
text written for theatre can be adapted for the stage in the same way that a 
fiction from another medium would be, leaving Lawrence’s plays as open to 
directorial and authorial tinkering, as if Sons and Lovers or another of his 
novels became the basis for a play.

 This is a provocative proposition, as the justification for the often radical 
changes made to novels in their stage and screen versions is that they are 
moving from one medium to another with different demands, whereas Elliott and 
Power are translating from pages written for the stage.

 It’s common these days, though, for plays of an older vintage to be rewritten 
for revivals. Ben Power himself – an unusually prominent example in British 
theatre of the Germanic concept of dramaturg, or script advisor and adapter – 
has edited and textually altered, for the National and other venues, dozens of 
classic plays including Marlowe’s Doctor Faustus and Shakespeare’sTimon of 
Athens 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/video/the-making-of-timon-timon-the-character>
. If a 400-year-old play can be reshaped for today’s audiences, then why not 
earlier 20th-century texts by Lawrence?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff27a37fd40d5b38f7ac0f098dc5a2b7e40746dbc%2F182_157_3980_2389%2F3980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lawrence%20and%20Chekhov%3A%20reimagined%20or%20violated%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lawrence%20and%20Chekhov%3A%20reimagined%20or%20violated%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff27a37fd40d5b38f7ac0f098dc5a2b7e40746dbc%2F182_157_3980_2389%2F3980.jpg>
 Radical changes for a radical playwright … Nina Sosanya in Young Chekhov. 
Photograph: Tony Larkin/Rex Shutterstock 
 Although sometimes presented as an ethical issue, respect for literary texts 
is largely a legal matter, through the device of copyright. Once that has 
lapsed, author and story take their chances with publishers – which is why you 
can now buy an edition of Lawrence’s complete novels for £1.49 – and with 
adapters.

 In my view, Lawrence has been lucky with his latest theatrical interpreters. 
Authorial integrity, for me, resides more in content and ideology than 
structure, so it would only be violated if, say, A Collier’s Friday Night were 
relocated to a spaceship in 2115, heading to set up a mining operation on the 
moon, and possibly only then if the director implied that Lawrence was on the 
side of the drilling company. Even those rules, though, are now routinely 
broken in productions of Shakespeare, whose canon is subjected to violent 
variations of setting and meaning.

 Another argument against absolute fidelity to what a playwright’s intentions 
are perceived to be is offered at Chichester by the tremendous, revelatory 
Young Chekhov, and, in particular, the first play, which Hare calls Platonov. 
Clearly, Chekhov never envisaged this piece of juvenilia beginning a trilogy 
that would follow him through to maturity, or, indeed, that the manuscript 
would ever reach the stage at all: rejected by theatres while he was alive, it 
was posthumously discovered in a bank vault.

Young Chekhov: The Birth of a Genius review – a masterly triple bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/18/young-chekhov-birth-genius-review-evolution-new-kind-drama>
While DH Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence> would at 
least recognise the characters and narratives in Husbands and Sons, if not 
their interaction, Chekhov’s unstaged play has long been treated as a block of 
stone from which various dramatists have chipped out their favoured shapes. As 
Hare points out in a preface to the published scripts of the Chichester 
trilogy, the papers from which he created this two and a half hour tragicomedy 
called Platonov have previously been hewn for numerous other pieces of theatre 
of various styles and titles. These include Alex Szogyi’s A Country Scandal 
(1961), Michael Frayn’s Wild Honey (1984), and Trevor Griffiths’ Piano (1990), 
three plays that could themselves be staged as a trilogy without much simple 
repetition.

 Doubtless, one day, a completist Chekhovian theatre director will offer a 
seven-hour English version of the complete Platonov project, but I am happy to 
take the assurances of Frayn and Hare and others that we probably don’t want to 
be in the audience when that happens. Better, surely, that what is generally 
known as “the Platonov material” or “play without a title” should be approached 
with the freedom that a screenwriter or playwright might bring to a novel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446555274684%2Ffc0044e5-3de6-46bc-89ca-5a824b91ebfd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lawrence%20and%20Chekhov%3A%20reimagined%20or%20violated%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lawrence%20and%20Chekhov%3A%20reimagined%20or%20violated%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Flawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446555274684%2Ffc0044e5-3de6-46bc-89ca-5a824b91ebfd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Niamh Cusack (Siobhan) and Luke Treadaway (Christopher Boone) in The Curious 
Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time at the Apollo in 2013. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton 
 Or with which theatre-makers might adapt an old play. Husbands and Sons 
combines theatrical cleverness (some sets and costumes implied by mime) with 
tender narratives of sex and death which, though it is always a treacherous 
business to guess what the dead would have wanted, Lawrence might well embrace 
as a good-faith variation in the way that Morpurgo and Haddon welcomed 
Elliott’s reworkings of their texts.

 By coincidence, at the interval of Platonov on Saturday, I met an English 
playwright who had just returned from the German premiere of one of his works, 
which, in what seems to be a common experience for foreign dramatists in that 
country, had been impressive but not entirely recognisable. German directors 
treat any play, however successful it has been in other productions or places, 
as a springboard for their own vision, which is why this is the theatre culture 
that populised the word and work of dramaturgy.

 As Husbands and Sons and Young Chekhov show in different ways, the dramaturg 
is becoming an increasingly visible figure in British theatre, which may 
require an adaptation of attitude. A standard defence of radical re-imaginings 
of novels for stage or screen is that the original book continues to survive 
alongside the new version; and perhaps such sanguinity can also be applied to 
the reworking of scripts created for the stage.
 