
Sky News presenter Adam Boulton has criticised veteran broadcaster David 
Dimbleby <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-dimbleby> for not standing 
down to make way for someone else to chair the proposed leaders’ debate ahead 
of the next general election.

Following the announcement of the proposed broadcasts by all four main news 
channels, Boulton, who wasinstrumental 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/aug/30/edinburghtvfestival-bskyb> in 
calling for the UK’s first televised debates between the main political leaders 
in 2010, said: “I do feel quite strongly that Dimbleby should have stepped 
down. This was meant to be a fresh start and so really we should have had 
different people.” Although an admirer of Dimbleby’s “professionalism”, he 
criticised the idea that any broadcaster had a “droit de seigneur”.

Both Boulton and Alastair Stewart 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alastair_Stewart> are to stand down to make way 
for a combination of Jeremy Paxman and Kay Burley on Sky/Channel 4 and Julie 
Etchingham on ITV.

The changes partly reflect criticism 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/communications-committee/news/general-election-debates-inquiry-launch/>
 that, at the last set of debates in 2010, three white middle-aged men faced 
three white middle-aged TV male presenters.

The BBC, which plans to broadcast a three-way debate between David Cameron, Ed 
Miliband and Nick Clegg next April, said it had no qualms about such a 
well-regarded broadcaster returning to the fray. Ric Bailey, chief advisor to 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> on politics, said: “He is the 
best broadcaster in the country. Is that a good enough reason?”

He also denied that Dimbleby, set to turn 76 later this month, is reported to 
have personally lobbied director general Tony Hall directly for the job. 
“That’s completely untrue,” he said.

However, Dimbleby was regarded as less than complimentary about the 
groundbreaking debates when he said people could “come to regret” the advent of 
the TV debates.

In a video message to the Broadcasting Press Guild awards in central London, 
where the party leader debates won the innovation prize, Dimbleby said: “The 
debates certainly were an innovation. They will change the way electoral 
campaigns are conducted, not necessarily entirely for the better.”

The BBC also denied that he remained critical of the debates with Bailey 
insisting that their most experienced political broadcaster was “four-square 
behind the debate”. It added that his performance last time won plaudits.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 