
Ask about the fish in restaurants in the centre of Puerto Maldonado, the 
biggest town in Peru’s south-east Amazon, and you’ll hear all kinds of things. 
Some people will shake their heads and say there isn’t any fish on the menu 
“because of the contamination” or “out of protocol”. Others might say thereis 
fish available, before sometimes hastily clarifying that it comes from farms 
along the Inter-Oceanica Highway running to Brazil, or from the Pacific coast, 
or even, according to one chef, all the way from Vietnam.

Why such problems with the fish in this part of the Amazon? Answer: alluvial 
gold and the mercury required to extract it. The gold-rush in the 8.5m hectare 
Madre de Dios region began in the 1980s and, by 2012, miners had destroyed more 
than 50,000 hectares of forest, effectively dumping 100s of tons of mercury 
into the rivers while doing so. In May this year Peru’s outgoing government 
announced a pathetic 60-day“declaration of emergency” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/andes-to-the-amazon/2016/jun/19/top-peruvian-amazon-tourist-invaded-gold-miners>
.

An image of a unpublished map obtained by the Guardian, based on “preliminary 
results” from studies of local inhabitants by the Duke Global Health Institute 
in the US, provides some idea of how widely-spread and severe the mercury 
contamination is across Madre de Dios. Arguably the map’s most alarming 
revelation is that the most contaminated area of all isupstream from the 
mining: the stretch of the River Madre de Dios between towns called Boca 
Colorado and Boca Manu, a significant part of which is in the buffer zone of 
the Manu national park, which Unesco calls the most biodiverse place on earth.

“It is noteworthy that some areas with high averages of mercury are upriver 
from the mining zones,” states the map, which was shown to Health Ministry 
officials earlier this year.

The map suggests the second worse-hit area is inside the Manu park itself, 
immediately upriver from Boca Manu, along the River Manu’s left bank. The right 
bank is affected too. William Pan, the study’s lead researcher, told the 
Guardian “we didn’t sample people in Manu national park”, but explains the map 
on the basis that his teams have sampled several communities “along that bend 
of the river (Rio Manu/Rio Madre de Dios)” and “the map smoothing method 
creates a 10km buffer around the study sites and the exposure is extrapolated”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fleaked-map-reveals-chronic-mercury-epidemic-in-perus-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb27212e04d41fc32e168430ef9b13dfdc10f761e%2F0_0_4160_2340%2F4160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leaked%20map%20reveals%20chronic%20mercury%20epidemic%20in%20Peru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fleaked-map-reveals-chronic-mercury-epidemic-in-perus-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leaked%20map%20reveals%20chronic%20mercury%20epidemic%20in%20Peru&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fandes-to-the-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fleaked-map-reveals-chronic-mercury-epidemic-in-perus-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb27212e04d41fc32e168430ef9b13dfdc10f761e%2F0_0_4160_2340%2F4160.jpg>
 According to US-based scientists, the people living upriver from gold-mining 
in Peru’s Madre de Dios region are the most contaminated by mercury. The 
worst-affected areas are shaded in red, the second-worst in orange, the third 
worst yellow. “µg/kg” should read “mg/kg.” Photograph: Anon. 
How come people upstream are the most contaminated? Or maybe the mercury there 
has little or nothing to do with gold? As acknowledged by a 2011 report by the 
Environment Ministry, titled Gold-mining and Mercury Contamination in Madre de 
Dios: a Time-Bomb, mercury stored naturally in Amazon soil and vegetation is 
released when the forest is cut down or burnt and then leaches into the water.

Pan describes the mercury levels recorded by Duke as “very high” and says 
Madre de Dios is experiencing a “chronic mercury epidemic.” The contamination 
upstream was, he says, “the most surprising finding of our human Hg [mercury] 
assessment.”

“The communities near the confluence of Rio Manu and Rio Madre de Dios have 
the highest exposures in the region,” Pan told the Guardian. “When we tested 
fish, water and sediment, none of the values were high. So we were surprised 
when people were detected with high levels. We have several hypotheses that we 
are evaluating.”

According to Pan, those hypotheses are the people in that region migrate 
downriver to work in the mining, and that they are more dependent than the rest 
of Madre de Dios on local agriculture, fish and meat because there are no 
roads. Another is that “due to reliance on fish consumption, they are likely 
eat larger fish, which will have more Hg just naturally”.

Pan says the map was “supposed to be confidential with the Ministry of Health” 
because it is “unpublished data and we have not fully analysed all the 
samples,” calling it “very crude” and far from final. He told the Guardian it 
is based on three distinct studies conducted between May 2014 and June 2016, 
and the final results will include samples from almost 72 sites. He says the 
Health Ministry has “real monetary constraints right now due to expenditures of 
the prior ministry”.

Previous research by Pan and colleagues argued that mercury contamination is 
generating “significant health risks” for communities in Madre de Dios 
“hundreds of kilometres” downstream from the mining, particularly among 
children and indigenous people.

“Children living within the central portion of the [Madre de Dios] watershed 
cannot safely consume carnivorous fish without exceeding recommended 
international [mercury] body burdens,” stated an article by Pan et al in
Environmental Science 
<https://globalhealth.duke.edu/media/news/duke-study-finds-devastating-effects-mercury-gold-mines>
 in January 2015. “Deforestation and mercury release are an immediate threat to 
both local and distant downstream communities, many of which do not benefit 
economically from [the mining].”

The law announcing Peru’s declaration of emergency in May stated that many 
people in Madre de Dios have “higher than the maximum recommended limits” of 
mercury, which causes “serious, chronic and complex health problems, 
particularly in children and pregnant women.”

“[M]ercury contamination of the air, water, sediment and fish is the result of 
inadequate practices by illegal and informal gold-miners during the extraction 
and working of alluvial gold,” the law stated. “In addition, there are people 
located beyond the mining extraction zones that are at high risk of being 
contaminated with mercury because of the high levels of it detected in the 
environment and in certain fish species, especiallyMota Punteada, which is part 
of the daily diet of Madre de Dios’s population.”

The social and environmental tragedy unfolding in Madre de Dios has been known 
about for many years: the Ministry of Environment dubbed it a “time-bomb” five 
years ago, but the bomb was ticking long before that. Will Peru’s new 
government, led by president Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, now take sincere, 
sustainable, non-violent steps to address the problem - not just in the Boca 
Manu region, obviously, butacross Madre de Dios and Peru’s Amazon as a whole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/andes-to-the-amazon/2016/may/01/gold-mining-in-peru-forests-razed-millions-lost-virgins-auctioned>
? What steps can the government take to initiate a massive public health 
campaign and inform those who are contaminated, or are at risk, and provide 
access to treatment – and if it doesn’t have the funds do so, who can provide 
them? What forms of alternative employment can be created, so those who find 
themselves forced to mine and handle mercury have other options? What steps can 
those buying, selling, hoarding, working and wearing Peruvian gold take to 
ensure they stop contributing to the devastation of huge swathes of the Amazon 
and the contamination of 1,000s of people living there?

The World Health Organization calls mercury “one of the top ten chemicals or 
groups of chemicals of major public health concern”, and states that human 
activity, including gold-mining and coal-fired power stations, is the “main 
cause of mercury releases.”

Peru is one of the world’s biggest gold producers, with the main importers 
being Canada, India, Switzerland, the UK and the US. A report published in 
April by the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime argued 
that 28% of all gold inPeru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru> is 
illegal, with illegal gold-mining across Latin America increasingly controlled 
by drugs traffickers and “organized crime” groups.

In January Peru ratified the Minamata Convention on Mercury, a legally-binding 
global treaty which commits parties to regulate artisanal and small-scale 
mining, among other things, and states that “parties may cooperate with each 
other” to stop altogether the use of mercury or mercury compounds in such 
mining. Switzerland and the US have ratified the Convention too, but Canada, 
India and the UK haven’t.

Peru’s Health Ministry did not respond to questions.
 