
Jobs in the art market are fearsomely difficult to come by, which is why 
universities and auction houses have launched their own master’s degrees 
concentrating on art as a business, aimed at would-be curators, auctioneers and 
collectors.


These courses give students the chance to study the history of art while 
teaching them about the legal, ethical and financial aspects of working in the 
art world. The one-year MA in art business (£24,900 to home and EU students) at
Sotheby’s Institute of Art 
<http://www.sothebysinstitute.com/london/masters-programs/ma-art-business/> is 
one of the oldest in this field, emphasising practice rather than theory.

We have students who come straight from a first degree. They have to be very 
focused, because the course is intense
Laura Harris, recruitment officer, Christie's Education 
“We aim to give students practical and intellectual tuition, which, hopefully, 
results in their achieving the required level to get employment as soon as 
possible after they graduate,” says Iain Robertson, head of art business at 
Sotheby’s Institute.

Such courses are aimed at career- changers and recent graduates. “We have 
people who have come from running their own business, maybe as a conservator, 
and who want to move to the commercial sector,” says Laura Harris, recruitment 
officer atChristie’s Education 
<https://www.christies.edu/london/courses/masters-art-law-business.aspx>, which 
runs a master’s in art, law and business over 15 months (£36,000). “Then we 
have those who come straight from a first degree. They have to be very focused, 
because the course is intense.”

Both Sotheby’s and Christie’s give students the chance to work on the 
auction-room floor, and some of their graduates move to jobs with the company. 
The courses also include overseas study trips.

A much cheaper option is the one-year course at Glasgow University 
<http://www.gla.ac.uk/postgraduate/taught/artcollectingprovenance/>, the MSc in 
collecting and provenance in an international context (£6,950), that aims to 
combine the serious study of art history with teaching about law and the tricky 
issues of restitution and illegal trafficking. The course starts in autumn.

Another competitively priced degree is the MA from the University of 
Buckingham in the history of collecting and the art market (£7,500 for home and 
EU students) which began in January. It is run with theNational Gallery 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/research/ma-the-art-market-and-the-history-of-collecting>
 in association with Waddesdon Manor, which houses the Rothschild collection. 
“The unique selling point of the course is that it gives access to great dealer 
archives,” says Buckingham’s programme director, Jeremy Howard.

Students will be able to see two of these dealer archives, Agnew’s, acquired 
by the National Gallery in 2014, and Colnaghi’s, housed at Waddesdon Manor. 
Guided by experts, students will receive practical training in how to use and 
analyse these holdings. The MA will investigate American and European art 
markets and cultures of collecting from the Renaissance to the present day. It 
will also include study trips to Paris and Florence. This course complements 
another MA run by Buckingham indecorative arts and historic interiors 
<http://www.buckingham.ac.uk/humanities/ma/decorativearts>.

Learning how the market works
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fpostgraduate-students-masters-courses-art-market-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6bcd26f51b97a12b0e4164f3bfc98955bc48259%2F0_201_960_1239%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learn%20about%20the%20art%20world%20with%20a%20master's%20degree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fpostgraduate-students-masters-courses-art-market-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learn%20about%20the%20art%20world%20with%20a%20master%27s%20degree&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fpostgraduate-students-masters-courses-art-market-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6bcd26f51b97a12b0e4164f3bfc98955bc48259%2F0_201_960_1239%2F960.jpg>
 Christophe Person decided that a qualification in London would give him the 
best exposure to the art market worldwide. Photograph: Magali Delporte/Magali 
Delporte (commissioned) 
Christophe Person had always nurtured a deep interest in art but it took him a 
long time to do something about it. “I really wanted to work in fine art,” he 
says. “I wasn’t sure where I wanted to work, but decided that a qualification 
in London would give me the best exposure to the art market worldwide. I liked 
the idea of taking a degree in English and I wanted a selective course.”

I hoped one day to open an art gallery, but on the course I discovered the art 
market offers a wealth of opportunities
Christophe Person 
That is how he ended up on the 15-month MSc in art, law and business at 
Christie’s with a dozen other students, seeking to learn about art history and 
the art market. Up to that point, he had been employed in finance and banking 
in London and Paris, working for subsidiaries of the major European bank Credit 
Agricole, where he was in charge of investment fund development, and the 
Grameen Credit Agricole Foundation, where he was running fund management for 
development projects and business in Africa and South-East Asia.


He enhanced his employability by gaining a master’s degree in management from 
HEC Paris, the highly rated European business school. He moved to London for a 
while to work for a financial services company, but in the end, his interest in 
art triumphed and he quit his job for a master’s degree at Christie’s Education 
in London, the educational arm of the auction house.

“At the beginning, I hoped one day to open an art gallery myself,” he says. 
“During the course, I discovered that the art market offers a wealth of 
opportunities.” Before undertaking the MSc, Christophe was already advising 
collectors and had made contact with people in Parisian art galleries and 
auction houses. During his course, one of those, the French auction house 
Piasa, offered him a job.

Christophe has been working there since January as director of strategy and 
business development, pursuing his interest in modern art and design. He is 
organising a dedicated auction in June on contemporary art from Africa and the 
African diaspora, which was the subject of his MSc thesis.

The Christie’s course was both useful and interesting, he says. He learned to 
appreciate art for its aesthetic qualities and to understand and analyse works 
of art. He learned about new movements and influences, such as minimalism and 
feminism, and about how cultural and historic contexts influences artists.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> on the master’s were 
taught how the art market works – for example, how important it is to have a 
validating institution where an artist’s work is presented. They also learn 
about how artists’ work is marketed via art galleries, fairs and auction houses.

“I had the chance to understand the interplay between the validation bodies, 
such as the biennales, the critics and the museums, and the market players such 
as the galleries and auction houses,” he says.

His thesis was important to the development of his thinking. In it he argued 
that the evolution of the idea of an “African identity” has changed 
substantially in the past 15 years. African artists have learned techniques 
from the west and applied those to themes such as identity, the environment and 
migration to produce work that is original and compelling.

“I am working on building a network of contacts in Nigeria, Angola and South 
Africa to develop my expertise in modern African art.”


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 