
At a recent event at the South Bank, Kazuo Ishiguro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/16/nocturnes-music-nightfall-kazuo-ishiguro>
 confessed to a packed audience that he didn't really get poetry. I couldn't 
help but nod along with a vague sense of relief and sadness. Relief because I 
felt exactly the same way, and sadness because that wasn't always the case. In 
my late teens and very early 20s I read little but poetry, yet over the 
succeeding 12 years I've only read one collection –WG Sebald's For Years Now 
<http://sebald.wordpress.com/2007/05/02/wg-sebalds-for-years-now/> – in its 
entirety, and that was more a case of completism than appreciation of sparse, 
blank verse. However, just a few weeks ago, a sequence of unrelated events sent 
me seeking out those thin collections gathering dust on the bottom shelves of 
my bookcases, cracking their meagre spines to see what I'd been missing. After 
all those years, I'd begun to get poetry again.

The initial catalyst was Nicholson Baker's new book The Anthologist 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/books/2009/09/write-poetry-interview-book>, a 
novel of deft and quiet beauty. Among many other things, it's a novel about 
poetry, poets and those who read them, and its enthusiasm for verse is utterly 
diverting. In fact if the novel has a real fault – it is an elegant and 
surprisingly emotional book; one of the finest of the year – it's that the 
discussion of poetry is so compelling it runs the risk of sending the reader 
off to discover the poems Baker is describing. I did this only once, for
Elizabeth Bishop's The Fish <http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-fish/>.

Around the same time, the new edition of The Reader <http://thereader.org.uk/> 
arrived. In it Brian Nellist provided a witty and considered argument for the 
reading of poetry. Fine though it was, however, I wasn't quite converted: that 
took a whole day of readings and discussions hosted by Jonathan Cape atFoyles 
<http://www.bookslut.com/independent_bookstore_profile/2003_08_000371.php>.

The day began with Adam Foulds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/10/adam-foulds-the-quickening-maze> 
reading from his Costa prize-winning poemThe Broken Word 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/06/costa-poetry-foulds>. Though his 
voice was bright and lucid I wasn't convinced a narrative poem about the Mau 
Mau uprising was going to change any of my preconceptions. I expected the work 
to be dry, earnest, proficient to the point of tedium, but this was far from 
the case, especially when he read the line: "This Jenkins, half remembered, had 
a tweed moustache." I was unpicked by the readiness and precision of this 
image, which was quickly followed by one of waxed hair so "fastidiously flat / 
it looked like a lick of paint". Something flickered inside me; something 
approaching genuine enjoyment.

This was then ignited during a lively and instructive panel discussion. 
Michael Symmons Roberts <http://www.symmonsroberts.com/> – whose reading was 
perhaps the most engaging of the day – made a strident case for poetry needing 
to be read in an entirely different way from fiction. The dominance of the 
novel and the expectations it has engendered, he argued, have left a large 
readership unable to view a poem with the care, diligence and patience it 
requires. Like music, he went on, poetry gains from repeated experience and it 
has more in common with songs than novels. I appreciate this is hardly breaking 
news, but it did crystallise for me where I'd been going wrong in my approach 
to poetry.

Dave Eggers <http://www.salon.com/books/int/2009/07/16/dave_eggers/> – 
according toNick Hornby's 31 Songs 
<http://www.rocklistmusic.co.uk/steveparker/nick_hornby.htm> – has a theory 
that we listen to certain songs over and over again to "solve" them. Once 
solved, they are pushed out in favour of new tracks to work through. This is 
fine for a three-minute pop ditty you can listen to while jogging or washing 
the car, but if you're going to do the same for a poem, you're going to need a 
lot more time and attention. Which means it's very easy not to bother in the 
first place.

Poetry's image, I think, is its great barrier. Poetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> means hard work, school and possibly 
university, time – what it isn't is the easy option. For this reason it's 
tempting to leave it to those who write it, to those who wish to be known as 
poets. Essentially this is how contemporary poetry has managed to survive into 
the 21st century – it's become a self-sufficient industry that requires no one 
from outside its borders to keep it going.

This insularity can be off-putting, but thanks to these three fortuitous 
events, I've begun to see the point in poetry – in the process rediscovering 
the joys of old favourites (Frank O'Hara <http://www.frankohara.org/>, Auden 
<http://www.eurekastreet.com.au/uploads/image/9/11643.jpg>) and finally reading 
collections I've somehow accumulated over the years (Pascale Petit's The Zoo 
Father <http://pascalepetit.co.uk/index.php?f=data_poetry_collections&a=3>, 
John Stammers's Panoramic Lounge Bar 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/3639047/John-Stammers.html>). I may 
not ultimately get poetry – but finally I'm getting there.
 