
I first read Alan Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/25/life-in-writing-alan-warner>’s 
novel The Sopranos in 1998. I laughed out loud more than I had ever done with a 
novel. What’s remarkable about the book is that Alan captures the amazing life 
force of working-class teenage girls on the rampage without any sense of 
censoriousness. Even though the novel is set in a fictional Scottish seaside 
town, these were the very girls I saw every weekend in the Bigg Market in 
Newcastle. Out together in groups hell-bent on a good time, unafraid of their 
sexuality, determined to ignore all the usual bounds of common decency, they 
were there to be alive, even if it nearly killed them.

The irreverence, the seemingly unassuageable appetites, the absolute pleasure 
in being with each other, in grabbing the night by the horns, seemed to be in a 
long literary tradition that seems more medieval than anything else. There was 
something Rabelasian about the girls’ capacity for alcohol, something 
Chaucerian in their lustiness, yet the characters couldn’t be more modern. 
These were the girls who are constantly pilloried by the purveyors of moral 
panic. Condemned by all sides because they are poor, seemingly “uncultured”, 
common, working class, yet here they were heroes of their own story. It seemed 
perfect material for the stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fbilly-elliott-writer-lee-hall-adapts-alan-warners-the-sopranos-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439827650467%2Fee4f357d-18b7-4ef2-ba92-5db5d64c7112-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lee%20Hall%3A%20Why%20I%20put%20Alan%20Warner's%20The%20Sopranos%20on%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fbilly-elliott-writer-lee-hall-adapts-alan-warners-the-sopranos-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lee%20Hall%3A%20Why%20I%20put%20Alan%20Warner%27s%20The%20Sopranos%20on%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fbilly-elliott-writer-lee-hall-adapts-alan-warners-the-sopranos-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F17%2F1439827650467%2Fee4f357d-18b7-4ef2-ba92-5db5d64c7112-680x1020.jpeg>
 Lee Hall. Photograph: Matt Lloyd/Rex Shutterstock 
The book charts the course of a single day in the life of six Catholic 
schoolgirls, all members of the choir of Our Lady of Perpetual Succour. They 
leave their small seaside town to compete in a choir competition in Edinburgh, 
but are more interested in “going mental” than in winning. Indeed, the real 
excitement is getting back to visit the Mantrap club before the slow dances, so 
they can cop off with the submariners who are anchored in the bay.

The book is breathtakingly rude. The girls end up in all sorts of scrapes. We 
follow them for 24 hours: one discovers she has cancer, another comes out, 
another reveals she’s pregnant, they all drink Soviet quantities of alcohol, 
ingest home-brewed magic mushroom lager and sleep with totally inappropriate 
strangers, yet never feel like victims of their circumstance. No matter how 
wildly dangerous their adventures become, somehow they miraculously get 
through. It is, to quote the novel itself, a poem to their youth.

I’d long wished to adapt the book, then about eight years ago I met Vicky 
Featherstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/08/vicky-featherstone-interview-royal-court>
, the founding director of the National Theatre of Scotland, at the Evening 
Standard awards. She was there for Black Watch and I for The Pitmen Painters. I 
rather drunkenly berated her for not having already adapted the novel, but she 
put me in my place, explaining it was one of the first things she’d tried to do 
but there were complications with the rights. We spent the rest of the evening 
talking about how much we loved the novel and Vicky left determined to sort out 
the rights issue and persuade Warner to let us do it.

It took several years to unlock everything – which turned out to be a 
blessing. Meditating more on the book, I realised that what at first might seem 
a picaresque, humorously wallowing in the squalor, was in fact its opposite. 
Really it was about ritual, about how the everyday can be transformed, about 
how transgression can transfigure us. I think we’ve all been through those 
rites of passage at the end of exams or on school trips where the rules of 
ordinary life are deemed insufficient to contain our youth, our energy, our 
life force. These are moments where we dice with death to show we are alive. We 
act with total irresponsibility to prove we are grown up. We do it together to 
feel uniquely individual. We know this isn’t contradictory. This is how life is 
and we are all compelled to do it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fbilly-elliott-writer-lee-hall-adapts-alan-warners-the-sopranos-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439888608124%2F63eeb8c2-0cd5-40e8-8092-c987a748afbb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lee%20Hall%3A%20Why%20I%20put%20Alan%20Warner's%20The%20Sopranos%20on%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fbilly-elliott-writer-lee-hall-adapts-alan-warners-the-sopranos-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lee%20Hall%3A%20Why%20I%20put%20Alan%20Warner%27s%20The%20Sopranos%20on%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F17%2Fbilly-elliott-writer-lee-hall-adapts-alan-warners-the-sopranos-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439888608124%2F63eeb8c2-0cd5-40e8-8092-c987a748afbb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A strange gig … Our Ladies of Perpetual Succour. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for 
the Guardian 
So despite the seeming degradation of their day, there is something deeply 
spiritual about their heedless journey into night. The story seems to be about 
how we all seek deliverance from the tawdriness of our lives. That the very 
limitations of our existence are grounds for their transcendence. We are all 
blessed and special. That the pregnant schoolgirl on the council estate with no 
hope in their future is as vital, intelligent, creative and magnificent as any 
of us.

Vicky and I have worked with six extraordinary young Scottish actors along 
with Martin Lowe, the Tony-winning musical director, to create a show. It’s not 
a “play” exactly. It’s certainly not a musical. It’s probably more like a gig 
than anything else. But it’s a strange gig, where Bach and Bartók sit side by 
side with the Brookside theme tune and ELO. The girls play all of the 50 or so 
characters themselves.

It became clear very early in the process that the show needed not only to be 
told from the girls’ point of view, but that the actors needed to own this 
space, and it has been thrilling to see them make the piece their own. So in 
many ways, the long process has gone full circle, and Alan’s tale has quite 
rightly returned into the often foul mouths of young women from Scotland. Their 
vigour, wit and fearlessness are a rebuke to any who might overlook their power.

• Our Ladies of Perpetual Succour is at the Traverse 
<http://www.traverse.co.uk/whats-on/event-detail/614/our-ladies-of-perpetual-succour.aspx>
, Edinburgh, until 30 August. Box office: 0131-228 1404.The production then 
tours Scotland and goes to Live theatre, Newcastle 
<http://www.nationaltheatrescotland.com>.
 