
I'm watching Billy Elliot the Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/may/12/theatre1> in a state of shock. 
Forget the movie – this is incendiary drama, militant to its core. Not only 
does it open with Labour MP Herbert Morrison's paean to the newly nationalised 
mines and common ownership ("Now I want you men of the pits to come through ... 
The great experiment of socialism in a democracy depends on you"),it also 
pre-empts the passing of Margaret Thatcher with a feelgood singalong 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HCAtNrK2G-g>: "We all sing together in one 
breath/ Merry Christmas Maggie Thatcher/ We all celebrate today/ 'Cause it's 
one day closer to your death."

The astonishing thing is that the musical, with tunes provided by the not 
notably radicalElton John <https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john>, has 
been a worldwide success, and has played at London's Victoria Palace for nine 
years. Thirty years on from the miners' strike, on a quiet afternoon in the 
theatre bar, writerLee Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lee-hall> is 
recalling the pressure to remove the song from the show after the former PM 
died. "I was on holiday when she snuffed it. I was on the beach and some geezer 
came along and said, 'There's a call from London!' Somehow the producers had 
tracked me down. They were asking permission to cut the Thatcher's Dead song 
out of 'respect'. I refused, as did directorStephen Daldry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-daldry>, but in our absence they 
tried to force the cast not to do it. The cast rebelled and stopped the show 
and put it to the vote. Only three people voted against playing it and they 
walked out – the other 1,500 people sang along. Democracy in action." He enjoys 
that story.

Hall, 47, grew up in the ship-building heart of Tyneside. Although his father 
was a self-employed carpet cleaner (until he had a heart attack at 40), he was 
still affected by Thatcher's assault on the miners. "Quite often in that strike 
year, if Dad had a job in, say, Yorkshire, he would be turned back because 
they'd hear the Geordie accent and think he was a flying picket."

Hall was a clever boy from a working-class family. His parents didn't 
understand why he would want to go to university, let alone Cambridge. Nor did 
they understand why, with all those brains, he was desperate to be a writer 
rather than an accountant – just as Billy's family couldn't cope with the idea 
of him being a ballet dancer.

Back then, in the early 1980s, he was involved with local theatre, updating 
Brecht'sFear and Misery of the Third Reich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2008/may/26/dontbashbrecht> for 
Thatcherite times. "The job description of the youth leader at the theatre was 
to politicise young people. It's unthinkable now!" He didn't have a clue how 
artistically rich Tyneside was then. It was only when he went to Cambridge 
university and saw how stultifying the arts were there that he realised he'd 
been at the hub of something truly invigorating. "Theatre was a place of 
resistance and criticism in the north-east as well as celebration. But the 
general hegenomy tells you the palaces of culture are elsewhere."

After university, he went to the US. "I wanted to write some big political 
play and I thought I'd hang out in New York. It wasn't until I'd failed to 
write the big important play that I started thinking about my childhood." When 
he returned to Newcastlea few years later, his father drove him through the old 
pit villages. He knew that the mines had closed, but what shocked him was that 
nearly every sign of the old way of life had disappeared. "The slag heaps were 
grassed over, the winding gears were nowhere to be seen, and when we spoke to 
people they said, 'Oh, that was the first thing they did.' There was a cultural 
cleansing of the entire area. They made it impossible for the industry to be 
brought back."

For Hall, this was not economic necessity, but a political vendetta. "It's 
much bigger than simply crushing unions. Fundamentally, this was the state 
smashing up a state-held resource. And now there are no mines in the north 
east, there's a big pile of coal on the Tyne that they bring in from Ukraine." 
He tuts at the irony. "It seems that everything Scargill said, he nailed. It's 
all come to pass."

The Billy Elliot movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/84830/billy.elliot> was released in 
2000 and nominated for three Oscars. When Elton John suggested a musical, Hall 
thought it was a terrible idea. "I eschewed musicals because they came from this
Andrew Lloyd Webber <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber>, 
middle-of-the-road shit." Then they talked about it some more and he was won 
over. Has Scargill seen the musical? He beams. "Yes. We sent someone into the 
audience to grab him and bring him backstage because we all wanted to meet him. 
So we all got our photos taken with Arthur. I was a bit nervous and he was a 
bit fazed because he wasn't coming to do a royal visit, he was just there to 
have a good night out with his granddaughter."

Does Hall regard Scargill as a hero? "Well, yeah! My dad hated Arthur Scargill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arthur-scargill> and he got a bad press 
in our house. But when I saw these old interviews with him talking about 
culture … there's a brilliant bit at the start of Tony Harrison's poem V, where 
he quotes Scargill as saying, 'My dad read the dictionary every day, and 
language is power.' He understood the industrial struggle was also a cultural 
struggle. That made a lot of a sense, and it explained why they wanted to 
crush him."

Hall, who lives in London and is married to the film director Beeban Kidron 
(now people's peer Baronness Kidron), says he would happily renationalise 
Britain's privatised industries. "The notion that the market could run things 
for values that are not just about profit seems ludicrous. I see this period as 
being akin to the enclosures in agriculture in the 1790s."

What about those who would say it's OK for you: you got away from a punishing 
way of life and now you're romanticising it? "Yeah, completely. I am a rich man 
because I write about poor people. But I don't think that's right." Nor, he 
says, does it lessen the need to write about the pits. "The lie we've been told 
is that our history is individual and you scrabble up the greasy pole pushing 
everybody down. But actually, value is created between people collectively. 
That's why culture is important – and representing communities that aren't 
represented as much as they were seems an important thing to me."
 Billy Elliot the Musical. Photograph: Gary Hershorn/Reuters 
After the success of Billy Elliot, he worked on movies in America and hated 
it. Even when he was working on subjects he cared about, the outcome was 
disastrous. Not least the film of War Horse, which he adapted forSteven 
Spielberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg>. He tells me of 
the time Spielberg rang to congratulate him because the project had been 
greenlit.

"He said, 'I'm going to call you at seven o'clock tomorrow and we'll talk 
about the next step. It's just a brilliant piece of work.'" So I get the bottle 
of chablis, get the cigarette on. Ten to seven, the phone rings. I pick it up 
and its, 'Hi, this is Cathy.' She's his producer and I go, 'Hi Cathy. Great 
news, hey?' She goes, 'Yeah, you've just done a wonderful job.' And as soon as 
they say 'You've done a wonderful job', it means you're fired."

Hall's version was rewritten by Richard Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis>, who was then also 
rewritten. "When I saw what they did with War Horse, I was like, 'Fucking 
hell!' I can't believe the morass of shit they poured down the funnel. The film 
is just unspeakable." Has it got his name on it? "Yeah." He laughs throatily.

He has since cut his links with America. In 2008, he wrote another play about 
miners, The Pitmen Painters, which examined the lives of miners who became 
feted artists. In a way, Hall says, this was about Billy Elliot's grandparents 
in the 1930s. "The trade union movement had broadened out to explore things 
like workers' education and culture." While Billy had to leave to become who he 
wanted to be, the pitmen painters were enriching their lives and their 
communities with art. "They did not have to become middle class to 
be fulfilled."

In 2012, he updated Alan Plater's musical Close the Coalhouse Door, an 
adaptation of miner Sid Chaplin's stories. He is now writing a play about the 
former England fast bowlerHarold Larwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/jul/07/harold-larwood-ashes-mike-selvey>
, who started out as a miner. And there's an adaptation of George Orwell'sDown 
and Out in Paris and London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/feb/09/real-george-orwell-down-out-review>
; and a screenplay about Queen Victoria and her Muslim manservant. But it's not 
all coal and class consciousness. "Bizarrely, I've done the life story of Elton 
John." Blimey, I say, who's playing Elton? "Tom Hardy. You needed someone with 
a bit of chops. Elton's a bit of a bulldog in real life." Physically? 
"Physically and emotionally."

As we leave the theatre, I ask if the Victoria Palace has become his 
theatrical home. God no, he says. "My theatrical home will always be Newcastle."

But make no mistake, he is proud of what he has achieved here with Billy 
Elliot. "I think it's really important I made a piece of populist theatre that 
still had politics and heart. I much prefer this to the film. It's 
more political and it's got much more heart."

• Billy Elliot the Musical is at the Victoria Palace theatre, London SW1 (0844 
248 5000).
 