
Lego’s vice-chairman has called his company’s refusal to sell its bricks to 
Chinese artist and activistAi Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> an “internal mistake”.

Kjeld Kirk Kristiansen, the grandson of the founder, told the Wall Street 
Journal 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2016/04/28/lego-admits-it-was-a-mistake-refusing-ai-weiwei-bricks-for-art-exhibition/>
 that the company’s decision last year todecline a bulk order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/24/artist-ai-weiwei-banned-by-lego-to-build-artwork-australian-exhibition>
 made on behalf of the artist, on the grounds that supporting his Melbourne 
exhibition would contravene “corporate policy”, was made by a very low-level 
employee.

Ai Weiwei interview: 'In human history, there's never been a moment like this'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/10/ai-weiwei-interview-in-human-history-theres-never-been-a-moment-like-this>
“It was an internal mistake,” Kristiansen said, adding that Lego’s board was 
not involved, and that the decision had been made by an employee from the 
consumer service department who misinterpreted the company policy of political 
neutrality.

After Lego’s initial refusal, Ai retaliated by reposting the company’s letter 
onInstagram <https://www.instagram.com/p/9PJl_XqDyX/> with a photo of a toilet 
bowl clogged with the toy bricks. He wrote that the Danish company’s refusal to 
sell its product was “an act of censorship and discrimination”.

He then received millions of donated Lego pieces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/25/ai-weiwei-swamped-by-lego-donation-offers-after-ban-on-use-for-political-artwork>
 from supporters around the world.

In an interview with The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/10/ai-weiwei-interview-in-human-history-theres-never-been-a-moment-like-this>
 he compared big companies like Lego to his traditional sparring partner, the 
Chinese Communist party. They had the “same kind of bureaucracy, same kind of 
ignorance” and found it difficult to “change their line”, even when mistakes 
have been made, he said.

“They have to stand by them because losing even one piece can collapse the 
whole structure,” Ai said.

Kristiansen denied the refusal was influenced by commercial considerations in 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and said freedom of expression 
was important to the company.

His son and successor, Thomas Kirk Kristiansen, said maintaining political 
neutrality remained a core value of the company, but admitted that refusing the 
artist’s request could also be interpreted as taking a political position.

An error had been made, he agreed: “It is a typical example of what can go 
wrong in a big company.”

In January Lego dropped its restrictions on bulk orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/13/lego-bulk-orders-change-ai-weiwei-storm>
, saying it would stop asking people why they wanted its bricks. Customers 
wanting to build public displays out of Lego bricks would now only have to make 
clear that the company does not endorse the project.


Ai told the Wall Street Journal he welcomed Lego’s about-face, but added: 
“They recognised it a bit too late.”
 