
GNM Australia Pty Limited is pleased to announce the appointment of Lenore 
Taylor, editor, Guardian Australia to the GNM Australia Board. Lenore joins 
current GNM Australia Board members; Ian McClelland, managing director, 
Guardian Australia, Matt Connor, finance director, Guardian Australia and 
Richard Kerr, chief financial officer, Guardian Media Group (GMG).


GNM Australia Pty Limited is also currently seeking two Board Members for its 
newly established Advisory Board. The Advisory Board will have no fiduciary 
obligations, but will advise the GNM Australia Board on a variety of specialist 
matters.See here 
<https://gnm.taleo.net/careersection/ex/jobdetail.ftl?job=SYD00003B> to view 
the positions available.

GNM Australia Pty Limited is a subsidiary of GNM Limited, part of Guardian 
Media Group and owned by The Scott Trust. GNM Australia Pty Limited is the 
Australian entity ofthe Guardian/ Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/au>. Profits generated by GNM Australia Pty 
Limited are reinvested to sustain journalism that is free from commercial or 
political interference.

For more information please contact:

Guardian Australia press office: katie.haffner@theguardian.com 
<mailto:katie.haffner@theguardian.com> or +61 403 357 831 <>.

About Guardian Australia

Launched in 2013, Guardian Australia is a premium digital news brand in 
Australia, with a total reach of 2.9m unique audiences each month (Nielsen, 
July 2016). We engage our audience with up-to-the-minute reporting, 
investigations, commentary, blogging, in-depth analysis, cutting-edge data 
visualisation and humour. Our team is committed to open journalism and 
supporting a diverse range of voices in Australia. Guardian Australia now 
offers national news coverage and has expanded to five offices/bureaus located 
in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Canberra and Darwin.
 