
Making a political statement at the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> podium appears to have come back into 
fashion, after Leonardo DiCaprio’s Oscar-acceptance speech exhorting action 
over climate change led a string of wide-ranging statements at the 2016 
ceremony – even if the expected controversy over Hollywood diversity was more 
muted than had been anticipated.

The campaigning period, which had officially been kicked off by the 
nominations announcement on 14 January, had been dominated by talk of boycotts 
over the film industry’s diversity issues, and the associated #OscarsSoWhite 
hashtag. High profile figures such as Will and Jada Pinkett Smith chose to stay 
away, while up-and-coming directors Ava DuVernay and Ryan Coogler opted to 
attend a benefit even for the#JusticeForFlint 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/JusticeForFlint?src=hash> campaign, over the water 
contamination crisis in Flint, Michigan. Oscars host Chris Rock tackled the 
issue with a stream of gags, but the combative mood was blunted by the
appearance of Fox News commentator Stacey Dash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/stacey-dash-shock-oscars-appearance-race-message>
 – a high profile critic of Black History Month – and a less-than-incendiary 
speechfrom musician Quincy Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/quincy-jones-avoids-oscars-so-white-controversy-in-academy-awards-speech>
.

In the event, however, DiCaprio’s intervention proved the most hard-hitting 
statement on the night.After being named as the winner of the best actor Oscar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/leonardo-dicaprio-wins-best-actor-oscar-for-the-revenant>
, DiCaprio said: “Making The Revenant was about man’s relationship to the 
natural world. A world that we collectively felt in 2015 as the hottest year in 
recorded history. Our production needed to move to the southern tip of this 
planet just to be able to find snow.”

DiCaprio, a committed environmental activist with a long record of backing 
campaigns added: “Climate change is real, it is happening right now. It is the 
most urgent threat facing our entire species, and we need to work collectively 
together and stop procrastinating. We need to support leaders around the world 
who do not speak for the big polluters, but who speak for all of humanity, for 
the indigenous people of the world, for the billions and billions of 
underprivileged people out there who would be most affected by this. For our 
children’s children, and for those people out there whose voices have been 
drowned out by the politics of greed ... Let us not take this planet for 
granted. I do not take tonight for granted.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Rock%20tackles%20Oscars%20diversity%20row%20head%20on%20during%20opening%20monologue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Rock%20tackles%20Oscars%20diversity%20row%20head%20on%20during%20opening%20monologue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video&media=>
Chris Rock tackles Oscars diversity row head on during opening monologue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/29/chris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video>
DiCaprio’s sentiments were echoed by Jenny Beavan, winner of the best costume 
design Oscar forMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, who said on receiving her 
award: “It could be horribly prophetic, Mad Max – if we’re not kinder to each 
other, and if we don’t stop polluting our atmosphere ... it could happen.”

The producers of another of the evening’s high-profile pictures, Spotlight, 
also issued a call to arms designed to resonate beyond the Oscars. Spotlight 
dealt with clerical sex abuse in Boston, and the institutional cover-up that 
followed to protect the Catholic church.After the film won the best picture 
award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/spotlight-wins-best-picture-oscar>
, one of Spotlight’s producers, Michael Sugar, called on the church hierarchy 
to listen to its message. He said: “This film gave a voice to survivors, and 
this Oscar amplifies that voice, which we hope will become a choir that will 
resonate all the way to the Vatican ... Pope Francis, it’s time to protect the 
children and restore the faith.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Flady-gaga-performs-with-sexual-assault-survivors-during-the-oscars-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lady%20Gaga%20performs%20with%20sexual%20assault%20survivors%20during%20the%20Oscars%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Flady-gaga-performs-with-sexual-assault-survivors-during-the-oscars-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lady%20Gaga%20performs%20with%20sexual%20assault%20survivors%20during%20the%20Oscars%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Flady-gaga-performs-with-sexual-assault-survivors-during-the-oscars-video&media=>
Lady Gaga performs with sexual assault survivors during the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/feb/29/lady-gaga-performs-with-sexual-assault-survivors-during-the-oscars-video>
An invitation to vice-president Joe Biden to introduce Lady Gaga’s performance 
of her Oscar-nominated song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/lady-gaga-performs-with-survivors-of-sexual-assault-oscars-2016-joe-biden>
 Til It Happens to You from the campus-rape documentary The Hunting Ground was 
a clear cue for a statement, and Biden told the Oscar audience: “Too many men 
and women around the country ... are still victims of sexual abuse.” He also 
asked his audience to “take the pledge that they “will intervene in situations 
where consent has not or cannot be given.” During Gaga’s impassioned 
performance, she was joined a group of sexual abuse survivors, with phrases 
such as “survivor” and “not your fault” written on their forearms.

However, Sam Smith’s attempt to take a stand for the LGBT community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/sam-smith-i-want-to-dedicate-my-oscar-to-the-lgbt-community>
 appeared to backfire, after he won the Oscar for best song for Spectre’s 
Writing’s on the Wall.Referencing a Guardian article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/25/ian-mckellen-why-no-openly-gay-man-oscar-diversity-homophobia>
, he said: “I read an article a few months ago by Sir Ian McKellen and he said 
no openly gay man had won an Oscar ... If this is the case, I want to dedicate 
this to the LGBT community around the world. I stand here tonight as a proud 
gay man and I hope that we can all stand as equals one day.” However, McKellen 
had been specifically referring to the best actor Oscar, and Smith’s remark’s 
provoked something of a furore – not least from Dustin Lance Black, who won 
best original screenplay in 2009 for Milk.Black, who is engaged to Olympic 
diver Tom Daley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/dustin-lance-black-sam-smith-oscars-faux-pas-gay-winners>
, posted a withering Tweet, writing: “If you have no idea who I am, it may be 
time to stop texting my fiancé”.

But the most baffling statement of all was the lack of appreciation for Jenny 
Beavan’s best costume design win. In agesture normally reserved for 
controversial figures such as Elia Kazan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YziNNCZeNs>, several members of the audience 
– including best director winner Alejandro González Iñárritu – conspicuously 
sat immobile as she walked up to receive her award; although Iñárritu can be 
seen half-heartedly joining in the applause as she reaches the podium.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEWeSz1-4Ki4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEWeSz1-4Ki4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEWeSz1-4Ki4&media=>
Whether it’s a case of simple apathy, or sexism as many have claimed 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2016/02/28/oscars-2016-jenny-beavan_n_9345016.html>
, or something more concerted, we may never know.
 