
"When I first started playing I thought Les Paul was just the name of the 
guitar. I feel like an idiot admitting that, but it's the truth. Then my 
grandmother said: 'Well, he was this great jazz guitarist.', and I was like, 
'Yeah, yeah, whatever.' It wasn't until much later that I was turned on to Les 
Paul the musician. About five years into my playing I was listening to 
everything, and some of the guys I was into were intoLes Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/les-paul>, so I looked him up on a Mary Ford 
record. It wasn't necessarily my style but I was blown away because a lot of 
his techniques are stuff we now use all the time: the muting, the fast picking. 
It was really innovative, especially for the time.

"Then I started to get an understanding of his innovations in recording 
technique â€“ the fact that he invented all the things that Jeff Beck and Jimmy 
Page were using that were so great. After that he took on this whole broader 
presence in my mind as an innovative guy, a tinkerer, who gave us so many 
different things.

"The first time I met him was in the early 90s at Fat Tuesday's club in New 
York. He invited me up on stage, and he wiped the place up with me! It was a 
humiliating, humbling experience. It inspired me to jam a lot with people who 
were better than me so I could get better.

"I jammed with Les a whole bunch of times, and I always used it as a barometer 
of how good I was getting. or how much better I'd gotten since the last time 
I'd played with him. That went on for years. I jammed with him at the Rock and 
Roll Hall of Fame tribute concert in 2008. He was 94, and it was just 
mind-blowing.

"For some reason he took a liking to me and was always really friendly and 
supportive and enthusiastic, to the point where we talked on the phone a lot. I 
was always in awe of him, very humbled in his presence, even on the phone. He 
had a fantastic wit and a great mind, great energy and a unique spirit. The guy 
was non-stop, really a tour de force. It's guys like Les who make guys like me 
optimistic about playing into the grave. As long as you have that passion, you 
never have to worry about having to put it down or give it up."

Key recording: The New Sound (Capitol, 1950)
 