
In the wake of the second world war, the US embarked on a construction frenzy 
that began decimating the country’s existing urban fabric. The federal 
government encouraged much of this Make-America-Shiny-Again activity through 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Many people, however, 
were concerned with the onslaught of destruction, and rightfully so.


In response, in 1966 Lyndon B. Johnson signed the National Historic 
Preservation Act (NHPA) in to law. The act attempted to keep federal agencies 
in check and ensure that they considered the impact of their actions on 
historic properties, including archaeological sites. This year the NHPA turned 
50, and as 2016 comes to a close, I thought this tiny piece of legislation, 
what I often think of as archaeology’s best kept secret, should be recognized 
and celebrated.


Ramesses II, victor of Kadesh: a kindred spirit of Trump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/05/ramesses-ii-victor-of-kadesh-a-kindred-spirit-of-trump>
One result of the NHPA that is probably the most familiar to the general 
public remains the National Register of Historic Places, a special designation 
that identifies the most important historic and cultural properties in the US. 
Although the National Register includes more than buildings, most people 
associate the register with an old Victorian house or the mid-century mod 
commercial building on main-street.

Today the National Register includes thousands of archaeological sites, such 
as the recently listedBent’s New Fort 
<https://www.nps.gov/safe/learn/historyculture/bents-new-fort.htm>, a 
mid-nineteenth-century trading post on the Colorado frontier that welcomed 
migrating easterners just before they crossed the Rocky Mountains, and 
unfortunately was also the point of departure for brutal military actions 
against American Indians. The story of the site didn’t end with the Army 
abandoning the fort. Its latest chapter is the story of how a ranching family 
on the eastern plains have been diligent stewards for the last century, and 
this year had the property listed to the National Register.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Flets-celebrate-us-archaeologys-best-kept-secret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a2fe2f36c5b0f2b412fcc8d9a3b26a751caddc%2F0_0_750_563%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let's%20celebrate%20US%20archaeology's%20best%20kept%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Flets-celebrate-us-archaeologys-best-kept-secret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%27s%20celebrate%20US%20archaeology%27s%20best%20kept%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Flets-celebrate-us-archaeologys-best-kept-secret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a2fe2f36c5b0f2b412fcc8d9a3b26a751caddc%2F0_0_750_563%2F750.jpg>
 USGS aerial photograph of Bent’s Fort, a mid-nineteenth-century trading post 
on the Colorado frontier. Photograph: Source: Santa Fe Trail Research, St. John 
Kansas. 
Unbeknownst to most of the general public, the bulk of the NHPA encourages 
federal agencies to consider the impact of their actions on historic resources 
like archaeological sites. These activities usually happen behind the scenes of 
a larger project, and are not the focus of projects themselves. While done for 
the public benefit, the public has little to no idea that these activities even 
occur. However, these types of activities account for 90% of the archaeological 
investigations done in the US today.

Archaeology sheds light on Mongolia’s uncertain nomadic future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/07/archaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future>
Initially, archaeology was a tough fit for the nascent law. It was a bit of an 
after-thought and the inclusion of archaeological sites into the framework of 
the National Register left many archaeologists of the era worrying that it may 
in fact hamper protection efforts. Despite this concern from the professional 
and scientific communities, the NHPA completely re-shaped the discipline. By 
the 1970s, an entire contracting industry was born, complete with private 
archaeological firms who today employ thousands of field technicians for 
evaluating and identifying sites. In addition, federal agencies need 
archaeologists to help them negotiate the process set forth in the legislation, 
and other entities such as State and Tribal Historic Preservation Offices were 
created to assist federal agencies in those endeavors.

The NHPA is not regulatory, like some US environmental laws. There is no 
over-arching agency that can dictate what will and will not occur with a 
historic property or archaeological site. There are standards and guidelines 
set forth by the Secretary of the Interior that provides a framework for 
identifying whether something that is at least 50 years old is significant: is 
the property associated with an important event or person in our history, is 
the building or structure architecturally notable, or can the site provide data 
to answer important questions about our past? This last criteria, D for Data, 
can be a catch-all for archaeological sites, but an archaeological site can 
also be significant under the other three criteria as well. Once it’s 
established that a site has significance, it is evaluated for seven different 
aspects of integrity, meaning can the site still convey the reasons why it is 
significant. This is all decided through field work, research, and active 
discussion between various participants in a project.

 Therein lies the beauty of the NHPA.

 All the stakeholders- the federal agency, a project proponent, the historic 
preservation officers, local governments, historical societies, your grandma’s 
knitting club- everyone has a seat at the table, and decide the meaning of a 
site. What are the effects of the proposed project? How can we avoid that 
archaeological site? What should we do if we can’t avoid that site? It all 
comes out in dialogue, in formal letters, in drafted agreements. The criteria 
and standards laid out by the Secretary of the Interior serves as a guideline 
to determine what is important to save and why, but not how. That ends up being 
a group project, and can have amazing results.

Mostly dead: what archaeology reveals about death and resurrection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/09/mostly-dead-what-happens-when-death-is-just-a-temporary-setback>
A great example is PO-29 <http://newsouthassoc.com/?page_id=1643>, a 
pre-Columbian site in Puerto Rico that was lying in the footprint of a proposed 
dam. In 2007 work commenced on the site, and the excavations revealed a 
spectacular ball court with petroglyph-carved walls. In addition, the 
archaeologists identified human burials and artifacts that brought to life a 
ceremonial center of a chiefdom that had existed nearly 1200 years ago. 
Fortunately, plans for the dam were adjusted to preserve the site for the 
benefit of the citizens of Puerto Rico.

The National Historic Preservation Act is the single most important piece of 
legislation protecting archaeological sites in the US. It is also the least 
known and the least understood. In part this is because the legislation focuses 
on federal properties, so the successes of the legislation are not always 
apparent. The other reason the NHPA is so misunderstood is that the legislation 
is just boring. It’s difficult to make a bureaucratic process sexy, no matter 
how many fun acronyms are thrown around. But this legislation has saved 
countless numbers of archaeological sites in the last five decades, provided 
scientists with valuable data regarding the past, and provided fodder for our 
imaginations. I for one would like to tip my glass to the NHPA: here’s to 
another 50 years.
 