
This coming August, Richard Reid <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Reid> 
turns 40. Astonishingly, it's now more than 12 years since Reid, presently an 
inmate of the "supermax" prison in Colorado, tried to detonate a shoe bomb on a 
flight from Paris to Miami, ushering in the era of compulsory footwear checks 
at all American airports. For the youngest air travellers, these edgy 
anti-terror rules (see also, most obviously, the ban on large containers of 
liquids in hand luggage) are how flying has always been. Yet it's increasingly 
commonplace to hear specialists arguing that the crackdown hasn't made us any 
safer. More people have almost certainly died in car crashes since 9/11, as a 
result of being put off flying by the attacks of that day, than died on 9/11 
itself. "We have made air travel an unending nightmare, [creating] a security 
system that is brittle where it needs to be supple,"wrote a regretful Kip Hawley
 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303815404577335783535660546.html>
, former head of the much-despised US Transportation Security Administration, a 
few months ago. Each new ban on a given item, he pointed out, merely "gives 
terrorists a complete list of what not to use in their next attack".

There are all sorts of political reasons for this mess. But the deeper 
explanation, the security expert Bruce Schneier <http://www.schneier.com/> 
argues, is that we confuse thefeeling of security with the reality of reducing 
risk. The "security theatre" of modern airports makes us feel better, without 
making us more secure. Indeed, it arguably makes us less secure, swallowing up 
resources that might otherwise be spent on more effective measures, and making 
airport staff, focused on finding oversized bottles of shower gel, less alert 
to genuinely suspicious behaviour. "Security is both a feeling and a reality," 
as Schneier has put it, "and they're not the same."

But this desire for a feeling of security doesn't only lure us into 
irrationality when it comes to air travel: it lures us into irrationality all 
the time. We live, we're constantly being reminded, in highly insecure times; 
huge swathes of our personal lives and our politics, in response to everything 
from the eurozone crisis to climate change, are directed by the quest to feel 
secure. But those responses, all too often, are counterproductive. Afraid of 
physical dangers, people move to gated communities, thereby undermining 
community cohesion and increasing the potential for more danger. Climate 
denial, one might similarly argue, is a way not to feel terrified about the 
fate of the environment, yet makes things worse – though the same might be said 
for giving up plastic shopping bags, then imagining you've "done your bit", and 
need do no more. The quest to feel secure helps explain the political appeal of 
"austerity" economics: tightening the purse strings can feel like the safe and 
cautious path. And it is why, as liberals ought to acknowledge, the National 
Rifle Association'srecent call for armed guards in all American schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/21/nra-newtown-armed-guards-schools>
 will strike many gun-rights advocates as perfectly reasonable. Guns do make 
many people feel more secure. They just don't make them safer in reality.

Part of the explanation for this puzzle lies in the "cognitive biases" with 
which natural selection has endowed us – ways of thinking that made sense for 
prehistoric humans, but that don't make sense today. Take the so-called 
"availability bias", which describes our tendency to be more scared of threats 
we can vividly bring to mind (like terrorist attacks) than those we can't (like 
heart disease, or road accidents). Long ago, such a bias might have been a 
sensible mental shortcut: if you could picture a certain threat vividly, that 
was probably because it had occurred a few yards from you, in the place where 
you lived, and fairly recently. Being especially alert to such threats was 
wise. These days, that's no longer the case. Seeing a television news report 
about a terror attack on foreign soil, you might abandon plans for an overseas 
holiday, in order to hold on to your feeling of safety – when in truth,spending 
too much time on the sofa 
<http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/17/get-up-get-out-dont-sit/> watching TV 
might pose a far greater threat to your life.

Three very different books published last year might help us rethink our 
troubled relationship to insecurity. InAgainst Security 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/9840.html>, the New York University 
sociologist Harvey Molotch focuses on "airports, subways, and other sites of 
ambiguous danger," arguing that in the long run, treating strangers with more 
kindness and less suspicion, rather than assuming the worst of every traveller, 
would actually increase security. Nassim Taleb, in his exasperating but 
compelling bookAntifragile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/16/antifragile-nassim-nicholas-taleb-review>
, praises "things that gain from disorder" – people, policies and institutions 
designed to thrive on volatility, instead of shattering in the encounter with 
it. (That the misanthropic Taleb seems to demonstrate increasing fragility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/24/nassim-taleb-antifragile-finance-interview>
 whenbeing interviewed by journalists  
<http://chronicle.com/article/This-Is-Not-a-Profile-of/136257/>is curious, but 
hardly undermines his point.) And inDaring Greatly, Brené Brown 
<http://www.brenebrown.com/>, a professor of social work who specialises in the 
psychology of vulnerability, considers the many ways in which "the courage to 
be vulnerable" is a precondition for fulfilling relationships, good parenting, 
conflict resolution and creative expression. "The truth that many people never 
understand," as Thomas Merton wrote in his autobiography,The Seven Storey 
Mountain <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Seven_Storey_Mountain>, "is that the 
more you try to avoid suffering, the more you suffer, because smaller and more 
insignificant things begin to trouble you, in proportion to your fear of being 
hurt."

As Merton's words indicate, the real problem with the quest for security is 
more than a matter of out-of-date cognitive biases. Rather, it's the ancient 
truth brilliantly expressed by the guru/philosopher/jester Alan Watts, in his 
1951 book The Wisdom of Insecurity 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Wisdom-Insecurity-Alan-Watts/dp/0394704681>: the 
search for a feeling of security is what causes the feeling of insecurity in 
the first place. The essence of life is flux and impermanence, and "if I want 
to be secure, that is, protected from the flux of life, I am wanting to be 
separate from life," he wrote. "Yet it is this very sense of separateness which 
makes me feel insecure… in other words, the more security I can get, the more I 
shall want."

It would be easy to interpret this as appallingly glib. "Embrace insecurity," 
after all, sounds like exactly the sort of message that the chancellor of the 
exchequer might find cynically helpful to inculcate in a society facing ever 
more precarious circumstances. Were he still around, though, Watts would 
presumably say that this misses the point. Our woes have their roots in 
security-chasing to begin with: politicians wanting to feel safe, bankers 
wanting to feel safe, voters wanting to feel safe. And truly to embrace 
insecurity wouldn't mean resignation in the face of social or economic 
inequity; it would simply entail the recognition that chasing the feeling of 
security isn't the way to solve them. Insecurity is the only condition in which 
any change – the good stuff as well as the bad – can happen. "To put it still 
more plainly," wrote Watts, "the desire for security and the feeling of 
insecurity are the same thing." Here's to a less security-fixated 2013.

• The Antidote: Happiness for People Who Can't Stand Positive Thinking by 
Oliver Burkeman is published this week in paperback from Canongate Books, 
price £8.99.
 