
The twin-propeller plane looked as if it was made of Lego. It flew us from 
Gdansk to Edinburgh this morning, our equipment strapped to the floor with rope 
webbing between us and the pilot. In-flight catering was watery, cold, 
scrambled eggs and cold bacon. The fat had congealed into hard white tears on 
the edge of the plastic tray. So, I'm hungry as we drive up the muddy track 
that leads to the artists' enclosure at T in the Park under evil, July winter 
clouds. Our tour bus, 15 tonnes of tinted excess, passes the security 
checkpoint where I stood on a parched summer's day three years ago, holding my 
guitar in its protective bin bag, as the security guard, after checking his 
list of bands, said, "Sorry son, I don't think you're playing - you shouldn't 
be in this area."

We don't have time to eat. We go straight to a press conference. It feels like 
February, but I keep my sunglasses on. It's not that I think it's cool. It's 
not. There are just too many eyes to make any meaningful contact with. A 
thousand flashes, a hundred questions. "How does it feel to be back at T?" I'm 
so hungry. We walk back through the rain to the catering tent. The caterers are 
Popcorn, who are always good. I glance at the blackboard, registering braised 
lamb shanks and five-spice duck with ginger greens, as I rush to the queue. I 
stand behind Edith Bowman and in front of Sophie Ellis-Bextor, who is holding a 
cute fiery-haired toddler in her arms.

I take some tuna to a table covered in a tartan tablecloth. I bite and there 
is a faint itchy tingle on the roof of my mouth. I had the same tingle two days 
ago when I ate a chicken salad in Serbia that had peanut butter in the 
dressing. I'm allergic and threw up for hours that night. I spit it out. It's 
probably nothing, but I can't risk it. The gig has to be good. I glance at the 
cakes instead. Amazing. A dark, gooey pecan pie, sugar-dusted lemon tart and a 
dense chocolate thing. Oh, yes! Let me eat cake! I'm a rock star! If I want to 
eat nothing but cake I can! I pile the bowl high, guiltily glancing around, 
looking for Security, still expecting to hear, "Sorry son - you shouldn't be in 
this area."

Â· The writer is the lead singer in Franz Ferdinand
 