
A letter from Neal Cassady to Jack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac>, which inspired the spontaneous 
style of On the Road and was described by Kerouac as “enough to make Melville, 
Twain … I dunno who, spin in their graves”, is to go up for auction later this 
month for the second time in less than two years.

Cassady wrote the 40-page letter to Kerouac on 17 December 1950. Running to 
13,000 words, Cassady later admitted that it was written in three days, high on 
Benzedrine. Kerouac,in a 1968 interview with the Paris Review 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/4260/the-art-of-fiction-no-41-jack-kerouac>
, said that his friend’s missive was the inspiration for the style of his most 
famous work, On the Road. “I got the idea for the spontaneous style of On the 
Road from seeing how good old Neal Cassady wrote his letters to me, all first 
person, fast, mad, confessional, completely serious, all detailed, with real 
names in his case, however (being letters),” said Kerouac.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fletter-inspired-jack-kerouac-on-the-road-on-sale-again-neal-cassady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9174e1e8c03d715ea36f33d3959b1ce7116c430e%2F0_0_1466_1230%2F1466.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Letter%20that%20inspired%20Jack%20Kerouac's%20On%20the%20Road%20goes%20on%20sale%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fletter-inspired-jack-kerouac-on-the-road-on-sale-again-neal-cassady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Letter%20that%20inspired%20Jack%20Kerouac%27s%20On%20the%20Road%20goes%20on%20sale%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fletter-inspired-jack-kerouac-on-the-road-on-sale-again-neal-cassady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9174e1e8c03d715ea36f33d3959b1ce7116c430e%2F0_0_1466_1230%2F1466.jpg>
 Cassady’s letter to Kerouac, with additions, corrections and deletions in 
pencil and pen. Photograph: © Cathy Sylvia Cassady, Jami Cassady and John 
Cassady. Christie’s Images Ltd. 2016. 
Kerouac called the letter “a whole short novel” that was “the greatest piece 
of writing I ever saw, better’n anybody in America”, superior to most of the 
acknowledged greats of US literature. He told the Paris Review that he lent it 
toAllen Ginsberg <https://www.theguardian.com/books/allen-ginsberg>, who 
subsequently lent it to a friend that Kerouac believed had lost it over the 
side of his California houseboat.

In fact, the letter was safe in the files of the Golden Goose Press, where it 
was discovered by Jean Spinosa in 2012, more than 60 years after it was written.
The letter was put up for auction in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/23/long-lost-letter-that-inspired-kerouacs-on-the-road-to-go-up-for-auction>
, but the auction was cancelled after both Kerouac and Cassady’s estates 
claimed ownership. Now an “amicable settlement” has been reached, Jami Cassady
told the San Francisco Chronicle 
<http://www.sfgate.com/entertainment/article/Famed-Cassady-letter-to-Kerouac-to-go-up-for-7551135.php>
, andChristie’s will auction the letter 
<http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/books-manuscripts/cassady-neal-typed-letter-with-ending-6005597-details.aspx>
 for an estimate of $400,000 (£273,000) to $600,000 (£410,000) on 16 June, 
following a preview tour moving from Seattle to New York between 31 May and 15 
June. Cassady also told the San Francisco paper that her family, which owns 
copyright in the letter, will publish it at a later date.

I thought it ranked among the best things ever written in America … almost as 
good as the unbelievably good Dostoevsky
Jack Kerouac 
The letter, only a fragment of which has previously been published, is a 
“compelling, unaffected and discursive account of Cassady’s frenetic love life 
in 1946”, said Christie’s, including “an acrobatic escape through a bathroom 
window” when he and his lover were surprised by her aunt. In his response to 
Cassady on 27 December, Kerouac wrote: “I thought it ranked among the best 
things ever written in America … it was almost as good as the unbelievably good 
‘Notes from the Underground’ of Dostoevsky … You gather together all the best 
styles … of Joyce, Céline, Dosy [sic] … and utilise them in the muscular rush 
of your own narrative style & excitement. I say truly, no Dreiser, no Wolfe has 
come close to it; Melville was never truer.”

Christie’s said that the letter had an “incendiary effect” on Kerouac. “It 
immediately became the catalyst for Kerouac’s critical breakthrough as a 
writer, transfiguring his approach to the material stored in his memory and 
recorded in his journals,” said the auction house. “Cassady left his mark on a 
generation of writers through the power of this one letter … its rawness and 
speed focused this strain of postwar American thought, drew together an 
immediacy of life and living with a new intellectualism, fused existentialism 
with the coming of pop, the prosaic with the elegiac. And it did so by 
influencing the masters of the movement without the benefit of having its own 
critical appreciation.”
 