
Late one afternoon, while walking around the Panmure basin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panmure_Basin>, it occurred to me that one 
measure of the health of waterways might be the numbers of fish-eating birds. 
Panmure basin is one of Auckland's many extinct volcano craters. Filled with 
water, it is connected by a channel through a breach in the crater wall to the
Tamaki river <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamaki_River>. A bridge spans the 
tree-lined channel, allowing walkers to circumnavigate the basin.

Our walk passes a bank exposing the layers of volcanic ash and kingfisher 
nesting tunnels. At low water, we see them sitting on rocks that give them a 
view over the mudflats. There is a flash of blue as they dart off to catch 
unfortunate mud crabs straying from their burrows. In the shallow water, grey 
herons stalk. Suddenly they thrust their beaks into the water, bring up a tiny 
crustacean or larger fish, tossed into the air and deftly swallowed.

Next we pass the mangrove 
<http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2007/02/mangroves/warne-text> trees growing 
along a sheltered edge of the lagoon. The extensive areas of mangroves in many 
Auckland estuaries are partly due to silt washed from land as a result of 
deforestation and subsequent farming and urban development: a transfer of 
resources from land to the sea. In the protection of the trees and their aerial 
roots, many invertebrates live and fish breed.

The highlight of the walk comes when we reach a cliff top to view cormorants 
nesting in trees. The birds ignore people, enabling close observation when they 
are on the ground resting or gathering nesting material. The pied shag is black 
on top and white underneath with a yellow spot below each eye. Its nests of 
sticks seem precariously situated on thin branches, but somehow they survive 
the strong winds. Some are high up in a pine tree, while others are on a
pohutukawa tree 
<http://www.nzplantpics.com/sfeature_galleries/new_zealand_christmas_tree/pohutukawa_tree.htm>
 growing out the side of the cliff, allowing a view of the nestlings. On this 
hot afternoon, the dark grey fluffy birds are panting.

Two years ago in later summer when the tide was going out, there was a line of 
cormorants in the water. At intervals one would dive down, sometimes coming up 
with a fish, which was tossed in the air before being swallowed headÂ first.

Judging by the thriving colony of cormorants, there must be plenty of fish in 
the Tamaki estuary.
 