
The "slumber party" the former prime minister's wife Sarah Brown hosted for 
guests including Wendi Deng and Rebekah Brooks was "completely bonkers", Sky 
News political editor Adam Boulton told theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>.

The veteran TV journalist said during his appearance at the inquiry as a 
witness on Tuesday afternoon that he could not believe it when he heard about 
the party from a then cabinet minister in 2008.

"At the time I just thought this is completely bonkers that this sort of 
intimacy is being indulged in by the prime minister and his wife and a 
proprietor and his wife. I thought it would end in tears," added Boulton.

Asked if he felt relations between newspaper proprietors had become so close 
that there was a level of "carelessness" involved, he replied: "Yes."

Boulton said he was also surprised to see a succession of prime ministers and 
opposition leaders turn up at theNews Corporation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/news-corporation> annual summer party. News 
Corp owns 39.1% of Sky News parent company BSkyB.

"I see nothing wrong in holding a party or inviting people to it, but I was a 
little surprised that they all felt compelled to turn up," he added.

Sarah Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sarah-brown>, the then prime 
minister's wife, hosted a "slumber party" at Chequers attended by Brooks, 
Murdoch's wife Wendi Deng, and his daughter Elisabeth in 2008.

Last month Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>, 
the News Corp chairman and chief executive, quipped at the Leveson inquiry that 
it was probably nothing more than a "bunch of women complaining about their 
husbands".

Boulton, who has been at Sky for 23 years, said he has only met Rupert Murdoch 
three times and then it was in the company of others.

He told Leveson he was resolutely opposed to becoming "pally" with politicians 
because it was inappropriate.

He said relations between the press and politicians hit a new low during the 
Tony Blair/Alastair Campbell era.

"Things there were handed out as favours," he said in reference to political 
briefings orchestrated by Campbell, Blair's director of communications.

His remarks come a day after Campbell told Leveson that he came to "loathe" 
some journalists during his time at No 10.

There is little love lost between Campbell and Boulton – shortly after the 
2010 general election they were involved ina bad-tempered on-air row 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1gkHwU4DRA8>.

Boulton said: "Increasingly there was a sense that you could not really trust 
what we were being told." This lack of trust "had led to the breakdown of 
political confidence".

He added that good old-fashioned journalistic tools such as "doorstepping" 
flourished under Baroness Thatcher in the 80s and early 90s and elicited some 
of her most famous headlines, including "We are a grandmother" in 1989 and her 
exhortation to the nation to "Rejoice, rejoice" when South Georgia was 
recaptured in the Falklands in 1982.

"I am the only person to doorstep the Queen and get her to talk about 
politics. I regard that as legitimate journalism," he said.

The Blair era heralded a new modus operandi, according to Boulton. Blair 
refused to answer questions as he was going in and out of No 10 Downing Street, 
he said, and held a dim view of journalists, whom he was later to describe as 
"feral beasts".

Boulton told Leveson he had experienced doorstepping first hand when his first 
marriage broke up. "As it happens I make no complaint about that. I think 
journalists do have to go to quite long and great extents to get stories but 
it's not a pleasant process."

He said Blair, however, loved to make the headlines and the now notorious 
claims that Iraq could bomb Britain within 45 minutes was a typical attempt by 
his spin doctors at No 10 to make the news.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 