
Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s classic novel Sunset Song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/24/james-naughtie-the-lost-scotland-of-sunset-song>
 has been voted Scotland’s favourite novel, beating titles including JK 
Rowling’s first Harry Potter story to the top spot.

A public vote 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/5yRRj2n52KpJTvcHGCVYrPJ/scotlands-favourite-book-the-top-ten>
 conducted in August by BBC Scotland, together with the Scottish Book Trust and 
the Scottish Library and Information Council, offered readers the chance to 
choose their favourite of30 well-known novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list>
 by writers born or based in Scotland, as selected by a panel of literary 
experts. Titles by some of Scotland’s biggest contemporary authors, including 
Rowling, Val McDermid, Jackie Kay and Michel Faber, were pitted against classic 
works by the likes of Walter Scott, Robert Louis Stevenson, John Buchan and 
Arthur Conan Doyle, but Grassic Gibbon’s 1932 elegy to crofting, the first part 
of his trilogy A Scots Quair, emerged triumphant.

Scotland's favourite books: readers' picks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/08/scotlands-favourite-books-readers-picks>
Iain Banks’s black comedy The Wasp Factory came second, followed by Alasdair 
Gray’s Lanark, Buchan’s The Thirty-Nine Steps and Muriel Spark’s The Prime of 
Miss Jean Brodie. Rowling’s Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone was in 
sixth place.

Grassic Gibbon’s story of Chris Guthrie, a girl growing up in the village of 
Kinraddie in the Mearns, was also the personal choice of Scotland’s first 
ministerNicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, 
who told the BBC that the novel “resonated with me first of all because it’s a 
wonderful story, beautifully written, but it also said something about the 
history of the country I grew up in and resonated very strongly with me as a 
young Scottish woman”.

Sturgeon described Sunset Song as “a very early feminist novel”, whose “themes 
are timeless to this day”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Flewis-grassic-gibbons-sunset-song-voted-scotlands-favourite-novel-crofting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8f3756350b74309f075858230b0815ed91424f%2F0_0_1181_1476%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lewis%20Grassic%20Gibbon's%20Sunset%20Song%20voted%20Scotland's%20favourite%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Flewis-grassic-gibbons-sunset-song-voted-scotlands-favourite-novel-crofting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lewis%20Grassic%20Gibbon%27s%20Sunset%20Song%20voted%20Scotland%27s%20favourite%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Flewis-grassic-gibbons-sunset-song-voted-scotlands-favourite-novel-crofting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8f3756350b74309f075858230b0815ed91424f%2F0_0_1181_1476%2F1181.jpg>
 Lewis Grassic Gibbon. Photograph: Aberdeen Journals Ltd. 
“She’s just a very, very strong character, at a time … when not many books 
would have portrayed a female character in that way,” she told the BBC. “He did 
something quite innovative and groundbreaking in that he used his own language 
in a fictional setting. That was for me part of the mystique and magic of the 
book ... it opened my eyes to parts of the country which I hadn’t until that 
point been very familiar with.” The novel was also voted the “best Scottish 
book of all time” ina 2005 poll 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/4189430.stm>.

Seventh place in the new poll 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/2ClzCqc45kb6xffl0bfD2w2/the-results-of-the-vote-to-find-your-favourite-scottish-novel>
 went to Irvine Welsh’s Trainspotting, eighth to Ian Rankin’s Knots & Crosses, 
ninth to Conan Doyle’s The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes and 10th to James 
Hogg’s The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner.
 