
LG has unveiled the first new smartphone, the V20, to come with Google’s 
latest version ofAndroid 7 Nougat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/android-7-nougat-review-battery-life-multitasking-operation-notifications-facial-recognition-android>
.

The South Korean firm, which was responsible for manufacturing last year’s 
Nexus 5X for Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/23/google-nexus-5x-review-android-60-marshmallow-smartphone-battery>
 and therecent modular G5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/lg-g5-review-power-users-friend-that-just-misses-mark>
, hopes that shipping with Nougat onboard will be enough to tempt buyers away 
fromSamsung’s high-profile Galaxy Note 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/samsung-galaxy-note-7-review-the-king-of-the-phablets-returns>
. The Samsung phablet runs last year’sAndroid 6 Marshmallow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/22/google-android-6-0-marshmallow-review-longer-battery-life-now-on-tap-apps>
 and recalls have been prompted byexploding batteries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/05/samsung-galaxy-note-7-official-recall-us-watchdog-consumer-reports>
.

The new top-end Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> 
smartphone comes with a standard 5.7in quad HD LCD screen on the front, but 
also has a smaller always-on “ticker” display just above it alongside the 
front-facing camera.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flg-smartphone-android-7-nougat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51f9c2502ff9286384aa495f7b7d31f33edcc83d%2F227_0_3639_3639%2F3639.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=LG%20unveils%20first%20smartphone%20to%20come%20with%20Android%207%20Nougat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flg-smartphone-android-7-nougat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=LG%20unveils%20first%20smartphone%20to%20come%20with%20Android%207%20Nougat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flg-smartphone-android-7-nougat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51f9c2502ff9286384aa495f7b7d31f33edcc83d%2F227_0_3639_3639%2F3639.jpg>
 The second-screen is positioned at the top right of the V20, showing ticker 
tape-like information, app icons and other bits. Photograph: Mark Lennihan/AP 
Always-on displays have become popular, with most high-end smartphones, 
including those from Samsung, Motorola and Google, offering features that 
constantly show or slowly flash notifications and the time on the main screen.LG
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lg> introduced the second-screen on 
last year’s V10.

“The V20 was built with storytellers in mind; the visual generation,” LG 
mobile communications director Frank Lee said at the unveiling in San 
Francisco. “It was designed to celebrate the idea of unmissable moments.”

The phone comes with two cameras on the back, one standard 16 megapixel camera 
and one wide-angle 8 megapixel camera, which are similar to that fitted to the 
company’sG5 smartphone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/11/lg-g5-review-power-users-friend-that-just-misses-mark>
. The V20 has Qualcomm’s Snapdragon 820 processor, 4GB of RAM and 64GB of 
storage, similar to competitors.

But it is the removable battery and a microSD card slot that put the V20 among 
the handful of top-end smartphones with swappable batteries – a highly 
desirable feature for power users.

Whether the two-screen, two-camera, removable battery and “utilitarian 
appearance <https://twitter.com/patrickmoorhead/status/773358050266664960>” are 
enough to sway buyers and revitalise LG’s falling mobile sales remains to be 
seen.

“I don’t think this will set the world on fire,” said the Current Analysis 
research director Avi Greengart. “That said, if you are looking for a large 
phone right now, and a name brand, this could be an option.”

The V20’s release comes on the eve of Apple’s unveiling of its next iPhone, 
which is widely speculated to come with two cameras on the back, similar to LG 
and Huawei’s recent smartphones.

 * Android 7.0 Nougat review: longer battery life and faster operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/android-7-nougat-review-battery-life-multitasking-operation-notifications-facial-recognition-android>

 * Android 7.0 Nougat: 11 tips and tricks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/23/android-7-nougat-tips-tricks-replies-settings-app-emoji>
 