
10.38am GMT 

Right that's that

Jacob Steinberg will be along tomorrow for the men's final between Nadal and 
Wawrinka. In the meantime thanks for all your Tweets and e-mails, and sorry I 
couldn't use them all.

The wonderfully timely Kevin Mitchell has filed his report, which you can read 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/25/li-na-wins-australian-open-final-dominika-cibulkova>
. Bye for now!

10.36am GMT 

Li Na takes to the stage

 John Inverdale  Chris Evert presents her with the trophy. Li begins 
congratualting Cibulkova, then thanks her agent "for making me rich!" Thanks go 
to her physio and coach, before congratulations are offered to her husband for 
now being famous in China. "Thanks for being my hitting partner, fixing drinks 
and fixing my racket. You're a nice guy... and you're so lucky!" The crowd are 
being thoroughly amused by this likeable and wry winner.

10.32am GMT 

The presentation bit

Cibulkova is in fact grinning broadly. "This is the most fantastic two weeks 
of my life and I think I'm going to cry." She thanks her team and her 
boyfriend. She does have tears streaming down her face. I'm welling up like 
it's the end ofToy Story 3 here! She thanks all the sponsors and adds "For me 
this is now my favourite Grand Slam."

10.30am GMT 

There is a round of applause for the man who announces that someone or other 
will sponsor the Australian Open for five more years. He announces it in that 
kind of momentous voice that suggests he's going on some sort of major, worthy 
campaign. This is what sport's all about.

10.23am GMT 

Dominika Cibulkova looks absolutely shattered, as you would expect. Losing 
that final set 6-0 feels a bit cruel, but Li overcame her earlier difficulties 
with moving around and really started to play some brilliant shots in that 
final set. Her backhand, so lethal at its best, really settled and she improved 
on the forehand too. I'd tell you what her immediate reaction was, but 
Eurosport have gone to a break. Ah no we have replays now. A big grin and arms 
aloft. She has that worn-but-happy expression you might have after climbing a 
moderately strenuous mountain ore something.

10.20am GMT 

Li Na wins the Australian Open 7-6 6-0

After a first set that lasted about an hour, by my reckoning this one could be 
all over inside 25 minutes. We've only played 17 minutes so far and already 
Cibulkova  is serving to stay in this. Oh and that's a stunning backhand from 
Li! Right on the line and it's 0-15. Then another after a brilliant rally, 
which had Cibulkova sprinting breathlessly from side to side and Li is two 
points away from what would be a surprisingly comprehensive victory. Back to 
15-30 as Cibulkova's shot clips the net and drops just over, but then Li does 
exactly the same on the next point and Cibulkova can only hit the backhand long!

So two Championship points for Li Na... and she can't take the first as she 
hits a forehand long. Cibulkova is putting everything into every shot now; 
she's going to lose but is doing so valiantly. We get another baseline rally on 
the next point, and Cibulkova puts a forehand long!

10.15am GMT 

Second set: Li* 7-6 5-0 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Li opens with a double fault, then gives Cibulkova a chance by netting. 0-30. 
Li is dominating now, no question, but this has been appalling tennis in 
places.  Cibulkova nets to take it back to 15-30. Li comes into the net again 
on the next point and has Cibulkova on the back foot. 30.30. Cibulkova can't 
return Li's first serve and it's 40-30. The drive volley again on the final 
point and from 0-30 down once again Li keeps a cool head and Cibulkova will 
serve to stay in the match.

10.11am GMT 

Second set: Li 7-6 4-0 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

If Cibulkova can't hold here I reckon it could be over quite quickly. She 
challenges a call on the right baseline on the first point and is correct to do 
so. 15-0. The next point she nets though. Every time Cibulkova hits the ball 
she seems to say "OK", which is far less annoying than the bloke in the crowd 
who charmingly seems to yell out "bagel her!" Li's placement is fantastic now, 
moving her opponent all over the court and even Cibulkova isn't quick enough 
with Li dictating the long points. She does it twice in a row here, hitting a 
couple of backhand winners and getting break point. A brilliant backhand return 
into the corner off of Cibulkova's second serve and Li has two breaks!

10.07am GMT 

Things Eurosport's coverage has taught me: I really hate dubstep.

10.07am GMT 

Second set: Li* 7-6 3-0 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

I can hear some very weird sounding animals in the background on the TV here. 
It's similar to the time I went camping in the Australian outback: the single 
most terrifying thing I've done since cycling along the Marylebone Road at rush 
hour.

Li deals with a net chord quite wonderfully, readjusting and driving a 
volleyed winner. An ace takes her to 40-0 but then when trying the ol' serve & 
volley next up her defence isn't quite resolute enough and Cibulkova passes 
her. Then the Slovakian hits an absolute monster of a forehand down the line to 
stay in touch, but a good rally on the next point ends with a cool, 
accomplished backhand down the line that takes Li into a 3-0 lead.
 The scene in Melbourne. Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images 
Updated at 10.12am GMT

10.02am GMT 

Second set: Li 7-6 2-0 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

15-0 as a backhanded lob from Li goes just long. Cibulkova has taken 65% of 
the points on her first serve and just 26% on the second. That first serve 
percentage increases slightly as Li goes long and makes it 30-0. Then what do 
you know, it's a seventh double fault. She avoids an eighth but after an 
excellent rally Cibulkova is stretched once again and is forced to net. Break 
point next up as Li drills a powerful service return down the line and out of 
her opponent's reach. A wild forehand from Cibulkova flies wide and having held 
from 0-30 in the previous game, Li has now broken from 30-0.

9.58am GMT 

Second set: Li* 7-6 1-0 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Apologies, I missed us getting to 30-30 as I took what in tennis terms is 
known as a comfort break. Anyhow, Li takes the next point dashing in and 
slightly mishitting a smash, but getting away with it. Cibulkova goes long on 
the final point and Li holds.

9.52am GMT 

Li Na wins the first set 7-6

Cibulkova nets after a short rally and Li takes the first set!
 First set to Li. Photograph: Rick Rycroft/AP 
Updated at 10.03am GMT

9.52am GMT 

First set tie break: Li 6-3 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Cibulkova nets and... wait, we play to seven in a tie-break, don't we? D'oh!

9.51am GMT 

First set tie break: Li 5-3 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Li tries the drop shot but it's chased down and Cibulkova hits a cross-court 
pass.

9.50am GMT 

First set tie break: Li* 5-2 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

After a baseline rally Li challenges a deep shot from Cibulkova and... ooh 
it's just caught a fraction of the line! A small fraction at that. Cibulkova 
gets the point.

9.48am GMT 

First set tie break: Li* 5-1 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Cibulkova blocks the serve long.

9.48am GMT 

First set tie break: Li 4-1 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

A horrible backhand flies wide and Cibulkova yet to take a point on serve in 
this tie-break.

9.47am GMT 

First set tie break: Li 3-1 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Li comes into the net to put away the drive volley after good defence from 
Cibulkova.

9.46am GMT 

First set tie break: Li* 2-1 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Back on serve as Li can't reach a forehand down the line.

Updated at 9.47am GMT

9.46am GMT 

First set tie break: Li* 2-0 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Backhand winner down the line this time.

Updated at 9.46am GMT

9.45am GMT 

First set tie break: Li 1-0 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Li puts a forehand down the line and takes the mini-break straight away.

9.44am GMT 

First set: Li* 6-6 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Li  has ridden her luck at times but here she is serving for the opening set. 
Indeed she rides her luck on the first point as Cibulkova blocks and the ball 
loops up high, only for Li to waste the chance and allow her opponent to 
return. They go back and forth down the middle a couple more times before Li 
hits the forehand winner. On the next point though she misses the gap with a 
forehand and her luck runs out. Chance for Cibulkova as her deep return is 
returned long by Li. Li then runs around one and smashes a backhand into the 
corner. 30-30. Break point now though as Li puts an awful, awful volley into 
the net after Cibulkova's drop shot. We go to deuce as Li dinks a forehand down 
the line with enough spin to take it away from Cibulkova. Cibulkova pulls a 
forehand wide and it's set point, but Li hits a backhand down the line wide! Oh 
Li! Another break point as Cibulkova comes forward and smashes a forehand 
winner into the corner. The Slovakian then goes deep and Li nets the return! 
We'll have a tie-break, which will be fun for me to write about.
 Dominika Cibulkova hits back. Photograph: William West/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 9.46am GMT

9.36am GMT 

First set: Li 6-5 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Another double-fault from Cibulkova at 15-15 gives Li a great chance. Then 
Cibulkova looks to go long to me, but they play on. The Slovakian is stretched 
though and Li has drawn her almost out of the stadium, so wide has she had to 
run. Li puts away a backhand into the empty court to take two break points. She 
only needs one though as Cibulkova nets and Li will serve for this opening set.

9.34am GMT 

First set: Li* 5-5 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Li is serving to stay in the set. Obviously. She takes the first point with a 
driven forehand, and she's certainly doing better when hitting through the ball 
on that forehand then when she tries to be a bit clever. Powerful backhand from 
Cibulkova next and Li nets the return. I miss the next point as I'm looking at 
what I'm typing, but Li wins it and it's 30-15. 40-15. But then a good forehand 
into the corner from Cibulkova and Li goes long. But then we get the first ace 
of the match and Li holds.

"Why do male Australian women's tennis commentators always barrack for the 
pretty blonde girl?" asks Suzy Le Concombre. "Could we have something different 
from you because you're not Australian?" I guess you've answered your own 
question, Suzy. I'd quite like to see Cibulkova win, but purely because 
underdog tales are nice. I won't be too fussed if Li does anyhow.
 Li Na serves to Dominika Cibulkova. Photograph: Paul Crock/AFP/Getty Images 
Updated at 9.36am GMT

9.27am GMT 

First set: Li 4-5 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Li goes for the backhand down the line but just goes wide. Cibulkova now tries 
to keep Li on the forehand but the world number four seems to have discovered 
some form on there. Then at 40-30 Li chases down a drop shot and backhands a 
winner down the line. Deuce. Advantage Cibulkova then as Li Na whacks a 
forehand wide. Back to deuce after Cibulkova's double-fault number five. Then a 
third fault in a row... but not a fourth. Doesn't matter though as she loses 
control of a rally and Li puts a backhand smash away. But another forehand 
error from Li... and another... and then another. Cibulkova holds.

Updated at 9.28am GMT

9.21am GMT 

First set: Li* 4-4 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

Who wants new balls? We've got 'em right here! Well over there actually. 
Better now from Li to move to 30-0, the latter especially as she has Cibulkova 
running all over the place and eventually looping a shot wide. Next up she goes 
long with a forehand; Cibulkova sure has to try and keep her on that side? 
Doesn't matter on the next point as Cibulkova's block loops up and down the 
centre of the court and Li's forehand sends her opponent the wrong way. Another 
bassline rally and with Cibulkova going side-to-side again Li plays a lovely 
backhand that even "The Pocket Rocket", as she's apparently known, can't change 
down.

The nerves appear to be settling, which possibly makes this email from a 
couple of games ago a bit redundant. Sorry, Sasu Laaksonen:

I am nervous, Li Na is nervous, Cibulkova is nervous, the crowd is nervous, 
It's nerves all around Dan...I I hope someone gets one's act together soon. 
Preferably Li. 
 Dominika Cibulkova in full flow. Photograph: Bobby Yip/Reuters 
Updated at 9.25am GMT

9.16am GMT 

First set: Li 3-4 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Cibulkova seems to have settled down a bit now and Li is struggling to cope 
with her power, netting after a powerful forehand down the line. A brilliant 
one goes into the corner leaving Li flat-footed and the number 20 seed 40-0 up. 
Oh but then she double faults again. Much better next up, Li can't get the 
return over the net from out wide and Cibulkova has taken three games in a row. 
Which is bad news for Mr. Unfortunate below.

9.13am GMT 

First set: Li* 3-3 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

We open with a fantastic 22-shot rally with both players moving side to side 
and really hitting through the ball. Li eventually is forced to drop a 
cross-court backhand from the bassline short and Cibulkova absolutely murders 
it, Viv Richards-esque, into the open court. The two exchange points before Li 
double faults and Cibulkova gets her first two break points of the match. A 
third fault in a row from Li... oh and another! Two double faults in a row and 
Cibulkova has broken back!

I don't know if I believe this email, from someone I'll allow anonymity: 

﻿Morning Mr Lucas,

Your updates are currently proving invaluable to me as I am currently standing 
outside of my house in just my dressing gown and trainers, with nothing but my 
phone on me for company. I have been kicked out the house again by the wife. I 
put the last of my JSA on a Li Na win and she said she's had enough. Tried 
explaining that Na is an extremely tenacious competitor and that we'd probably 
be alright, but alas here I am in the cold.


Pray for me.


Updated at 9.25am GMT

9.07am GMT 

First set: Li 3-2 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

At 3-0 we're up to ten unforced errors each with Li leading 6-1 in winners. 
It's then 11-10 in unforced errors as Li hits long, but then Cibulkova serves 
up her third double fault then hits a backhand wide. 40-30, but another one 
goes long from Li Na. The nerves are absolutely understandable, but this has 
been really, really poor.

9.04am GMT 

First set: Li* 3-1 Cibulkova (*denotes server)

0-15 after a poor miss from Li; she shanks her backhand – normally such a 
strength of hers but very erratic so far today – into the net. At 15-15 the 
umpire overrules and calls a fault, which Li surprisingly doesn't challenge. I 
reckon Cramer was spot on there.  Not to matter as Li rediscovers her backhand 
and gets the winner. 40-15 as Cibulkova slips and can't reach a drop shot and 
Li then takes it to 15 without really looking comfortable.
 Li Na sends a backhand return to Dominika Cibulkova. Photograph: Andrew 
Brownbill/AP 
Updated at 9.10am GMT

8.59am GMT 

First set: Li 2-1 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

Brilliant forehand return by Li on the second serve into the corner gives her 
an opening at 15-30. On the next point Cibulkova drops short and Li comes in on 
the attack, but gets a little overenthusiastic and hits long. Break point after 
a long baseline rally ends with Cibulkova going long, but saved with a lovely 
forehand pass down the line as Li came into the net. Advantage Cibulkova as Li 
puts a scatty backhand wide, but then a much better one cross court pulls it 
back to 40-40. Now it's Cibulkova's turn to put a wild backhand out to cede 
another break point and you sense the nerves are getting to her a little. 
Still, we go back to deuce after yet another error. Finally she gets off the 
proverbial bagel as Li nets a block service return.

8.52am GMT 

First set: Li Na* 2-0 Dominika Cibulkova (*denotes server)

So Li will be looking to consolidate the early break writes your insightful 
expert. She looks a bit stiff here and sends a firm backhand into the net from 
the baseline to make it 15-30. She looked cramped for room there. 30-30 though 
as Cibulkova goes wide with a backhand – the 9th unforced error of the match 
already. Another strong backhand right down the line for Li makes it 40-30 and 
she holds when Cibulkova misses another backhand.

"You're not alone, Dan," writes Diana Badder. "I'm here in Córdoba, southern 
Spain, keeping you company between doing a bit of housework...I like 
Cibulkova's what we used to call "spunk", a bit like the Spaniard Arancha 
Sanchez Vicario, who made up for her lack of height by running around and 
getting everything back willy-nilly, winning Roland Garros and many other big 
tournaments. You'd be probably too young to have seen her and unfortunately no 
other Spanish woman has come to take her place. I reckon Li Na will win here."

 Hair today … Dominika Cibulkova powers back a return. Photograph: Aaron 
Favila/AP 
Updated at 9.11am GMT

8.47am GMT 

First set: Li 1-0 Cibulkova* (*denotes server)

So as previously mentioned, Cibulkova will serve first. The 15,000-seater 
stadium is packed but oddly quiet. Li takes the first point after a short 
baseline rally, with Cibulkova going long. Ditto on the second point and it's 
0-30. Li has some sort of alien-looking contraption on her knee, which may be 
hindering her movement. This time Cibuilkova comes into the net and plays the 
drop shot; Li reaches it but her lob goes long. 15-30. Cibulkova gets back to 
30-30 as Li hits a poor service return long. The next point goes to Cibulkova , 
but she then nets and we're at deuce. Advantage Li after a double-fault but 
when well-placed to break she hits a wild backhand wide. She gets a second 
chance though with a much better backhand, powerful and down the line. 
Double-fault again and Li breaks!

8.39am GMT 

Useless spurious stat of the day no. 2:

At 5'3", Cibulkova would be the shortest Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> champion ever. We think.

8.37am GMT 

Ugh, they appear to be playing Oasis at the Rod Laver Arena as the players 
knock up. A joke band invented specifically to annoy me.

8.36am GMT 
Mohandas Menon (@mohanstatsman) 
Na Li (4) Dominika Cibulkova (0) 2008 Antwerp 6-4 6-3 (2nd rd) 2010 Madrid 6-2 
3-6 7-5 (2nd) 2012 Rome 6-1 7-6 QF 2013 Canada 7-6 6-2 QF
 <https://twitter.com/mohanstatsman/statuses/426996259182743552> January 25, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/mohanstatsman/statuses/426996259182743552> 
8.35am GMT 

Here's the toss...

Kerrilyn Cramer is the umpire, which means I can make a bunch of Seinfeld 
puns. Cibulkova calls heads, loses, and Li Na opts to receive first.

8.34am GMT 

The commentary team are talking slightly patronisingly about how to pronounce 
Cibulkova's name: they're going with Ci-BUL-kova rather than Cibul-KO-va. I 
don't know, I've been going with the latter. In my mind, obviously, I've very 
little need to say anything aloud at all given I'm alone in the office right 
now.

Updated at 8.34am GMT

8.29am GMT 

Your useless stat of the day:

The women's trophy is taller than the men's, but not quite as heavy.

8.20am GMT 

Musical interlude

Who doesn't love this?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkKxGzm98AU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkKxGzm98AU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkKxGzm98AU&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkKxGzm98AU&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkKxGzm98AU>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnkKxGzm98AU&media=>
close  . 
8.15am GMT 

Preamble

Morning folks. We've got a quick turnaround here so apologies for the brevity 
of today's preamble. Not that I'm going to be able to offer much more insight 
at this stage than Kevin Mitchell, whose excellent preview for this match is 
linked below and is certainly well worth spending 15 minutes or so with.

Anyway. Way over yonder in the land of that football they have now, today is 
FA Cup day. For upsets and romance though, Melbourne could well be the place to 
be, as Dominika Cibulkova has been in blistering form so far in this 
tournament, dumping all kinds of big names out on her way to the final: the 
20th seed has dumped Maria Sharapova and Agnieszka Radwanska out of the 
tournament here and well deserves her place in the final.

Whatever the result here, Cibulkova is almost certain not to be seeded so low 
in her next tournament, given that even a defeat is likely to see her rise to 
13th in the world rankings. Hoping to make sure that's as high as she gets is 
Li Na, the former French Open champion and number 4 seed. Her route to the 
final has certainly been more straightforward, disposing mainly of lower-seeded 
players, but nonetheless she's only dropped one set on her way here – and that 
in a tie-break – and starts as the favourite with those high-street folk who 
have a predilection for emptying your wallet.

Kevin Mitchell is backing Cibulkova mind, and I'm no man for disagreeing with 
him. Indeed I'm a man with a headache and a horrible ringing in his ears, so 
bear with me here.

Play starts around 8.30am-ish if you're in the UK. If you're in Australia, 
that's... er, in about 15 minutes.

11.08am GMT 

Play will start around 8.30am London time.

Dan will be with you from around 8am. Meanwhile, here's Kevin Mitchell's 
preview for your perusal.

The Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> will 
get a fine women's champion on Saturday, whoever wins, because former finalist 
Li Na and little giant-killer Dominika Cibulkova have done all that has been 
asked of them over the past fortnight in negotiating the falling timber in a 
tournament of high temperatures and lowered ambitions.

While there is a lingering sense that it should have been different – and 
anyone who says he or she predicted that neither the world No1, Serena 
Williams, nor the defending champion, Victoria Azarenka, would be contesting 
the Daphne Akhurst Memorial Cup could only have been touched by sunstroke in 
the first week – it is what it is, to borrow from Serena's lexicon. Nobody 
except the player and her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, knew Williams was 
carrying a back complaint and wouldlose so listlessly in the fourth round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/19/ana-ivanovic-serena-williams-australian-open>
 to the 14th seed, Ana Ivanovic – who thencollapsed in the final set against 
the promising 19-year-old Canadian Eugenie Bouchard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/21/eugenie-bouchard-ana-ivanovic-australian-open>
, who in turngave the fourth seed Li Na such a reduced argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/23/eugenie-bouchard-v-li-na-australian-open-2014-live>
 in the first semi-final on Thursday, when the Chinese veteran, 12 years her 
senior, won 6-2, 6-4 in an hour and 26 minutes.

Nor did many see the 5ft 3in Cibulkova rushing with such intent from the 
undergrowth. "It's not about how tall you are," she said. "Even if you are 
tall, it doesn't mean that your are 100% going to make it. You have to really 
want something, to believe in it. There is nothing more important."

You can read the full piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/23/dominika-cibulkova-li-na-australian-open-final>
.

 