
Hi Liam! How’s New York?

New York is, um … yeah, it’s coming in, let’s put it that way.

That’s quite noncommittal (1).

Yeah. Yeah, it’s coming in (2).

You narrate a new documentary about Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/manny-pacquiao>. Do you think you’re 
similar, in that you’re both respected in your fields, but you’re reaching the 
age limit for your best-known work?

That’s a strange comparison. Manny’s, what, 34? I hope to be doing this when 
I’m 90, you know. If you think that 62 is way past the age of acting, then …

No, no (3)! I meant the action stuff.

Oh, the action stuff. Well, 60 is the new 40, so I’m not going to complain.

Can you relate to Manny?

I was a boxer as a kid, from the age of nine to about 17. But Manny was 
brought up in a fucking shack with rebels firing guns and stuff. He was facing 
death on a daily basis. And not having food to eat! That’s rock, rock bottom. 
What a foundation to build your future on; there’s nowhere to go but up. So, 
when he fights, beside his natural talent – which is phenomenal – you’ve got 
this fucking anger. But it’s a very controlled anger. He’s fighting not just 
for himself, but for all of the Philippines.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQqi_DVcSMPY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQqi_DVcSMPY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQqi_DVcSMPY&media=>
 The official trailer for Manny, the Neeson-narrated documentary about Manny 
Pacquiao. 
How were you as a boxer?

I was an amateur. I won a few titles. Looking back, I’d say I was competent.

Did you have a nickname or anything?

Nope. I wasn’t a knockout specialist. I had a good left jab and I just used 
that a lot. Not exactly a crowd-pleaser.

Have you seen any of Pacquiao’s acting roles (4)?

No I haven’t. I saw a sample of them on the documentary and it threw me a 
little bit. I thought, OK … maybe let’s save those for another day.

Have you ever had any projects like that, where you haven’t necessarily played 
to your strongest skills?

I did a movie once that nobody saw, called Duet For One 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RMKe2-vUQ1s>. It was based on the life of 
Jacqueline du Pré, a cellist who suffered from multiple sclerosis. It was Julie 
Andrews, lovely Alan Bates, Max von Sydow and myself. Julie Andrews was playing 
Jacqueline du Pré. I played her sort of lover, a third-rate singer in a working 
men’s club. There’s a scene where I’m singing The Green, Green Grass of Home, 
and I’ve never been more nervous in all my life. Oh, my knees were shaking. 
Fuck me, I’m singing to Julie Andrews, you know? She can hold a tune.

That must be on YouTube, surely 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gQ1O6BEVP3k&t=6m5s>.

Oh God, it won’t be. Jesus, no, don’t look (5).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fnon-stop-liam-neeson-julianne-moore-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F2%2F26%2F1393418469561%2FNon-Stop-stars-Julianne-M-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Non-Stop%20star%20Liam%20Neeson%3A%20'We%20all%20racial-profile'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fnon-stop-liam-neeson-julianne-moore-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Non-Stop%20star%20Liam%20Neeson%3A%20%27We%20all%20racial-profile%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fnon-stop-liam-neeson-julianne-moore-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F2%2F26%2F1393418469561%2FNon-Stop-stars-Julianne-M-014.jpg>
 Neeson discusses his role as tough-as-nails air marshal Bill Marks in Non-Stop.
Back to Manny. The film doesn’t spend very long on his gambling or rumoured 
infidelities.

I know. But I think he more than hinted that he’d had a few flings. He 
obviously did. And his wife did, too, without saying it. We don’t need to know 
any more than that. This is a kid who grew up in the fucking jungle with 
nothing to eat. So, OK, it went to his head. He won all those world titles and 
he strayed a bit. He’s only human. I didn’t really want to see what his 
gambling debts may have been, you know? It’s powerful. You see him being 
vulnerable.

It ends on the biggest moment of vulnerability of all (6).

That fucking knockout. I remember watching that. I saw it on TV, I was on my 
own. I froze. I thought he was dead. I wondered if someone in the audience had 
shot him. He dropped like a tree. Fuck me, what a punch. Jesus wept.

Do you think he’ll ever retire?

I think he will. The doorman at my building is an ex-boxer and we’re always 
arguing. He says, “I think Manny’s got four more fights in him.” I say, “Four? 
Fuck me, he doesn’t have four more fights.” Maybe two. But I hope it’s just one 
and that’s it. He’s certainly fit enough for four, but that’s when he could get 
hurt. That’s the danger.

Last question. It seems like it’d be a waste if I had Liam Neeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson> on the phone and he didn’t 
threaten me …

Ugh, I can’t do that, mate. If I had 25 cents for every time I left a message 
on my son’s answer machine … No. No, I can’t do that(7).

• Manny is out on Blu-ray and DVD on 17th November, from Universal Pictures 
(UK)

Footnotes

1) This is code for: “I don’t know what that means.”

2) Nope, still no idea.

3) Imagine the most panicky voice in the world. Now triple it. Now triple it 
again. You’re still nowhere close to how I sounded at this point.

4) Genuinely including the superhero film Wapakman, the drama Brown Soup Thing 
and a sitcom called Show Me Da Manny that I promise really exists.

5) I did, and it is.

6) His sudden knockout at the hands of Juan Manuel Márquez in 2012 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xvqq0u_manny-pacquiao-knocked-out-raw-and-uncut_sport>
.

7) To be fair, he did say this in a vaguely threatening way. It still counts.

• This article was amended on 14 November 2014 to correct the description of 
Jacqueline du Pré: she was a cellist, not a violinist.

• Manny is out on Blu-ray and DVD on 17 November
 