
For current undergraduates, prospects after university might seem dire. 
Certainly the statistics suggest uncomfortable truths:24.8% of 21-year-old 
graduates are unemployed 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/graduate-job-market-statistics>, 
approximately83 graduates apply for every job 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2012/jun/01/graduate-job-hunting>, and nearly a
million young people are out of work 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/interactive/2011/nov/16/youth-unemployment-map>
.

Meanwhile, a recent report by the Prince's Trust 
<http://www.princes-trust.org.uk/pdf/youth-index-2013.pdf> has warned that 
youth unemployment will lead a generation to be trapped within a "miserable 
spiral," and Nick Clegg has lamented the "long-term scarring effects" of 
unemployment. This constant pessimism can damage the approach of graduates to 
their career and the ambitions for their working life.

But peel back the statistics and a more nuanced picture emerges. Let's take 
the big figure: 24.8% of 21-year-old graduates are unemployed. Of course, this 
is a disheartening figure, but one that misses several points asCharlie Ball 
notes 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/careers-blog/graduate-job-market-statistics>: 
"In the case of graduates, this means that if you have a job or are starting a 
course in, say, September, but looking for a few weeks work in the summer, 
you're unemployed. If you waited until your finals were done, looked for a job, 
and have one to start next week – you are unemployed".

And the statistic only applies to 21-year-old graduates. But not everyone 
graduates at 21: people take gap years, foreign-language degrees require a year 
abroad, while some science courses such as chemistry last four years. For 
22-year-olds, the rate drops to 16%, while falling even further to 8.6% for 
23-year-olds.

Many applicants focus on big graduate schemes that are well-publicised and 
organise omnipresent graduate networking events. But small-to-medium sized 
companies (SMEs), the public sector and charities offer the bulk of graduate 
opportunities. In total, these firms offer 44,000 of the 60,000 graduate jobs 
available in the UK. These openings perhaps aren't as well-publicised as the 
big firms, but they offer just as rewarding careers.

For too long the SMEs have been ignored by graduates. Research by Icconyx 
<http://prospects.ac.uk/latest_news_graduates_missing_out_on_jobs_with_smes.htm>
 shows that only one in five graduates are proactively looking at employment in 
SMEs.

And despite our generation's ease with social networking, research suggests 
some graduates stop short of using it to find career opportunities. While 
around a third of SMEs spend£525 a month on social media management tools 
<http://www.moorelegaltechnology.co.uk/Blog/Entry/social-media-marketing-for-law-firms/87-percent-of-smes-believe-social-media-is-helpful-for-their-business.html>
, only a third of graduates have heard of LinkedIn and just 10% actively use it 
to find job opportunities.

Relative to their size, this investment in social media can be significant for 
SMEs, and reflects their increased emphasis in the area. This not only presents 
more job-seeking options for graduates, but it may also present career 
opportunities. Research suggests that manySMEs believe social media has been 
"somewhat helpful" or has helped their business "a great deal" 
<http://www.moorelegaltechnology.co.uk/Blog/Entry/social-media-marketing-for-law-firms/87-percent-of-smes-believe-social-media-is-helpful-for-their-business.html>
.

And opportunities with SMEs seem to be on the rise. Lucy Hawkins, a careers 
adviser for the University of Oxford, found that 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/smes-graduate-employment>: "Three years ago 
small enterprises employed 235 Oxford graduates in a graduate-level role. Last 
year that number had risen to 493."

I have faith in graduates to navigate out of this spiral of doomed prospects – 
young people in Britain have faced tough times before and overcome the hurdles. 
Indeed, it was the class of 1984, not 2011 as commonly believed, that facedthe 
high point of youth unemployment 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/08/22/youth-unemployment-not-as-bad-as-you-think_n_1820973.html>
. It is wrong to underestimate graduates and treat them as passive victims who 
need help at every stage. Graduate prospects may be tough, but the challenges 
are in no way insurmountable.

Anirudh Mandagere is in his second year at St. Catherine's College, University 
of Oxford, studying history.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 