
The introduction of a lifetime cap on superannuation contributions would not 
save the federal government much money and could even be a drain on the budget 
if poorly designed, according to new figures from the parliamentary budget 
office (PBO).

Superannuation overhaul proposed to make system fairer for women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/20/superannuation-overhaul-proposed-to-make-system-fairer-for-women>
The government has indicated all options remain on the table for tax reform. 
Changing the limits on voluntary contributions to retirement accounts is 
reported to be one idea being considered.

A paper by the independent PBO – and commissioned by the Greens – says 
individuals aged under 65 are allowed to contribute up to $540,000 into their 
superannuation accounts over a three-year period.

Most of these post-tax contributions are made by people who are preparing to 
retire and want to move their assets into super where they benefit from 
tax-free earnings.

The Greens asked the PBO to estimate the cost of replacing the existing cap 
rules with a lifetime cap on voluntary contributions of $500,000, $600,000 or 
$800,000.

The first option, a $500,000 cap, would boost the budget bottom line by $165m 
over four years.

But the second and third options involving higher caps would cost the budget 
$85m and $335m respectively, according to the estimates. This higher cost is 
because the extra contributions from one-off contributors would be expected to 
drive an increase in super funds under management.

Income earned in superannuation funds are taxed at concessional rates. The PBO 
suggested the increase in funds under management could be accompanied by “a 
corresponding decrease in capital income attracting personal income tax”.

The Greens MP Adam Bandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adam-bandt> said the figures showed 
a lifetime cap was “unlikely to generate the kind of savings we need to address 
the growing cost of unfair super tax breaks”.

“We need to do much more to end the unfairness in our super system to make 
sure it properly looks after people in their retirement,” he said.

“To raise the revenue we need to properly fund our schools, hospitals and 
services, the government will need far more serious reform.”

Bandt instead called on the government to adopt the Greens’ previously 
announced proposal to apply progressive tax rates to super contributions, 
saying that would raise $10bn over four years.


The proposals are the latest in a series to be floated by political parties, 
economists and industry groups with a focus on overhauling superannuation tax 
concessions.

On Friday, Industry Super Australia unveiled a plan to overcome the gender pay 
gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/20/superannuation-overhaul-proposed-to-make-system-fairer-for-women>
 in super savings, including government “seed” payments early in a low-income 
earner’s working life that would grow over decades of compounding earnings.

Labor plans to rein in super concessions for wealthy in bid to raise $14bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/21/labor-plans-to-rein-in-super-concessions-for-wealthy-in-bid-to-raise-14bn>
Labor has previously announced a policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/21/labor-plans-to-rein-in-super-concessions-for-wealthy-in-bid-to-raise-14bn>
 to curb tax concessions for annual earnings above $75,000 from super accounts 
in the pension phase. Labor’s package,announced in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/22/chris-bowen-hints-negative-gearing-may-be-in-labors-budget-saving-sights>
, was estimated to improve the budget bottom line by about $14bn over the next 
decade.

The Australian newspaper reported earlier this month 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/treasury/treasury-examines-superannuation-lifetime-savings-cap/story-fn59nsif-1227603961688>
 that the Treasury was examining a lifetime cap on contributions. Deloitte has 
proposed one set at $580,000. The Association of Superannuation Funds of 
Australia has previously proposed a $1m lifetime cap on non-concessional 
contributions.

The government has sought to keep its options open. The assistant treasurer, 
Kelly O’Dwyer, told Sky News the government was “looking at superannuation 
overall because we have to make the whole system work [and] we need to be very 
clear on our objectives for superannuation”.

The PBO warned of uncertainty about its lifetime cap costings, pointing to 
limited data on superannuation contributions across the life cycle and people 
changing their behaviour after policy changes.

 