Antonio Carluccio My first contact with Drew was many, many years ago when he 
told me he was picking mushrooms in Scotland, and wondered if I'd be interested 
in being supplied by him. I said yes, naturally, as I was buying mushrooms from 
all over the place for the Neal Street Restaurant, which I had taken over from 
Terence [Conran] in 1981.
Mushrooms have always been my passion, and when I saw that he was reacting to 
my writing and filming about mushrooms, I thought it was lovely that someone in 
England had caught the commerciality of that, because in Europe it's always 
been a big business, whereas in England it was just taking off.

When I first started taking mushrooms from Drew, he explained that he was 
putting together a sort of net of pickers and making it a really commercial 
thing. He sent the mushrooms down to me by aeroplane and would personally 
escort them to the plane, and they were lovely mushrooms: chanterelles, ceps, 
whatever was in season, and all of the highest quality. At the same time, my 
name as a mushroom expert was growing and I had people contacting me from 
various parts of the world asking if they could buy mushrooms from me. But I 
couldn't touch this commercial side of things as I had too many other things to 
get on with, so I passed on all those contacts to him.

Drew and I got along straight away. Originally, I wanted to run a mushroom 
company myself, but I decided it would be better to leave it to someone who had 
the time to do it properly. And one benefit of passing on all my business 
contacts to him is that he gives me a very good price for the mushrooms I use 
in the restaurant.

I think Drew was the first person who realised the growing importance of 
mushrooms in this country. He was the first one and is now the biggest one.

I would say he is as passionate about mushrooms as me, but it is a different 
passion. He likes mushrooms, but more from a commercial standpoint, whereas I 
like mushrooms from a culinary point of view, and the real hunt of it.

In Italy, you are taken mushroom picking as soon as you can walk. I started to 
learn the difference between mushrooms when I was about six. It's a fantastic 
pastime. You are in the woods with nature and you are part of it, collecting 
something that's lovely to look at, lovely to smell and lovely to eat. What 
more could you want? They say it's best to go in the morning to avoid 
competition, but in this country if you go in the afternoon they're still there.

I remember passing a group of 10 wonderful porcini on the side of a road once 
and I thought I'd like to go home and pick up the camera and take a picture of 
them. In Italy it would be impossible to do that. They wouldn't even have grown 
that large But here they were large and in their prime, and I had time to go 
home, pick up the camera and go back and photograph them before picking them. 
Nobody had taken them.

Drew makes my business a lot simpler. Before he came along I was getting my 
mushrooms from all over the place. I once put an advert in the Polish daily 
paper in London saying that I would buy the surplus of any reader's hunts, and 
we had a queue of people outside the restaurant with two or three kilos of 
mushrooms each. It was really lovely, and I still have contact with some of 
them. I also have people from Wales and Cornwall who send me their mushrooms, 
but I buy the bulk from Drew, as we use at least 100 kilos a week. Drew is very 
much a gentleman. He's invited me to Scotland several times, but I rarely have 
the time to go, though I do want to spend more time with him, picking mushrooms 
or whatever. Drew and I are a funny combination, although we work very well 
together. We are a sort of unspoken team. It's not arranged, but we certainly 
think of each other when it comes to business. Like me, Drew also appreciates 
the flavour of mushrooms. He loves every aspect of them. It's fantastic that 
you can make a business out of something you really like, which is something we 
have both managed to do.

Drew Macpherson The first time I met Antonio was when he came up to Scotland 
with one of his suppliers in about 1988. My company had just started on its 
wild mushrooms then, and we met, got on well and have been working closely ever 
since.

At that point, my business was embryonic. When I met Antonio we had about 20 
pickers, now we have 300 or so, and they vary from people who do it seriously 
to grannies who just go out for a walk in the afternoon. No one is actually 
employed by us they just bring what they pick to our collection points.

There's no getting away from the fact that Antonio is Mr Mushroom. He's been 
the chief exponent for the wild mushroom industry in Britain and he's the one 
who's bought it to prominence. When we both started out, the mushroom market in 
the UK was quite small, it was a niche market, but now it's quite mainstream. 
Our businesses have basically grown together. Antonio is a hugely amusing 
character and a loyal friend. When we meet up, which nowadays is all too rare, 
it's a good laugh. I like to see him about four times a year, but he's in 
London and I'm in Scotland, and his schedule is very demanding.

He's been up to Scotland a couple of times and we go out and pick, and that's 
when he's at his best. Put him in a wood where there are mushrooms and porcini 
and he just goes funny, he loves it. It's like that saying that any Italian 
will swap their grandmother for a decent cep. He has a deep understanding of 
the whole thing and gets a huge kick out of it, and that comes across in all 
his books and in everything he does. He's much more passionate about the 
subject than I am - it's almost as if he's involved on an emotional level.

Antonio is very charismatic and he captivates people using the knowledge he 
has of his subject. He's got all the stories and anecdotes. I've seen him when 
we were filming for the BBC up in Scotland and he was there with a gas stove in 
the middle of a forest whipping up a wild-mushroom risotto for the crew who 
were completely won over by him.

One of his strongest character traits is that he's enormously generous and he 
doesn't territorialise. He does what he does and he wants as many people to 
share in that as possibly can. What he does has directly affected our business 
throughout the years. If he brings out a book on wild produce, the demand 
increases, and then we meet that demand. We were just starting out when he and 
I met, and he gave us a big leg up and he's continued to do that ever since.

It's a relationship that works very well, but I don't know that it would work 
with anyone else. My life has been enriched by knowing Antonio. He's a strong 
character, and I'm particularly pleased that he chose to take us under his wing.

 To order a copy of Antonio Carluccio's Vegetables for £20 (rrp £25), plus 
99p p&p, freephone 0800 3168 171
 