
Nearly 40 years ago I leaked the Pentagon papers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pentagon_Papers> – a top secret 7,000-page study 
of US decision-making during the Vietnam war which revealed repeated lies and 
cover-ups by the administration. The Iraq war logs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq-war-logs>, published this weekend by 
Wikileaks, could be even more significant.

As with Vietnam, we have again seen evidence of a massive cover-up over a 
number of years by the American authorities. The logs reveal the human 
consequences of the continuingIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> 
war, which have been concealed from the western public for too long: the 
countless instances of torture; the killing of hundreds of civilians at 
roadside checkpoints.

Now we know that the Pentagon, which claimed in the early years of the Iraq 
invasion either that it didn't count casualties or that it had no evidence of 
them, was indeed keeping meticulous records all along. It has reports of 66,000 
civilian casualties – 15,000 of which were completely unknown toIraq Body Count 
<http://www.iraqbodycount.org/>, the only public attempt to log the war's 
victims. That means 15,000 deaths that never made any news report – five times 
the number murdered on 9/11. It certainly would be news if they were American 
or British deaths. That's 15,000 families who've suffered huge anguish and who 
may potentially have been motivated to seek revenge against American or allied 
troops. For the Pentagon to lie or try to hide this kind of carnage can only be 
self-defeating.

Perhaps that the victims are "only" Iraqis shows the kind of mindset among the 
occupying commanders that kept this bloody war going for so long. Perhaps they 
failed to realise that the coalition's deadly activities have been such a 
powerful recruitment weapon for the resistance, both in Iraq and Afghanistan.

When I released the Pentagon papers in 1971, the administration responded by 
trying to suppress publication. It took out an injunction against myself and 
the New York Times in order to stop publication – a clear violation of the US 
constitution's first amendment – claiming that every page and every day's 
revelations were gravely damaging national security. We were eventually 
vindicated by the fact that no such damage was shown to have taken place.

Indeed, what gained such great media attention then was not so much the 
substance of our revelations but the unprecedented efforts by the 
administration to suppress them. Other newspapers followed suit – in total 19 
defied the department of justice. And this duel sparked a wave of civil 
disobedience that had never been seen before. After a two-week legal battle the 
supreme court eventually ruled in our favour.

The US administration has learned from that episode. It has repeated the line 
– as it did with the leakedAfghan war papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-war-logs> in July – that the leaks are a 
danger to national security and put US troops' lives at risk. (Though the 
Pentagon has now had to acknowledge that it doesn't have any evidence of a 
single life being harmed in Afghanistan since July, despite the fact they've 
been searching desperately for it.)

At the same time, however, the Pentagon has been trying to downplay the 
revelations in order to lessen the public reaction. It says these reports are 
nothing new, and that they've already been the subject of public discussion. 
Well, maybe they're nothing new to Iraqis, who have lived with the consequences 
of torture and checkpoint killings for seven years. And of course they're 
nothing new to the Pentagon – it has been reporting these cases internally for 
years. But over that period, each time the American media has reported claims 
of indiscriminate killings, it has always reported either that the US military 
deny the allegations or that they are "investigating". As formerBritish 
ambassador Craig Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2004/jul/15/foreignpolicy.uk> once said, 
these revelations don't risk the lives of our soldiers, but risk merely the 
reputations of the politicians and bureaucrats who send them to their deaths.

The US is in the midst of a frenzied congressional election campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/richard-adams-blog/2010/oct/25/us-midterm-elections-2010-live-blog>
, and because Republicans and Democrats are both incriminated in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, the wars have scarcely been mentioned. But now that we have strong 
evidence of a huge cover-up over a number of years – in the largest 
unauthorised disclosure in history – the mainstream media cannot ignore it. And 
I feel confident that meaningful action will result. Forty years ago, to make 
my revelations, I utilised the then leading technology, Xerox, to photocopy 
7,000 pages of evidence. I can only envy the ability of a 21st century 
whistleblower to impart a vastly greater trove of material using digital 
technology. And now the information is on the web, millions have the ability to 
look into it further in the coming days. It will play out very differently.

In addition, I've been impressed by Britain's deputy prime minister Nick Clegg 
– who, rather than complaining about national secrets being compromised, has 
said the Iraq dataneed to be investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/24/iraq-war-logs-nick-clegg>. Any 
inquiry, even if only in the UK, will keep the issue high on the global agenda.

In the coming months I hope the courage and patriotism shown by the sources of 
these records – who risk long prison sentences – will be emulated by those with 
access to higher level documents. We need to see White House, Pentagon and CIA 
papers that reveal evidence of war crimes by top-level policy-makers – to bring 
the criminal activity that's happening right now into the conscience of the 
American people.

The possibility of uncovering this is worth the great personal risk by whoever 
the sources may be – just as I never doubted that it was worth risking my own 
freedom to reveal the Pentagon Papers four decades ago.
 