
If I were to say the words Australian feminist anthem, chances are your mind 
would immediately drift to the defiant Aussie twang of Helen Reddy’s 1972 
classic,I Am Woman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zu4xpDuf84A>. 

As much as I love Reddy’s delightfully earnest song, and the filigree guitar 
work of Wrecking Crew memberMike Deasy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mike_Deasy>
 that accompanies it, there’s always been another Australian ’70s pop hit that 
occupies an equal place in my heart, at least: Linda George’sMama’s Little Girl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G9J-GWxYSOI>. 


The first single lifted from George’s debut album, 1974’s Linda, was a cover 
of a song previously recorded by Dusty Springfield on 1973’s Cameo and buoyed 
by breezy arrangements care of noted Canadian producer Jack Richardson (who 
would later push the buttons on one of the all-time classics,Bob Seger’s Night 
Moves <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mRFWQoXq4c>). Richardson had been 
imported to provide a touch of international glamour by George’s label, Image 
Records.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMUBnxqEVKlk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMUBnxqEVKlk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMUBnxqEVKlk&media=>
Image and George were rewarded with a modest hit. The single made it to No 8 
on the hit parade, and the accompanying album remained in the charts for five 
months. Perhaps this was because, compared with some Australian rock and pop 
output in 1974, the song is easy listening: all sweeping strings and coy 
wah-wah guitar breaks.


But if the arrangements are the typical Barry Crocker-esque syrup you’d expect 
of the Australian hit parade circa 1974, George delivers the lyrics with bite: 
“In this day of liberation, I’m lookin’ to find my share/ What’s the use of 
bein’ patient? You ain’t goin’ nowhere.” Indeed, she growls those words with a 
lot more conviction than Reddy’s initial, cooed: “I am woman, hear me roar!”


Anthems of empowerment are more often adopted than born specifically for that 
purpose. Think of Aretha Franklin turning Otis Redding’s more than slightly 
unpleasant Respect intothe barnstorming number  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FOUqQt3Kg0>we now know and love, that soul 
battlecry that demands R.E.S.P.E.C.T.


George, like her pop successor Karen Knowles 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TqavrFn8xno>, had a smooth, assured voice that 
was more “entertainer” than “singer”; it’s not surprising she went on to a 
successful career as a session and backing vocalist. There’s something 
thrilling, then, in the passion with which she delivers the song.


Yes, you could be callous and write off Mama’s Little Girl as the embarrassing 
little sister of I Am Woman; say that George was merely playing dress-up in 
Reddy’s armour, two years after the earlier song became such a clarion call for 
women’s liberation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ZZqtkab42k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ZZqtkab42k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ZZqtkab42k&media=>
You might sniff that Reddy co-wrote her song while George’s was just a cover, 
and a cover of a song written by two male hitmakers at that (Dennis Lambert and 
Brian Potter also wrote Hamilton, Joe Frank & Reynolds’s Don’t Pull Your Love, 
for which they should be knighted).


But let’s not be blind to the fact that not all people, politically speaking, 
are there at the crest of the wave when times change.

If Reddy’s I Am Woman represents Australian pop music’s Feminine Mystique 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feminine_mystique> moment (its Female Eunuch 
momentdidn’t come until the ’80s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/11/divinyls-i-touch-myself-australian-anthems>
), then George’s Mama’s Little Girl speaks to the woman who borrowed the same 
book from the library a few years later. Maybe she didn’t even realise there 
was “a problem that has no name”.


This isn’t Highlander. There doesn’t have to be just one of them. How lucky is 
Australia to have had two feminist pop hits within as many years? It pays to 
remember that some people, as the song says, take a little time to grow. And 
that’s a-OK.

 