
“Tonight, all the political programmes on TV are about football,” Ezequiel 
Fernandez Moores, Argentina’s leading sports columnist, tells me from Buenos 
Aires. He has just returned home on the underground, and noticed that the 
arrivals board read “No te vayas Lio”: Lio, don’t go.

That phrase had been trending on social media since the early hours of Monday, 
when the Argentina captain announced, in tears, thathe had quit international 
football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/lionel-messi-says-he-is-quitting-argentina-team-after-copa-america-final-defeat>
after defeatin the Copa América final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
 to Chile. Messi missed a penalty in the shootout and the result extended 
Argentina’s title drought to 23 years.

It was 10 years ago that Messi made his World Cup debut. He was hailed as the 
great hope for a country that had already won two World Cups, a country in 
which football is central to notions of national identity. “Football has 
resonance everywhere,” Moores says. “But more here inArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>, because it really is the one 
area in which we are a recognised force in the world.”

Lending credence to the idea that everything can be explored through football, 
a dividedArgentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> entered 
into endless discussions throughout the day. Young people said that, having 
missed the World Cup wins, they are more affected and hurt by Messi turning 
away from the possibility of giving them a taste of victory. Older fans explain 
in detail why a man who cannot deliver a trophy shouldn’t be so revered.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fargentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentina's%20Lionel%20Messi%20retires%20from%20international%20football%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fargentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentina%27s%20Lionel%20Messi%20retires%20from%20international%20football%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fargentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video&media=>
Argentina’s Lionel Messi retires from international football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/27/argentinas-lionel-messi-retires-international-football-video>
Opponents of the current government took comfort in the fact that the nation’s 
president,Mauricio Macri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/argentina-president-mauricio-macri-nationwide-strike-by-public-sector-workers>
, would not pick up reflected glory from an Argentina Copa win, and pundits 
devoted much of the day to disseminating the many ways in which Messi ‘bottles’ 
it when it comes to delivering for his country.

Eminent thinkers discussed whether the bad karma is his alone or belongs to 
the whole squad, whether the curse is when he wears the strip or when he gets 
to a final.

Among the many, many comments on social media, this one from Agustin Suárez 
Doreski on Facebook is a good synopsis: “Enough of Messi. I’ve had enough. I’m 
tired of reading so many ignorants criticising him for losing another final. To 
have him called a failure by people who allow routine to defeat them on a daily 
basis, who allow themselves to get walked over in their jobs and get robbed by 
the political classes. Messi doesn’t ‘feel’ the Argentina strip … says some 
geezer who hasn’t hugged his parents for years.

“Messi has to grow a pair … says a bloke who tomorrow is going to pretend to 
fall asleep on the train when a pregnant woman walks on. Messi doesn’t turn up 
for the finals … shouts another who quit college because he couldn’t be 
bothered to study. Messi is a coward … says the one who let the girl of his 
dreams run off with another because he didn’t dare tell her he loved her.”

Lionel Messi and Argentina: will his latest international low really be the 
end? | Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/argentina-messi> 
And in a nutshell, those are the accusations levied at him by many in 
Argentina. Messi grew up inBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> after moving to Spain when he 
was young to pursue his football career; he became an icon for a club that has 
marked a new standard in excellence; and he has had to endure whistling and 
booing when playing on home soil. The weight of the Argentina strip has clearly 
become a burden, in spite of the many in his home nation who adore him.

Football generally is seen in as many different ways as there are people 
watching it. But at the 2006 World Cup, when Argentina were knocked out by 
Germany in a match in which the then manager, José Pekerman, chose to leave a 
young Messi on the bench, the world shouted: “Messi should have played”. We now 
know about Messi’s almost pathological stage fright, his vomiting on the eve of 
big games, but it’s a guess whether these were factors Pekerman took into 
account at the time. Since then, Argentinian football has tried to create 
circumstances in which Messi can thrive. Managers are appointed and people say 
Messi wanted them. Players are dropped and people say Messi asked for it. But 
we have no evidence for these theories, we simply attribute power to Messi, and 
then reproach him when he doesn’t live up to our expectations.

It’s impossible to know exactly what Messi was thinking when he quit, but 
there is a feeling that this was not a knee-jerk reaction but a careful 
decision that had been brewing for some time. At 29, now a father, and having 
become a household name worldwide with all that this entails –fiscal scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/lionel-messi-tells-tax-trial-i-didnt-know-anything>
, public interpretations of his every move, accountability on a scale 
unimaginable to non-celebrities – it is possible Messi was planning to retire 
even if Argentina had won. That he really has had enough of international 
football.

 In the meantime, throughout the weekend, the Argentine Football Association 
underwent a certain amount of turmoil of its own. Under contract with the 
government until 2019 in a project known as “football for all” to televise 
matches on open access TV, and with an ongoing battle between various factions 
over the control of a proposed ‘super league’ among other issues, Fifa stepped 
in to create a “normalising committee” only to find both sides disputing Fifa’s 
jurisdiction. You’d think Gianni Infantino had enough on his plate, but 
apparently he found the time to meet with all the main players over the past 
few months, including one Diego Maradona, and on Friday when their creation of 
the “normalising committee” was hijacked, Fifa threatened to ‘disaffiliate’ 
Argentina, which would see the country banned from official international 
competition both at national and club level.

Chile win Copa América once again as Argentina title drought continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
No one believes that episode had any impact on Messi’s decision, and the 
player said the AFA’s troubles did not influence his international retirement. 
But I am reminded of an incident a couple of years ago when a new theatre was 
opened in Buenos Aires. A huge controversy ensued: opponents of the then 
government declared that anyone who performed there was tacitly lending support 
to the regime. The pianistMartha Argerich 
<http://www.deutschegrammophon.com/us/artist/argerich/biography>, an 
Argentinian genius who has lived abroad her whole adult life, was due to play 
at the theatre for the opening but as the political slanging match progressed, 
she bowed out. Her friend Daniel Baremboim urged Argerich to rise above 
politics, but the artist in her couldn’t go ahead with the performance. Almost 
as if her art could not happen in proximity to such a toxic environment.

Messi is also an artist. In a way, the lack of patriotism attributed to him is 
partly a natural interpretation of someone who, like Argerich, has developed 
his genius abroad and never been involved in local arguments. Messi is the face 
of the Youth Olympic Gamesdue to be staged in Buenos Aires in 2018 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2018_Summer_Youth_Olympics>, in a deal he made 
with Macri when the latter was head of the city government, but this is almost 
an ambassadorial role: a promotion of sport, rather than a political 
affiliation. Unlike Diego Maradona, who always vociferously took sides in 
political power struggles, Messi is an incredibly low-profile public figure.

Maradona has said  
<http://www.si.com/planet-futbol/2016/06/09/diego-maradona-lionel-messi-lacks-leadership-personality>
that Messi doesn’t have the personality of a leader. Since thenMaradona has 
backtracked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/diego-maradona-lionel-messi-quit-argentina>
, and is now, God help Messi, suggesting they should join forces to together 
fight the AFA. Macrihas personally called Messi 
<http://www.espnfc.us/argentina/story/2904089/argentina-president-aims-to-talk-lionel-messi-out-of-national-team-exit>
 to beg he reconsiders. There are public demonstrations being organised later 
this week to ask for his forgiveness. Only the Pope hasn’t called him. Yet.

Jorge Valdano wrote in the Mexican paper Record before Sunday’s final that 
Messi wanted to win in order to be forgiven. After the final, the nation was 
thrown into introspection as Argentinians debated whether or not they should 
forgive Messi. Some thought the question was foolish in the first place. 
“Please forgive us, the country who gave you nothing,” wrote one of my distant 
cousins on WhatsApp.

Diego Maradona plea to Lionel Messi: don’t quit Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/diego-maradona-lionel-messi-quit-argentina>
If we take in all the factors above, it’s easy to see why football is 
dominating the political shows in Argentina. A national squad without Messi can 
expect revenues to fall, and there will have to be heads bowed over contracts, 
from sponsors to friendly fixtures, all tied into Messi’s presence on the 
pitch. Without him, and under current governance, Argentina is on the brink of 
dropping out of world football. (The caption below reads: “Monday, cold, grey, 
rain, and without Messi what else could happen to us?”)
Nik (@Nikgaturro) 
Lunes, frío, gris, lluvia y sin Messi. ¿Nos puede pasar algo más? #NoTeVayasLio
 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NoTeVayasLio?src=hash> #RenuncióMessiDDM 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Renunci%C3%B3MessiDDM?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/3TCdP6YOQx <https://t.co/3TCdP6YOQx>
 <https://twitter.com/Nikgaturro/status/747499217380335616> June 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Nikgaturro/status/747499217380335616> 
“Enough of Messi,” continued Agustin Suárez Doreski’s post. “Stay away. Don’t 
come here any more. Why come here? To weep? To feel indebted to a people that 
ask more of him than their own politicians?” But Messi, whether out of a sense 
of duty or love or both towards his homeland, really wanted to deliver. After 
last year’s Copa final, which Argentina also lost to Chile, there was a telling 
quote from the then Chile manager Jorge Sampaoli. After the game Sampaoli asked 
Messi why he had refused the best player award. Messi said he didn’t want to 
win for himself. He wanted to win for Argentina.

For Argentina. Many Argentinians need Messi to bring a trophy home so they can 
feel like champions. But many others are simply satisfied with the joy he 
brings with his game alone. We don’t know how much he still enjoys playing. One 
thing is clear, this marriage between country and ball, this ongoing unsettled 
debt which runs both ways … Messi is not enjoying it at all.
 