
Lionel Messi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> “knows 
everything about everything” in football, according to the man who convinced 
him to continue playing for Argentina.

The sad story of Omar Orestes Corbatta, scorer of Argentina’s second greatest 
goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/06/argentina-omar-orestes-corbatta-angels-dirty-faces-jonathan-wilson>
Edgardo Bauza, who took over from Tata Martino as Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> coach in the summer, recalled 
his first meeting with Messi and said: “Leo surprised me even more than I 
thought. Leo knows everything about everything. Nothing escapes him.”

Messi announced in June that he would no longer play for Argentina, following 
the disappointment of three straight losses in major finals: theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> of 2014, the Copa 
America in 2015, and the Centenario this summer. After Messi broke the news, 
thousands of Argentinians, many holding “Don’t go, Leo” signs, took to the 
streets of Buenos Aires, and even president Mauricio Macri urged him to 
reconsider.

Shortly after Bauza took over in August, he flew to Barcelona for a meeting 
with Messi. Following talks, Messi duly reversed his decision, and he played 
his first game back after a brief hiatus against Uruguay, where he scored the 
winning goal in a 1-0 victory.

“First we asked him if he would receive us,” Bauza told the Spanish newspaper 
Sport 
<http://www.sport-english.com/en/news/barca/edgardo-bauza-lionel-messi-knows-everything-about-football-5475249>
 about his meeting with Messi. “When he accepted, I knew that there would be no 
problem with him because it was going to be a chat about football.

“I didn’t go to convince Messi, I was convinced that in the chat a possibility 
would arise. He received me with Javier Mascherano at the Ciutat Esportiva, and 
after the chat there was nothing more to say other than: ‘Boys, you’re called 
up for the next game.’

“What surprised me is how much he knows about football, because he knows 
everything, about his teammates, the technical team, about football. He’s aware 
of everything.

“I always thought a player of his standing would have to be a player who knew 
a lot about football. But he surprised me even more than I thought. Leo knows 
everything about everything. Nothing escapes him. He has a very important 
understanding and this helps when one has to communicate their idea.”

Messi did not play in Argentina’s 2-2 draw with Peru on Thursday because of a 
groin injury, and he won’t be available for Tuesday’s home game with Paraguay, 
either. But Barcelona hope he’ll be able to face Deportivo in La Liga on 15 
October.
 