
The vast majority of lives, in football and elsewhere, end in failure. The 
poignant farewell, the reminder of the transitory nature of thegloria mundi, 
are familiar parts of the narrative. But still, there would be something 
desperately sad, desperately unfulfilling, desperately banal, if Lionel Messi’s 
international career were to end with a penalty blazed over the bar in East 
Rutherford.

The MetLife Stadium in New Jersey may be excellently appointed, but it is not 
one of football’s great arenas. The Copa América Centenario may have proved 
more engaging than many imagined, but it is not one of football’s great 
tournaments – it is not even, Conmebol decided last week, a Copa América. This 
was not a place forLionel Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> to say goodbye.

Lionel Messi says his Argentina career is over after Copa América final defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/lionel-messi-says-he-is-quitting-argentina-team-after-copa-america-final-defeat>
After Sunday’s Copa América final defeat to Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/lionel-messi-says-he-is-quitting-argentina-team-after-copa-america-final-defeat>
, he sounded adamant. “My thinking right now and thinking about it in the 
dressing room, I’m done playing with the national team,” he said, face solemn, 
barely able to meet the eye of the journalists who surrounded him. “I tried my 
hardest, it’s been four finals but I was not able to win. I tried everything 
possible. It hurts me more than anyone but it is evident that this is not for 
me.”

That echoed what he had said before the game, when he had reflected glumly on 
three lost finals and spoke about changing history. It’s almost as though Messi 
feels he is cursed, that he is the reason this great generation, the players 
that won the Under-20 World Cup in 2005 and 2007 andretained Olympic gold in 
2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/23/olympics2008.argentina>, 
cannot win a senior trophy.

But the sense of disappointment and disillusionment goes further than that. 
Javier Mascherano has also retired, while Sergio Agüero and Gonzalo Higuaín are 
considering their futures. Agüero missed two decent chances in the game. 
Higuaín wasted one, to go with the good chances he missed inlast year’s Copa 
América final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/05/chile-argentina-copa-america-final-match-report>
 and theWorld Cup final the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/germany-argentina-world-cup-final-2014-match-report>
 before. Is it fair to blame the Napoli striker? Not really, but it’s hard to 
not reflect that, for all the talk ofArgentina’s 1986 World Cup-winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/jun/11/mexico-86-world-cup-argentina-maradona-lineker>
 being Diego Maradona plus 10 others, Messi’s international record might look 
rather better if he’d had a centre-forward of the calibre of Jorge Valdano to 
play alongside.

Perhaps Messi will, in time, change his mind. He is angry at the moment with 
the Argentinian Football Association, calling it a “disaster” in an Instagram 
post last week. He subsequently promised to reveal exactly what he meant after 
the final. But a new president – the AFA is currently in the hands of a Fifa 
normalisation committee as it tries to sort out a tie in last year’s 
presidential elections, when one more vote was cast than the number of 
delegates present – perhaps could tempt him back. He is only 29.

Chile's super-predators are now South America's most dangerous team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/chile-copa-america-final-argentina-lionel-messi>
Perhaps there will be a glorious finale at the Luzhniki Stadium in the 2018 
World Cup in Russia, or a slightly less glorious one at the Maracanã (or 
wherever Brazil chooses to hold the Copa América final) in 2019. Maradona, 
after all, had long periods away from the national side. That’s something that 
often seems to be forgotten when Messi’s commitment to the national side is 
called into question, a quibble that has come to seem increasingly bizarre.

He clearly cares. Just because he doesn’t belt out the anthem like Gianluigi 
Buffon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zjp-xCkit6Q>doesn’t change that. He may 
have moved to Spain when he was 11, but he is very much Argentinian: his accent 
remains Rosarino, his favourite actor is Ricardo Darin and his favourite food 
is his mother’smilanesas with tomato and cheese. His devastated face as he was 
handedthe player of the tournament award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/13/lionel-messi-golden-ball-award-world-cup>
 after defeat in the World Cup final in 2014 was confirmation: the individual 
honour meant nothing to him.

It’s understandable that he should feel weary. He has played in major 
tournaments in each of the past three (European) summers. It’s fairly clear 
that he does not find turning out for Argentina much fun. The pressure is 
always on. He’s always the scapegoat if they lose. Forget his hat-trickagainst 
Panama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/10/argentina-v-panama-copa-america-live>
, or his brillianceagainst the USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/21/argentina-usa-copa-america-semi-final-score>
, forget thedemolition of Paraguay in last year’s semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/jun/30/copa-america-argentina-paraguay-live>
 or even the key goals and the superb pass for the winneragainst Switzerland in 
the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/01/argentina-switzerland-world-cup-2014-last-16-match-report>
. He’s a bottler, he never does it in finals, he doesn’t really care … the 
accusations must grate. The fact is he played very well against Chile, stood up 
to a fearful kicking … and then took the worst penalty of his life.

The shadow of El Diego hangs for ever over him. Messi has never done what 
Maradonadid in Mexico in 1986 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/that-1980s-sports-blog/2014/jun/11/mexico-86-world-cup-argentina-maradona-lineker>
. Which is true. But then Messi’s club career eclipses anything Maradona 
achieved at club level: four Champions Leagues and eight league titles against 
a Uefa Cup and three league titles. The comparison, of course, is of only 
limited relevance.

Copa América 2016: Guardian writers pick their highs and lows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/27/copa-america-2016-highlights-lionel-messi>
They were very different times – but then they were different too at 
international level. The World Cup then was the apogee of football; it is not 
now.

In truth, Messi could have scored half a dozen against Chile on Sunday and it 
would have made little difference to his reputation. Those who want to 
criticise could have said it’s only a weird supplementary Copa América and 
they’d have had some justification. Messi is a great player, one of the 
greatest of all time: beating Chile wouldn’t have confirmed that and losing 
doesn’t undermine it.

But the narrative perhaps demands one last glory. The greatest triumphs are 
those that follow the greatest lows. The true hero must know and overcome 
adversity, not just ride the gilded escalator to success. Argentina’s hope must 
be that in Russia in two years there is still one final chapter to be written.
 