
The first time I heard a Bruckner symphony in the concert hall was back in 
1990, as part of the celebrations that inaugurated the Glasgow Royal Concert 
Hall. The city scored a major coup that year by getting the Berlin Philharmonic 
to playtwo concerts under Kurt Sanderling 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drygXfak724>. The second of these – every 
moment of which is seared into my brain – featured Mozart's Fourth Violin 
Concerto, played with dazzling warmth and delicacy by Frank Peter Zimmermann – 
and then, after the interval,Bruckner's Third Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NYrPLzJtrws&feature=results_video&playnext=1&list=PLE838595B9C7D7591>
.

As a dutiful and slightly obsessed teenager, driven to devouring as much 
classical music as I could get my ears around, I had read up on Anton Bruckner 
before the concert. From the strange countenance that stared out from the pages 
of the Collins Encyclopedia of Music, Bruckner seemed to be an elderly, 
otherworldy 19th-century peasant, wearing loose-fitting clothes andsitting in a 
gloomy room in Vienna at a grand piano 
<http://www.classical-composers.org/img/bruckner4.jpg>. The book's description 
of his symphonies as some of the longest and oddest ever written didn't fill me 
with confidence, and neither did the notion that his life's work (nine and a 
bit symphonies, choral masses, motets, and a smattering of pieces in other 
genres) was simply a musical realisation of his devout Catholic faith. None of 
that made me think my life was about to change in the concert hall.

But then the Third Symphony started. And out of a cosmic mist of D minor 
arpeggios, a stately trumpet melody began, which built to an ear-bleeding 
climax – I was sitting just above the double-basses and the brass section – 
that shook the hall to its newly built foundations and made my brain and being 
shudder. The rest of the huge, 25 minute-long first movement passed as an 
almost hallucinogenic vision, not so much a piece of music as a sublime 
landscape, by turns nightmarish and consoling. The music lurched from the 
depths of abyssal terror in its huge, minor-key climaxes to gentle, song-like 
string writing, but the movement ended with the most thrillingly,obsessively 
dark music I had ever heard 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=upR_NEez_do&feature=results_video&playnext=1&list=PLE838595B9C7D7591>
.

I was in a shocked trance for the rest of the piece and the next three 
movements 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8g7TwLHfuA0&feature=autoplay&list=PLE838595B9C7D7591&lf=results_video&playnext=2>
. At the end, as the symphony at last found a transcendentmajor-key fanfare, 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JD2cqBs50P0> I felt battered, bruised and 
elated. It was a surprise to look around at the applauding masses and realise 
the world was still turning, to walk outside the concert hall and see that life 
appeared to be going on as normal. But my musical life, at least, was never the 
same again.

Talking about my Brucknerian conversion to friends and musicians, I'm often 
taken aback that his symphonies don't have the same narcotic effect on 
everyone. But if you're reading this thinking you don't like Bruckner much, 
you're in good company. In his lifetime, he was set up as the Viennese polar 
opposite of Brahms, a Wagnerian symphonist for the contemporary avant garde to 
hold against Brahms's classicism. Pitted against the combined forces of 
Vienna's musical establishment in the late 19th century, Bruckner never stood 
much of a chance.

When he conducted the Vienna Philharmonic in the premiere of the Third 
Symphony in 1877, the leading criticEduard Hanslick 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eduard_Hanslick> described the piece as "a vision 
of Beethoven's Ninth [that had] made friends with Wagner's Walküre and wound up 
trampled under the hooves of their horses". Hanslick liked the Eighth even 
less, if that was possible: "Interminable, disorganised, and violent, 
Bruckner's Eighth Symphony stretches out into a hideous length … It is not 
impossible the future belongs to this nightmarish style, a future we therefore 
do not envy." Gustav Dömpke, writing in 1886, a decade before Bruckner's death, 
wrote one of the masterpieces of musical vitriol of all time about the 
composer: "We recoil in horror before this rotting odour which rushes into our 
nostrils from the disharmonies of this putrefactive counterpoint. His 
imagination is so incurably sick and warped that anything like regularity in 
chord progressions and period structure simply do not exist for him.Bruckner 
composes like a drunkard! 
<http://mq.oxfordjournals.org/content/94/1-2/156.short?rss=1&ssource=mfr>" 
Brahms summed up the anti-Bruckner position most succinctly of all, saying that 
he didn't write symphonies at all, but rather "symphonic boa constrictors".

Ironically, it's exactly the things Bruckner's fiercest critics hate that his 
devotees admire so much: the scale, the uniqueness of his harmony, the new kind 
of symphonic form he developed, the spiritual journeys he creates. But there's 
a dark side to being a Brucknerophile. It's arguable that the Nazis did more to 
co-opt Bruckner to their ideology than they did even Wagner. There'sa chilling 
photograph 
<http://www.photographersdirect.com/buyers/stockphoto.asp?imageid=665091> of 
Hitler unveiling a bust of Bruckner in the Valhalla at Regensburg in 1937. That 
year, Hitler chose to end the Nazi's annual Nuremberg rally with a performance 
of the gigantic finale ofBruckner's Fifth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QW8UCqR1l3c>; and when news of the Führer's 
death was announced in 1945, it wasn't Wagner that was played over German 
airwaves, butthe slow movement of Bruckner's Seventh 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uxt7VAmfVLk>.

The Nazis had an opportunity to remake Bruckner in their own image. His 
biography is short on detail, apart from his career as an organist and teacher, 
his obsessive study of the arcana of musical theory (especially counterpoint, 
the art of matching different musical voices with one another), and his 
occasional, ill-starred attempts at the seduction of young girls. Bruckner 
never married, and almost certainly died a virgin. He left no writings or 
theoretical tracts of any substance, and so was a blank canvas on which the 
Third Reich could paint their vision of a völkisch Wagnerian symphonist.

Since the war, something strange has happened to the performance practice of 
Bruckner's symphonies. More and more, conductors have made the monumental, 
monolithic aspects of Bruckner's symphonies the defining feature of the music. 
At their best, there's a meditative, intoxicating quality to the mesmerically 
slow speeds of performances by such conductors asHerbert von Karajan 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ZNNcvVd2EI> and especially Sergiu Celibidache 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1M4DD2yJMaI&feature=related>, but with less 
accomplished maestros, Bruckner is reduced to a weirdly one-dimensional 
architect of sound. Too often these days, his music is performed by conductors 
who unthinkingly take their cue from the slow speeds of the school of 
performance that sees Bruckner as a pseudo-spiritual-guru, as if the music were 
a static marble sculpture rather than a living, breathing organism.

At the Southbank Centre in London this year, there's a season-long chance to 
see where we are now in the story of Bruckner interpretation, with performances 
ofsix of the symphonies 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/composers/bruckner-anton>. The season 
starts with Claudio Abbado conducting the Lucerne Festival Orchestra in the 
Fifth, a performance – that should sing and soar like no other before or since 
– of Bruckner's most contrapuntally ambitious symphony. It ends next April, 
when Daniel Barenboim conducts the last three symphonies with hisStaatskapelle 
Berlin <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8nXtRG_lf1k>. I'm hoping we'll hear a 
more dynamic Bruckner from Abbado and Barenboim, as well as Vladimir Jurowski, 
Osmo Vänskä and the Southbank's other Brucknerians. Recent recordings byRoger 
Norrington 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckner-Symphony-No-3-D-Mi/dp/B000002RWT/ref=sr_1_6?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1317737926&sr=1-6>
,Nikolaus Harnoncourt <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hz3o38GE9Lo> and Jonathan 
Nott 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symph-Nr-3-d-moll-Bamberger-Symphonik/dp/B0006TN8YK> 
have revealed a different side to Bruckner, interpretations that make him a 
human being rather than a self-annihilating penitent.

But here's the biggest Brucknerian irony of all. You can experience the most 
dynamic vision of Bruckner in recorded history in performances given by Wilhelm 
Furtwängler, including some during the second world war with the Nazi-sponsored 
Berlin Philharmonic. There'sa performance of the Fifth Symphony from 1942 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=150NnjMRhZ0> that is still shockingly intense, 
vital and energetic. For anyone who thinks Bruckner only wrote slow, static, 
boa-constricting music, this is the performance to hear. There's an intensity 
and wildness Furtwängler finds that flatly contradicts the monolithic vision 
Hitler and Goebbels had of the composer. It's an energy and fearlessness 
today's conductors need to recover in their approach to Bruckner to do justice 
to the musical and existential revelations at the heart of each of 
his symphonies.
 