
January

10 Charles Dickens's The Mystery of Edwin Drood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jan/04/mystery-edwin-drood-dickens-bbc?newsfeed=true>
, starring Matthew Rhys and Tamzin Merchant, begins – and, unlike the book, 
ends – on BBC2.

13 Michael Morpurgo's much-loved children's novel War Horse 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/dec/21/war-horse-film-review>, a 
long-running favourite at the National and on Broadway, gets the Hollywood 
treatment. A tearjerking saga about a young soldier and his horse – it was only 
a matter of time before it was Spielberged.

16 TS Eliot prize <http://www.poetrybooks.co.uk/projects/4/>. Despite 
withdrawals from the shortlist over objections to a hedge fund's sponsorship of 
the prize, the Eliot remains the UK's premier poetry award, and its 
eve-of-event reading is always a treat. This year's shortlist includes Daljit 
Nagra, Carol Ann Duffy and John Burnside.

20 Release of film of Coriolanus, an Orson Wellesian effort directed by and 
starring Ralph Fiennes, with Gerard Butler as Aufidius and Vanessa Redgrave as 
Volumnia.

24 Costa awards ceremony <http://www.costabookawards.com/>. The multi-genre 
shortlist features Matthew Hollis's biography of Edward Thomas, Andrew Miller's 
novelPure, former Great Ormond Street nurse Christie Watson's debut novel Tiny 
Sunbirds Far Away, Carol Ann Duffy's poetry collection The Bees (also on the TS 
Eliot shortlist), and debut children's writer Moira Young'sBlood Red Road.

The 24th is also the 150th anniversary of Edith Wharton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/edithwharton>'s birth, in danger of being 
overlooked amid Dickens mania.

31 Oliver Goldsmith's She Stoops to Conquer opens at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, starring the former Coronation 
Streetactor Katherine Kelly.

New titles

Jack Holmes and His Friend by Edmund White 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/edmund-white> (Bloomsbury). White's new novel 
follows his hero's romantic adventures from the 1960s to the 80s, through 
gay liberation and up to the advent of Aids, his sexual life dominated by what 
he cannot have: his straight best friend Will.
 Chad Harbach, The Art of Fielding 
The Art of Fielding by Chad Harbach (Fourth Estate). This debut about 
ambition and friendship among college baseball players has been 
rapturously received in the US, generating plaudits from across the 
literary spectrum, from Jonathan Franzen to James Patterson.

All Is Song by Samantha Harvey (Jonathan Cape). The Wilderness  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780099526537/the-wilderness>
marked the debut of a substantial new voice. Her second novel is about a man 
whose determination to live philosophically puts him out of step with the world.

Pity the Billionaire by Thomas Frank (Harvill Secker). The first important US 
politics book in election year. Frank, the author ofWhat's the Matter with 
Kansas?, continues to ask why so many ordinary Americans favour free-market 
republicanism against their economic interests, even in the wake of the banking 
crisis.

Willpower by Roy F Baumeister (Allen Lane). A psychologist's study that argues 
willpower is like a muscle: it can be strengthened with practice.

Cairo: My Country, My Revolution by Ahdaf Soueif 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/ahdafsoueif> (Bloomsbury). One year on from 
the start of the Arab spring, Soueif interweaves recent events with 
episodes from her long relationship with the city of her birth.

Philip Larkin: The Complete Poems (Faber). All the published and unpublished 
verse, with comprehensive notes.

The Mara Crossing by Ruth Padel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ruth-padel> 
(Chatto). Poems and prose on the themes of home and migration.

February

6 60th anniversary of the Queen's accession, potentially providing a challenge 
for the poet laureate,Carol Ann Duffy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/carol-ann-duffy> – though she could delay 
singing for her sherry by writing a poem until June, when Her Maj will be doing 
her own celebrating.

7 200th anniversary of Charles Dickens's birth. As publishers, newspapers, 
television and radio all celebrated the birthday months ago, the actual date 
could well be marked only by a few pedants and Simon Callow.

10 Susan Hill's supernatural thriller The Woman in Black 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2011/aug/18/woman-in-black-video>, the 
stage version of which has been sending shivers down the spines of audiences 
since 1989, is now set to do the same for cinema-goers. Stars a grown-up Daniel 
Radcliffe.

17 Release of the film version of Jonathan Safran Foer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/jonathan-safran-foer>'s novel Extremely Loud 
and Incredibly Close, about a little boy grieving for his father who died in 
the 9/11 attacks.

27 The centenary of Lawrence Durrell's birth coincides with the 10th 
anniversary ofSpike Milligan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2002/feb/28/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
's death. Nothing in common? Far from it – both were born (six years apart) in 
British India.

New titles
 Nathan Englander, What We Talk About When We Talk About Anne Frank 
The new year is bristling with short stories, from Cornish folklore to Korean 
immigrants to hillbilly noir. Look out for Nathan Englander's much-garlanded 
collection of stories about modern Jewishness,What We Talk About When We Talk 
About Anne Frank (Weidenfeld), and Jon McGregor's This Isn't the Sort of Thing 
That Happens to Someone Like You (Bloomsbury), unsettling dispatches from the 
English fens.

Zona by Geoff Dyer (Canongate). "If I had not seen Stalker in my early 20s my 
responsiveness to the world would have been radically diminished." Subtitled "A 
Book About a Film About a Journey to a Room", Dyer's latest idiosyncratic 
meditation is a quest to unlock the mysteries of the great, unfathomable 
Tarkovsky film.

A Card from Angela Carter by Susannah Clapp (Bloomsbury). A study of the 
hugely influential novelist and journalist who died in 1992.

The Origins of Sex by Faramerz Dabhoiwala (Allen Lane). A first book by an 
Oxford historian who argues that between 1600 and 1800 society's view of sex 
changed completely – it began to be thought, for instance, that sex should be a 
private matter.

March

2 20th anniversary of the death of Philip K Dick 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/philipkdick>, the SF writer whose fiction 
inspired films such asBlade Runner, Total Recall and Minority Report. BBC1 is 
set to screen a Ridley Scott mini-series adapting (with Dick's own title, 
unusually)The Man in the High Castle.

It's also the UK release date of Declan Donnellan and Nick Ormerod's film of 
Maupassant'sBel Ami, with Uma Thurman, Christina Ricci and Robert Pattinson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/nov/06/robert-pattinson-interview-reality-bites>
, a rare instance of a dreamboat being cast as a journalist).

28 Eve Best, the British star of Nurse Jackie, returns to take the lead in The 
Duchess of Malfi at Kevin Spacey's Old Vic.

29 Sheffield Theatre's Michael Frayn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-frayn> season begins with 
Copenhagen and continues with Benefactors and Democracy.

New titles
 John Lanchester, Capital 
Capital by John Lanchester (Faber). Research for this hugely readable 
state-of-the-nation novel about how money makes London go round spawned 
Lanchester's elegant dissection of the financial crisis,Whoops! 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/businessandfinance/9781846142857/whoops-why-everyone-owes-everyone-and-no-one-can-pay>
.Capital intertwines the stories of a disparate group of Londoners at the 
height of the credit bubble, from an overstretched City trader to a Zimbabwean 
traffic warden, conceptual artist to cornershop owner, all linked by one south 
London street where the house prices have rocketed.

The Woman Who Went to Bed for a Year by Sue Townsend 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/nov/07/sue-townsend-interview-alex-clark> 
(Penguin). It's 30 years since Adrian Mole first appeared on Radio 4 as Nigel; 
in her new novel, Townsend turns her attention to the tribulations of a 
middle-aged woman.

No Time Like the Present by Nadine Gordimer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/nadinegordimer> (Bloomsbury).A 
state-of-the-nation novel about the new South Africa from the Nobel laureate.

The Lifeboat by Charlotte Rogan (Virago). Fantastic debut about survival at 
sea and on land. It's 1914: Grace escapes family ruin to snare herself a rich 
husband. Then the liner on which they are honeymooning goes down, and she finds 
herself adrift on an overloaded lifeboat.

Wired for Culture: The Natural History of Human Co-operation by Mark Pagel 
(Allen Lane). An evolutionary biologist argues that it is our cultures and not 
our genes that determine how we live.

Aftermath by Rachel Cusk <https://www.theguardian.com/books/rachel-cusk> 
(Faber). A personal study of marriage, separation and life afterwards.

Making the Future (Penguin) by Noam Chomsky. Four essays on the "unipolar 
moment" in which the US dominates – but for how long?

April

5 Jonathan Cape publishes Irvine Welsh's prequel to Trainspotting and Andrew 
Motion's sequel toTreasure Island on the same day. Hopes are high of 
cross-promotion (eg flashmobs of junkie pirates in city squares).

15 The Titanic centenary arrives at last, and with it an ocean liner of books, 
not least Richard Davenport-Hines'sTitanic Lives (HarperPress); also TV drama 
from Julian Fellowes.

16 London Book Fair  <http://www.londonbookfair.co.uk/>opens, with China 
honoured as this year's "Market Focus", sending over a squad of writers.

20 100 years since Dracula creator Bram Stoker reportedly died …

23 The Bard's supposed birthday sees the start of the RSC's World Shakespeare 
Festival 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/about-us/updates/world-shakespeare-festival-launch.aspx>
. BBC2 Shakespeare plays, which are expected to run April-June, include the 
history cycle ofRichard II, Henry IV, Parts 1 & 2, Henry V, with Rupert Goold, 
Richard Eyre and Thea Sharrock directing, Ben Whishaw, Jeremy Irons and Tom 
Hiddleston as the kings and Simon Russell Beale (who may have to put some 
weight back on) as Falstaff.

The Cultural Olympiad <http://www.london2012.com/cultural-olympiad>'s 
Shakespearefest gets off to a swaggering start with the Globe performing 37 
plays in 37 languages and continues with celebrations and performances up and 
down the country, from Stratford to Gateshead.

It's aso World Book Night <http://www.worldbooknight.org/>, the great book 
giveaway, which this year is also taking place in the US.

New titles

The Apartment by Greg Baxter (Penguin Ireland). A Preparation for Death, 
Baxter's brutally honest memoir about his literary ambitions and 
self-sabotaging behaviour in boomtime Dublin, revealed a blazing talent. Now 
comes a powerful first novel about an American who has set himself adrift in 
Europe.

Stonemouth by Iain Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/books/iainbanks> 
(Little, Brown). Banks's publishers are always promising a return to the 
blackly comic rites-of-passage territory ofThe Crow Road. This new one, about a 
man run out of town after he offends the local crime family, and his subsequent 
return to face his demons, looks as though it may deliver.

Scenes from Early Life by Philip Hensher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philip-hensher> (Fourth Estate). 
An autobiographical novel – but the twist is that the autobiography belongs to 
Hensher's husband, Zaved Mahmood. It's the story of growing up in a Bengali 
family against the backdrop of civil war and the creation of a new country, 
Bangladesh.
 Peter Carey, The Chemistry of Tears 
The Chemistry of Tears by Peter Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/petercarey> (Faber). In modern-day London, a 
conservator mourning the death of her secret lover tries to unravel the mystery 
of a 19th-century automaton: a clockwork puzzle made for a sick child. Life and 
death, love and human invention are explored as the two stories intertwine.

Pure by Timothy Mo (Turnaround). The three-times Booker-shortlisted author of 
Sour Sweet has had a volatile relationship with publishers and editors, turning 
to self-publishing in the past. For his first novel in over a decade, set in 
Thailand, he's teamed up with a small London distribution company. The key 
attraction of his new publisher? He answers the phone: "None of this 'he's in a 
meeting', which is like 'your cheque's in the post'."

Imagine: How Creativity Works by Jonah Lehrer (Canongate). With a blurb by 
Malcolm Gladwell, this study by the still-young Lehrer (his third book) 
contends that creativity is not a gift possessed only by the special few, but a 
variety of thought processes that can be learnt.

What Money Can't Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets by Michael Sandel (Allen 
Lane). The Harvard star professor asks how we prevent market values from 
reaching into spheres of life where they don't belong.

How Soon Is Now? by Richard King (Faber). A history of Britain's independent 
record labels.

Love's Bonfire by Tom Paulin (Faber). His first poetry collection since 2004.

May

7 Post-Dickens Victorian fatigue may dampen celebrations of twin 
bicentenaries, of Robert Browning's birth and Edward Lear's on 12 May. 
Together they can claim an influence that has filtered through to all surreal 
or nonsense literature and anyone writing in character, from Jay-Z and Beyoncé 
to Carol Ann Duffy.

11 The British Library <http://www.bl.uk/> exhibition on "British literature 
and place" will include such treats as the first hand-written and illustrated
Alice's Adventures Underground; William Blake's notebooks; JG Ballard's 
handwritten manuscripts; the "suppressed" chapter from Wind in the Willows; a 
childhood newspaper written by Virginia Stephen (Woolf) describing a summer 
visit to a lighthouse and manuscripts of the Brontës, includingJane Eyre.

28 Centenary of the birth of Patrick White 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2010/may/17/lost-booker-prize-patrick-white-the-vivisector>
, the prickly Australian novelist who won the Nobel prize in 1973, and vies 
with Elias Canetti and Alberto Moravia for the coveted title of major author 
whose works are most often seen in secondhand bookshops.

30 Orange prize <http://www.orangeprize.co.uk/> ceremony – will Joanna 
Trollope and her fellow judges anoint the first non-American winner since 2008?

New titles

Home by Toni Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tonimorrison> (Chatto 
& Windus). It's now a quarter of a century since the publication of Morrison's 
masterpiece,Beloved. Her new novel explores the bitter homecoming of a black 
Korean vet, who must take on the racism of 50s America and his own 
self-loathing in order to rescue his sister and redeem his Georgia roots.
 Hilary Mantel, Bring up the Bodies 
Bring Up the Bodies by Hilary Mantel  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/17/hilary-mantel-sequel-wolf-hall>
(Fourth Estate). Mantel's grand reimagining of Thomas Cromwell and his times 
has grown into a trilogy. This follow-up to the mighty 2009 Booker-winnerWolf 
Hall takes a detour into the brutal downfall of Anne Boleyn. Mantel promises a 
"shorter, more concentrated" book this time, though it will be no less 
gruelling: "By the time Anne was dead I felt I had passed through a moral 
ordeal."

Skios by Michael Frayn (Faber). Cerebral summer reading set on an idyllic 
Greek island, where a famous scientist has been invited to give a lecture to 
the annual convention – but turns out to be not at all what his audience was 
expecting …

In One Person by John Irving <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnirving> 
(Doubleday). In typically tragicomic style, Irving sets out to explore sexual 
identity – difference and desire, togetherness and solitude – through a 
half-century in the life of his bisexual narrator Billy and a cast of friends 
and lovers.

The Deadman's Pedal by Alan Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-warner> (Jonathan Cape). There must be 
a tinge of autobiography to Warner's seventh novel, in which a teenager in the 
Scottish Highlands in the 70s dreams, drifts, falls in love and works on the 
railways. His last novel was longlisted for the Booker prize; his eccentric 
star continues to rise.

Mrs Robinson's Disgrace by Kate Summerscale (Bloomsbury). The follow-up to the 
prizewinning, bestsellingThe Suspicions of Mr Whicher centres on a celebrated 
Victorian divorce case.

London, You're Beautiful: An Artist's Year by David Gentleman (Particular 
Books). The capital as represented by the Camden-based artist.

Jubilee Lines (Faber). Carol Ann Duffy, the poet laureate, brings together 60 
contemporary poets to write about each of the 60 years of the Queen's reign.

Also out this month: The Server by Tim Parks (Harvill Secker), about a 
Buddhist retreat; a family get-together inThe Red House by Mark Haddon 
(Jonathan Cape); short stories from Jackie Kay (Reality, Reality, Picador); and 
humanity reaches the stars in2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (Orbit).

June

8 Euro 2012 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/interactive/2011/dec/02/euro-2012-complete-interactive-guide>
 football tournament begins, offering host nations Poland and Ukraine a 
slightly spurious opportunity – but who are we to talk in Olympics year? – to 
draw attention to their vibrant cultural heritages. If all goes well, lectures 
on Bulgakov, Gogol, Mickiewicz and Miłosz will replace half-time analysis in TV 
match coverage.

26 Poetry Parnassus  
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/about-us/discover-and-do/poetry-parnassus>
gets under way, an Olympics for poets overseen by Simon Armitage with each 
country able to nominate one writer.
 Getty Images 
28 300th anniversary of the birth of Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/jul/15/reveries-solitary-walker-rousseau-review>
. Switzerland and France can be expected to fight for ownership of the romantic 
novelist, philosopher and autobiographer.

New titles

Canada by Richard Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/books/richard-ford> 
(Bloomsbury). Ford promises "all kinds of untoward and actually quite violent 
things" in this novel about fugitives in the 1950s.

The Dream of the Celt by Mario Vargas Llosa (Faber). The Celt of the title is 
Roger Casement, the Irish poet-patriot who was executed in 1916 for seeking 
German support for a revolt against British rule. The South American connection 
is provided by his role as British consul, when he campaigned against the abuse 
of rubber workers in Peru.

The Long Earth by Terry Pratchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/terrypratchett> and Stephen Baxter 
(Doubleday). "Our Earth is but one of a chain of parallel worlds, each 
differing from its neighbours by a little (or a lot) in an infinite landscape 
of infinite possibilities. And you can just step from one world to the next …" 
Pratchett, who last year published his 50th book, has been mulling over this 
idea for more than 20 years.

The Old Ways by Robert Macfarlane (Hamish Hamilton). This completes the 
informal trilogy that began withMountains of the Mind, tracing the 
relationships between landscape and ways of thinking and feeling. Macfarlane 
journeys along the old drovers' tracks and sea paths of Britain.

Vagina by Naomi Wolf (Virago). The Beauty Myth author writes a cultural history
of female sexuality and how it has been perceived.

July

19 Staging the World – British Museum exhibition 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/> on London and its theatres in the 1590s and 
1600s.

27 The Olympics begin, and Ruth Mackenzie brings her Cultural Olympiad to a 
climax.

Mo Said She Was Quirky by James Kelman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/james-kelman> (Hamish Hamilton). A master of 
Scottish dialect, Kelman has inhabited the consciousness of men of all ages. 
Now he takes us through 24 hours in the life of a young woman.

The Truth by Michael Palin (Weidenfeld). The globetrotting Python's second 
novel features a hack who is given the chance to write a biography of a 
legendary environmental activist – and discovers that his hero may have feet of 
clay.

Lionel Asbo: State of England by Martin Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> (Jonathan Cape). Amis promised 
that this satire about a violent criminal who wins the lottery will be the 
"final insult" to the England he's left for the US. The novel will be his 
revenge on celebrity culture,X Factor vacuity and the decline of England in all 
its "rage, dissatisfaction, bitterness". Oh, and Katie Price.

The Twelve by Justin Cronin (Orion). The Passage, in which humanity breeds its 
own destruction when vampiric "virals" are created for the military, was a 
monstrous success: an absorbing, gruelling 1,000-page epic – that ended on a 
cliffhanger. In part two, the small group of survivors fight back; but with a 
third volume in the pipeline, resolution is some way off yet.

August

7 Joe Wright's Anna Karenina is released, with who else but Keira Knightley, 
hoping to match Greta Garbo and Vivien Leigh as Anna, Jude Law as Vronsky, and 
Oxfordshire as the Russian countryside.

11 The world's biggest celebration of books commences for two weeks of events 
and performances from literary names established and new at the International 
Edinburgh Book Festival.

Umbrella by Will Self <https://www.theguardian.com/books/willself> 
(Bloomsbury). In the psychologically swinging 60s, Self's long-running 
character, notorious shrink Zack Busner, takes up a post at a north London 
mental asylum. There he finds coma victims who have been sleeping out the 20th 
century.

Jeanette Winterson's as yet untitled horror story (Hammer). The film company 
Hammer is moving into publishing with what Winterson describes as her "very 
scary novella about the Lancashire witches", the nine women and two men who 
were tried for murder by witchcraft in 1612.

Toby's Room by Pat Barker <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pat-barker> 
(Hamish Hamilton). Set among a group of students at the Slade School of Art in 
London and France before and during the first world war, Barker's new novel 
explores the intersection of art and medicine, through the pioneering science 
of facial reconstruction.

September

NW by Zadie Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/zadiesmith> (Hamish 
Hamilton). There's been a seven-year wait for Smith's fourth novel, which 
follows the fortunes of a group of friends on an estate in north-west London 
through school and into adulthood. Though they stay faithful to this most 
diverse of postcodes, their adult lives diverge dramatically.

Zoo Time (Bloomsbury), Howard Jacobson's follow-up to the Booker-winning The 
Finkler Question, continues his themes – love, lust, loss – and turns a fierce 
eye on the state of publishing.

After an 11-year wait, there's a new novel from Lawrence Norfolk, John 
Saturnall's Feast(Bloomsbury), set in the 17th century.

Unapologetic by Francis Spufford (Faber). A defence of Christian belief, and 
attack on the New Atheism, as represented by books such as Richard Dawkins'sThe 
God Delusion and Christopher Hitchens's God Is Not Great. Billed as "unhampered 
by niceness".

On Design by Alice Rawsthorn (Penguin). On the history, meanings and 
challenges of design.

Joseph Anton by Salman Rushdie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/salmanrushdie> (Jonathan Cape). His memoir 
of the fatwa.

October

16 The Man Booker Prize <http://www.themanbookerprize.com/> is announced. The 
chair of judges this year is Peter Stothard, editor of the TLS; his fellow 
judges are Dinah Birch, academic and literary critic; Amanda Foreman, 
historian, writer and broadcaster; Dan Stevens, actor; and Bharat Tandon, 
academic, writer and reviewer.

New short story collection from Margaret Atwood (Bloomsbury).

Country Girl by Edna O'Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/books/edna-o-brien> 
(Faber). A long-awaited memoir from the Irish novelist born in 1930, energised 
by encounters with Hollywood stars and literary heavyweights.

November

Just over 50 years since it was first published, Jack Kerouac's beat classic 
On the Road <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/aug/05/fiction.jackkerouac> 
finally makes it to the big screen. The film will be directed by Walter Salles, 
with Francis Ford Coppola (who first bought the rights as far back as 1979) as 
executive producer.

December

21 Ang Lee's film adaptation of Yann Martel's Life of Pi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/26/ang-lee-life-of-pi>, the story of a 
boy trapped on a boat with a tiger, will surely captivate audiences; the novel 
is the bestselling Booker-winner of all time.

25 The Great Gatsby gets the Baz Luhrmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/baz-luhrmann> treatment for the big screen, 
with Leonardo DiCaprio and Carey Mulligan starring as Jay and Daisy. A timely 
new take on Fitzgerald's depression-era classic.
 