
Paramount is developing a big-screen version of Little House on the Prairie 
after the project was put into turnaround by Sony.

Spirit of the frontier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/26/little-house-on-the-prairie-ingalls-wilder>
The family drama, which aired from 1974 to 1983, was based on the books by 
Laura Ingalls Wilder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/26/little-house-on-the-prairie-ingalls-wilder>
 chronicling her upbringing in 19th-century rural Minnesota. The film version 
was originally announced in 2012 with Scott Rudin producing. Rudin’s credits 
range fromThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/14/the-social-network-review> to 
School of Rock.

But with changes at the top of Sony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/24/sony-pictures-new-chairman-amy-pascal-tom-rothman>
 last year, the film was put reportedly canned after worries over a $45m 
budget. According to theHollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/little-house-prairie-movie-lands-859422>
, Paramount has now taken on the adaptation.

It’s set to be directed by Sean Durkin, who took over from Pineapple Express 
director David Gordon Green, who dropped out. Durkin initially broke out with 
the Sundance hitMartha Marcy May Marlene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/02/martha-marcy-may-marlene-review> 
and went on to direct the acclaimed Channel 4 series Southcliffe. He is also 
still attached to a Janis Joplin biopic.

The script will come from Abi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/10/abi-morgan-interview>, 
who most recently brought Suffragette to the big screen. Her previous credits 
include Shame and The Iron Lady.

Little House on the Prairie ran for 10 seasons on television. It starred 
Michael Landon andMelissa Gilbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/10/melissa-gilbert-us-congress-michigan-democrat>
, and also featured notable guest stars such as Anne Archer, James Cromwell and 
Sean Penn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVt4z16n-3eU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVt4z16n-3eU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVt4z16n-3eU&media=>
The opening titles of Little House on the Prairie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vt4z16n-3eU>  