
This month, A Room for London plays host to author and historian Maya Jasanoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/maya-jasanoff>. For four days 
each month, a different writer spends time in the house boat currently perched 
on the top of the South Bank Centre in London as part of Artangel's year long 
project,A London Address 
<http://aroomforlondon.co.uk/a-london-address/may-2012-maya-jasanoff>. Earlier 
in the year we welcomedJuan Gabriel VÃ¡squez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/jan/24/live-webchat-juan-gabriel-vasquez>
 andJeanette Winterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/feb/22/jeanette-winterson-live-webchat>
 for webchats live from the boat. Now it's Maya's turn.

Maya is professor of British and Imperial history at Harvard University. Her 
latest book,Liberty's Exiles: The Loss of America and the Remaking of the 
British Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780007180103/libertys-exiles-the-loss-of-america-and-the-remaking-of-the-british-empire>
, (shortlisted last year for the Samuel Johnson Prize) looks at the aftermath 
of the American Revolution, following the fortunes of those people who 
supported and fought for the losing side who sought refuge across the world.

If you have a question for Maya, either about her research or her time in the 
boat, she will be here between1pm and 2pm (BST) on Wednesday 30 May to chat. 
Post your questions in the thread below and check back on Wednesday to join in 
the conversation.

We've posted the conversation here, to make it easier to follow.

EmBrom asks <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16371537>
:

Hello Maya, what's it like being a writer in residence in A Room for London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/a-room-for-london>? And can you tell us 
about the strangest residency offer that you've had?

Maya Jasanoff replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16374178>:

Hello from the Room with the best view in London! Well, let me begin by saying 
that this is the best residency I've done, and probably the strangest, but I 
hereby welcome offers for others! I wrote portions of Liberty's Exiles in two 
residencies, one at the magnificent MacDowell Colony in New Hampshire, the 
other as a visiting scholar at Thomas Jefferson's house in Virginia, 
Monticello. I stayed in a cottage on the neighboring farm, which had been built 
for the use of a very special guest: Franklin Delano Roosevelt. It was fun to 
write a book about pro-British loyalists under the shadow of the two Presidents 
on our nickels and dimes....

LaurenJM asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16371924>:

Hi Maya, it must have been hard being stuck on a boat during this great 
weather!

I think my biggest worry if I went up there would be that I would have a 
four-day slump and not be able to write anything... then again, in such a small 
space I'd run out of ways to procrastinate eventually.

As a historian/historical writer though, such a great view of London must have 
been very inspiring? Is it strange to think that some day even the (fairly) new 
London Eye will become a part of its history?

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16374361>

Tough life indeed.... It's very easy to procrastinate--but also to get 
inspiration for writing--because there is so much going on around me: sirens 
and cheering schoolchildren and Tubes and buses and bells. And so many boats of 
different shapes and sizes.
The view extends from St. Paul's to Westminster and over to the London Eye, so 
it is indeed quite a sweep of British (London) history: church and state and... 
surveillance? When you're inside the London Eye, you're looking out at a 
fantastic cityscape, but when you're sitting "on deck" at the Room as I've been 
doing, you realize that the Eye is really a great big panopticon in motion.

2011anna2011 asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16371479>:

Given you have written quite extensively about the British Empire, what do you 
make of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee this weekend...?

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16374496>:

I've been thinking about this a lot, partly because I'll be speaking at a 
conference on monarchy next week http://www.hrp.org.uk/monarchyconference about 
the relationship between the monarchy and the empire. The last Diamond Jubilee, 
in 1897, was an explicit celebration of Britain's Empire at its height. Now, it 
seems to me the timing of the Jubilee against the Olympics demonstrates a new 
way of thinking about the relationship of London to the world.

I will be fascinated to watch the flotilla, which is meant to make us think 
about the older Elizabethan age. There will be a thousand boats. In Queen 
Elizabeth I's day, there were two thousand boats at any given time on London's 
stretch of the Thames, and by Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee, more than ten 
thousand boats were registered on the river. At the same time, the thousand 
boats also suggest resonances with the "little boats" at Dunkirk, a reminder 
that the Queen is perhaps the strongest symbolic connection between Britain 
today and the "finest hour."

AndrewLucas asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16371908>:

Good afternoon, Maya
I understand that slaves were offered freedom & land if they fought in support 
of the British? Is there any truth in that? What happened to those people after 
the British defeat, was there a colony of former-slaves in Nova Scotia?
With thanks & best wishes

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16374671>:

Yes, this is one of those rather flattering stories that happens to be true. 
As early as 1775 British officials offered freedom to runaway slaves--belonging 
to patriots only, mind--who agreed to fight for the British. The response was 
instant and signficant: some 20,000 slaves all told ran to the British during 
the war, including, incidentally, slaves belonging to many of our founding 
fathers (Washington, Jefferson, etc.).

At the end of the war, against loud patriot objections, the British 
commander-in-chief Sir Guy Carleton superintended the evacuation of some 
8-10,000 slaves to Britain and British colonies. About 3000 went to Nova 
Scotia... for a little while at least: in 1791, 1200 of them went on again, to 
become the founding settlers of Freetown, Sierra Leone.

lateforbreakfast asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16372215>:

Hello Maya,

in Liberty's Exiles you talk of Canada as a chance to see how the US would 
have been had the loyalists been victorious. If that's the case, do you think 
the USA mightn't have become such a dominant superpower if the war had gone the 
other way?

Also - was fascinated by the story of the black loyalist immigrants to the UK 
who were then sent en masse to Sierra Leone? Seems we often think of Britain's 
black population as something that arrived in the 1950s but that story explodes 
that myth. Was wondering, did you uncover any stories about what became of 
those who didn't go to Sierra Leone?

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16374893>:

Very good question. I think the first thing to note is that the US didn't 
become a dominant superpower for a very long time... Britain was the dominant 
superpower throughout the 19th century and the US was decidedly provincial--as 
well as unstable (think: Civil War). Then there's the great "what if" question 
about what would have happened had the thirteen colonies remained part of the 
British Empire. We'd probably have ended up with a rather different British 
Empire: slavery might have persisted longer, transcontinental expansion would 
have been slower, and Britain might not have been able to stave off the French 
revolutionaries (but the what-ifs begin to pile up badly here).

As for the black loyalists, yes, there were thousands who came to Britain, 
especially London, after 1783. It's a mistake to think of Britain's black 
community as a 20th-century phenomenon: there was a substantial black 
population in Britain in the 18th century too, and slavery was effectively 
unenforceable here from the 1770s.

kindofgirl asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16373746>:

Hi Maya,

At a time of heightened conflict in parts of the world, which are increasingly 
elevated to a global stage through the intervention of the international 
community, do you think we run the risk of creating a generation of 
"international exiles" once conflict is over? And how do we contend with this, 
and guarantee against individuals on the "wrong side" of conflict becoming 
internationally ostracised?

Thanks! Rachel

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16375140>:

Haven't we already done so? There are so many stateless populations in the 
world today, displaced from so many conflicts: Palestinians are the most famous 
example perhaps, but then there are Burmese refugees in Thailand, Tibetans in 
India, Congolese refugees in neighboring countries, and so on and on and on. 
What's more, only those who attract western sympathies for political reasons 
tend to get much attention; and as Guardian readers know well, even then 
diplomacy doesn't always follow suit. Short of stopping conflicts altogether... 
I think the only way forward is to remember the importance of applying 
humanitarian aid in non-partisan ways. I admire the commitment of Medecins Sans 
Frontieres (and UN peace-keeprs) to not taking sides, however difficult this 
role can be in practice.

littlewhite asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16373286>:

Hi Maya

Do you think we have moved as far from the Imperialism which Conrad explores 
as we have hoped to? Or are there still significant vestiges of our dark past 
still present in the London you see out of the window?

How does the view make you feel about London's future?

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16375318>:

In a word, no. Empires are the most enduring and durable form of political 
organization in world history, and I don't see imperialism going away any time 
soon. These days, when we use the word "imperialism" we normally apply it to 
economic and cultural practices, as opposed to outright political domination, 
but even that continues in many parts of the world (we just happen to call 
today's empires nation-states).

The view here invites comparison with another riverfront, the Bund in 
Shanghai. The institutions of western informal empire, from the 19th/20th 
centuries, line the embankment: HSBC, Jardine's, and so on. But on the other 
side of the river rises the astonishing new city of Pudong, utterly 
overshadowing--or rather, over-illuminating, with all their neon lights!--the 
architecture of 20th-century western investment with a strikingly 21st-century 
vision of Chinese growth. I can see the Shard going up from here, and a fair 
number of cranes on the skyline, but compared to Pudong, Canary Wharf looks 
very... dare I say, 20th century?

Kaiteur asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16375235>:

Hi Maya, greetings from Beijing. Looking at your trajectory from Edge of 
Empire, to Liberty's Exiles, to Conrad, I'm really interested in how you are 
attracted as a historian to outsiders, to people who trim the edges of imperial 
systems. How do you understand that?

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16375530>:

"Trim the edges": great phrase! I guess I have always been fascinated by the 
relationship between outsides and insides, outsiders who become insiders, and, 
inevitably, insiders drifting to the outside. (You must have a terrifically 
interesting perspective on this from Beijing--cf my last comment.) There's 
perhaps something particularly American about that dynamic--we're a nation of 
immigrants, and I'm a child/grandchild of them--but it's also central to the 
experience of so many communities in the modern imperial and "globalized" world.

Conrad offers a great perspective on this because at one level he is seen as 
the archetypal author about imperialism and imperial--racist--attitudes (as 
Edward Said and Chinua Achebe, among others, have stressed), but at another 
level he was the consummate outsider: an ethnic Pole raised in different parts 
of eastern Europe, who spent 20 years as a sailor and only came to Britain and 
writing--and the English language--as an adult. He forces us to remember that 
history tends to unfold in technicolor--blazing, blinding, confusing, 
fascinating--not in easily reducible blacks and whites.

BookBeeOne asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16371221>:

Hi Maya, I'm currently reading Liberty's Exiles. I wonder how much of a 
clearly discernable 'American' culture you think those who fled took with them?

Maya replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/16375703>:

You can see a tendency to resist certain forms of authority, connecting this 
first great successful war of anti-colonial independence to later independence 
movements in the British Empire. But you can also see different bargains being 
struck around types of government and authority, whose legacies perhaps we're 
still wrestling with today.

â¢ Follow us on Twitter @Guardianbooks <https://twitter.com/#!/guardianbooks>
 