
In February this year a survey by Unison of more than 14,000 local government 
workers <http://www.unison.org.uk/asppresspack/pressrelease_view.asp?id=2967>
showed that a massive 87% were struggling to cope with increased pressure in 
their jobs.

Employees said that the combination of declining staff numbers and increased 
expectations from both the public and their bosses was leaving them feeling the 
strain. As many as 72% said stress was affecting how well they can do their 
jobs and 70% claimed that stress was affecting their personal life.

In a statement released by Unison, Heather Wakefield, head of local 
government, said: "Working in local government is like living in a pressure 
cooker and eventually the lid will blow off."

With statistics indicating that a large number of local government workers 
feel overburdened, what can be done to reduce stress?

• Is more support at work needed?

• What practical steps can help?

• How can we strike a better work-life balance?

Join our experts from 12pm-2pm May 29 to explore how stress can be managed. 
Our expert panel includes stress specialists and local government frontline 
workers. Post your questions now or take part on the day.

Expert panel:

Chris Lecatsas-Lyus is a career counsellor and owner of Career Workouts 
<http://www.careerworkouts.com/> with 10 years experience working in local 
government. Her focus over the last three years has been in supporting people 
to manage their workload and job uncertainty.

Ruth Hyde is chief executive of Broxtowe council <http://www.broxtowe.gov.uk/>
. A lawyer by profession, she worked with various councils before being 
appointed to her first chief executive role at Oadby and Wigston borough 
council in 1991.

Katie Porkess is an organisational psychologist. She specialises in the 
behaviour of employees, both individuals and groups, and their leaders when 
they are working under pressure and stress and offers solutions for its 
management. Katie is a fellow and trustee of theInternational Stress Management 
Association <http://www.isma.org.uk/> (UK), an affiliate of the Centre for 
Leadership Studies 
<http://business-school.exeter.ac.uk/research/areas/centres/cls/>, and a guest 
lecturer on the Business Ethics module of the One Planet MBA programme, both at 
theUniversity of Exeter <http://www.exeter.ac.uk/>.

Heather Wakefield is Unison's <http://www.unison.org.uk/> head of local 
government.

Elizabeth Cotton is an academic at Middlesex University <> and director of the 
Resilience Space <http://theresiliencespace.com/>. She blogs as Surviving Work  
<http://survivingworkweekly.wordpress.com/>.

Martin Rayson is divisional director of human resources and organisational 
development for theLondon borough of Barking and Dagenham 
<http://www.lbbd.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>.

Cary Cooper is pro vice chancellor for external relations and distinguished 
professor of organisational psychology and health atLancaster University 
Management School <http://www.lums.lancs.ac.uk/>.

Samantha Brousas is head of human resources at Cheshire West and Chester 
council <http://www.cheshirewestandchester.gov.uk/>.

Elaine Hirshall is a helpline adviser at Acas 
<http://www.acas.org.uk/index.aspx?articleid=782>.

Janet Dean worked for 30 years in local government as an executive director. 
She has worked as freelance consultant, coach and mentor for the past eight 
years. She is cofounder ofOpen Channel 
<http://janetdeansblog.blogspot.co.uk/2012/09/if-you-missed-open-channels-new-format.html>
, a network which providers coaching and organisation development for public 
service organisations.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the local 
government network <https://register.theguardian.com/local-government/> for 
analysis, best practice and the latest job opportunities
 