
The UK higher education budget cuts have been well-documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/feb/08/university-funding-cuts-crisis?intcmp=239>
. Occurring concurrently, aredebates 
<http://www.case.org/Public_Policy/Europe/BritPhil.html> about how universities 
can use fundraising and philanthropy as a means to sustain and increase funding.

While the UK may not have the experience in educational fundraising that north 
American universities have (Nick Blinco, director of development and alumni 
relations at the University of Brimingham, said at theGuardian Higher Education 
Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/higher-education-network-blog/2011/mar/15/future-of-higher-education-summit-live-blog>
 that UK HEIs were about 30 years behind the US) Adrian Salmon argues that 
universities are, at their core, "fully-fledged charities, just like Oxfam, or 
the NSPCC."

In a recent blog for the network, he argued that "the only difference is that 
we're what are called 'exempt charities' ...exempt from registration because 
our governance structures are deemed exceptionally strong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/higher-education-network-blog/2011/mar/24/universities-charitable-institutions>
."

If universities, as Salmon says, have "stopped thinking of themselves as, 
first and foremost, educational charities," does this suggest that fundraising, 
philanthropy and alumni relations staff are not adequately supported in their 
efforts to communicate with donors and their own institutions?

Do fundraisers have the skills to capitalise on the year-on-year increase in 
charitable giving? And what can the sector learn from those universities who 
have mastered fundraising?

In our first live Q&A, we will bring together experts from HE institutions and 
consultants, to debate these points and take your questions, as well as share 
experience and strategies for effective higher education fundraising.

Put your questions to our panelists below or join us for the live debate on 
Friday 1 April from 1-4pm.

The Panel

Lin Richardson, senior grants officer, The Wolfson Foundation 
<http://www.wolfson.org.uk/>

The Wolfson Foundation is a charitable foundation that awards grants to 
support excellence in the fields of science, medicine, health, education, and 
the arts and humanities. Lin joined the Foundation in 2001 and has experience 
in each stage of the grant-making process, from the initial assessment of grant 
applications, through to the awards, monitoring and payment.

Kate Hunter, executive director, CASE Europe  <http://www.case.org/>


CASE is the international membership organisations for professionals working 
in fundraising, alumni relations, communications and marketing in the education 
sector. Prior to this Kate worked as head of communications at Queen Mary, 
University of London and in public relations roles at the Royal Shakespeare 
Company.

Adrian Salmon, annual fund manager, University of Leeds 
<https://alumni.leeds.ac.uk/Page.aspx?pid=183>


Adrian joined the university in February 2008, having previously been head of 
client services for The Phone Room Ltd. In his time at The Phone Room he 
devised and executed telephone campaigns for over 100 UK charities, raising 
more than £20m. He is now in charge of telephone, direct mail and online 
charitable appeals to the University of Leed's worldwide alumni community.

Lorna Gozzard, director, Kindred Agency <http://www.kindredagency.com/>


Lorna has over 12 years of media and branding experience. Within the higher 
education sector, Lorna worked closely with Universities UK to launch the 
inaugural Universities Week 2010, and is now working on extending public 
awareness of the wider benefits of the university sector through Universities 
Week 2011. She also works with CASE Europe to help normalize the concept of 
philanthropic giving to UK universities

Sam Davies, director of development and alumni relations, University of 
Brighton <http://www.brighton.ac.uk/alumni/>

Sam started out her fundraising career as a student caller as an undergraduate 
student at Warwick in 1997 and joined Brighton in August 2008 tasked with 
establishing a fundraising operation able to raise £1m per annum and 
significantly increase the size of the engaged alumni community.

Adrian Beney, partner, Iain More Associates <http://www.iainmore.com/>

Adrian was a fundraiser at the University of Durham for more than 20 years, 
establishing the Development office and programmes in major gifts, regular 
giving, prospect research and more. Since joining Iain More Associates he has 
worked with a number of universities including Oxford, Edinburgh, Newcastle, de 
Montfort, Liverpool and Middlesex, as well as a consortium of universities 
benchmarking their "annual" giving programmes.

Tania Jane Rawlinson, director of campaigns and alumni relations, University 
of Bristol <http://www.bris.ac.uk/alumni/>

TJ began her fundraising career in 1991, working part-time in the development 
office at Lincoln College Oxford. In 1998, she became development director at 
University College Oxford, running a successful £15m campaign over five years. 
She is a member of the Ross Group and leads the RossCASE Survey Working Party. 
TJ joined the University of Bristol in 2003 and in 2009 Bristol launched a 
£100m Centenary Campaign, of which £68m is now pledged or committed.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>
 