
For the next four days, the Colombian novelist Juan Gabriel Vásquez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/juan-gabriel-vasquez> is making a
house boat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2012/jan/15/architecture-design#/?picture=384406674&index=0>
 perched on the top floor of the Queen Elizabeth Hall, London, his home and 
study.

Juan was one of the up-and-coming Latin-American writers under 40 who were 
selected for the Bogota 39. His novelsThe Informers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/may/24/fiction2> (2004) and The Secret 
History of Costaguana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jun/05/secret-history-costaguana-gabriel-vasquez>
 (2007) both riff on the legacy of Joseph Conrad – the former in the form of a 
politically complex thriller of Colombia in the 1980s and 90s, and the later 
through a picaresque account of the shenanigans surrounding the building of the 
Panama canal. Last year he won the richest prize for Spanish literature, the
Premio Alfaguara 
<http://www.alfaguara.com/es/noticia/juan-gabriel-vasquez-premio-alfaguara-de-novela-2011-por-el-ruido-de-las-cosas-al-caer-1/>
.

He is the first writer to stay in the boat as part of Artangel 
<http://www.artangel.org.uk/>'s year long project, A London Address 
<http://aroomforlondon.co.uk/a-london-address/jan-2012-juan-gabriel-vasquez>. 
He'll use his four days aboard the boat to write a specially commissioned piece 
on the theme of London andThe Roi des Belges 
<http://www.shmoop.com/heart-of-darkness/photo-roi-des-belges.html>, the boat 
Conrad commanded on the Congo. He will also take part in live author webchat 
with Guardian books site readers. Here is your chance to put your questions to 
Juan.

Juan will be here between 4pm and 5pm (GMT) on Wednesday 25 January to chat. 
Post your questions for Juan in the thread below and then check back on 
Wednesday to join in the conversation.

We've posted the conversation above the line to make it easier to follow.

SazzleinBelfast asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14304845>:

I'm a researcher in translation and train university students to become 
freelance translators - I'm keen to know what your philosophy is on translation 
and if your own work as a translator of Victor Hugo and E.M Forster influences 
how you work with the translators of your own work?

Saludos!

Juan Gabriel Vásquez replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14328899>:

Hello and thank you for your question. Since I'm not a professional 
translator, my philosophy is quite utilitarian: I have always regarded 
translation as the best school a novelist can have. Let's agree that 
translators are the perfect readers: nobody reads as closely, as accurately, as 
sympathetically, with as much solidarity and generosity, as a translator. If 
this is true, then there is no better way to understand how a work of fiction 
works than through translation. As for my own translations, I have learned 
enormously from every one of them, even from the bad books – especially from 
the bad books, because translating them you notice firsthand the shortcuts, the 
lies, the cheating.

C1aireA asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14307419>:

Both The Informers and The Secret History of Costaguana reference Conrad's 
work. What is it about him that you find so powerful and do you think he has a 
special relevance to Latin American writers?

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329079>:

Those are two very different novels and Conrad is there in very different 
ways. In The Informers, he is undoubtedly an influence, a sort of tutelary god 
always looking over my shoulder (and I resent him for it). In The Secret 
History, however, he was a character - and sometimes just a metaphor. I think 
he should have a particular relevance for Latin American novelists, but that 
doesn't seem to be the case (for older generations, Faulkner or Joyce seemed to 
be more important). Nostromo, however, is perhaps the best novel written about 
Latin America outside the Spanish language; it has more to do with the great 
Latin American novels of the sixties than any Latin American novel. But I feel 
close to him for personal reasons: his life as an expatriate, his difficulties 
with his own literary tradition, the feeling that he didn't belong in just one 
culture (or language).

AggieH asks <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14313973>
:

[Quoting her own earlier question]"Do you translate your own work into 
English?" Ignorant question. My apologies to Anne McLean. If I amn't barred 
from the thread for stupidity, my other questions still stand though. 
Especially the collaboration would be interesting to hear about.

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14328969>:

Hello. Apologies accepted on behalf of Anne, and of course your other 
questions still stand! Well, I do work very closely with her. As a translator, 
however, I know that there can be fewer things as terrible as a novelist who 
thinks he knows your language – and sets out therefore to teach English to the 
English. So, all the time keeping in mind that the English language still has 
mysteries, I try to involve myself as much as I can in the process, changing 
whole sentences if it is necessary for reasons of euphony, but always relying 
heavily on Anne McLean's talent and impeccable ear. She's fully authorized to 
kill off a character if the sentence sounds better that way. (She has never 
dared.) Do I drive my translators to distraction? In the case of the three 
languages I can read, I think I drive them to madness. For the rest of them, I 
have a tendency to trust translators, mainly because nobody does it for the 
money.

arneDu asks <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14310984>
:

Thank you for enjoyable reading. I observe that many writers need a distance 
to their own country in order to approach it through fictional writing.

Is living abroad important to you as a writer? Do you think the issues you are 
dealing with in your books - such as deceit and betrayal - would have been 
depicted differently if you still lived in Colombia?

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329184>:

Hello. Well, let me put it this way: leaving Colombia 16 years ago has perhaps 
been the single most important decision I have made. But it is an old and 
clichéd tradition: it's as if Latin Americans had to do it. Just talking about 
the Latin American boom, you see great Colombian novels being written in Mexico 
(One Hundred Years of Solitude), great Peruvian novels being written in Spain 
(The War of the End of the World), great Mexican novels being written London 
(Terra Nostra), great Argentinean novels being written in Paris (Hopscotch). 
Why? I don't really know. Do you see things with more clarity from the outside? 
In my case, living abroad is what allowed me to write about Colombia. I think 
leaving helped me understand what was universal about my personal experiences 
or my country's past. And there's also a question of temperament: I feel better 
as an immigrant, living in places where I do not belong. Writing novels is very 
difficult and you should try to reduce those difficulties as much as you can.

RosalindHarvey asks: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329269>

I'm a translator of fiction and co-translated Héctor Abad's memoir 'Oblivion' 
with Anne McLean, who introduced me to your books, and so firstly I'd like to 
thank you for your beautiful and necessary novels.

You said in an interview once that 'not understanding something is perhaps the 
best reason a novelist can have to write about it', and that this kind of 
writing is a sort of 'finding out '.
I'm interested in the idea that this also happens when writers write about 
things in their own personal histories that perhaps they don't understand or 
weren't aware of, whether in straight autobiographies or in books with 
autobiographical elements. Did you discover new things about yourself while 
writing any of your books, and is it possible to control how much of yourself 
you put into your writing?
Gracias

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329269>:

Hello, Rosalind. Thank you for showing up (and congratulations on your 
rendering of Abad's beautiful book). When I said that I was talking about my 
troublesome realization that I didn't understand my country and so felt I 
wasn't allowed to write about it. But of course the idea applies to every 
experience, whether social or personal: fiction is a process of discovery, of 
going into a place you haven't been to or don't fully know (an area of 
darkness), and trying to come back with the news. And of course sometimes you 
find out things you didn't particularly want to face; but great novelists are 
people who never, never close their eyes. As a reader, I think you notice that: 
you know when the author is just looking the other way when dealing with a 
difficult truth. Javier Marías talks of "recognition": in a good novel you come 
across things that you knew, but you didn't know you knew. Those are wonderful 
moments, part of the reason we read fiction.

AggieH asks <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14305316>
:

You write novels, short stories, essays and reportage.

Let's pretend that you must give up all but one of these forms of writing. You 
will simply not be allowed out of that house boat until you have agreed that 
you will only ever practice one of those writing forms again ever ever in the 
future.

Which one?

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329333>:

Well, what a mean world you can imagine. I would choose novels. I am a 
novelist, whether I like it or not. I write essays to learn to read so that I 
can write novels. I would miss short stories, sure.

luceritoG asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14314001>:

In 'The Art of Distortion' you write that:

'We novelists understand that the only way to reveal the past is to treat it 
as a narrative product, therefore susceptible to being retold by any means.' 
(my translation, I hope that's OK!)

What do you think is the role of literature, of narrative, then, in 
re-imagining the past of a country like Colombia where certain national or 
historical narratives have become myth, like those of the Bogotazo and La 
Violencia?

How can retelling the past help to shape the present?

Is there a way to retell a violent history without resorting to the 
sensationalism of 'narcoliterature'?

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329433>:

Hi there. Well, I have always thought that the role of fiction, when dealing 
with the historical past, is to tell us things we can't find anywhere else.
Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> should not be redundant. I 
don't care too much for novelizations of history: War and Peace is not great 
because it is perfectly accurate, but because it allows us into places where 
even the best historiography can't go. The thing in Colombia us that we learned 
the lesson well: that period called La Violencia (around mid-century; 300,000 
deaths) produced so much bad, immediate literature that a young novelist called 
García Márquez was forced to question the whole approach. He thought that 
novels should not reproduce reality, but reconfigure it. Look at it from the 
side, if you will. Tell us something neither journalism nor historiography can.

As for your last question, I have certainly tried. My last novel has, anyway. 
It will probably be published at the end of the year in the UK, so you can tell 
me what you think.

patasola asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14306360>:

Why has it taken Colombian authors so long to deal with the country's murky 
and corrupt contemporary politics? I enjoyed Los Informantes because it showed 
the Colombia of today, without the stock cliches of literary Latin America or 
folclorismo.

So much Colombian writing seems either to deal with the distant past of La 
Violencia or generic narco-stories (Rosario Tijeras etc). Los Ejercitos won 
prizes, but dealt with today's violence in a non-specific, almost mythical way. 
I've long thought the narco-para-corruption of Colombia's national and local 
politics would be perfect for a James Ellroy-style dissection. Monteria 
Confidential, if you will.

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329613>:

I often ask myself that. But I think fiction always takes a little while to 
deal with reality, doesn't it? Novels that successfully explore their present 
moment are very, very rare, if only because they take two or three years to 
write, and the present they were in at the beginning is not there anymore when 
they end. Los ejércitos (The Armies) is a successful novel because it stylizes 
its subject matter instead of taking it head on, as great journalists have 
done. I know the most recent events dealt with in my fiction happened 16 years 
ago. We need that kind of perspective, I think. But Monteria Confidential does 
seem appealing…

Gavesend123 asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14323825>:

Can you tell us what it's been like working in A Room for London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/a-room-for-london>?

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329730>:

Hello. Nice Conradian nickname. A Room for London is an astonishing project – 
I suspect it will be one of those things that stay with you for a very long 
time, and I'm really very grateful. For a novelist, the greatest gift is the 
gift of time; and time on board my rooftop boat has been so concentrated, and 
the place so incredibly stimulating, that for the past four days I have been 
living an alternative life, really living inside the Conrad novels I'm reading 
and even seeing things I had not seen before. This I have tried to explain in a 
short text I have written (that was the whole purpose). Plus, the boat is full 
of great books. An ideal place to begin a new novel. Who knows?

JustineJordan asks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14328851>:

Could you tell us about what you're working on at the moment? Are you bringing 
work in progress to A Room for London, or starting something new?

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329806>:

For three whole days I have been thinking about Conrad's novels. Three in 
particular: Heart of Darkness, Nostromo, and The Secret Agent. I wrote a small 
text trying to suggest how amazing it was that those three novels, published 
between 1899 and 1907, anticipate every major issue the world had to deal with 
during the XX century. Today I've been writing the last lines of that essay. 
And looking at London through my fourteen windows. (Oh, and rereading Michael 
Ondaatje's beautiful The Cat's Table.)

But I published my last novel in Spanish less than a year ago, so no, no work 
in progress. Anxieties in progress, maybe.

MCosta asks <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14329554>
:

I remember you saying, while discussing Ondaatje's Anil's Ghost, that being a 
Colombian didn't mean you had to write forcibly about the country's political 
situation and the ensuing violence. What made you decide to write about it?
Reading your last comment I wonder if the growing distance has anything to do 
with that. In your first book, the stories where set in central Europe, as a 
matter of fact, and you have since come closer and closer to a subject you 
seemed to reject, a few years back.
Are you working on anything at the moment?

Juan replies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/14330015>:

Hi, M. That book of stories was written at a time in which I didn't think I 
could write about Colombia: after all, I had left the place with a feeling of 
tension or even rejection I felt I didn't understand it. In a way, I thought 
fiction should be written in response to what you know. (Write about what you 
know.) So I wrote that book of stories. But then, through the discovery of 
certain novelists and through certain personal experiences, I think I 
understood that not knowing (myself, my country) was as good as reason as 
anything. And I have been obsessively trying to explore what I don't know, 
which is a lot.
 