
Live music pumped $15.7bn into the Australian economy last year, creating 
65,000 full andpart-time jobs across the country 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-08-13/australian-live-music-pumped-to-the-tune-of-157b-in-2014/6694874>
, according to a report released on Thursday, conducted by the University of 
Tasmania and commissioned by the Live Music Office.

The home of Australia’s live music industry is Melbourne. It has more venues 
and working musicians than any other place in Australia.

You can see a gig any night of the week, any day of the year, in venues 
ranging from small suburban RSLs to large theatres and stadiums.

Here’s our pick of the best.

Crossroads on ACDC Lane: building frenzy raises fears for Melbourne music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2013/jun/24/crossroads-acdc-lane-melbourne-music>
The Corner Hotel, Richmond


The Corner is a Melbourne institution, with generations of live music fans 
standing on its sticky carpets. The venue is often seen as a launchpad to 
success, with many local and international acts having graced the stage when 
they were on the brink of going mainstream.

The Corner has hosted live music since the 1940s and now has a spacious band 
room with two bars and a rooftop upstairs.

It’s also notable as the place where Jack White came up with the ubiquitous 
Seven Nation Armyriff during a soundcheck 
<http://www.nme.com/blogs/nme-blogs/20-things-you-might-not-know-about-seven-nation-army>
, the Living End played 12 shows in 13 nights, and Elliott Smith played his 
Australian shows.

Just beware of that pillar though, standing smack bang in the middle of the 
room. Just like the Mona Lisa, wherever you stand it always seems like it’s 
looking straight at you.

Howler, Brunswick


A relatively new player on the Melbourne scene, the almost two-year-old 
reworked wool store offers an elaborate range of spaces and a spacious band 
room out back.

Howler’s <https://h-w-l-r.com/> stage has already played host to an impressive 
array of local and international acts, and can be transformed into a seated 
theatre.

The handful of raised booths at the back are prized property and there are 
usually dumplings on offer in the bar.

Howler is nestled behind a carpark next to Jewell train station in Brunswick. 
It hosts a range of performances, from spoken word – the iconic New York 
storytelling slam Moth is being held at Howler on 24 August – to film and album 
launches.

Cherry Bar, CBD

Everyone has a story about Cherry Bar <http://cherrybar.com.au/>. It might be 
an encounter with a touring musician, or stumbling on a secret gig, but if 
you’ve ever ventured down AC/DC Lane, you’ll have met some memorable characters.
Founded in 1999, Cherry earned the famously grumpy Noel Gallagher’s affection 
to the extent that he offered to buy it,rejected Lady Gaga’s request  
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/music/the-bar-that-said-nah-to-gaga-20120705-21jja.html>
to hold a party there because it clashed with a local band’s booking and saw 
the Arctic Monkeys frontman Alex Turner look good on the dancefloor.

It has live music on every night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2013/jun/24/crossroads-acdc-lane-melbourne-music>
 of the week, every week of the year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Flive-music-in-melbourne-four-of-the-best-places-to-see-a-gig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439516820003%2F105498bf-97e0-4cd9-baa8-f267e679d172-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Live%20music%20in%20Melbourne%3A%20four%20of%20the%20best%20places%20to%20see%20a%20gig&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Flive-music-in-melbourne-four-of-the-best-places-to-see-a-gig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Live%20music%20in%20Melbourne%3A%20four%20of%20the%20best%20places%20to%20see%20a%20gig&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Flive-music-in-melbourne-four-of-the-best-places-to-see-a-gig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439516820003%2F105498bf-97e0-4cd9-baa8-f267e679d172-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Lady Gaga has since returned to party at Cherry Bar after being turned away 
for an afterparty in the Melbourne live music venue. Photograph: Marco 
Piraccini/Demotix/Corbis 
Palais Theatre, St Kilda


While mostly known for smaller bar venues, Melbourne also has a collection of 
beautiful theatres that are now used for gigs. ThePalais Theatre, 
<http://www.palaistheatre.net.au/> on the picturesque St Kilda foreshore and 
Forum in Flinders Street <http://www.forummelbourne.com.au/> are heritage 
venues that also attract some of the world’s best bands.

With a capacity of 3,000 people, the Palais is the largest seated theatre in 
the country and its art deco architecture has earned it a spot on the Victorian 
heritage register.

The former cinema opened in 1927 andhas gradually grown to embracing popular 
live music, and hosting musicians including Nick Cave and the Rolling Stones.

Special mentions for the suburbs


Good music venues aren’t just confined to inner-city areas. Special mention 
must go to some of these smaller venues outside the city.


Caravan Club, Oakleigh

An old-style but revamped RSL <http://www.caravanmusic.com.au/>, the 
vaudeville hall performance space now hosts regular gigs from the likes of 
Russell Morris and Karise Eden, catering for a wide range of age groups.

Flying Saucer Club, Caulfield

The Caulfield RSL <http://www.flyingsaucerclub.com.au/> has been around since 
1935 but has only just taken on the role as a live music venue, with a large 
fireplace keeping things warm and cosy during the winter months.

Memo Music Hall, St Kilda

First opening in 1924 as a dancehall for soldiers, the hall 
<http://www.memomusichall.com.au/> has a capacity of 400 and plays host to a 
whole range of entertainment from singalong shows to intellectual discussions,
 while also doubling as a recording and rehearsal space.
 