
Academics at Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> University 
have threatened strike action if management push through proposals to axe its 
politics, philosophy and probability departments in what appears to be the the 
first casualty of poor scores in December's national exercise to judge research 
quality.

A meeting of the University and College Union today voted to oppose the 
closures and "prepare for possible industrial action" including a boycott of 
the university's procedure for making staff redundant or changing their 
contracts from research to teaching-only.

Local Labour MP, Peter Kilfoyle, lodged an early day motion in parliament 
condemning the cuts, while John Pugh, Liberal Democrat MP for Southport and 
alumnus of the university, said the cuts were "deeply troubling".

"Proposals to close entire departments on the flimsy justification that 
research scores aren't high enough are simply outrageous," Pugh said.

The draft proposals to close the departments include similar plans for civil 
engineering, cancer studies, dentistry, sociology, and Latin andAmerican studies
 <https://www.theguardian.com/education/americanstudies>. They will be 
discussed tomorrow at Liverpool University's senate meeting.

The school of politics and communication studies, the philosophy department 
and the division of statistics and probability failed to do well in the 
research assessment exercise (RAE 2008).

The new vice-chancellor, Prof Sir Howard Newby, has told staff that in 
"driving towards world-class excellence in areas where we are globally 
competitive, we need to undertake reviews of academic departments where 
performance is not of the same exceptional standard".

The recommendations follow detailed analysis of the RAE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/rae> results, Newby told staff in an 
email sent yesterday.

If the senate passes the proposals on Wednesday then it and the university's 
council will decide the final fate of the departments in June.

The university says it will honour obligations to students in any departments 
affected, including those entering in 2009-10.

It will also "honour all existing staff contracts and will only consider 
compulsory redundancy measures as a last resort".

But both staff and students are mobilising against the moves, despite finding 
out about the proposals only late last week.

A source at Liverpool's University and College Union branch said: "It's fairly 
drastic. This VC's proving to be a bulldozer. His rubric is that we rise to the 
middle of the Russell group [of research intensive universities] by the end of 
his tenure and to pursue that he's going to close down a series of departments.

"What they are proposing subsequently is to measure everybody according to 
their research star rating. The fear is that they will get rid of people with 
1* or 2* research or offer them teaching-only contracts," the source said. 
"That's an appalling situation for a civic university committed to its 
community."

The UCU branch is trying to get professors on the senate to vote against the 
proposals at Wednesday's meeting but "it looks like the university has made up 
its mind".

"Essentially the VC is doing what he likes and doesn't seem to recognise that 
he needs to negotiate with staff."

Students are planning to protest outside the senate meeting tomorrow and have 
already rallied support from more than 1,000 students usingFacebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=54685808820#/group.php?gid=54685808820>.

Luke Smith, a second-year politics student, said: "When lecturers find out 
about this they will look for other jobs. To say it will not affect us is 
ridiculous. New students will not find out about the proposals until June when 
it may be too late to change their course.

"I don't know how my degree will be perceived by graduate recruiters when they 
see it's from a department that's closed because it wasn't up to standard."

Dr Fionnghuala Sweeney, vice-president of the Liverpool UCU branch, said: "The 
proposals are the work of people who know the price of everything, and the 
value of nothing. We are appalled by the contempt shown for staff and students 
by the university.

Sally Hunt, UCU general secretary, said: "Liverpool University must not 
overreact to the RAE results; institutions do not build long-term reputations 
for excellence by axing departments on short-term results. The worst thing the 
university could do would be to rush into any redundancies or closures."

A spokeswoman for Liverpool University said: "The university is looking at a 
range of options in the light of analysis of the 2008 RAE.

"The university is one of only four institutions in the UK that will receive 
an increase of more than 8% in research grant income from the Higher Education 
Funding Council.

"This allocation rewards excellence across a range of areas, but especially 
science, engineering and medicine.

"These extra resources will enable us to invest further in our research base â€“ 
both in terms of enhancing our facilities and attracting more world-class 
researchers.

"Our research benchmarks are international and therefore, to ensure we 
continue to build on our global reputation, it is vital that our research is of 
an international standard, not just nationally excellent."

Academics at Reading University are also protesting against plans to close its 
school of health and social care, which will be discussed by its senate today.

Ann Quinn, a UCU member who teaches at the school of health and social care, 
said: "There is no logic whatsoever in closing this school. It provides 
invaluable training and is completely self-sustaining. It is really important 
that senate members realise that axing the department will damage Reading's 
reputation.

"The UK is desperately short of social workers at the moment, and Reading 
should be at the forefront of provision, not scaling things back. The 
government has made it quite clear that we need more, not less, support for 
social work in this country and Reading University is undermining those plans."
 