
There may be music in the roar of the sea, as Byron eulogized, but the waves 
can also bring creeping unease. On low-lying fragments of land like theMarshall 
Islands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marshall-islands>, the tides are 
threatening to take away what they previously helped support: life.

Hilda Heine surveys the latest temporary sea wall that cleaves her property 
from the waves. It has been knocked down twice since February by floods and she 
frets about her plants that will probably face a salty demise.
Map of Marshall Islands 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/marshall-islands-locator/> 
Her vista would, sadly, be unremarkable in the Marshall Islands were it not 
for the policeman languidly guarding the corrugated metal wall – Heine is the 
president of the Pacific island nation. Here, no one is spared the rising seas.

“I need a better wall, one with rocks,” Heine mutters. Her presidency will 
probably be defined by climate change. Heine took charge in January and 
immediately declared a state of emergencyover a drought so dire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/obama-marshall-islands-drought> 
that water was rationed in the capital, Majuro. The nation also faces the 
existential threat of sea level rise and, with it, the potential exodus of its 
population.

“The numbers are increasing, of people leaving,” Heine says. “We see that 
almost every day. It concerns us. I think to a certain extent there are people 
who are thinking about the sea level rise and they’re wanting to make sure 
they’re on secure land.”

There is one destination at the top of the list for departing Marshallese: the 
USA. More than 20,000 people from this remote sprawl of islands, located 
between Hawaii and Australia, are now in the US. Surprisingly, the largest 
Marshallese community has gathered not in New York or Los Angeles, but around 
Springdale, an unremarkable corner ofArkansas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas>.

Better job prospects and a college education are major pulls, but climate 
change is now elbowing its way on to the list of considerations. A third of the 
Marshall Islands’ 60,000-strong population now resides in the US and some of 
those left behind fret that many more will follow, with the archipelago’s 
unique culture blemished by each departure. The Marshallese government has 
openly worried “about massive outmigration in recent years” – a fifth of the 
populationleft between 1999 and 2011 
<https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/migrated/oia/reports/upload/RMI-2011-Census-Summary-Report-on-Population-and-Housing.pdf>
.

As the seas rise <http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/sea-level/>, the pathway 
to the US could be closing. Acompact of free association 
<http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/173999.pdf>, which allows 
Marshallese people to live and work in the US without a visa, ends in 2023 and 
there are no guarantees it will be extended. Those already living in the US 
would be able to stay but, if the agreement isn’t extended, those living in the 
Marshall Islands will be treated like hopeful migrants from any other country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe130dd4cea63b320965914f2cb28e1bb2f85b028%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe130dd4cea63b320965914f2cb28e1bb2f85b028%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Unemployment in the Marshall Islands is about 36% and many chose to leave in 
search of employment in the US. Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
The looming expiration of the American deal means there is a “concern that 
more people will leave, definitely”, Heine concedes. “It’s hard being in 
competition with the United States. But I don’t think we should give up. These 
are our homes.”

While the Marshall Islands would fulfill most aesthetic criteria for an island 
paradise, it’s easy to see why this selection of 29 coral limestone and sand 
atolls and five islands, strewn across 750,000 sq miles of ocean, are so 
vulnerable to an ocean that is advancing due to melting glaciers and thermal 
expansion.

The islands are arranged in broken arcs around large lagoons. The islands are 
coin-flat and incredibly narrow – at some points just a dozen yards separate 
one coast from the other.

Water is, claustrophobically, everywhere. Its handiwork is evident even in its 
absence – graves that are sliding into the sea and spilling bones on to what 
remains of the beach, the Sisyphean labour of repatching flood defenses, the 
gnawed-away coastline releasing the determined grip of precipitously angled 
trees, one root at a time.

In 2014, after five-meter swells inundated Majuro 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-03-04/marshall-islands-tidal-waves/5298646> 
for the third time in a year (historically, something that only happened once 
every few decades), the US Geological Survey releasedsobering research 
<http://walrus.wr.usgs.gov/climate-change/lowLat.html> that shows that a mix of 
sea level rise and marauding waves means “many atoll islands will be flooded 
annually, salinizing the limited freshwater resources and thus likely forcing 
inhabitants to abandon their islands in decades, not centuries, as previously 
thought”.
Majuro Atoll 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/marshall-islands-marjuro/> 
The escape route is there, for now, but it has come at a cost. The option of 
moving to the US was born from the Marshall Islands’ misfortune of being under 
US administration during the cold war.

Between 1946 and 1958, the US conducted nuclear weapons testing on the islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/02/bikini-atoll-nuclear-test-60-years>
, peppering Bikini atoll alone with 23 bombs. The largest, known as the Bravo 
shot, was 1,000 times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb and vaporized three 
small islands.

While Bikini was evacuated, the wind blew radioactive detritus on to the 
inhabited atolls of Rongelap and Utrik. “Within hours, the atoll was covered 
with a fine, white, powder-like substance,” says Jeton Anjain, who led the 
eventual evacuation of Rongelap. “No one knew it was radioactive fallout. The 
children played in the snow. They ate it.”

Cancers, particularly of the thyroid, riddled many of those who came into 
contact with this radioactivity. But the wounds of dispossession are the ones 
that run deepest, 70 years on. The Marshallese may use faded US dollar bills, 
daub murals of LeBron James and Steph Curry on walls and retain the names Rita 
(after Rita Hayworth) and Laura (after Lauren Bacall) for the two ends of the 
curved Majuro island, but the relationship with America is a complicated one.

A US military base remains at Kwajalein, where unarmed missiles periodically 
land, fired from California. Many Marshallese serve in the US army, while the 
rest of the population each gets around $500 a year via a trust fund set up to 
compensate the harrowing nuclear tests. Still, many feel it’s not enough given 
the legacy of trauma.

“It appalls me the way the US has treated the Marshallese people out here,” 
says Jack Niedenthal, a native Pennsylvanian who came to the Marshall Islands 
with the Peace Corps in 1981 and never left.

“It’s just a really dark spot, I think, in US history. In my mind, the cold 
war was really fought and won by the United States on the shores of Bikini.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed8dbe8977aec7305bcb9d6a9a9654031d73e6f3%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed8dbe8977aec7305bcb9d6a9a9654031d73e6f3%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 A child plays in a cemetery on Majuro, the capital of the Marshall Islands. 
With the increase in King Tides, some cemeteries on the island are being washed 
out to sea. Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
Lani Kramer’s grandmother was moved from Bikini as a 12-year-old. Along with 
other evacuees, she was dropped on to Kili, a sparse, unforgiving place that 
felt nowhere like home. Today, more than 800 people are crammed into a scrap of 
land barely a mile long, a place that depends on regularly shipped containers 
of food to survive.

“No one from the US government has ever come to Kili and asked us: ‘Are you 
guys doing OK, what can we do for you guys?’” says Kramer, who relentlessly 
ear-bashes American officials as an advocate for the Bikinian people. A lack of 
a US-funded cancer clinic is a particular frustration. “It was so easy for them 
to spend millions of dollars to do the testing but why is it so hard to help 
the people that they moved off of Bikini atoll? A lot of people are very upset.”

Kramer is part of a relatively influential Marshallese clan – her husband is a 
leading construction magnate in Majuro. But a comfortable life in the US won’t 
represent home, just like Kili doesn’t now. The prospect of climate change 
finishing off what nuclear bombs started fills her with horror.

“When the next uprising from the sea comes and washes away all the crops and 
stuff from people’s houses, then what?” she says. “We are going to go under. 
The water is going to keep coming up and we’re going to have nowhere else to 
go. We’re going to have no place.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42309f164b7a10318b1c5d8645bfe29fdc4e9c2b%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42309f164b7a10318b1c5d8645bfe29fdc4e9c2b%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Children play volleyball in Majuro where the minimum wage is $2 and half the 
population is under 24. Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
The Marshall Islands are so remote that they make you feel like a reasonably 
well-equipped castaway. Everything needs to be imported, meaning that tasks 
such as car repairs are expensive and often left to fester.

The need for speed isn’t pressing given that Majuro, where half the population 
lives, has just one proper road, connecting two hotels, two ATMs, a couple of 
restaurants. The heat can be blistering all year round. Life proceeds at a 
plod, the cars trundling along at barely 15mph, the friendly populace showing 
few signs of impatience or haste.

The minimum wage is just $2 and that is if you are lucky – the unemployment 
rate isaround 36% 
<http://www.theodora.com/wfbcurrent/marshall_islands/marshall_islands_economy.html>
. The country produces coconuts and breadfruit, and sells fishing licenses for 
the international trawlers that scour Marshallese waters for tuna, but it leans 
heavily upon the aid of others. Majuro’s police station, courts and street 
lighting were funded by Japan and Taiwan, the latter country getting 
Marshallese recognition in the UN in return.

Half of the Marshall Islands population is aged under 24 and many inevitably 
wonder how life would play out in the US, even if it is cloaked in the language 
of duty. Family bonds are sprawling yet iron-clad in Marshallese culture – 
moving countries is largely aimed at helping the family thrive financially or 
socially.

“A lot of people feel like the United States is the promised land, and that’s 
where a lot of them wind up going,” says Niedenthal, the former Peace Corps 
member who has helped administer the trust fund for years but is now packing up 
his office, disillusioned. “Most times they buy one-way tickets. It’s not a 
great thing to say, but to me, it’s almost hopeless.

“I think this place is going to be gone. I feel like I’m going to be one of 
the last people to leave. If the roads get so bad that you can’t drive any 
more, and the people’s houses keep getting washed away, I just think people 
will start leaving en masse.”

It’s a big weekend in Springdale, Arkansas. Not only is it the Marshallese 
constitution day – which marks the country’s independence in 1986 – but it will 
be the first celebration to feature a beauty pageant, where young women will 
wear traditional clothing, read poetry and sing.

In an office located in a retail strip opposite the town hall, a clutch of 
young women of Marshallese descent are getting ready for the parade that will 
kick off the celebrations. As they get into their Marshallese flag dresses (
ratak, meaning “sunrise”, and rālik, “sunset”, are the central elements of the 
national emblem) the room is filled with teenage American accents talking about 
teenage American things. One girl plays theSilento song Watch Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vjW8wmF5VWc> on her cellphone.
Map of Little Rock 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/marshall-islands-arkansas/> 
Springdale is almost the polar opposite of the Marshall Islands – it’s in a 
landlocked state, riven with large highways and chain stores in the foothills 
of the Ozark mountains. But the Marshallese community, now numbering around 
10,000, remains close-knit.

Legend has it they congregated at this unlikely, nondescript place because of 
a pioneer named John Moody, who moved to the area first through education and 
then work in the 1970s.

Moody toiled for nearly 20 years in the Tysons <http://www.tyson.com/> poultry 
plant, gutting and packing chickens. The work was smelly and dangerous – Moody 
lost the tip of his index finger to a factory saw – but the pay was a major 
upgrade on the Marshall Islands.

Tysons, along with fellow chicken producer George’s, remains a major employer 
of Marshallese people in Springdale. Walmart’s headquarters, located up the 
road in Bentonville, is another major feature of the local economy.

The Marshallese are an object of curiosity here, but are largely accepted by a 
population that has has become more diverse in recent years. White, Latino and 
Marshallese students rub shoulders at theHar-Ber high school 
<http://har-ber.sdale.org/> in Springdale, where the Marshallese passion for 
basketball is well appreciated. “If they were taller than 5ft 3in we’d have the 
best team around,” the basketball coach admits, a little ruefully.

 Melines Morris, who moved to Springdale from the Marshall Islands as a 
five-year-old, says she is often confused for a Hawaiian person.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53cb15191f8e729e0e207e9bc15b85d3f9f46137%2F0_0_5643_3762%2F5643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53cb15191f8e729e0e207e9bc15b85d3f9f46137%2F0_0_5643_3762%2F5643.jpg>
 Teenagers get ready for the first Marshallese beauty contest in Springdale, 
Arkansas. This year’s theme is climate change. Photograph: Mae Ryan for the 
Guardian 
“The Hispanic kids, they was like: ‘What’s up Hawaiiana?’” Morris, now 18, 
says. “I’m just like: ‘No, I’m Marshallese. I’m from the Marshall Islands. You 
can call me marshmallow.’”

Like many Marshallese in Springdale, Morris’s family is fractured. Her 
mother’s side of the family came to Arkansas but her father stayed in the 
Marshall Islands, where he has been ever since, speaking to his daughter over 
Skype or Facebook. Morris was plunged into a new reality, a world of McDonald’s 
and Valentine’s day and Hanukkah, without being able to speak English. But she 
is now what many people would expect of a stereotypical American teen.

“When I first started here, I always wanted to tell myself ‘I’m American’, 
because I thought it was really cool coming here and then seeing new faces,” 
she says. “As I grew up, I knew more about my culture, and then I really liked 
it. I was telling myself: ‘Wow, I’m blessed to have this culture.’”

Morris now attempts to straddle both worlds, of Snapchat and of Marshallese 
customs on clothing and behavior, as well as celebrations such askemem, a big 
bash thrown at the first birthday of a child. She says she was “very angry” 
when she heard about what climate change was doing to the Marshall Islands and 
wants to go back to help – but not to live.

Arlynda Jonas, 23, is also inclined to stay in the US. Like Morris she has an 
American accent, which she says some Marshallese people tease her about.

“I feel like I’m more towards the American side than my Marshallese side but I 
know that I should be on my Marshallese side more strongly,” she says. “It’s 
really hard. I don’t want to forget my culture, my heritage or anything.”

At the Constitution Day parade in Springdale, the tone is a little more 
defiant. The celebrations have been given a climate change theme, giving the 
occasion more of a protest than a party feel. Banners proclaim “70 years of 
exile” for the Bikinian people and “1.5 to stay alive”, referring to theglobal 
temperature rise that can’t be breached 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/14/worlds-scientists-to-join-forces-on-major-15c-climate-change-report>
 if the Marshall Islands is to survive. Candies are tossed to onlooking 
children as the parade passes by.

Kenneth Kedi, speaker of the Marshallese parliament, is in Springdale to 
address the crowd. Kedi decries the salt-soaked soils of home, ruined for 
crops, and the disastrous drought.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> “isn’t shenanigans, 
it’s reality”, Kedi says.

Kedi spent six years in the US and is now putting his son through school here. 
But he says he has “mixed feelings” about the diaspora, as he inspects a lei 
filled with candies that has been placed around his neck.

“They’re losing their identity as Marshallese,” he says of the Springdale 
community. “This is what we fear and our chiefs fear will happen, and it’s 
happening.” He moved back to the Marshall Islands because he loves his country, 
he says, but “now, that train is reversing”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd251a2f9ddcae9502082953cac1f831c3e5a4734%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd251a2f9ddcae9502082953cac1f831c3e5a4734%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Marshallese men and women celebrate Constitution Day in Springdale, Arkansas. 
Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
Kedi, a soft-spoken man, worries that more people will flee as climate change 
starts to bite deeper into the fabric of Marshallese life. That they will 
probably move to the US is “bittersweet”, he says.

“We believe we have been given a bad deal,” he says. “We make a minuscule 
contribution to the climate greenhouse effect but we are at the very frontline 
of the problems of climate change.” He adds that plutonium stored at Enewetak, 
one of the Marshallese islands, is starting to leak into the ocean – yet 
another American legacy.

“So, yeah, we’re getting a bad deal,” he says. “We certainly are getting a bad 
deal.”

Before the beauty pageant begins there is a lengthy church service. 
Marshallese people are often deeply religious – most of the population is 
Protestant. Large sections of the address is in Marshallese but at one point 
the pastor blurts out in English while referencing climate change: “What is 
going on?”

Pageant contenders read out poems on climate change. One has the anguished 
line: “We are losing our island, where will we stand?” Another offers: “Keep 
your faith in God.” There follows dancing, singing and intricate, beautiful 
Marshallese gowns. Eventually, as we near 1am and even Marshallese patience is 
wearing thin, Arlynda Jonas is crowned the winner.

It’s a Marshallese triumph rooted in America. Jonas would be sad if the 
Marshall Islands were eaten away by the waves but can see an obvious solution 
for the country’s people. “It would be great if they did all move [to the US] 
because there are just so many opportunities for them here, you know?” she 
says. “I think it would be great for them to move here.”

Back in Majuro, there are people who have to weigh whether to stay or go every 
day. For those who don’t have the means or desire to relocate to the US, the 
future is particularly precarious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F973dd14993f2bdb8d9c1448bee50eca8bd1acda6%2F0_0_5289_3526%2F5289.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lives%20in%20the%20balance%3A%20climate%20change%20and%20the%20Marshall%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fmarshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F973dd14993f2bdb8d9c1448bee50eca8bd1acda6%2F0_0_5289_3526%2F5289.jpg>
 A child plays with trash in Majuro, the capital of the Marshall Islands, where 
20,000 people live. Photograph: Mae Ryan for the Guardian 
Marlyna Laibwij, a teaching assistant in the community of Laura, has seen her 
neighbours abandon their coastal homes and move inland. Shells of concrete 
caked in vegetation dot this stretch of Majuro.


Laibwij says the increasing flooding made her “sick because of worrying”. 
Earlier this year, after the waters yet again lapped at the walls of her family 
home, she pleaded with the local mayor for help. He organized the construction 
of a sea wall, essentially rocks bundled in bags. It has provided some 
temporary relief.

“I would have abandoned my house but I would have missed it very much,” 
Laibwij says. “I loved my home and I didn’t want to abandon it.

“Life is getting hard, and I believe that all of these [changes] come from the 
same thing, from climate change.”

Should the waves advance further, however, Laibwij isn’t sure if her family 
could remain. As we leave her house, in a moment of tender devastation, she 
confides: “I think we can be here for another year or two. That’s what I think. 
What do you think? Do you think we can be here that long?”

Graphics and additional reporting by Jan Diehm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jan-diehm>

 * Support the Guardian’s independent journalism by making a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/home?INTCMP=co_us_editorial_footer_marshallislands>
 orbecoming a member 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=mem_us_editorial_footer_marshallislands>
 