
This month, A Room for London 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/a-room-for-london> plays host to novelist 
Kamila Shamsie. For four days each month, a different artist is spending time 
in the houseboat currently perched on the top of the South Bank Centre in London
as part of Artangel's year-long project, A London Address 
<http://www.aroomforlondon.co.uk/hearts-of-darkness>. Earlier in the year we 
welcomed Juan Gabriel Vásquez 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2012/jan/24/live-webchat-juan-gabriel-vasquez>
 andJeanette Winterson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2012/feb/22/jeanette-winterson-live-webchat>
 for live webchats from the boat.

The writer currently undertaking this challenge is Kamila Shamsie 
<http://literature.britishcouncil.org/kamila-shamsie>, author of the novels In 
the City by the Sea 
<http://bookdragon.si.edu/2009/11/01/in-the-city-by-the-sea-by-kamila-shamsie/>,
Kartography 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2003/jun/07/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
(both shortlisted for the John Llewellyn Rhys Prize),Salt and Saffron <http:>, 
Broken Verses 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2005/apr/16/featuresreviews.guardianreview8> 
andBurnt Shadows 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/mar/07/burnt-shadows-kamila-shamsie-review>
 which was shortlisted for the Orange Prize.

Kamila will be holding a webchat live from the boat on Monday 29 October, 
taking place here between 1-2pm (BST). She will be talking about the time she 
has spent on the boat and whether it has aided her creativity and productivity, 
as well as discussing her work and writing.

Post your questions below now and come back on Monday at 1pm to chat live to 
Kamila.

We've posted the conversation here to make it easier to follow:

epigrapheuse asks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19106772>:

Hi Kamila, I'm really excited that you're on A Room for London! I'm intrigued 
by your experience of living atop -- or beside, rather -- the Thames; do you 
find that living in a boat, as such, as opposed to any regular room with a view 
of the Thames, makes a particular difference to your process? The word that 
comes to mind is "unsettling", for we tend to think of boats as creatures 
inseparable from water. How has that affected you?

This would lead into a larger question about your relationship with water 
bodies generally: you are from Karachi, which is, as you say, the city by the 
sea. The sea also features as a rather prominent figure in novels like 
Kartography. Is water a powerful influence on your writing, in terms of poiesis?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142099>:

I think the primary difference living up here makes to process has to do with 
time. When I sit down at a desk it can take me a while to sink into a frame of 
mind where nothing distracts me from the sentences, the thoughts I'm attempting 
to string together. Up here, I seem to be living in a concrete (or wooden) 
version of that frame of mind – slightly separate from the world but with a 
view on it, nothing pressing down on me, a sense of unexpectedness all around. 
So I don't need to struggle to find my way into a writing frame of mind – I am 
in in automatically. Fancy way of saying I've been writing very productively 
here.

Gravesend123 asks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19141854>:

Oh and a second question. According to A Room for London's website, there's a 
library of books aboard the boat. Have you read or looked at any? Do you have a 
favourite book about London?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142154>:

Yes, I'm surrounded by wonderful books. Including three copies of 'Heart of 
Darkness', many books about London and rivers and ships. There are so many 
books here I haven't read and yet - because this is Conrad's boat - I find I'm 
unable to move away from 'Heart of Darkness' which I've read and re-read before.

Favourite book about London: well, as I'm up in this aerial ship, the first 
thing that comes to mind is Peter Pen.

CinziaSy asks <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19141866>
:

As a post colonialist writer, how relevant do you feel novels such as Joseph 
Conrad's 'The Heart of Darkness' are to members of twenty-first century society?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142238>:

I'm always a little wary around the post-colonialist tag - so let's just say 
that as someone living in the 21st century I'm struck by how Heart of Darkness 
seems to speak even more to me now than it did when I first read it 20 years 
ago. That could be because I'm older; but more likely, I think, that we're 
still surrounded by Kurtz-like figures and Imperial Vanities.
But this time around - and I've written about this for my podcast - I'm also 
struck by the overwhelming maleness of Conrad's world. And i wish that felt 
more outdated than it does!

everbleed asks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19101307>:

Over time, great literature is subsumed into the consciousness of a nation. 
Even though your novels are mostly set in Pakistan, they remain inaccessible to 
the majority of the people therein.

Your stories, no matter how well told, will never truly be part of the 
zeitgeist for a people. Although it is supremely arrogant for any writer to set 
out with that goal primarily in mind, it is surely something that many must at 
least secretly aspire to.

Does it bother you that your work will, in all probability, never achieve that 
status?

Why do you think it is that many of the brightest literary minds in the 
subcontinent are writing in a foreign language?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142378>:

I don't know that all writers secretly aspire to being part of the zeitgeist 
of a particular nation. I'm not bothered by being un-zeitgeisty, but of course 
I wish more people in Pakistan could read my books. This has nothing to do with 
a 'foreign' language - isn't it odd that both Pakistan's official language 
(English) and its national language (Urdu) get referred to as foreign languages 
because they originated outside the geographical boundaries of the 
nation-state? But yes, English is a language that only a small minority know 
well enough to read novels in it. The same is true of many other languages of 
Pakistan - Balochi, Siraiki etc. Though in the case of English it isn't ethnic 
background that divides the readers. The real answer, of course, for writers in 
all Pakistan's languages lies in translation - but sadly, the publishing 
infrastructure in the country doesn't support a healthy translation industry.
Given how low the literacy rates are in the country, in any language, it's 
really poets who are part of the zeitgeist, much more than novelists.

SKMGweme asks <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19105392>
:

Hi Kamila. Great to see you here. Can you tell us about the education project 
that you took part in that was funded by the Open Society? I also understand 
that you have worked with Amnesty International. Do you see yourself as a a 
writer and activist?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142607>:

Hi, and thanks. The education project is called Writers Bloc. It was started 
by 5 writers - Zadie Smith, Nick Laird, Hari Kunzru, Rachel Holmes and myself - 
with funding from OSF. The brief is simple: send writers to different countries 
to write about education there. Leave it to the writers' curiosity and 
imagination to decide what they want to write about. The intention was to end 
up with a series of essays on education that did something which policy papers 
- irreplaceable as they are - can't do, which is to talk about some of the 
challenges around education in very human terms. The essays were published in 
Guernica - here's the introduction by Zadie Smith, with links to the other 
pieces: http://www.guernicamag.com/features/smith_01_15_12/

As for how I see myself - I wouldn't say writer/activist. That would be an 
insult to people who really are activists. But every so often there are 
opportunities for my writing life to overlap with campaigns, ideas that 
activists are working on.

CinziaSy asks <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142562>
:

Thank you Kamila for your response, and I certainly take your point about the 
maleness of Conrad's novel not being as outdated as one would wish it was! 
However, which is more important to you today: your gender or your nationality, 
and which do you think is more significant in society today?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142774>:

Depends entirely on the context. both to me and to society. But the 
significant difference is I can walk through various parts of the world and not 
be immediately recognised as a Pakistani (or I can be in a place where everyone 
is Pakistani so it's not a way of separating me from the others around me). But 
I'm always recognised as female. So I suppose I encounter and am aware of 
responses to my femaleness more of the time.

atavisticendeavor asks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19102357>:

Hi Kamila. In Burnt Shadows it seems one of your intentions was to transcend 
the nation, as the novel's traditional frame, and point individual awareness in 
a different direction.

Can I ask what your reasons were for this and whether you would describe Burnt 
Shadows as a novel of globalisation, internationalism or cosmopolitanism?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142920>:

Hi - the question of intention assumes, well, intention. I do start off my 
novels with some kind of intentions but they generally get thrown overboard 
very quickly. 'Burnt Shadows' was supposed to be a novel about the Indo-Pak 
nuclear stand-off. Go figure, as they say. I like Michael Ondaatje's phrase 
'following the brush' to describe writers whose process involve working out 
what you're doing only as you're doing it.
Certainly my own deep misgivings about the nation-state make its way through 
the novel, but I didn't at any point think that I was transcending the novel's 
traditional frame. And I suppose this is because some of the novels I love the 
most - Ondaatje's 'the English Patient' and 'In the Skin of a Lion' 
particularly come to mind - have already achieved this far better than I could.
How would I describe 'Burnt Shadows'? The book wot I wrote. Beyond that, I 
leave it to the critics.

Skasster asks <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19140355>
:

What project are you working on right now? Novel/ short stories? Will you be 
writing a non-fiction book in the near future?

Also - if you were to appear on Come Dine with Me, what would you make for 
your guests? (No, I really want to know!)

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143182>:

This morning I was working up finishing up the 'London address' which will be 
podcast at the end of my stay up here on this amazing boat. But mostly these 
days I'm working on a new novel set mainly in Peshwar in 1915 and 1930.
Come Dine With Me: now this a question that requires deep thought. And an 
Urdu-English dictionary (in culinary terms, my English falters). Probably 
something like this: baghary baingan, deep fried bhindi, garam masala aloo, 
murgh korma, timatur kut.
Now I'm hungry.

@simon_r_katz on twitter asks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142991>:

Kamila, have you been cooking and if so what have you cooked?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143230>:

I have not! Only a microwave here, but let's be honest - I'm so near Borough 
Market and the foodstalls behind the Royal Festival Hall that there's not much 
likelihood I'd be donning an apron even if the kitchen was fully equipped.

Carolina via email 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19142923>:

Kamila, was it daunting to take on Hiroshima when you wrote Burnt Shadows? Did 
you feel a responsibility to the people who'd died, and did that change the way 
you wrote the book? thanks!

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143357>:

Nagasaki, not Hiroshima. And yes, it was tremendously daunting. If I could 
have thought of a way to write about the bombing of Nagasaki without writing 
about the bombing of Nagsaki i expect I'd have done that - I was only really 
able to do it because I started off thinking, well, this will never work and 
I'll have to give up at some point but let's see what I can manage.
And yes, there is of course some sense of responsibility - but if I'd ever 
framed it to myself in terms of being responsible to hundreds of thousands of 
people who'd died or suffered the effects of radiation I'd probably have 
crawled into a dark corner somewhere. In the end, what I kept in mind was my 
responsibility as a novelist to create this world to the best of my abilities, 
without shortcuts or compromises.

littlewhite asks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143198>:

Hi Kamila

I am interested to know whether anything has particularly surprised you about 
spending four days alone in the Room For London? Or is it pretty much as you 
expected? Have you seen anything out of the ordinary/ unexpected which you 
would like to share with us?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143474>:

I'd be surprised if even the most imaginative novelists could find their 
expectations of this place matching up to actually being here. Surprises: how 
much more breath-taking the view is than I would have imagined; how time seems 
to slow down after sunset so that the night seems a vast and wonderful expanse 
in which to read and write and listen to Billie Holiday; the lift which takes 
you up and down is manufactured by a company called ALIMAK, which is my name 
backwards; the lights are turned off on Big Ben's clockface at midnight the 
night BST ends; the spaciousness of the boat, the excellent water pressure of 
the shower. etc etc etc

Gravesend123 asks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19141760>:

I hope you're enjoying your stay in the boat. As A London Address is a series 
of podcast recordings, I'm wondering if you've approached the writing of the 
piece any differently knowing that you have to read it aloud? Thank you.

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143568>:

Yes - I've written for the radio before, and I always find that I'm writing in 
a slightly different rhythm if I know it's going to be recorded. A little more 
conversational - and I try to avoid complex sentence structures which the eye 
can follow but the ear might have more trouble with (particularly if the ear 
hears it being read by someone who isn't a trained actor able to articulate a 
semi-colon.

Beeeee asks <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19103444>:

Does it matter where you come from?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143636>:

Well, context always matters – and where you're from is always part of your 
context (as is where you've been, and where you are.) In terms of my novels 
they seem increasingly to circle back in one way or another to Pakistan's 
history – which is both very short and also filled with gaps (in terms of my 
own understanding of it). Though having said that, I don't mean I feel limited 
by the nation-as-subject, or bound exclusively to it.

CinziaSy asks <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143234>
:

Do you ever feel conscious that many readers will approach your literature 
with more defined preconceptions about Pakistan than they would about any other 
culture due to media coverage of the troubles in the region? If so, do you feel 
works in your favor or not?

kamilashamsie replies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143696>:

When I'm writing, no. When the books are published, it's hard to get away from 
questions about Pakistan. But all novelists create the world of their novels on 
the page - so like any other novelist I concentrate on creating that world of 
the novel, and trust my readers to enter into it on the terms in which it's 
presented. And if they don't, well, then they don't .

kamilashamsie <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/19143724>
:

Thanks everyone for your questions. Big Ben has just struck 2 pm outside my 
window, so I'm off to forage for food down by the river.
 