
In 1966 Raphael Ortiz, a self-proclaimed Latin American revolutionary, entered 
a nice house in Islington, London, stripped to the waist, picked up an axe and 
hacked apart a fashionable couple's piano in the name of art.

It will be announced, on Thursday, that the wood, metal and felt scraps left 
over from that event will now be owned by the nation – to join 29 other 
treasures going in to public collections thanks to theAcceptance in Lieu 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/supporting-museums/cultural-property/tax-incentives/acceptance-lieu/>
 scheme.

The AiL scheme was created in Lloyd George's 1910 "people's budget" which let 
cultural objects be left to the nation as a way of offsetting or settling 
inheritance tax bills.

This year the objects, outlined in AiL's annual report, had a record 
commercial worth of £49.4m.

Sir Peter Bazalgette, chair of Arts Council England, which administers the 
scheme, said it "brought treasures with an unprecedented commercial value into 
the national collections".

He added: "If their sale had been on the open market, these works of art might 
have been lost forever. Instead, this report details the beautiful and 
fascinating objects that can now be enjoyed by the public."

The items accepted include an important Millais portrait of Ruskin, going to 
the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford <http://www.ashmolean.org/news/?id=203>, papers of 
Charles Darwin going to Cambridge University library, and a Rothko watercolour, 
a permanent home for which has yet to be decided.

The most eclectic items on the list are two works by Ortiz, the only known 
surviving pieces from the first Destruction inArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Symposium which took place in 
London in 1966. Here, avant-garde thinkers and artists gathered to discuss the 
theme and, of course, destroy some stuff – not least a piano belonging to the 
fashionable Bohemians Jay and Fran Landesman.

It was on that piano that Fran wrote the lyrics for the jazz standard Spring 
Can Really Hang You Up The Most. Ortiz was watched by an audience which 
included two Tate curators. Before the destruction Ortiz asked for the piano to 
be tuned.

The works have been temporarily allocated to the Tate. One is named Duncan 
Terrace Piano Destruction Concert: The Landesmans' Homage to Spring Can Really 
Hang You Up The Most, and the second is Duncan Terrace Chair Destruction. They 
settle tax worth £70,000.

The value of the accepted objects is far higher than that of previous years, 
up on the £31.3m for 2011/12 and the £8.3m for 2010/11.

One reason is that the Treasury has increased the threshold of the amount of 
tax that can be settled, from £20m to £30m. It was altered because of the 
introduction, in March 2013, of theCultural Gifts Scheme 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/supporting-museums/cultural-property/tax-incentives/cultural-gifts-scheme/>
, a long-awaited change to the law that allows artefacts to be left within the 
lifetime of a person.

Under the gifts scheme the Beatles' biographer Hunter Davies donated to the 
British Library letters and handwritten lyrics written by John Lennon,
offsetting an income tax demand 
<http://pressandpolicy.bl.uk/Press-Releases/John-Lennon-Letters-and-Lyrics-donated-to-the-Nation-British-Library-first-institution-to-benefit-631.aspx>
. The donation was the first to a national collection by a living owner in 
return for tax breaks.

The culture minister, Ed Vaizey, called the AiL scheme a fine example of a 
win-win-win situation. He said: "The owner of the item gets a discount on their 
tax bill, a museum or gallery gains an important new acquisition for their 
collection, and the public get a chance to enjoy it free of charge, often for 
the very first time."
 