
Vivaldi. The world's most forgetful composer? Why on earth have so many of his 
manuscripts been turning up in obscure collections across the British Isles in 
the last couple of months? In October, it was a flute concerto called Il Gran 
Mogol ("The Great Mogul", if my Italian's up to snuff)discovered in the 
Marquesses of Lothian's family papers in Edinburgh 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-edinburgh-east-fife-11491307>, and this 
month, it's a couple of violin sonatas in a 180-page portfolio donated to the 
Foundling Museum in London, pieces that were probably originally written for 
amateurs, which could be heard for the first time in 270 years,played by La 
Serenissima in Liverpool on Sunday. 
<http://www.hope.ac.uk/cornerstone-festival-events/21st-november-vivaldi-violin-sonata-rv-815.html>

Something's going on. It's as if Vivaldi deliberately left some of his 
original manuscripts around locations in Britain as part of a deliberate 
attempt to keep posterity interested in his music, creating a posthumous 
treasure hunt that would take more than two and a half centuries to solve. 
There must be more out there. The Gran Mogol concerto was one of a set of four, 
all previously thought lost, so the other three must be lurking in libraries 
and private collections somewhere. And given the Vivaldi hit rate over the last 
few weeks, I reckon it's worth us all checking our lofts. Who knows what 
Antonio and his successors might have left in attics from Stoke to Southwold, 
from Bo'ness to Bournemouth? Even if you haven't got a couple of Scottish 
marquesses in your family, you too could be sitting on some Vivaldian treasure.
 