
On the eve of the most bitterly fought US presidential election in decades, the
British Museum <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum> has 
unveiled a print created by Andy Warhol in 1972, a demonic Richard Nixon urging 
the viewer to vote for George McGovern – a spectacular and spectacularly 
unsuccessful campaign image that preceded a landslide victory for Nixon.

Warhol used a bland official photograph of Nixon and his wife Pat, taken from 
the cover of Newsweek, and doctored it to give him glaring yellow eyes, 
lipstick, and a eerie face the colour of his wife’s top. It will be be a star 
exhibit in themuseum’s major spring exhibition 
<http://americandreamexhibition.org/> of prints made in the US since the 1960s, 
including some gigantic recent acquisitions that have never been displayed 
because they are too big for any of the prints and drawings galleries.

Warhol believed the image, created to be sold as a fundraiser for the 
Democratic party, made him a marked man politically, with the tax authorities 
poring over every cent of his income tax returns for the rest of his life.

Stephen Coppel, joint curator of the exhibition, said Warhol’s subsequent 
lifelong battle with the revenue service was the true reason for the 
much-mocked revelation that he kept scrupulous daily notes in his diaries of 
every taxi fare and other expenses – “he knew his accounts would be crawled all 
over”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Flondon-exhibition-usa-postwar-creative-superpower-british-museum-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54a0fa915cf3bea48179f536b99cd8fd46e734d3%2F0_472_4541_2726%2F4541.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20exhibition%20puts%20US%20on%20show%20as%20postwar%20creative%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Flondon-exhibition-usa-postwar-creative-superpower-british-museum-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20exhibition%20puts%20US%20on%20show%20as%20postwar%20creative%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Flondon-exhibition-usa-postwar-creative-superpower-british-museum-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54a0fa915cf3bea48179f536b99cd8fd46e734d3%2F0_472_4541_2726%2F4541.jpg>
 Anonymous, Description of a Slave Ship, woodcut, 1789. 
Andy Warhol’s Self-Portrait With Platinum Bouffant Wig
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/19/anatomy-of-an-artwork-warhol-self-portrait-1981>
Coppel’s department has for years been planning and acquiring works specially 
for an exhibition, The American Dream, which will open in March, knowing it 
would come close to a US presidential election – but with no idea how bitterly 
fought that contest would be.

Although many of the recent acquisitions and loans from major collections, 
including the Museum of ModernArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>
 in New York touch on campaign issues including racism, feminism and 
immigration, Coppel said they would not be making any changes to reflect the 
outcome. “I think we will let the viewers draw their own conclusions,” he said.


After Vikings, Celts, and Egyptian underwater archaeology, the exhibition will 
be the first contemporary art show in the museum’s new Sainsbury exhibition 
gallery, and will include more than 200 works by 70 artists including some of 
the biggest names in American art, such as Jasper Johns,Louise Bourgeois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bourgeois>, Edward Ruscha, Claes 
Oldenburg and and Robert Rauschenberg. Almost half the works have been acquired 
by the museum in the last eight years, which the director Hartwig Fischer 
described as “a fantastic achievement” given the stature of the artists and the 
soaring art market prices.

As Aleppo burns in this age of lies, Picasso's Guernica still screams the 
truth about war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/oct/12/picasso-guernica-aleppo-syria>
Although some of the earliest pieces include Warhol’s images of Jackie Kennedy 
after the assassination of her husband, and the artist’s electric chair series, 
generally the works from the 60s have a more optimistic air. One of the largest 
will be Rauschenberg’s towering Sky Garden, more than 2 metres tall, an 
explosion of joyful colour from his Stoned Moon series when he was invited by 
Nasa to go to Cape Canaveral to witness the launch of the Apollo 11 mission. It 
includes an image of the footprint Buzz Aldrin later left on the surface of the 
moon.

Another, coming on loan from MoMA, is a 1966 vision of an immaculate filling 
station by Ruscha, the petrol pumps gleaming under a blue sky, the open road 
waiting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Flondon-exhibition-usa-postwar-creative-superpower-british-museum-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa645f4d0b5198a78319efc7f3fa649bc0f62434c%2F58_110_3686_2212%2F3686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20exhibition%20puts%20US%20on%20show%20as%20postwar%20creative%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Flondon-exhibition-usa-postwar-creative-superpower-british-museum-american-dream%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20exhibition%20puts%20US%20on%20show%20as%20postwar%20creative%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Flondon-exhibition-usa-postwar-creative-superpower-british-museum-american-dream%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa645f4d0b5198a78319efc7f3fa649bc0f62434c%2F58_110_3686_2212%2F3686.jpg>
 Edward Ruscha, Standard Station, colour screenprint, 1966. 
 The mood has darkened dramatically in many later pieces, including Willie 
Cole’s huge woodcut Stowage. Cole, who comes from an African-American family, 
was inspired by a famous 18th-century image he saw as a child in a schoolbook, 
of the human beings packed like barrels into the hold of a Liverpool slave 
ship, which was widely used by campaigners for the abolition of slavery.

Cole reinvented it to reflect the grinding drudgery of domestic service of his 
mother and grandmother, embedding a real ironing board into his printing blocks 
to represent the ship, surrounded by the soleplates of steam irons evoking 
African tribal masks.

Only 16 copies were printed, almost all now in museum collections in the US. 
Coppel recently managed to buy the 16th copy in New York for the collection, 
and it will go on display for the first time in the exhibition. “It was in 
astonishing mint condition,” he said fondly; “when we unrolled it, it still 
smelt of printing ink.”

The American Dream: Pop to the Present will be shown at the British Museum in 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> from 9 March to 18 June 2017

 