
In the summer of 1955 an advertisement appeared in the Stage newspaper asking 
for new plays. It had been placed by the English Stage Company, which was 
setting up in business at an unfashionable theatre, the Royal Court, in 
London’s Sloane Square. The response to the ad was tremendous. Seven hundred 
and fifty scripts poured in.

The only trouble was, most of them were rubbish: either bottom-drawer pieces 
by hack writers or, in the words of Tony Richardson, who was to become the 
ESC’s associate director, “endless blank-verse shit”.

John Osborne: in his own (and others’) words
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/24/john-osborne-in-his-own-and-others-words>
Only one piece leapt out of the pile: the curiously entitled Look Back in 
Anger by a totally unknown young actor calledJohn Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne>. George Devine, the founding 
father of the ESC and its first director, read the play in the study of his 
riverside house in Hammersmith and immediately sniffed its promise. He took it 
to Richardson, who lodged in the flat upstairs, who was even more smitten by 
it. Together they made a commitment to produce it in their first season at the 
Royal Court in 1956.

But who exactly was John Osborne? To find out, Devine made the unusual 
decision to track the author to his lair. He discovered the writer was living 
in a leaky old Rhine barge, moored near Chiswick Bridge, which he shared with a 
fellow actor, Anthony Creighton. So on a hot afternoon in August 1955, because 
the tide was high, Devine was obliged to borrow a boat and row himself out to 
the Osborne residence. He quizzed him eagerly and discovered that Osborne was a 
hard-up 26-year-old actor who had slogged his way round the regional reps, had 
written part of Look Back in Anger while sitting in a deckchair on Morecambe 
pier and was separated from his actress wife, Pamela Lane. By the end of the 
afternoon, Devine had offered Osborne £25 for a year’s option on his play. What 
neither man could have realised was that they were helping to make theatrical 
history.

But Osborne had to bide his time. The ESC didn’t officially take over the 
Royal Court until April 1956. Its mission was quite clear: to provide a 
counterweight to the quilted divertissements of the West End by unearthing new 
British plays and exposing audiences to the best work from abroad. Having 
recently visited Brecht’s Berliner Ensemble, Devine also wanted to change the 
whole style of British theatre. Lavish pictorial scenery was to be banished.

Its place was to be taken by design that, on the Brechtian model, was to be 
spare, rigorous and beautiful. There was even a covert sexual agenda and an 
attempt to rid British theatre of its pervasive air of camp: something that was 
achieved with a team of associate directors who were all, as it happens, 
privately gay. There was, however, no overnight Royal Court revolution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427712738267%2F8d963e99-0afa-4f3b-92f7-b4cd40ea6a19-2060x1376.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Look%20Back%20in%20Anger%3A%20how%20John%20Osborne%20liberated%20theatrical%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Look%20Back%20in%20Anger%3A%20how%20John%20Osborne%20liberated%20theatrical%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427712738267%2F8d963e99-0afa-4f3b-92f7-b4cd40ea6a19-2060x1376.jpeg>
 John Osborne (right) and Kenneth Haigh outside the Royal Court theatre in 
1956. Photograph: Frank Pocklington/Getty Images 
The opening production, in April 1956, was of Angus Wilson’s The Mulberry 
Bush: a decent, middle-class play by an admired novelist that failed to 
generate much excitement. The second choice, Arthur Miller’s The Crucible, was 
more successful but revealed little about the Royal Court’s policy. Then, on 8 
May 1956, Look Back in Anger had its premiere. It is a date that has now 
entered the history books but, according to Osborne’s own testimony in his 
memoir, Almost a Gentleman, there was little sense at the time that anything 
momentous had occurred. Only later would that date acquire the status of 
legend. In fact, the reviews in the daily papers were not as disastrous as 
theatrical myth suggests. The Times, the Daily Telegraph and the London evening 
papers were all decidedly negative. ButPhilip Hope-Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1956/may/09/mainsection.fromthearchive> in 
the Manchester Guardian was cautiously approving (“I believe they have got a 
potential playwright at last”), John Barber in the Daily Express got highly 
excited (describing the play as “intense, angry, feverish, undisciplined” but 
also “young, young, young”), and Derek Granger in the Financial Times was 
intelligently appreciative (“its influence should go far beyond such an 
eccentric and isolated one-man turn as Waiting for Godot”). The trouble was 
that the FT didn’t sell many tickets. I have a touch of sympathy with the 
overnight critics: I know how difficult it is to absorb, describe and evaluate 
a game-changing new play against a merciless deadline. But on the following 
Sunday the whole tone changed.Kenneth Tynan wrote a much-quoted review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2011/may/15/archive-1956-kenneth-tynan-john-osborne>
 in the Observer that unequivocally turned Osborne into a spokesman for the 
disaffected young and that ringingly declared: “I doubt if I could love anyone 
who did not wish to see Look Back in Anger.” Harold Hobson in the Sunday Times 
was more restrained, but dubbed Osborne “a writer of outstanding promise”.

John Osborne: a natural dissenter who changed the face of British theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/24/john-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre>
Even with the imprimatur of Tynan and Hobson, the play was not an instant hit. 
But two events gave the play a fresh momentum. One was the fact that BBC 
Television showed an 18-minute extract which led to the box-office being 
besieged. The other was the decision by a young Faber editor, Charles Monteith, 
to ask Osborne’s permission to publish the play at a time when few stage 
scripts achieved that kind of permanence. In fact, only a month after the 
opening night Monteith wrote to Osborne saying, “I haven’t enjoyed an evening 
in the theatre so much for a very long time indeed,” and going on to ask if he 
might be interested in writing a novel. No fiction ever transpired. But this 
was the start of a long and lasting relationship in which Faber went on to 
publish the entire Osborne canon. It was also a significant moment in that it 
established the idea that play-texts should become a vital part of the 
publishing agenda. I can vouch for the importance of that since I still have my 
own dog-eared copy of the original paperback edition of Look Back in Anger.I 
can also testify to the play’s impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/may/09/theatre3>. I was a 16-year-old 
Midlands schoolboy when the play first appeared but I became obsessed both by 
the work itself and the whole Angry Young Man phenomenon it supposedly 
represented. I have written before of how, coming to see the play at one of its 
many revivals in 1957, I stood outside the Royal Court gazing at the faces of 
people emerging from the Saturday first-house performance to see if they had 
been visibly changed by the event.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427711664364%2Ff665f5d1-28a7-43cc-a8e1-c8abaef6e764-1020x907.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Look%20Back%20in%20Anger%3A%20how%20John%20Osborne%20liberated%20theatrical%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Look%20Back%20in%20Anger%3A%20how%20John%20Osborne%20liberated%20theatrical%20language&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmar%2F30%2Fhow-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427711664364%2Ff665f5d1-28a7-43cc-a8e1-c8abaef6e764-1020x907.jpeg>
 Richard Burton played Jimmy Porter in the 1959 film version of Look Back in 
Anger, directed by Tony Richardson. Photograph: Ronald Grant archive 
But why did Look Back in Anger make the impact it did? The first, and most 
obvious point, is that it put so much of 1950s England on stage. Through the 
eloquent arias – “not ‘tirades’,” insists Osborne – of Jimmy Porter, it tackles 
sex, class, religion, politics, the press and the sense of a country stifled by 
an official, establishment culture. What few of us realised at the time was 
that Osborne, while endorsing most of Jimmy’s jeremiads, also had a sneaking 
sympathy for his father-in-law, Colonel Redfern, an upper-class relic of the 
Raj. Alison, Jimmy’s wife, tells her father: “You’re hurt because everything is 
changed. Jimmy is hurt because everything is the same.” I think she’s half 
right in that, while the colonialist Colonel grieves over an Edwardian paradise 
lost, Jimmy is an angry romantic nostalgic for a world he never knew. In the 
1950s the play was prized, above all, as a social document: an eloquent 
testament of alienated youth. Later it came to be seen as a Strindbergian study 
of a marriage steeped in love and hate. But, increasingly, I suspect Osborne’s 
real revolution lay in liberating theatrical language. Osborne himself has 
written of his despair, as a young actor, of trying to learn Somerset Maugham’s 
dialogue: “Dead, elusively inert, wobbly like some synthetic rubber substance,” 
was his typically damning phrase. But Osborne’s language is thrillingly alive 
and calls on a variety of sources, ranging from Bunyanesqe moral rigour (note 
the emphasis on words like “fire” and “blood”) to the rat-a-tat repetitions of 
the music-hall and the sexual candour of DH Lawrence. Osborne showed that 
theatrical prose could achieve its own distinctive poetry and among the 
beneficiaries were writers as diverse asHarold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
,John Arden <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/30/john-arden> and 
Peter Gill. More immediately, the success of Look Back in Anger gave the Royal 
Court a pivotal status in British culture and encouraged successive generations 
to turn to playwriting. Some, such as Arnold Wesker and Ann Jellicoe, were 
Osborne’s contemporaries.

Others, such as David Hare, Christopher Hampton and Howard Brenton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/howardbrenton>, were products of later 
decades who burned with a theatrical ambition that Osborne himself had kindled. 
It is easy to sneer at the journalistic concept of the Angry Young Man (a 
phrase, incidentally, coined by a dismissive Royal Court press officer). But 
what is unarguable is that Look Back in Anger, through its blazing immediacy, 
corrosive vitality and linguistic exuberance, changed British theatre. In the 
words of Alan Sillitoe, “John Osborne didn’t contribute to British theatre: he 
set off a landmine called Look Back in Anger and blew most of it up. The bits 
have settled back into place, of course, but it can never be the same again.”

• This is the introduction for a new edition of John Osborne’s Look Back in 
Anger, published on 3 April byFaber Modern Classics 
<http://fabermodernclassics.com/>. Michael Billington’s The 101 Greatest Plays: 
from Antiquity to the Present will be published by Faber on 3 September 2015
 