
Last week Ariane Sherine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/21/religion-advertising>, 
with some financial backing from ubiquitous atheistRichard Dawkins 
<http://www.richarddawkins.net/>, launched a campaign to raise £11,000 to fund 
atheist adverts on London buses. Within 10 hours, she'd hit her target. The 
total raised has now topped £100,000.

It's a great idea, but as it stands it's something of a missed opportunity. 
What will these adverts accomplish? Primarily, they'll offset those unavoidable 
adverts for the wretchedAlpha course <http://uk.alpha.org/>, which is bound to 
annoy that very small minority of British Christians who feel only their views 
have validity. Which can only be a good thing. But they've got the potential to 
do much more: here's a great chance to produce a little more solid evidence 
towards (dis)proving the existence of God himself.

Yes, it's true that it's impossible to prove there's no God. But as you also 
can't prove there's not an intangible, invisible monkey sitting on your 
shoulder as you read this, that's perhaps not the best clinching argument 
going. Especially as you can't even prove that your shoulder-monkey won't work 
to thwart your life's ambitions in subtle ways unless you pay me a tenner. In 
fact, if I'm ever particularly hard up, I may just have founded that religion. 
Hell, it worked forL Ron Hubbard <http://www.lronhubbard.org/>, after all.

What we can look for is any evidence of the Almighty's handiwork on earth. 
Many atheists maintain their world view is based on evidence, not faith, which 
is an admirable policy, but does imply some slight duty towards gathering that 
evidence. While extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof, if we can 
gather some counter-evidence without too much exertion or cost, it's well 
worthwhile.

And many attempts to do this, to date, have been less than inspired, ranging 
from the tragic to the feeble. A 45-year-old eastern European philosopher died 
last year after lowering himself into a tiger cage declaring, "God, if he 
exists, will protect me."

Charlie Brooker took a less risky but not much more convincing approach in a 
column <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/dec/16/religion.uk1> a few years 
ago. "In summary: a mere sore throat is proof enough that there is no God – or 
that if there is, he doesn't give a toss about human suffering. In which case, 
why bother worshipping him?"

Neither is likely to win awards for good experimental design. A good 
experiment has a control group – for a drugs trial, this is the group given 
sugar pills instead of our new drug, just to allow accurate comparison. It's 
carried out in as natural an environment as possible. Ideally, no one involved 
has to die.

And this is where our newly atheistic buses come in: come January, London will 
have three distinct groups of buses. First up, at least 30 buses will be 
emblazoned with banner advertising rubbishing the idea of God. In all 
likelihood, at least 30 others will be encouraging a new generation of recruits 
to sign up to the Alpha course. And the rest will be their usual secular 
selves: in other words, a perfect control group.

So what I propose is this: let's track the punctuality of these three groups 
(or as many as we can track, randomly selected from each group). We can log 
breakdowns and accidents too, for good measure. The adverts are being paid for 
anyway, the breakdowns and punctuality of the buses involved are already 
measured byTransport for London <http://www.tfl.gov.uk/>, so with a little 
goodwill and some help from a professional statistician, we've got a solid 
natural experiment. After all, if anything could do with a little divine 
intervention, it's our capital's transport system.

The most likely outcome, I'd guess, would be no statistically significant 
difference between any of the three groups. If the Alpha buses significantly 
outperform the other groups, there's pause for thought (if they float 
heavenwards amid a chorus of angelic harpists, it'll be quite a long pause). If 
the buses sporting atheist adverts did significantly better, something out 
there perhaps has a warped sense of humour.

Some proper experiments along these lines have been done before. Here is a 2001
paper <http://www.mayoclinicproceedings.com/inside.asp?AID=1322&UID=> into the 
effects of prayer on patients recovering in coronary care, which found prayer 
had no significant impact on patients' recovery. Science might be "boring" and 
slow, but just as dripping water eventually moves mountains, the slow 
accumulation of such evidence might yet do the same.

Sceptic extraordinaire Ben Goldacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/badscience> recently commented you 
"cannot reason someone out of a position they did not reason themselves into". 
If Britain's atheists are spending £100,000 of our hard-earned cash – during a 
recession, no less – in an attempt to do so, we might as well learn something 
out of it in the process.
 