
Susie Geraghty, in her scissored-down wellingtons, fleece gilet and flowery 
cotton gloves, looks every bit the retired woman engrossed in that very British 
hobby, gardening. But, as she sows her summer cabbages kneeling on a folded 
magazine, she says she feels more like an endangered species.

“You hear about allotments going, up and down the country, so it’s always a 
worry. There is such pressure on land, schools selling off their playing 
fields, and of course the councils must have an eye on allotments: it’s prime 
space for housebuilding and we all know there is such a desperate need for 
houses, especially here in the south-east.”

Geraghty doesn’t want me to say where the allotment is – on the south coast – 
because she is not registered for the plot but working it for her daughter, and 
the business of renting allotments is a deeply serious one. “Oh, I’d hate to 
lose it if they didn’t approve: the waiting lists are so long – years and years 
– and my daughter hasn’t time really. She loves coming here when she can, but 
really it’s mine now and I’ve put so much into it. It feeds me and plenty more! 
They’re very strict. There’s always a beady eye on you because the waiting 
lists are so high, and everyone has a friend or a neighbour that’s waiting for 
one. So it’s zero tolerance if you’re not dedicated and spick and span!”

There is a busy A-road just outside the entrance, but once inside the high 
metal gates – where the padlock codes are changed every month – the noise is of 
birdsong and squeaky wheelbarrows. The allotment holders have an association 
and a shop and the few people around greet each other warmly as they potter 
around in the spring sunshine. A middle-aged man wrestling with a new plastic 
water butt said: “It’s like stress relief. I can’t imagine life without it now. 
Who needs a gym membership?”

When gardener and former Observer columnist Monty Don called last week for an 
“allotment revival” in the UK, he was speaking to the converted, feeding into a 
trend that is already expanding quickly. It has brought a spike in demand for 
allotments and already many councils have been cutting the size of the plots to 
squeeze in more enthusiasts.

An estimated 350,000 people in Britain have allotments, with more than 800,000 
on waiting lists. But as their popularity rises, the pressure on councils to 
release brownfield land for building is also increasing. Already two pressure 
groups have sprung up to help fight the trend, Save AllAllotments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/allotments> and Don’t Lose the Plot, 
alongside the work being done by the British Allotment Society, which takes 
several calls a week from worried gardeners who fear their little plot might be 
taken away. When the land is council-owned there is a statutory duty to find 
another site but it means starting again, often far away and in poorer soil, 
for many people who will have spent years building up plots and friendships. 
For private landowners there is only the duty to give a year’s notice.

Don, 59, is concerned that the arrival of generation rent, thanks to rocketing 
house prices and lack of space for new homes to be built with gardens, many 
people are not getting the opportunity to grow their own food. “My generation 
grew up expecting some sort of ownership and access to gardens. I had my first 
home aged 26 and started growing things then. My three kids are in their 
twenties and none of them rent or own homes with gardens. A generation is 
growing up with no access to green space. There’s an increased remoteness about 
it all. Gardens can reach into life in a way that’s beyond horticulture,’ he 
said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fallotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785940776%2Ffde4e1a0-b95c-4410-a408-f5b63f0cbc4b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Losing%20the%20plot%3A%20the%20fight%20is%20on%20to%20save%20our%20green%20and%20pleasant%20allotments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fallotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Losing%20the%20plot%3A%20the%20fight%20is%20on%20to%20save%20our%20green%20and%20pleasant%20allotments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fallotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785940776%2Ffde4e1a0-b95c-4410-a408-f5b63f0cbc4b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Monty Don. Photograph: Tim Ireland/PA 
“We’ve lost so many of our allotments, and it’s a tragedy. They’re 
increasingly important as young people have less access to gardens. They’re 
part of our way of life and we can’t keep building on them.”

Before this week’s Chelsea flower show, which Don is covering for the BBC, he 
said: “Councils are selling them off and say they’ll find allotment space 
somewhere else, but this is missing the point. Allotments are supposed to be in 
the centre of things. They unite people of different ages, diverse backgrounds.”

For the past few years the grow-your-own trend has been spreading like 
Japanese knotweed. Even as DIY has waned as a hobby, gardening has exploded and 
sales of vegetable seeds are exceeding the sales of flower seeds in the UK for 
the first time since the second world war. Vegetables account for almost 80% of 
sales of seeds and plants compared to 30% in the 1990s.

Even the pushed-for-space householder can buy tumbler tomatoes or alpine 
strawberries that can grow down from a hanging basket. And theIncredible Edible 
<http://www.incredible-edible-todmorden.co.uk/> project at Todmorden in 
Yorkshire inspired other towns when residents began pulling out the ornamental 
shrubs in public places and replacing them with herbs, vegetables and fruit 
trees. There has been a huge surge, too, of people scavenging parks, woods and 
hedgerows for wild edible plants such as garlic, elderflower and berries.

“They’re about community, communication, producing food and doing it alongside 
each other,” said Don. “They’re a paradigm of a successful society. We should 
treasure them. There’s a mental and social factor to be taken into account when 
urban people have no access to gardens.”

His plea comes at a time when several sites are under threat. Sara Jane Trebar 
from Farm Terrace allotments in Watford, Hertfordshire, has been among those 
fighting since 2009 to stop her local authority handing over the site to 
builders of 68 houses and a car park for Watford football club. The case has 
been in and out of court and the office of the secretary of state for local 
government. Last October the allotment holders thought they had won a landmark 
victory to overturn the decision by Eric Pickles, then secretary of state, in 
favour of the council, but they have just found out that Watford borough 
council is to appeal again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fallotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786153011%2F0e2e9ab9-1edd-4437-9417-c299676a64b8-1607x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Losing%20the%20plot%3A%20the%20fight%20is%20on%20to%20save%20our%20green%20and%20pleasant%20allotments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fallotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Losing%20the%20plot%3A%20the%20fight%20is%20on%20to%20save%20our%20green%20and%20pleasant%20allotments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fmay%2F17%2Fallotments-threat-housing-cities-green-spaces%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786153011%2F0e2e9ab9-1edd-4437-9417-c299676a64b8-1607x2040.jpeg>
 An allotment holder at work on his plot of ground by the Albert Hall Memorial, 
in Kensington Gardens IN 1942. Photograph: Fox Photos/Getty Images 
“There’s so much pressure to build, build, build,” said Trebar. “Our 
allotments have been here since 1896. It’s been harrowing that just as we’re 
seeing this green surge, with people wanting to grow things in their own space, 
that local authorities are starting to get rid of them. It’s happening more and 
more to people. It’s very sad, especially at a time when food banks are at an 
all-time high.”

A freedom of information request by the Save All Allotments campaigners found 
that, between 2007 and 2014, 194 out of 198 applications to close allotments 
were granted by the secretary of state. The Department for Communities and 
Local Government has said that 2,000 new allotment places were created in the 
past few years but has no figures for how many have been lost.

Di Appleyard of the National Allotment Society <http://www.nsalg.org.uk/> said 
that, as people are ending up with smaller and smaller gardens, allotments have 
never been more vital. “They are wonderful for mental health, for creating 
community, but there is a problem in that it’s the right to grow that is 
protected by statute, so if a council wants a bit of land it really doesn’t 
have to take account of the community there.

“But a lot of councils are respecting their allotments and not trying to get 
rid of them despite the pressures,” she said. She added that the once 
traditional “allotment officer” post was mostly disappearing, leaving many 
allotments unmanaged, while other councils were raising rents.

“Allotments are of course vulnerable with the pressure on urban space 
increasing,” Appleyard said. “But there are ways to fight back and things 
people can do. People power is an impressive thing.”

GROW YOUR OWN

■ During the Dig for Victory days of the 1940s, Britain had 1.5m allotments.

■ The austere years of the 1970s saw another surge of grow-your-own.

■ Beans are said to be the most popular homegrown vegetables, while about 10% 
of strawberries and raspberries are homegrown, along with 7% of potatoes.

■ In 1908 the Small Holdings and Allotments Act placed a duty on local 
authorities to provide sufficient allotments, according to demand. The rights 
of allotmenteers in England and Wales were strengthened with the Allotments Act 
of 1925, which established statutory allotments that local authorities could 
not sell without ministerial consent.

■ Thirty minutes of allotment gardening burns about 150 calories, the same as 
low-impact aerobics, according to the British Allotment Society.

■ An allotment is traditionally measured in “rods” or “poles”, a measurement 
from Anglo-Saxon times. Ten poles is the accepted size of a plot, equal to 250 
square metres. Recent “plot chopping” by councils to accommodate rising demand 
has been controversial.
 