
“If they do as we agreed then we will win,” said Louis van Gaal before 
Manchester United played Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/16/manchester-united-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
, his first competitive game as the club’s manager. Such blase simplicity 
seemed reasonable: only a month earlier, he hadtaken Holland to third place at 
the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/12/brazilholland-world-cup-2014-third-place-play-off-match-report>
 – and seldom have managerial interventions played such an obvious role in a 
team’s progress. Roughly, they did as agreed.

Pre-season sustained that impression. United beat LA Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/24/manchester-united-hammer-la-galaxy-as-van-gaals-reign-starts-with-bang>
, Roma, Internazionale,Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/03/real-madrid-manchester-united-pre-season-friendly-match-report>
, Liverpool and Valencia, producing passages of incisive, imaginative football, 
and Van Gaal asserted himself off the pitch. “The discussions were very long 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/23/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-need-time>
,” he said of his appointment, “and I think they understand the timescale or I 
would not have accepted the job. I told them the way I worked, the consequences 
of hiring me and explained that I had experienced difficult starts at my former 
clubs. That is why we discussed a three-year contract, not one year.”

Real Madrid’s Karim Benzema emerges as target for Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/26/karim-benzema-target-manchester-united>
He did well to get his retaliation in first because United lost to Swansea and 
thendrew with Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/24/sunderland-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
. Clearly, his summer buzz was unsustainable – not even Louis van Gaal could 
expect Louis van Gaal to proceed in that vein – but nor did he expect to be 
complaining that “there were so many chances we didn’t create”. In only two 
games he had botched an opening run that, in theory, looked capable of spurring 
a surprise title challenge.

The poverty of the start was not solely Van Gaal’s fault. Players he expected 
to arrive had not arrived, nor had players he expected to leave left – so he 
picked them. Marnick Vermijl, Michael Keane, Anderson, Shinji Kagawa, Danny 
Welbeck and Javier Hernández all started in the League Cup tie at MK Dons,where 
United were humiliated 4-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/26/mk-dons-manchester-united-capital-one-cup>
.

This was a considerable oversight. With no European football, and 
international weekends interrupting league competition three times by 
mid-November, United needed all the games that they could get, particularly 
given the curious 3-5-2 formation that Van Gaal decided was the best way of 
maximising qualities and hiding deficiencies.

Then Ángel Di María arrived and, assuming he was still playing in a good team, 
immediately unfurled an array of beautiful passes and purposeful runs. United, 
however,still could not score against Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/30/burnley-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, so, with Van Gaal also needing to incorporate Radamel Falcao, he switched to 
a midfield diamond.

Immediately, the team were liberated, thrashing QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/14/manchester-united-qpr-premier-league-match-report>
 and dazzling their way to a 3-1 lead at Leicester. Following an unfortunately 
but impetuously conceded penalty, though, they collapsed,letting in four goals 
in 21 minutes to cover themselves in embarrassment once again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/21/leicester-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Rather than note a defence with Tyler Blackett and Jonny Evans at its centre, 
Van Gaal was spooked, his diamond deemed a fugazi. He persevered for the next 
two games, both at home, and United again managed moments of promising 
excellence to win them hanging on, before, away to West Bromwich Albion, they 
were sent out in a rigid 4-3-3.

This heralded the start of Di María’s deterioration. A very handy winger, he 
had only announced himself as a special player the previous season, thanks to a 
deeper and narrower role that enabled him to fill two positions at once. Now, 
however, he was back where he started, the team no longer organised to extract 
the most from its biggest talent.

At half-time, an outmuscled United found themselves a goal down, so Van Gaal 
swapped Ander Herrera for Marouane Fellaini. Fellaini scored within three 
minutes; Herrera started only one of the next 17 league games.

United escaped The Hawthorns with a draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/20/west-bromwich-albion-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
,and the Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers’ summer warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/05/liverpool-brendan-rodgers-louis-van-gaal>
 as to the intensity of the English game – greeted at the time with all the 
obvious career comparisons – was proving prescient. Van Gaal later acknowledged 
as much, discussing the uniqueness of a league in which every team has at least 
one match-winner.

Next came Chelsea and Manchester City, a draw and a defeat meaning a drop to 
10th in the table. A significant improvement was now established, however: big 
games were turned up for, and late goals were back. A semblance of United was 
back.

The rolling injury crisis soon forced a return to 3-5-2 and then, at Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/22/arsenal-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, United could barely connect a pass in the first half; with Di María mainly 
hanging around up front for breaking purposes, the midfield was devoid of 
creativity. Or, put another way, they were there to win, not to play.

This wasn’t altogether surprising. Despite his Ajax-Barcelona pedigree, Van 
Gaal is a pragmatist not a fantasist, all the more so with a job to keep, and 
so, through the winter, United were relentlessly, fascinatingly awful. It 
seemed inconceivable that each game, each half, could be as bad as the one 
before, particularly as attacking players returned – and yet it was.

Still he radiated authority. “I’m not interested,” he said, when it was put to 
him that Falcao wanted to start more games. “He has to follow my philosophy. Do 
you understand that?” Even if that philosophy sat somewhere between spartan and 
puritan, its essence – trying hard, expecting to win and winning – transmitted 
to the players.

So they tried hard, expected to win and won, the party guest who silently sits 
in the same seat, joylessly and methodically consuming even after everyone else 
has left. Artless, yes, but with conviction undeniable and, as such, numerical 
comparisons of the two post-Fergie seasons missed the elemental difference 
revealed by eyes, not stats: where once there was David Moyes, now there was 
hope.

Which is not to say that Van Gaal’s performance was perfect. In particular, 
his persistent complaining about the festive schedule not only put the idea of 
tiredness into his players’ minds but it gave them an excuse for failure. No 
wonder that, by theNew Year’s Day draw at Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/01/stoke-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, he found himself observing that “the buildup was not good, the crossing was 
not good and the last part was also not good”.

Nor was fatigue – ascribed or otherwise – the only factor. For years Wayne 
Rooney <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> has scored and made 
goals, despite playing in front of a purported midfield that bore greater 
resemblance to the middle of a field. Relocating him to it deprived the team of 
its most likely scorer and reflected the outsider’s perception of him as a 
total footballer, rather than a reliable finisher who experiences occasional 
transcendence.

In which context, Herrera’s continuing exclusion became all the more peculiar. 
The team were plainly missing his energy and creativity as well as the mental 
and physical steel belied by his barmitzvah boy haircut. His eight goals from 
midfield have come in 22 starts; Michael Carrick, Fellaini and Daley Blind have 
10 in 59 between them.

His omission reflected a not unfamiliar pattern, dictated by the reality that 
Van Gaal does not appreciate risk. Having previously fallen out with Rivaldo, 
Lúcio and Franck Ribéry, at United, he was largely ignoring Rafael da Silva, 
Adnan Januzaj and Juan Mata, while Antonio Valencia, Ashley Young and Blind – 
less talented but more predictable and controllable – were favourites.

The upshot was possession without penetration, the chants of “4-4-2” heard at 
QPR in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/17/qpr-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 probably more primal than tactical. Van Gaal explained that the formation
“twitches my ass” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/22/manchester-united-louis-van-gaal-twitchy-bum>
 but this was precisely the point being made – for those making it, a privilege 
of the job.

United carried on getting by, though, until, a month later, they lost to 
Swansea again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/21/swansea-city-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 – on the face of it a poor result but actually a turning point. Returning to 
the starting XI, Herrera applied a superb finish to the kind of sweeping break 
that was once a trademark and although the objective measure of the score 
disproved claims that they were unlucky to lose, things looked a lot better. 
They were still not creating enough chances but, for the first time, their 
domination was further from sterile than virile.

Also important was the felicitous injury suffered by Robin van Persie, shown 
loyalty though more than two years away from a run of decent form. This left 
Rooney free to play up front, and he duly scored twice against Sunderland 
before facilitating a cruciallast-minute winner at Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/04/newcastle-united-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Manchester United’s Phil Jones expects strong start to next season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/25/manchester-united-phil-jones-hoping-strong-start-next-season>
Arsenal, however, then eliminated Van Gaal’s team from the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/09/manchester-united-arsenal-fa-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
 and, with difficult games imminent, United’s season was under threat. Again 
they got lucky with an injury, this time to Luke Shaw; Van Gaal was left with 
no choice but to remove Blind from midfield, just as Michael Carrick was 
available to return, and then, for the first time, picked players to fit a 
system rather than the other way around. Finally, there was balance between 
skill and strength, speed and technique, and Tottenham Hotspur, Liverpool, 
Aston Villa and Manchester City were taken apart.

This was not as suddenly serendipitous as was painted, the previous month 
seeing incremental improvements. It was just that, liberated by a suitable 
structure, the players could inject composure with fury, amplifying the 
thoroughness of Van Gaal’s coaching. They were doing as agreed.

Only briefly, as it turned out, but Champions League qualification, along with 
wins over rivals, made the season just about acceptable in the circumstances. 
Beyond that, it was interesting solely because of Van Gaal; football is meant 
to be fun – and Van Gaal is fun.

His ballooning at United’s awards night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/20/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-fans-lady-saxophone-player-awards>
 was the latest episode of endearing swagger and spirit but he will know that, 
in the end, none of it can compensate for the failings of his team; next season 
there can be no excuses.
 