
Louis van Gaal has responded to Ángel Di María’s claim that he was unable to 
settle atManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> because he was 
constantly asked to change position by accusing the Argentinian of failing to 
take responsibility for his disappointing time at the club.

Di María became the British record transfer when signing from Real Madrid in 
summer 2014 for £59.7m. Yet he left 12 months later forParis Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> having scored only four 
goals and made 32 appearances, of which 13 were starts.

Luke Shaw unlikely to play again this season, says Louis van Gaal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/01/luke-shaw-injury-louis-van-gaal-manchester-united>
After Di María complained that he was too often shifted around by Van Gaal, 
the Dutchman said: “I have never seen [many] players who look at themselves, 
who look to the way they have performed. It is always the fault of the manager. 
So he is one of the players who are in a row of players who have no 
self-criticism. Unfortunately it is my life as a manager. It is always like 
that.”

Di María told the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/35944285>: “It’s 
not nice to say certain things but it’s more that they didn’t let me settle 
properly than I couldn’t settle. I left and that team are still playing the 
same way. Out of the European competitions, far from being champions of the 
Premier League.

“I don’t think it was my fault or the fault of my team-mates. Every time I was 
given the opportunity, I did all I could but it didn’t work out as I hoped. So 
I decided to leave, not only to be happy but to win things. I started a game in 
one position then the next game in another. I scored goals playing in one 
position, then suddenly the next game I was picked to play in a different 
position.”

Manchester United face May deadline to make move for José Mourinho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/31/manchester-united-deadline-jose-mourinho>
Di María’s PSG face Manchester City in Wednesday evening’s Champions League 
quarter-final first leg in Paris. It is a competition United hope to 
participate in next season but Van Gaal believes he could remain as United 
manager even if the side fail to qualify. United are in sixth place on 50 
points, one point behind City, who are in fourth, and have eight matches left. 
At the end of the season Van Gaal will have a year left on the three-year 
contract he signed in the summer of 2014.

Asked if he would be surprised to remain should United finish outside the top 
four, Van Gaal said: “I cannot say that because I do not know the next eight 
matches. You can only evaluate when you have the total facts. The board has to 
evaluate after the results of this year, what they have to do. That is normal. 
I cannot predict that when I do not know the facts.

“The results and Champions League positions you can only say in May and then 
you have to evaluate the circumstances I had to work in.”
 