
Residents in Louisiana and Mississippi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> are taking stock of damage 
Saturday after a massive deluge of rain submerged roads and cars, washed out 
bridges and forced residents to flee homes.

The rain and flooding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/06/sea-defences-not-enough-to-protect-delta-cities-from-rising-flood-risk-study>
 is part of a weather system that has affected Louisiana, Mississippi, 
Arkansas, Tennessee and Alabama. At least three people have died in Louisiana 
alone.

In Mississippi, officials said as many as 1,000 residents could see their 
homes flooded by the rising Leaf River in Hattiesburg, Petal and surrounding 
areas.

Southern US prepares for flooding surge as waters move down Mississippi river
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/tennessee-louisiana-mississippi-river-flooding-rains>
In Louisiana’s St Tammany Parish, officials late Friday asked people living 
near two rivers to consider evacuating because the rivers were rising to 
“historical proportions” because of heavy rains north of the area.

In southwest Louisiana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana>, a band 
of rain dumped 10 to 15 inches across some areas late Thursday and into Friday, 
sparking vicious flash flooding.

Allen DeWeese was living in the Land-o-Pines campground in Covington with his 
10-year-old son when the rushing waters of the Tchefuncte river destroyed his 
trailer.

“They’re calling it Land-o-Lakes right at the moment,” he joked, while smoking 
a cigarette at a shelter set up in Covington. His trailer? “It’s destroyed. 
It’s underwater.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Flouisiana-mississippi-flash-floods-rain-deaths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20ffd1d4b3c59a81f73d2fbf0e3c3a4ec6327a54%2F0_13_3870_2321%2F3870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louisiana%20flash%20floods%20leave%20at%20least%20three%20dead%20as%20Mississippi%20faces%20deluge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Flouisiana-mississippi-flash-floods-rain-deaths%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louisiana%20flash%20floods%20leave%20at%20least%20three%20dead%20as%20Mississippi%20faces%20deluge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Flouisiana-mississippi-flash-floods-rain-deaths%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20ffd1d4b3c59a81f73d2fbf0e3c3a4ec6327a54%2F0_13_3870_2321%2F3870.jpg>
 Dacia Winters, left, embraces Ryan Ficca, center, and Stormy Winters after 
they were evacuated in a Louisiana national guard high water vehicle from 
rising floodwaters in Bossier Parish, Louisiana. Photograph: Gerald Herbert/AP 
He planned to spend the night at the shelter. After that, he wasn’t sure. 
“I’ll take it day-to-day,” he said.

In nearby Tangipahoa Parish, sheriff Daniel Edwards said close to 50 roads 
were closed because of high water and an estimated 300 to 400 people had to 
evacuate. Further to the east in Washington Parish, swollen rivers and creeks 
led to widespread flooding.

In northern Louisiana, the deluge has dumped 15 to 20 inches this week. In 
Ouachita Parish, well over 1,000 people have been evacuated, said Glenn 
Springfield, a spokesman for the sheriff’s office. He said authorities started 
doing water rescues early Wednesday morning and have been “doing those pretty 
much around the clock nonstop since then”.

In Bossier Parish, also in northwest Louisiana, first responders evacuated at 
least 1,000 people. Officials Friday said they expect waters to overtop the Red 
Chute Levee but it’s too soon to say by how much or what damage it could cause.

Brenda Maddox was forced to flee her home of 26 years. She and her spouse left 
Thursday with four days of clothes packed. On Friday, they came back to 
retrieve their car from the flooded streets and were going to an RV park to 
wait out the rain.

“We’d heard we’d get a lot of rain, but it all came so sudden,” she said. “We 
hate to leave, but we thought we’d get out while we can.”

At the Pecan Valley Estates mobile home park, Sam Cassidy and his wife were 
the last holdouts Friday – worried looters might come if they left.

Thursday morning, with waters creeping up his front steps, he stood in 
waist-deep water watching his neighbors evacuate. An alligator swam by. By 
night, it looked like a “horror movie”.

“It was pitch black; the houses were empty. It’s been an adventure,” he said.

The weather system responsible for the problems was starting to move slowly to 
the north-east, but additional showers were expected Saturday, said Frank 
Revitte, from the National Weather Service in Slidell.

Governor John Bel Edwards crisscrossed the state Friday checking on parishes. 
He said there had been record flooding in some areas and called it a “major 
event”.

Mike Steele, a spokesman for the Office of Homeland Security and Emergency 
Preparedness, said Friday it was too early to provide estimates on damage as 
the number of flooded properties and evacuees was “changing by the minute”.
 