
Painting a subject who is famous for portraying so many different characters 
proved a struggle for Louise Hearman, who won the 2016 Archibald prize on 
Friday for her portrait ofBarry Humphries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/barry-humphries> – a man she described as 
having “a truly fugitive face”.


Hearman, a Melbourne-based artist who was awarded the $150,000 Moran prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/28/louise-hearman-wins-2014-moran-prize-australias-richest-portrait-award>
 in 2014 for her portrait of Bill Henson, told the media at the Art Gallery of 
NSW it took her years to feel as though she had fully captured Humphries, the 
actor and comedian behind Dame Edna Everage and Sir Les Patterson, among others.


Archibald finalists 2016: from artists to activists to celebrity chefs – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/07/archibald-finalists-2016-from-artists-to-activists-to-celebrity-chefs-in-pictures>
“Every feature on this painting has been in a different place in some point, 
and it took me several years to make it,” she said. “I had to keep waiting for 
Barry to come back from overseas, and I had to go up to his face and look into 
his eyes and try and work out what colour they were. He was a very difficult 
person to paint. I hope I kept him open; he’s not one thing or another, he’s 
all things at once.”

When she put the final stroke on the work, Hearman brought her neighbours 
around for the first assessment. “I said, ‘OK, now turn around’ – and my 
neighbour [gasped]. And I thought, that’s so fantastic. That means so much to 
me.”

Hearman became friends with Humphries, who also paints, through mutual 
acquaintances. “Much to my delight, Barry agreed to sit for a paint,” she said. 
“I tried many ideas, but as it progressed the painting itself showed me the 
way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bcd8eb28e81c5972a7fb9e9d11208034d10e97c%2F0_0_3666_2384%2F3666.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louise%20Hearman%20wins%20Archibald%20prize%20for%20Barry%20Humphries%20portrait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louise%20Hearman%20wins%20Archibald%20prize%20for%20Barry%20Humphries%20portrait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bcd8eb28e81c5972a7fb9e9d11208034d10e97c%2F0_0_3666_2384%2F3666.jpg>
 Louise Hearman’s portrait of Barry Humphries, which won the $100,000 Archibald 
prize. Photograph: Nick Kreisler/AGNSW 
She described Humphries as a “man with a searing intellect, extraordinary 
talent, and a mind-boggling memory”, saying he was an inspiration to artists of 
every medium. “It’s sad that so much great talent in Australia has to leave 
this country to make a living from what they do. I love Australia, I want to 
stay here, I want to work here – and this prize will really help me do that.”

Hearman beat 50 other finalists for the prize, which reached gender parity 
among artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/14/the-archibald-prize-finally-hit-gender-parity-but-the-exhibition-tells-a-different-story>
 for the first time in the Archibald’s 95-year history. The 11-personBoard of 
Trustees of AGNSW 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/about-us/people/agnsw-trust/> met at the 
gallery on Friday morning to decide on the pool’s top contenders, narrowing the 
field down to just six works: Natasha Bieniek’s portrait of Wendy Whiteley; 
Lewis Miller’s of Bernie Teague; Nick Stathopoulos’s of Deng Adut; Marcus 
Wills’s of James Batcheler; Imants Tillers for his self-portrait; and Hearman’s 
portrait of Humphries.

The trust’s vice president, Mark Nelson, said judging was difficult, but 
“Louise Hearman’s portrait took centre-stage in the end. It stood out as a 
portrait that truly captured the spirit of the sitter – she has caught Barry’s 
sardonic smile brilliantly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8994a06a12ce40a3d59a4a36a0c53207d270a0ca%2F0_0_2560_2054%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louise%20Hearman%20wins%20Archibald%20prize%20for%20Barry%20Humphries%20portrait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louise%20Hearman%20wins%20Archibald%20prize%20for%20Barry%20Humphries%20portrait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8994a06a12ce40a3d59a4a36a0c53207d270a0ca%2F0_0_2560_2054%2F2560.jpg>
 Seven Sisters tjukurrpa, by the Ken Family Collective, which won the Wynne 
prize at the 2016 Archibald announcement Photograph: Ken Family 
Collective/Felicity Jenkins/AGNSW 
Each year, the $100,000 Archibald prize is awarded to a portrait 
“preferentially of some man or woman distinguished in art, letters, science or 
politics”. Announced concurrently are the $40,000 Sulman Prize for subject 
painting, genre painting or murals, which was won this year by Esther Stewart 
forFlatline Dreaming 
<http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/prizes/sulman/2016/29770/?utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=PR%20Archibald%20Announcement%20-%20winner&utm_content=PR%20Archibald%20Announcement%20-%20winner+CID_ebb076dbb8ed06112e63db876ecf9007&utm_source=Email%20marketing%20software&utm_term=Esther%20Stewart%20Flatland%20dreaming>
; and the $50,000 Wynne Prize for landscapes, which was won by the Ken Family 
Collective: five sisters who live in the remote Aboriginal community of Amata 
in the Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara (APY) lands in South Australia.

The Archibald prize finally hit gender parity but where are the women on the 
walls?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/14/the-archibald-prize-finally-hit-gender-parity-but-the-exhibition-tells-a-different-story>
The Ken Family Collective’s collaborative work, Seven Sisters, is a story 
about family protection and teaching. “It tells of women being chased by a bad 
man but being protected by their elder sisters,” the artists’ statement reads. 
“We have also included the tjala (honey ant), which refers to our country.

“When we work together as a family we are learning from each other and 
teaching each other. Our family is strong because we teach all our young women 
this important tjukurpa (the force which unites Anangu with each other and with 
the landscape).”

Four of the sisters travelled to Sydney for the first time to receive the 
award. “We are very proud to see our painting here in Sydney and to win the 
Wynne Prize,” said Tjungkara Ken. “I am happy to be here with my sisters and 
for my family in Amata to see our painting win this big award.”

As the prizes were announced inside, the Art Gallery of NSW steps played host 
to another group eager for the attention of the press: students, artists, 
alumni and supporters of Sydney College of the Arts, who gathered in red capes 
to protest againstthe Sydney University college’s merger with UNSW Art and 
Design 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/sydney-university-art-school-merger-with-unsw-sparks-outrage-among-students-20160621-gpofi2.html>
, which was announced in June and will go into effect in 2017.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b333d22671bcb1a1092cddbac429ae054da19f0%2F0_0_3008_1664%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louise%20Hearman%20wins%20Archibald%20prize%20for%20Barry%20Humphries%20portrait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louise%20Hearman%20wins%20Archibald%20prize%20for%20Barry%20Humphries%20portrait&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Flouise-hearman-wins-archibald-prize-for-barry-humphries-portrait%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b333d22671bcb1a1092cddbac429ae054da19f0%2F0_0_3008_1664%2F3008.jpg>
 The Sydney College of the Arts’ Save Our School campaign meets at the steps of 
AGNSW, to protest against the school’s merger with UNSW Art and Design. 
Photograph: Steph Harmon for the Guardian 
The merger – which also plans to bring a third Sydney art education 
institution, NationalArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> School, 
closer to the fold – has been touted by University of NSW vice-chancellor Ian 
Jacob as “an exciting step towards the creation of a national centre of 
artistic excellence”.

But many have spoken out against a move they believe will reduce the diversity 
of educational options and which will, according to National Association for 
the Visual Arts executive director Tamara Winikoff, “have very deleterious 
consequences for art education in Australia”. Three SCA graduates have won the 
Archibald prize, including Ben Quilty, who spoke at the protest.

• The Archibald prize exhibition at the Art Gallery of NSW is open to the 
public from 16 July
 