
Louis van Gaal expects Ángel Di María to join Manchester United’s tour in San 
Jose on Saturday, but the manager refused to rule out British football’s most 
expensive footballermoving to Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/paris-saint-german-target-manchester-united-angel-di-maria>
.

Di María and Marcos Rojo have been resting following their involvement in the 
Copa América, while Mexico’s Javier Hernández injured himself during the Gold 
Cup. The trio are due in San Jose on Saturday to be part of United’s pre-season 
trip, though there had been some doubt about Di María’s involvement due to 
PSG’s interest.

However, Van Gaal confirmed that the Argentinian, who cost £59.7m from Real 
Madrid last summer, will be in San Jose, though he, Rojo and Hernández will not 
feature in Saturday’s match against Barcelona in Santa Clara.

Asked about arrival of the three, the Dutchman said: “I expect them tomorrow 
because we have communicated that and they have responded on that. He [Di 
María] cannot play in the game because we have to build him up. When you come 
out of your holidays you cannot play immediately a game, so that is out of the 
question.”

Golden Goal: Eric Cantona for Manchester United v Liverpool (1996)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/24/golden-goal-eric-cantona-for-manchester-united-v-liverpool-1996>
Van Gaal would not be drawn on the likelihood of Di María departing: “I am not 
answering questions about transfers,” he said. The manager istargeting 
Barcelona’s Pedro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/manchester-united-yet-bid-barcelona-pedro>
 andReal Madrid’s Sergio Ramos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/23/real-madrid-manchester-united-sergio-ramos>
 but again refused to discuss moves when asked. “I never answer the question. I 
cannot. I want to but it is not good for Manchester United, it is not good for 
players, and it is not good for me. Every word I say about players in the 
process is one word too much.”

David de Gea will start against Barca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/23/louis-van-gaal-david-de-gea-manchester-united-barcelona>
 after missing the first two tour matches because of an injury that is thought 
to be in his back. “I think so,” said Van Gaal, who believes the goalkeeper 
will not be undercooked for the Premier League opener against Tottenham Hotspur 
on 8 August. “It is still possible because he shall play [against Barcelona].”

Bastian Schweinsteiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/16/bastian-schweinsteiger-premier-league-manchester-united->
 will miss the game through injury, though Van Gaal would not specify what the 
midfielder’s problem is. “I never talk about the injury. I say only it is a 
minor issue and I don’t take risks in preparation time. He shall not even play 
for 30 minutes.”

Football transfer rumours: Cristiano Ronaldo off to Manchester United?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/football-transfer-rumours-cristiano-ronaldo-manchester-united>
The manager stated that next season’s ambition is not to win the Champions 
League. “I have said to the players it is fantastic to play against Barcelona 
because then you know a little bit if you are at a certain level, to play, to 
win the Champions League,” said the 63-year-old. “Our aim this season is not to 
win the Champions League but to be close. Of course I know that this is 
pre-season. We know very well that winning [against Barça] is not the real 
truth because in the season you have to show it. Not in the pre-season. The 
performance is more important than the result. That is for me what counts, how 
we perform. I would be very happy when we win, of course.”

Van Gaal also wants his team to play with a higher tempo this season. “It is 
always our standard to play quicker but it is also dependable of the quality of 
the opponent. When they park the bus, you cannot play very quickly because the 
space is very narrow and it is very difficult to play very quickly,” he said. 
“I have explained that also in that kind of games but we have played also 
fantastic games where we have played very quickly with very good positional 
play and that delivers a lot of goals.”

The signing of Memphis Depay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/08/manchester-united-memphis-depay-dream-chaser>
 should help, but Van Gaal added he expects the same intensity from the rest of 
his squad: “It is not only Depay, all the players have to play like that. 
Because when you don’t have all the players who are able to do that, you cannot 
do that because you are a team.”
 