
The Scottish writer and academic Alexander McCall Smith is the second author 
to feature in ourBook Week Scotland  <http://www.bookweekscotland.com/>series 
in which writers celebrate their favourite library by writing a love letter to 
it. The creator ofThe No. 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/oct/04/review-no1-ladies-detective-agency-alexander-mccall-smith>
 has written this letter toInnerpeffray Library 
<http://www.innerpeffraylibrary.co.uk/>, the oldest lending library in 
Scotland, founded in 1680 and still open to the public.

A letter to Innerpeffray Library

Dear Innerpeffray Library, 

Have you noticed how big everything is these days? Big roads, big buildings, 
big libraries … The world gets smaller in one sense while it gets bigger in 
another. And all the while, we humans remain very much the same size, with much 
the same needs as we have always had. One of these needs is for small rooms 
with bookshelves that go up to the ceiling, with chairs tucked away in corners, 
and with just enough space to sit and read.

It is possible, I think, to love one thing while you also love another: the 
heart grows bigger if one shares in that way

I very rarely come to see you even if I belong to something called The Friends 
of Innerpeffray Library. But at least you know that you have these friends, and 
that they love you, in particular, and all libraries in general. It is 
possible, I think, to love one thing while you also love another: affections 
can be shared, and indeed the heart grows bigger, I think, if one shares in 
that way.

You are a very old library indeed. You have been there since 1680, tucked away 
in that lovely bit of Perthshire countryside, at the end of a Roman road lined 
with hedges and fields that put one in just the right mood for old square rooms 
and tiny staircases and books on all sorts of obscure subjects. There you are, 
in your beautiful little building, with its ancient kirk to keep it company. 
There you are – a building on a truly human scale, designed for one or two 
people at a time, reminding us how things were before the world became so big 
and impersonal.

People who come to read in your building think they have been there before, 
even if they have not. This, I think, is because they have seen you in one of 
those dreams in which they imagine a holy place, an ideal place, and they see 
something very much like you.

There you are – a building on a truly human scale, reminding us how things 
were before the world became so impersonal

You have no computers – or none that I have seen. So many libraries today have 
become sheds for computers, with books being edged out, put away. You have none 
of that. Let books who are exiled by computers seek refuge here in your little 
reading room. You are there to receive them, to comfort them in a world that is 
turning against the book.

You are so generous. You were a free library back in the seventeenth century, 
and you still are. In keeping alive this tradition you are reminding us of what 
libraries are all about. You are about knowledge and the open and generous 
sharing of knowledge. You are about the good that comes from the written word 
in an age when there are so many lies around.

You are the senior library in Scotland. You are loved by those who know you, 
but you are happy to take on new friends. You are a little beacon. You really 
are.

Alexander McCall Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexander-mccall-smith>

Alexander McCall Smith’s handwritten letter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-alexander-mccall-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416838079109%2Ff742a7c9-3c0f-4a1b-9050-95cd5adf4f3b-1484x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%20letters%20to%20libraries%3A%20Alexander%20McCall%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-alexander-mccall-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%20letters%20to%20libraries%3A%20Alexander%20McCall%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-alexander-mccall-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416838079109%2Ff742a7c9-3c0f-4a1b-9050-95cd5adf4f3b-1484x2040.jpeg>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-alexander-mccall-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416838102766%2Fcd43289f-4d39-4b8d-b513-15105e560193-1020x949.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%20letters%20to%20libraries%3A%20Alexander%20McCall%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-alexander-mccall-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%20letters%20to%20libraries%3A%20Alexander%20McCall%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-alexander-mccall-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416838102766%2Fcd43289f-4d39-4b8d-b513-15105e560193-1020x949.jpeg> 