
Oz stylewatch: sequins throw fabulousness back into fashion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2015/mar/17/oz-stylewatch-sequins-throw-fabulousness-back-into-fashion>
The Rolling Stones’ She’s Like a Rainbow has long been a catwalk soundtrack 
favourite. Lately, though, it seems designers have been taking the song far 
more literally.

Flourishes of psychedelia were a street-style hit during Australian fashion 
month, withPaula Cademartori 
<http://www.refinery29.com/2015/09/94190/cute-handbags-fashion-week-street-style#slide-33>
 handbags and stripedFendi monster backpacks 
<https://www.pinterest.com/pin/232568768234561981/> dangling off shoulders. 
Meanwhile,Beyoncé 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3020433/Beyonce-steps-vibrant-striped-midi-dress-NYC.html>
 has made alasting commitment to Roy G Biv. 
<https://instagram.com/p/9FS_t3vw7S/?taken-by=beyonce> 

The global rainbow wave has demonstrated that kaleidoscopic clothing and 
accessories aren’t just for theIris Apfels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/jul/19/iris-apfel-interview-designer-fashion-film>
 of the world. In How to Be a Woman, Caitlin Moran wrote that leopard print, 
gold sequins and silver lamé are “neutrals”, and a similar principle applies to 
rainbow designs. When you wear every colour at once, it doesn’t “go” with 
anything, which means the rainbow clothes in questioncome full circle 
<http://media4.popsugar-assets.com/files/2013/03/10/4/192/1922564/3eeef4474bd61944_Laure-Heriard-Dubreuil-StellaMcCartneyParisMarch2013-Melodie-Jeng-2708/i/rainbow-bright-take-70s-working-girl-vibe.jpg>
 andend up matching everything 
<http://cdn5.arabiastyle.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/street-style-intarsia-sweaters-01.jpg>
 (even orange and olive green simultaneously).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Flovers-and-dreamers-of-australian-fashion-chase-a-rainbow-connection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b37ba1b65b4456a5d93a80f4a556a5170df893%2F0_79_2800_1678%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lovers%20and%20dreamers%20of%20Australian%20fashion%20chase%20a%20rainbow%20connection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Flovers-and-dreamers-of-australian-fashion-chase-a-rainbow-connection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lovers%20and%20dreamers%20of%20Australian%20fashion%20chase%20a%20rainbow%20connection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Flovers-and-dreamers-of-australian-fashion-chase-a-rainbow-connection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b37ba1b65b4456a5d93a80f4a556a5170df893%2F0_79_2800_1678%2F2800.jpg>
 Turning up the colour: the US fashion favourite Iris Apfel. Photograph: 
BEI/Rex Features 
Multicoloured accessories can be used to bring a joyous touch to an otherwise 
conservative black, white or navy outfit, or rainbow pieces can be piled on top 
of each otherfor a delightfully insane look 
<http://cdn9.lbstatic.nu/files/looks/large/2015/01/02/4229356_Eleonora-Carisi-Fendi-fur-shoes-e-Cavalli-jeans-almaty-streetstyle.jpg?1420209662>
.

While designers including Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pierpaolo Piccioli of 
Valentino 
<http://www.spottedfashion.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Valentino-Rainbow-Zigzag-Flap-Bag-Resort-2015.jpg>
 looked toElmer the Patchwork Elephant 
<http://images-eu.amazon.com/images/P/0099697203.02.LZZZZZZZ.jpg> for 
inspiration, and Mary Katrantzoutook cues from 60s op art 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/resort-2016/mary-katrantzou/slideshow/collection>
, Australian designers have looked to more organic muses to find their pots of 
gold.

For the Sydney-based designer Emma Mulholland, native birds 
<https://instagram.com/p/7cniXZsuLD/?taken-by=emmamulholland> and heatwave maps 
<http://emmamulholland.com/product/weather-map-tshirt/> provided fruitful 
colour palettes. “I often look to animals and nature for inspiration,” she told 
Guardian Australia.

“I find there is so much to draw from, whether its colour combinations or 
funny animal traits. I find it all pretty fascinating and amusing.

“I think so many designers stop at leopard print or something basic but there 
are a lot more ways to use nature in design.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Flovers-and-dreamers-of-australian-fashion-chase-a-rainbow-connection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ebc7b2a1a1dac32021b922846a2b202a431405%2F0_724_2557_2694%2F2557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lovers%20and%20dreamers%20of%20Australian%20fashion%20chase%20a%20rainbow%20connection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Flovers-and-dreamers-of-australian-fashion-chase-a-rainbow-connection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lovers%20and%20dreamers%20of%20Australian%20fashion%20chase%20a%20rainbow%20connection&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Flovers-and-dreamers-of-australian-fashion-chase-a-rainbow-connection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ebc7b2a1a1dac32021b922846a2b202a431405%2F0_724_2557_2694%2F2557.jpg>
 Carla Fletcher’s portrait of Australian fashion designer Jenny Kee was an 
Archibald prize finalist. Photograph: Felicity Jenkins/AGNSW 
The artist and fashion legend Linda Jackson introduced Romance Was Born to the 
diffracted beauty of opals this season 
<http://bowandarrowstore.com/collections/romance-was-born>, while her longtime 
friend and collaboratorJenny Kee was painted for the Archibald prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jul/09/archibald-prize-finalists-2015-from-popstars-to-politicians-in-pictures#img-9>
 in varicoloured silks of her own creation, drawing on native flowers and 
desert sunsets.


Colour analysis: fashion’s search for the perfect shade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/08/colour-analysis-fashion-colour-me-beautiful-35-years>
The rainbows Australian designers have been producing are less clean and 
precise than their international counterparts. This point of difference is in 
an advantage. Rather than being explicitly tied to the flower-child moment that 
is gripping the fashion world more broadly, Mulholland, Romance Was Born and 
Kee’s colourful creations feel more timeless than 2015-takes-on-1970. A piece 
like Bella Freud’s1970 jumper 
<http://www.bellafreud.com/rainbow-1970-jumper-navy-multi.html> is literally 
designed to date,whereas a waratah and ying-yang patchwork 
<http://www.jennykee.com/#product-24> is more eccentric than slyly retro. 

While rainbow has the potential to tire the eye quickly, it also lasts. Buying 
a prismatic printed skirt for spring might only yield three or four wears this 
season, but unlike pieces that are in “good taste”, which tend to be influenced 
by the It silhouette or palette of the moment, something that looks fabulously 
garish now is likely to look fabulously garish three years from now, too.

Rainbow clothes are also a relatively cheap way to bring colour into your 
wardrobe. Unlikecolour blocking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/feb/28/high-street-fashion-block-colour>
, which requires full commitment and various garments (the yellow blouse, the 
fuchsia trousers and the aqua satchel all at once), like a shard of light 
through the clouds it only takes a little rainbow to create something beautiful.
 