
When it comes to apprenticeships, the government is on a mission. It has 
committed to creating 3m apprenticeships by 2020, andreforms 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/apprenticeship-changes> are under 
way to raise the standards of roles and training.

However, pupils and parents lack good quality information about 
apprenticeships and this is leading to misconceptions, says Sharon Walpole, 
chief executive of Walpole Media Group, publisher of the siteNot Going To Uni 
<http://www.notgoingtouni.co.uk/>, which highlights vocational opportunities 
for school and college leavers. “In the careers world we all know about 
apprenticeships and talk about them,” she says. “But parents and young people 
don’t have a clear understanding about them.”


As National Apprenticeship Week kicks off, here are the top five myths about 
apprenticeships.


It’s for people who have failed their A-levels

“The biggest misunderstanding is that people think it’s a second rate, second 
class route. That if you fail your A-levels it’s for you,” says Walpole. Steven 
McIntosh, professor of economics at the University of Sheffield, studies 
vocational education and agrees. “It’s not for people who have messed up at 
school,” he says. “There’s a misconception that anyone can get an 
apprenticeship.”


For an advanced level apprenticeship, for example, candidates typically need 
four good quality GCSEs, including English and Maths. There’s also high demand 
for places on popular apprenticeship schemes such as at British Airways and 
Rolls-Royce, says McIntosh. “Some of the best apprenticeships are harder to get 
into than Oxbridge.”


You must decide between university and an apprenticeship

People tend to think you need to choose between doing an apprenticeship and 
going to university, says Walpole. However, if you go to university, you can 
still complete an apprenticeship afterwards, and vice versa. “It doesn’t mean 
you can’t go to university later. It’s not a fork in the road or a shutting of 
a door,” says Walpole.


Becci Newton, principal research fellow at the Institute for Employment 
Studies, is evaluating theApprenticeship Trailblazers programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/452935/Trailblazer_Funding_Rules_2015_to_2016_version_1.pdf>
 (pdf) which aims to raise standards. She says: “Doing an apprenticeship 
doesn’t close down your options. For example, there’s a long tradition in 
engineering of people doing apprenticeships and then afterwards going on to 
study at university part-time.”


If you’re doing a higher apprenticeship, it could involve studying at 
university a day a week 
<http://www.careerpilot.org.uk/info/apprenticeships/higher-apprenticeships/>, 
or for blocks of several weeks, depending on the training provider, and can 
lead to further academic qualifications, such as a bachelor’s degree. With a 
degree apprenticeship there is bothuniversity study 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-rolls-out-flagship-degree-apprenticeships>
 and on the job training, and apprentices can get a full bachelor’s or master’s 
degree. “There’s a move towards more academic apprenticeships,” says McIntosh.


Young people mistakenly think an apprenticeship will mean a lack of career 
progression, says Teresa Frith, senior skills policy manager at the Association 
of Colleges. “They think their potential is going to be limited if they do an 
apprenticeship rather than go to university, which in most instances is wrong. 
If you have the ability to follow the higher education route, you can make just 
as good progress in your career with an apprenticeship.”

Apprenticeships are only in trade and manual jobs

While the typical image of an apprentice is someone working in manufacturing 
or construction, there are many sectors that have apprenticeship schemes. 
Newton says: “There are lots in the digital industry, media, accountancy, 
ambulance service and aviation. There’s a huge range now.”


“People have outdated views of apprenticeships, a 1970s view when more people 
worked in manufacturing,” says McIntosh. “But apprenticeships reflect the 
economy we have, a service sector economy.Business, health and retail 
<http://www.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/SN06113.pdf> (pdf) are the sectors 
with the most apprenticeships.”


You’ll be poorly paid

While apprentices start on a low wage, it can go up. Those aged 16-18 
<https://www.gov.uk/apprenticeships-guide/pay-and-conditions>, and people 19 or 
over who are in the first year of the apprenticeship receive the apprentice 
minimum wage rate of £3.30 an hour. However, if you are 19 or over, and have 
completed the first year of the apprenticeship, your pay will go up as you’ll 
be entitled to the minimum wage rate for your age. In 2014 theaverage hourly pay
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/387319/bis-14-1281-apprenticeship-pay-survey-2014.pdf>
 (pdf) received by apprentices in England was £6.31 an hour for level 2 and 3 
apprentices, and £9.68 an hour for level 4 and 5 higher apprentices.


“You’re not racking up debt and you’re getting paid,” says Newton. “By the end 
of an apprenticeship you’ve got qualifications, work experience and you’re in 
the labour market. You’re in a really strong position.”


University v apprenticeships: choose the right career option for you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/university-apprenticeship-choose-right-career>
In 2013, the average take-home salary among long-term former apprentices – 
after tax had been deducted – was £15,107, according to theApprenticeship 
Evaluation Learner Survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/229998/bis-13-1126-apprenticeship-evaluation-learners.pdf>
.

You’ll miss out on a great social life

One of the big draws of university is the social life – the opportunity to 
make new friends through your course, or in your halls of residence, while 
enjoying all that student life has to offer.


Are you missing out on a good social life if you do an apprenticeship? Not 
according to Walpole. She says there are opportunities for apprentices to 
socialise and make new friends, giving the example of the Honda Institute 
apprenticeship scheme. “It advertises for apprenticeships for garages across 
the country. The apprentices go to the Institute for training, it’s like a 
graduate trainee programme.” There’s no doubt it’s a different experience to 
university, says Walpole, but if you’re going to leave university with £50,000 
debt, you need to weigh up whether it’s worth it.

Newton agrees: “Large employers have their own training centres. If you’re 
with a large employer, you’re part of a pretty big cohort, so you get good 
links there. It’s not that the social aspect isn’t there, it’s just slightly 
different.”


Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 