
Lomana LuaLua will be staying on in Egypt rather than return to the Portsmouth 
attack after the Democratic Republic of Congo qualified yesterday along with 
Cameroon for the African Cup of Nations quarter-finals.

Even though the Congolese lost their final Group B game 2-0 to Cameroon, they 
move through at the expense of World Cup qualifiers Angola, who could only 
manage a 3-2 win over Togo yesterday. Angola finished level on points with DR 
Congo but were eliminated by one goal on goal difference. Flavio scored twice 
and Maurito hit a late winner to record Angola's first ever win at a Cup of 
Nations tournament. Togo, who will also be in Germany this summer, twice 
equalised through their France-based strikers Mohamed Kader and Cherif Tour√© 
Maman.

Cameroon made it three wins out of three in a game that featured a fifth goal 
of the tournament for Barcelona's Samuel Eto'o plus an opener from Geremi of 
Chelsea. The DR Congo defender Gladys Bokese was sent off for kicking out at 
the Cameroon substitute Achille Webo.

Talal El Karkouri is threatening to quit international football following 
Morocco's exit. Finalists two years ago, Morocco failed to reach the last eight 
after a 0-0 draw against Libya, their third game without a goal.

"This match was a disaster," said the Charlton defender. "We didn't play our 
game. In fact, for this tournament, we've had very bad preparation. We played 
stupid friendly matches, during which several of our players were injured. You 
can't make a good team in 15 days. A lot of us live and work in Europe, we know 
what preparation is, what a training camp is. But here in Africa, generally, 
people don't work in a professional manner. Furthermore, in the world of 
Moroccan football, there are too many people who have nothing to do with the 
game. On my side, I am asking myself if I want to continue to play with 
Morocco."

Egypt and Ivory Coast progressed from Group A instead. Ivory Coast had already 
qualified before Saturday's 3-1 defeat by the host nation, who hope to have the 
Tottenham striker Mido fit after a groin strain.Reuters
 