
The top two teams in the world rankings will not meet until less than a year 
before the World Cup. The wayEddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> spoke after England completed 
an unbeaten year with victory over Australia, he is glad of the wait but the 
way the All Blacks wearily hauled themselves over the line in Paris the 
previous week it was probably as well for them they were on the beach rather 
than at Twickenham.

If the autumn series confirmed New Zealand’s place at the top of the world 
rankings, fighting back after suffering the rare indignity of defeat, of 
greater interest was the jockeying for position behind them. England, 
consistent in results if not performances, have established a clear gap over 
Australia while Ireland are fourth.

And then come Wales, which says something about condition of international 
rugby. Jones described England’s play in the first halfagainst Australia as 
scatty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/eddie-jones-unbeaten-england-2003-comparisons>
but Wales were sclerotic all month, struggling to break out of the rigidity of 
an old gameplan. South Africa and France are below them, Scotland sandwiched in 
between. Wales reached the semi-final of the 2011 World Cup and South Africa 
did last year while France were beaten finalists four years ago but they are 
some way behind the top four.

Autumn internationals: Who makes the cut for our best XV of the series? | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/06/autumn-internationals-best-xv-england-ireland-all-blacks>
It could be argued South Africa and France are struggling for the same 
reasons, the recruitment of the leading clubs in Europe, many of whom inflate 
the wage market by being able to live beyond their means through wealthy 
backers. There are not many more French players than South Africans in the 
squads of the Top 14 clubs, laced with more than a dash of Wallabies and All 
Blacks.

To win the World Cup, Jones’s England will need to beat the All Blacks or hope 
someone else knocks them out. There are few areas where the Six Nations 
champions are clearly superior to the All Blacks: goal-kicking is one, with 
Owen Farrell more accurate than Beauden Barrett. Strength in depth is another: 
England were without the second rows Maro Itoje and George Kruis for all or 
part of the autumn internationals but they had Joe Launchbury, until he was 
suspended, and the rejuvenated Courtney Lawes to call on with Dave Attwood on 
standby.

Take Brodie Retallick and Sam Whitelock out of the New Zealand pack, as 
happenedagainst Ireland in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 when Luke Romano was unavailable, and there was a notable drop down, although 
Scott Barrett emerged during their European tour.

And there is player retention. England’s policy of not considering anyone who 
is playing outside the Premiership, other than in exceptional circumstances, is 
working in the sense it is keeping those Jones wants in the country. New 
Zealand, unlike South Africa and Australia, operate the same system and have 
long done so; moving abroad puts an international career on hold.

The All Blacks lost players to French clubs at the end of last year’s World 
Cup, including Dan Carter, Ma’a Nonu and Conrad Smith, but their Test careers 
had pretty much played out, like most of the 17 All Blacks playing in the Top 
14, but sides are now making offers to Israel Dagg, Malakai Fekitoa and Aaron 
Cruden, all young enough to be involved in the 2019 World Cup, as well as the 
30-year-old Ben Smith.

“There is definitely a fear we could lose them,” said the New Zealand 
assistant coach, Ian Foster. “We just have to do whatever we can, and say 
whatever we can, and then we have to give these guys space. They are making a 
tough decision and there is no question they love the black jersey. They have a 
really clear message from us: a number of them have the ability to play for 
another two or three years and then look at going overseas for another couple. 
The ones who seem to regret it are the guys who go over a little bit early and 
find they’re still playing great rugby but they’ve given up on the All Blacks 
dream.”

New Zealand produce players, if not in the same number as some others, of 
consistently high quality. The system allows the coach of the All Blacks to 
weather the losses incurred by Steve Hansen after the World Cup so when Sam 
Cane, Beauden Barrett and Joe Moody get their opportunity, new blood comes in 
behind them and the wheel keeps turning.

Unless the European club game punctures it. After an autumn in which the 
decline of South Africa was shown to be more pronounced than post-World Cup 
reconstruction and Australia finished the year without a victory in eight 
attempts over the other teams with them in the top four of the world rankings, 
the debate over the global calendar, which will rumble into the first couple of 
months of the new year, needs a more radical outcome than the minor realignment 
that looks set to be the outcome; although one proposal, to reduce the number 
of matches the Lions play on tour from 10 to seven, with only three before the 
opening Test, would surely mark the start of their end.

Has Australia fallen out of love with rugby union?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/behind-the-lines/2016/dec/08/australia-rugby-union-england>
When England were on their way up under Clive Woodward, New Zealand, Australia 
and South Africa were the teams he aspired to emulate and then overtake, which 
his side did in 2003. Jones has only New Zealand to catch, although if the 
Wallabies increase their depth at forward, they will be able to fully exploit 
their rich attacking options: a difference between Beauden Barrett and Bernard 
Foley is what they have in front of them.

In front of Jones is two years of improvement. Like Argentina, he is playing a 
long game, although enjoying more short-term success. He has tweaked rather 
than transformed England: the old buzzword culture has been replaced by 
attitude.

He wasted no time before the match against Australia in baiting them. He 
confined his remarks to aspects of their game rather than personalities, acting 
aggrieved when, in response to direct questions which tended to start with the 
words Eddie said,his opposite number, Michael Cheika, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/28/michael-cheika-eddie-jones-vitriolic-australia-tarnish-legacy-england-rugby>
 someone given to straight talking rather than mind games, made observations 
about Jones. It was billed as a war of words, which it wasn’t; Jones was 
playing his old chum and won.

He was portrayed in an Australian newspaper on the day of the match as a 
sinister clown but after 13 victories out of 13 since taking charge of England 
and a squad who are gaining in experience and knowhow, his clowning glory is 
still to come.

This is an extract taken from the Breakdown, the Guardian’s weekly rugby union 
email. To subscribejust visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-breakdown?utm_source=esp&utm_medium=Email&utm_campaign=The+Breakdown+2016&utm_term=201201&subid=830441&CMP=EMCSPTEML866>
.
 