
Luxembourg <https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg> has declared its 
intention to blaze a trail in asteroid mining in the hope that it will reap 
lucrative returns.

The small country’s government said on Wednesday it would invest in space 
mining companies and establish a legal framework to assure those engaging in 
the activity that they can keep the fruit of their toils.

The 1967 outer space treaty 
<http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/spacelaw/treaties/introouterspacetreaty.html>
 appeared to designate space as public property, meaning no one could claim 
sovereignty over asteroids. But companies have recentlychallenged that 
interpretation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2013/jan/23/asteroid-mining-deep-space-industries>
, and in November Barack Obamasigned a law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/13/congress-claims-space-resource-rights-for-americans-to-exploit-new-frontier>
 enabling US citizens to obtain their own asteroids, mine them and keep what 
they find.


The year of the outer solar system: how space exploration reached new heights 
in 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/25/2015-big-year-space-exploration-major-tim-peake-pluto>
Now Luxembourg has staked its claim, hoping it can become a European hub for 
the futurist activity. Its declared aims are to stimulate economic growth on 
Earth and offer new horizons in space exploration.

The country’s deputy prime minister, Étienne Schneider, said: “Our aim is to 
open access to a wealth of previously unexplored mineral resources, on lifeless 
rocks hurtling through space, without damaging natural habitats.

“We will support the long-term economic development of new, innovative 
activities in the space and satellite industries as a key high-tech sector for 
Luxembourg. At first, our aim is to carry out research in this area, which at a 
later stage can lead to more concrete activities in space.”


Asteroids <https://www.theguardian.com/science/asteroids> vary in their 
composition, but some are rich in platinum-group materials and other highly 
valued metals.

How humans will conquer Mars and beyond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/13/kevin-fong-how-to-survive-in-space-royal-institution-christmas-lectures>
 Luxembourg, with a population of just over 540,000, punches above its weight 
in the space sector as home to the satellite operator SES.

Two US companies, Deep Space Industries and Planetary Resources, are in a race 
to be thefirst to commercially mine an asteroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/jan/22/space-mining-gold-asteroids>. 
They both welcomed Luxembourg’s announcement.

Jean-Jacques Dordain, former director general of the European Space Agency  
<http://www.esa.int/ESA>(ESA) and adviser to Luxembourg’s government on the 
project <http://www.gouvernement.lu/5653386>, said: “This initiative is a clear 
demonstration that Europeans are innovative and able to take risks when the 
stakes are high.

“While futuristic, the project is based on solid grounds, ie technical prowess 
that already exists inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
and around the world.”
 