
The Kim Scott Walwyn prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kim-scott-walwyn-prize>, set up in 2004 to 
celebrate outstanding achievements by women in publishing, has been awarded to 
the head of the Nature Publishing Group, Annette Thomas.

Thomas beat Rebecca Carter, editor-at-large at Random House, and Oxford 
University Press's head of marketing, Susanna Lob, to take the Â£3,000 prize. It 
honours a career that includes 14 years at NaturePublishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/publishing> Group, where Thomas rose from 
the role of assistant editor to her current position as managing director, and 
her appointment in 2000 to an executive director's position at Macmillan 
Publishers.

The prizegiving took place yesterday evening at St Anne's College, Oxford. The 
prize committee was chaired by Dame Gillian Beer, professor emeritus at 
Cambridge University, and included the literary agent Catherine Clarke and the 
writer Hermione Lee. Speaking after the award, Dame Gillian praised Thomas's 
achievement. "Annette's 14-year career with the group has been remarkable," she 
said, "acted out in the very competitive, fast-moving and intellectually 
demanding world of international science and medical research."

The prize, which is administered by the independent reading charity Booktrust, 
commemorates the life and career of Kim Scott Walwyn, a pioneering publishing 
director at OUP, who died in 2002, aged just 45. It was conceived by Catherine 
Clarke and Hermione Lee, both friends of Walwyn. In the words of Lee, they 
"wanted her short life to have an afterlife".

"Publishing is one of the industries in which women have been able to forge 
careers that takes them to the top, but I still think it hides a lot of very 
talented women who are achieving huge things," said Clarke, explaining the need 
for the prize. "This reflects Kim herself: she was great at bringing out other 
people but didn't put herself forward. It is wonderful to be able to honour 
women whose work would not otherwise receive public recognition."

Previous winners of the prize were Lynette Owen, copyright director of Pearson 
Education, and Penelope Hoare, deputy publishing director of Chatto and Windus.
 