
Friends


Here’s my theory: despite what they may claim, nobody loves Friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/friends>. Nobody on the entire planet 
has ever felt a genuine whoosh of love when they realised it was on. Maybe they 
felt a warm tingle of familiarity. Maybe a fizzle of nostalgia. Maybe 
resignation because the remote was too far away to reach. But love? Hardly.

Friends was – is – too mass-produced for that. It was a fast-food sitcom that 
prized lukewarm consistency over wit or invention. IfSeinfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld> was a show about nothing, 
Friends was a show about nothing interesting. It was about six white 
twentysomething haircuts relying on tired old cadences for laughs. Friends 
never changed, it never evolved. Watch any episode now and it could 
realistically come from anywhere in the series. The only way you can accurately 
date an episode is by scrutinising Matthew Perry’s face for the ravages of 
drug-related exhaustion.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b025ef47f6ad3b739b108145589d61991405c09%2F0_0_1364_1102%2F1364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b025ef47f6ad3b739b108145589d61991405c09%2F0_0_1364_1102%2F1364.jpg>
 Friends … six white twentysomethings relying on tired old cadences for laughs. 
Photograph: Channel 4 
Even though it ended 12 years ago, Friends inexplicably refuses to die. It was 
repeated into the dirt on E4 for years, and now it’s repeated into the dirt on
Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> Central. When Netflix 
bought the US broadcast rights, over a decade after the final episode aired, it 
paid almost $120m. This is a bewilderingly vast sum of money, because Friends 
isn’t anywhere near as good as people say it is. I had to watch Friends in the 
1990s because I was young and we only had four channels. But now, with all the 
choice available, you can do better. Friends is wallpaper. It’s slop, mashed 
down and processed for easy consumption. Friends is hospital food. Could itbe 
any blander? Stuart Heritage


Seinfeld  <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/seinfeld>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fccce61e04c7463423093be276d06ed9e80749e%2F0_0_3000_2560%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fccce61e04c7463423093be276d06ed9e80749e%2F0_0_3000_2560%2F3000.jpg>
 Agony … Seinfeld. Photograph: NBCU/Rex 
An episode of Seinfeld always appears to me to be an exercise in actorly 
masochism. Here’s a standup’s single semi-insight-cum-joke-type-thing stretched 
thinner than bubblegum across 22 minutes. How long can you keep selling it? How 
long can you maintain the illusion that anyone would truly give a mouse-sized 
shit about any of the infinitesimally small social solecisms that fill this 
world?

It is further agony to watch Jason Alexander, Julia Louis-Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/02/julia-louis-dreyfus-disgraceful-genius-veep-seinfeld>
 and Michael Richards keep pumping energy and credibility into the roles of 
George, Elaine and Kramer in order to disguise the void that is “Jerry 
Seinfeld” and Jerry Seinfeld – outplayed by the furniture itself – at the 
show’s heart. It should be prosecuted for nine years of cruelty to actors, not 
feted.Lucy Mangan

Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/29/mad-men-box-set-review>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9db683cbd9251ffbab470860a527965d0ef26fb%2F0_0_3600_2008%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9db683cbd9251ffbab470860a527965d0ef26fb%2F0_0_3600_2008%2F3600.jpg>
 Not the great existential drama of our age … Mad Men. Photograph: 
AMC/Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
For a while I had the privilege of writing the Mad Men recaps for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/mar/27/mad-men-season-five-episodes-one-two>
. With a large and loyal audience, the blogs required attention. You had to 
watch the episode and take notes. You had to submit those notes to intensive 
textual analysis, then scan the show once more for oblique cultural references 
(Don is reading Dante on the beach) and analyse those too (but what does it 
mean?). Finally you had to double cross-check your observations against every 
other episode in the series so far, to fit each character’s actions into the 
grand, heroic arc that creator Matthew Weiner no doubt had planned for them. 
Then you had to take notes about the clothes.

Jon Hamm interview: 'Don Draper is dismal and despicable'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/16/jon-hamm-don-draper-daniel-radcliffe>
After a while, I decided all this effort wasn’t worth it. This may have 
coincided with the third reinvention of Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce Cuthbert 
Dibble Grub, or when that underwhelming Brit baddy got his toes chewed off by a 
lawn mower. Like Saul on the road to Damascus, I had a realisation:Mad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> wasn’t the great 
existential drama of our age, exploring the nature of identity and our Freudian 
urges. It was just a meandering soap.


I stuck with it to the end, partly because I didn’t want to admit I’d wasted 
my time (there were 92 episodes, ninety flipping two), but also hoping there 
would be a satisfying resolution. In the end all I got was an attempt at 
pulling a Sopranos; an enigmatic ending that, in fact, wasn’t at all enigmatic. 
The conclusion, if you’ll pardon the spoiler, was that Don Draper, Mr Death 
Instinct, had used a moment of ultimate crisis to come up with a better jingle 
for Coca-Cola.


If the conclusion was a cynical comment on the nature of mankind, it hadn’t 
been necessary to spend 70+ hours to get to that point. And if, as I suspect 
was actually the case, it was intended as a happy ending with the great man 
creating a lasting piece of culture, then I had to despair for humanity. Still, 
nice suits.Paul MacInnes


The West Wing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff48ca9a06f1809fdf639a4b2880f12168cf2bc96%2F0_223_1505_902%2F1505.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff48ca9a06f1809fdf639a4b2880f12168cf2bc96%2F0_223_1505_902%2F1505.jpg>
 Notquite the smuggest show ever made, but … The West Wing. Photograph: Channel 
4 
It’s the drama that convinced me to love American politics, that taught me 
about filibusters, pork-barrel projects and how fast it’s possible to walk 
while still holding a conversation. So why don’t I loveThe West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing> more?

Partly it’s because creator Aaron Sorkin is so unashamedly sentimental about 
life on Capitol Hill. President Josiah “Jed” Bartlet (Martin Sheen) and his 
idealistic team always mean well. Their opponents, meanwhile, are cartoonishly 
evil figures who exist only so Bartlet and co. can point them towards the 
righteous path of truth and justice. This hectoring tone reaches its nadir with 
The US Poet Laureate, the 16th episode of the third series, AKA the one in 
which Josh discovers the internet. Like his creator, he despises it. And he 
tells us so at great length.


There are some highlights – John Spencer and Allison Janney are a joy to watch 
as irascible chief-of-staff Leo McGarry and White House press secretary CJ “The 
Jackal” Cregg – and the series two climax is a beautifully handled look at 
bereavement, grief and the lies we tell each other and ourselves. But boy does 
this show know how good those moments are. It’s not quite the smuggest TV show 
ever made, but that’s only becauseThe Newsroom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/dec/15/the-newsroom-good-riddance-aaron-sorkins-bully-pulpit>
 exists.Sarah Hughes


Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/sep/03/lost-your-next-box-set>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F858c30ab24120e8ac839e7602a8b86f08f2bb750%2F19_173_1596_957%2F1596.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F858c30ab24120e8ac839e7602a8b86f08f2bb750%2F19_173_1596_957%2F1596.jpg>
 Made a mockery of fans … Lost. Photograph: Channel 4 
For six long convoluted seasons, we lapped up Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/lost>. We lived on that 
not-very-deserted island, the one that can magic planes to crash into its surf. 
We loved Jack, Sawyer and their fights over Kate. We loved Locke, Sayid, 
Hurley, Jin, Sun – all the Oceanic Flight 815 crash survivors in fact. We can 
still recite the number that cropped up everywhere. We can still sing Drive 
Shaft’s You All Everybody.

But let’s just stop and consider Lost again. The hatch? The light in the 
hatch! The monster? A column of smoke that emitted mechanical croaks. And a 
button that had to be pressed every 108 minutes to “save the world”. Plus the 
island was full of polar bears and dead people? Oh, and the island speaks – and 
it’s electromagnetically adrift in time and space thanks to a giant frozen 
wheel at its core.


It’s so clear now that the entire thing made a mockery of us. I wasted six 
years on conspiracy theories. I went online to watch Dharma Initiative training 
videos for clues, for pity’s sake. Millions of us did. No wonder the 
showrunners will never live down the despicably maudlin cop-out biblical 
ending. Lost was the ultimate in tease TV. 4 8 15 16 23 42.Kate Abbott

This Is England <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/this-is-england>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3752343b897afe0446e3c436173183507a4751e6%2F0_87_1537_922%2F1537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3752343b897afe0446e3c436173183507a4751e6%2F0_87_1537_922%2F1537.jpg>
 Local theatre workshop histrionics … This Is England. Photograph: Channel 4 
“I just … I fuckin … I dunno, I just fuckin … it’s like ... my head, it’s … I 
just fuckin … I dunno.” So says Woody fromThis Is England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/this-is-england>, several times in 
every episode, regardless of what’s actually happening, and normally ending 
with: “But I fuckin … I do love yer Lol.”

And so on and so on. Of course, I wanted to love This Is England. I fully 
expected to. Who wouldn’t get excited about the trials of a group of 
scooter-riding, Fred Perry-wearing mates as they entered adulthood against the 
backdrop of two World Cups and one acid house explosion?

But it just seems so one-note. A production line of endless bleak trauma with 
the odd “having a laugh” scene that usually features nothing anyone in real 
life would laugh at. And real life is, after all, what This Is England prides 
itself on. Despite the fact some of the acting looks like a local theatre 
workshop doing a histrionic run through their new play Look How Real I Am, Me. 
And without the insight that sometimes talking like you do IRL isn’t so much 
“authentic” as repetitive and boring.

There’s none of the subtlety or depth that you’d demand from, say, a top HBO 
drama. The drugs, violence and sex, no doubt intended to be brave and 
challenging, is delivered in such a heavy-handed manner it just seems try-hard. 
And despite the suffering written into the lives of the characters, it’s an 
effort to really care what happens to them.

If I ever speak to anyone about this show they all nod along to these points 
and then say, “but I still quite like it” – infuriatingly affording it a sacred 
cow status that makes me really mad and ... I just ... I dunno, I fuckin … I 
just, I fuckin … I dunno.Tim Jonze


Downton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/26/downton-abbey-christmas-special-review-glorious-fantasy-britain-comes-to-an-end>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426781c8e92b5c6b56edc70671552461d3d44f95%2F0_485_2142_1284%2F2142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426781c8e92b5c6b56edc70671552461d3d44f95%2F0_485_2142_1284%2F2142.jpg>
 All that’s missing is amnesia and evil twins … Downton Abbey. Photograph: ITV 
Americans have a propensity to believe that anything delivered in a British 
accent is inherently more intelligent and important than anything with a twang. 
It’s the only possible explanation whyDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> has won so many Emmys.

Julian Fellowes’s saga of the Crawley family and their servants was mostly 
enjoyable, but it certainly doesn’t rank as prestige television. Just look at 
some of the events that took place around that historic mansion: Sybil’s death 
by childbirth, Matthew’s death by car accident, Anna and Bates’s multiple 
murder investigations and jailings, Lady Edith’s child out of wedlock that she 
tried to pawn off on the farmer down the road, Cora losing her baby after 
slipping on soap. These are the plot devices of a daytime show; all that’s 
missing is amnesia and evil twins.

Downton Abbey was a great spectacle, but it never had the depth to be anything 
more than posh filler. Don’t be fooled by the accents – it was a bodice-ripper, 
not an historical novel.Brian Moylan


Battlestar Galactica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jul/31/battlestar-box-set>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6d0e5d726195278e18bbf053837c1118fc4cb5%2F0_422_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e6d0e5d726195278e18bbf053837c1118fc4cb5%2F0_422_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Impossible to take seriously … Battlestar Galactica. Photograph: 
Allstar/Sportsphoto Ltd. 
Back when Sky aired Battlestar Galactica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/battlestar-galactica>, they ran an advert 
comparing it to other golden-age TV series: it had, they claimed, the political 
smarts of The West Wing, the raw adrenaline of 24, the characterisation of The 
Sopranos and the social commentary of The Wire. This wasn’t just geek fare; 
this was gourmet telly.

You hear this sort of thing a lot about Battlestar Galactica, but I’ve never 
accepted that argument. OK, the show did wrestle with some big issues – race, 
religion, free will v determinism. But every sci-fi series, from Star Trek to 
Babylon Five, has done the same. And like those shows, Battlestar Galactica had 
sci-fi signifiers that made it impossible to take seriously: cringeworthy 
cod-philosophical dialogue, acting that flits between stilted and hammy, and an 
overwhelming sense of self-importance, as if we should be treating a series 
about sleeper robots infiltrating a spaceship like a Ken Loach film.


So no, the Battlestar box set doesn’t deserve to sit on the shelf beside Mad 
Men et al. But there is one fantasy series that has all those attributes 
boasted about in that Sky advert. Its name? Game of Thrones.Gwilym Mumford


The Walking Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61be41042a9f1c16e32d9f523c0c380e4d2eaba%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61be41042a9f1c16e32d9f523c0c380e4d2eaba%2F0_0_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Senseless killing of your time … The Walking Dead. Photograph: Allstar/AMC 
Studios 
There’s something about The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> that will transform 
you into a bloodthirsty gut-junkie, desperately hoping the next supernatural 
disembowelling will be more depraved than the last. That something is 
boringness.

The series, which has followed Rick Grimes and friends through a 
post-apocalyptic, zombie-filled America for over 80 hours now, moves so slowly 
it can feel as if you’re physically wading through time itself.

It’s not that The Walking Dead doesn’t have characters or ideas or content, 
it’s just that they are spread so thinly and monotonously. Forget zombie 
carnage, this is a show most concerned with the senseless killing of your time.
Rachel Aroesti


Arrested Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/08/arrested-development-producer-brian-grazer-17-more-episodes>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d62ef9826dd3df90a76d3d0078727e5eaf48d0%2F0_186_2608_1742%2F2608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Men%20to%20Seinfeld%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20criminally%20overrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmost-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d62ef9826dd3df90a76d3d0078727e5eaf48d0%2F0_186_2608_1742%2F2608.jpg>
 Signposting every joke … Arrested Development. Photograph: Rex/20th Century 
Fox/Everett 
As much as I liked the ensemble cast and the many talented guest stars, this 
show was far too happy with itself to make me happy too. It always felt as if I 
was watching it with the writers sitting next to me, signposting every overly 
constructed joke, smugly looking back at me not for a laugh but for a 
self-satisfied smirk. I had similar problems with Community – another show that 
decided to tell you it was funny then explain why for what felt like an 
eternity.Benjamin Lee

 * Look out for our pick of the most underrated TV shows tomorrow
 