
Missing the Austin ditch in which he’d slept most nights for the last two 
years, Mike Wille curled up on the front lawn of the large house his mother had 
just left him via her suicide note. Her death meant that Mike – known to fans 
of his street music and his homelessness blog,The Ground Score 
<http://madmikethehippiebum.blogspot.com/>, as Mad Mike the Hippy Bum – would 
soon be a millionaire. Mad Mike worried that, given his love of drink and 
drugs, he could not survive such a lifestyle shift.

At birth, Mike’s left leg was shorter than his right by an inch, with no 
defined calf muscle and an under-formed footsans big toe. When I visited his 
mother’s former home nearNew Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans> recently, he showed me a box 
of family papers he’d unearthed regarding the lengthening of his leg by the 
famous doctor Gavriil Ilizarov, who invented the procedure.

Still, the bum leg helped Mike nurture a negative outlook that, once he became 
teenager, fractured his relationship with his already volatile parents. “My 
mother was a fairly erratic person. Sometimes extremely benevolent and 
generous, other times scathingly cruel,” Mike told me. “When I was in the 
seventh grade, she tried to kill herself in front of me because I got a D in 
history and I said I didn’t care. Later we found her passed out in the garage 
with the car running and my dad freaked out, showing more emotion than I’d ever 
seen out of him.

“Things came to a head when I was 17 and had a fist fight with my dad, causing 
him to have me arrested. This was my first time in jail,” says Wille, who 
immediately moved out of his house. Mike has more recently written exquisitely 
about subsequent trips to jail (most for public intoxication) at The Ground 
Score:

Immediately upon entering, one of the prisoners, a skinny guy about my age, 
walked up to me, looked me in the eyes, extended his hand, and in a welcoming 
voice said, “Hi. My name is “John.” Now I knew I was in luck. Not only had I 
stumbled upon a harmonious pod, but also one which contained at least one smart 
inmate. If you ever go to jail, I recommend doing just what he did, and greet 
any unfamiliar inmate coming into your living space in exactly this way (almost 
any). You can learn a lot from a guy by presenting him with the option of 
civility.

I gave this gentlemen amongst the despondent a firm handshake and said, “Hey 
man. I’m Mike.” Over the next two nights I ate, slept, watched TV, read a book 
about Marlon Brando, and talked to John. A decent conversation is hard to find 
in jail, and I could tell he hadn’t had one in a while. As for me, it had 
probably been even longer. In this town, the only class of people less worthy 
of respect than prisoners, are the homeless.

Thanks to his blog, Mike received fan mail from Scotland, New Zealand, Latvia 
and the Ukraine. To a homeless bum, this meant everything.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427136143861%2Ff4a4e2e7-3848-4659-842a-96af5c1766b5-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Mike%2C%20the%20homeless%20blogger%20who%20became%20a%20millionaire%20overnight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Mike%2C%20the%20homeless%20blogger%20who%20became%20a%20millionaire%20overnight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427136143861%2Ff4a4e2e7-3848-4659-842a-96af5c1766b5-1020x612.jpeg>
 Wille, now 36, lived rough on the streets of Austin. Photograph: Jonathan 
Traviesa 
Mike’s deceased mother’s house, a nicely appointed junior McMansion 45 minutes 
east of New Orleans, represents the first roof over Mike’s head in four years. 
Mad Mike spent the last 15 years blowing back and forth from Texas to his home 
state ofLouisiana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana>, surfing both 
couches and park benches.

I met him in New Orleans where he played music in the French Quarter – songs 
like I Love the Devil and Money For Drugs, which he’d specially designed to 
make shocked tourists pause. “But after I got them to stop I’d get them to 
listen to a more substantial song,” Mike clarifies, “usually getting them to 
tip more money or buy an album in the process.”

Wille, now 36, first played music on the street in Austin at the age of 19, 
and he ended up spending his last two years in a ditch there because it does 
not snow and the attitude is fairly liberal. That, and there are drugs on the 
ground, everywhere. “The main reasonAustin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> is such an ideal place for ground 
scoring is that it’s a college town with a heavy drinking culture. Drunk young 
people love to buy drugs, but they aren’t always the best at holding on to 
them,” Mike explains. “So not a day went by that I didn’t find a few nugs and a 
pack of cigarettes.”

Highly intelligent, Mike could probably hold a job despite his handicap. He 
was not, however, what they call in New Orleans a “fauxbeaux”— one of those 
grungy traveler kids who begs for change even though they have a safety net.

Mad Mike chose homelessness, feeling cast out from normal society. Since it 
was technically his choice, Mike held onto a strict rule against ever bothering 
anyone, even for a cigarette. “As a homeless person I always tried to be 
self-sufficient and not reliant on others,” he says. “Partly because I’d found 
in the past that others are not always all that reliable. Also, I don’t like it 
when strangers come up and ask me for things, and can only assume other people 
feel the same way.”

As a result, Mad Mike became a highly skilled scavenger. During an early trip 
to Houston, he found $700 atop a toilet paper dispenser in the bus stop bathroom
.Another time he found what he estimated to be $500 worth of crack cocaine, 
which he intended to sell but instead smoked with his musical partnerRay Bong 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1fGaGJySod0> in a single evening. Soon after, 
he sniffed out a bottle of Dom Pérignon 2005 from behind a restaurant’s 
dumpster.

His mother gave him his first laptop. They’d reconciled somewhat in the years 
since Mike’s 48-year-old oilman father died of cancer in 2001, leaving his mom 
a rich widow. She and Mike occasionally bonded by getting drunk together, but 
most of these hang sessions devolved into brutal, raging arguments. She gifted 
him the computer, unaware that any drug Mike found, whether or not he 
recognized the plant or powder, Mike would ingest and write about on his blog.

Mike daily sat outside on the back steps of an Austin coffeeshop with Wi-Fi, 
blasting out touching and hilarious stories; as such, he possibly was the 
world’s first homeless blogger. His direct, pathos-driven diary entries smirked 
along with what most would consider an extremely rough life. Mad Mike’s economy 
of words and life of hardship even reminded some of Bukowski.

With his writing, he was able to provoke in readers an empathy for 
homelessness that most Americans do not regularly feel. And to accomplish that, 
he gave deeply of himself. “I mean, what did I have to lose by telling 
everybody everything about my life?” Mike asked me as he sat on the throne 
behind his brand new DW drum-kit, and lit a cigarette in what was once his 
mother’s living room.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427136078960%2Fb7760793-f138-4d04-b1a3-7415ff06ebf6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Mike%2C%20the%20homeless%20blogger%20who%20became%20a%20millionaire%20overnight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Mike%2C%20the%20homeless%20blogger%20who%20became%20a%20millionaire%20overnight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427136078960%2Fb7760793-f138-4d04-b1a3-7415ff06ebf6-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mad Mike: ‘Facebook and my blog were forums where I wasn’t judged by my 
financial situation.’ Photograph: Jonathan Traviesa 
Mad Mike still has not told the thousands of readers who keep up with The 
Ground Score that he is now a multi-millionaire; he fears they will judge him 
differently.

“People talk so much about how Facebook is garbage, and just some cheeseball 
thing you shouldn’t take seriously, but … Facebook and my blog were forums 
where I wasn’t judged by my financial situation,” says Mike. “In Austin, people 
were cold to me, people didn’t look me in the eye. Women didn’t look me in the 
eye for years. Police would put me in jail every chance they’d get. The 
internet was the perfect escape.”

His first computer was quickly stolen, along with his guitar during one of his 
blackouts on Austin’s world-famous 6th Street. He managed to continue writing 
within the two hours allotted by the public library’s computers. “I’d post 
something in one hour, then go back later in day to see how it was received. 
When I wanted to get more done in a day, I’d write it all out in longhand 
first.”

It is tough to corroborate the stories of a homeless loner. But I’ve shared 
just a few degrees of separation from Mike in real life for enough years to 
believe his Ground Score tales. “In real life, I was a heavy drinker who rubbed 
people the wrong way,” said Mike. “But I always thought that if everyone could 
understand what I wasthinking they might understand me and like me better. So 
hitting it big on the internet validated my feelings on that.” Fans out of 
nowhere also helped him live: “I’m obviously some kind of big shot artist to 
these guys – but then I’d look away from the screen and remember that I’m a 
pariah. It helped me to survive under those conditions. I made light of it in 
my writing,” he says, “but life in the ditch was fucking rough.”

Mike finally went against his own rule and asked his internet followers if 
anyone had an extra laptop he could have. His next two computers and a 
smartphone came from readers. “It was an amazing thing, the moment I realized I 
would always have a computer, just so long as I kept writing …”

A university press even reached out and offered Mike a one-book contract – 
which I advised him not to take because I thought his writing could touch more 
people than a university press could reach. Having published a couple books 
with universities myself, I knew that route wouldn’t lift him out of the ditch. 
“Hold out,” I advised him. “You could make real money with your writing.”

Soon though, money wouldn’t be a problem for Mad Mike.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427136200455%2F8eacce38-ec80-4263-bf09-11e71ec9ffd9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Mike%2C%20the%20homeless%20blogger%20who%20became%20a%20millionaire%20overnight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Mike%2C%20the%20homeless%20blogger%20who%20became%20a%20millionaire%20overnight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F24%2Fmad-mike-homeless-blogger-millionaire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427136200455%2F8eacce38-ec80-4263-bf09-11e71ec9ffd9-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mike replaced his mom’s furniture with thousands of dollars worth of brand new 
musical equipment. Photograph: Jonathan Traviesa 
“Three out of five of our siblings have committed suicide. Mike’s mother is 
the third,” says Danny Branighan, the arbiter of his sister’s will, though 
they’d been estranged since 2001. Danny has a turbulent relationship with his 
brother as well, and another sister who was so horrified to read Mike’s blog 
that she cut him off, and demanded he never write about her in even the most 
veiled of ways.

Danny’s most recently deceased sister had argued with her boyfriend, told him 
to leave the house, then went to sleep in the garage with the car running. “She 
had a will drawn up before that, but the one that she wrote that day was 
considered more valid, and it held up in Louisiana district court,” says Danny, 
who ever since has been giving Mad Mike rides and amateur legal advice. He 
confirms Mike will inherit $1.8m in investment money, plus his mother’s big 
house. “I’d have been upset if it all hadn’t gone to Mike,” he claims.

After the loss of his mother, Mike wasn’t heard from for weeks. When he 
resurfaced a month later, he told me that he was “very happy about the money, 
but I don’t like the way I got it. I wish she would have given me 10% of it and 
had a deeper relationship with me.”

Though still smoking weed and dabbling in other drugs – and worst of all, 
ripping the filters off his Pall Mall cigarettes – Mike is attempting to quit 
drinking. “I simply can’t afford to fuck this up, and if I’m drinking, I 
certainly would. Either I would waste all the money or kill myself,” he 
believes, pointing to his last drinking binge this past New Year’s Eve, when 
Danny ended up driving alcohol poisoned Mike to Tulane Hospital. “Abject 
poverty had kept my drinking reasonably contained,” says Mike, “but with a full 
bank account I tend to drink until I get sick.”

Instead, he’s indulging in music. Mad Mike immediately moved his mom’s sofa, 
love seat and ottoman out of the living room and replaced it with thousands of 
dollars worth of brand new, gorgeous musical equipment: a cherry wood Les Paul 
guitar and a Fender Deluxe Reverb amp; a giant, black Korg keyboard and a huge 
multi-channel Roland amp; a sleek, black Fender Jazz Bass; several microphones 
and the six-piece drum kit. As we sit around jamming, he tells me: “This 
morning off of eBay I ordered a $2,500 Martin acoustic guitar, a standup bass, 
a Deering maple Banjo, and an Irish Bouzouki Mandola.” I had to look that last 
one up.

He promises that now, after he buys his first car as an adult, and then helps 
Danny’s family pay off tens of thousands worth of debt, Mike will keep the rest 
of the money invested. “This looks like rash consumerism,” he recognizes, 
moving into the kitchen, which now serves as his recording studio’s control 
room. “But I am just acquiring the specific tools for my needs. I intend to 
spend the rest of my life writing, producing artwork, and recording music. I 
suppose I might even consider starting a family now that I have the resources 
to take care of one.”

Wanting me to try the weed he stashed out in the guesthouse, we must first 
cross his vast, verdant yard. The guesthouse is tiny but, with a bathroom, bed 
and TV, inheriting it alone would have wildly changed Mike’s life. Now, it is 
just another place Mike keeps weed.


I ask him if he’s worried people will treat him differently. “Oh yes, it 
happened immediately,” he says. “Now people invite me into their parlors, their 
guestrooms, they offer to let me sleep on their couch. Though this also has to 
do with the fact that I’m not drinking…”

Despite that he’s currently embroiled in something even more interesting than 
finding drugs on the ground, Mike hasn’t posted on The Ground Score since he 
moved in here. He did tell his followers that he’d inherited a nice house and 
is no longer homeless. But he fears the word “millionaire,” will alienate his 
fans. “They like an underdog,” he understands. “So I’m kind of nervous as to 
how they will react.”

He admits that the house is too distracting for blogging. “But more 
importantly, my family is now all really paying attention to my posts,” he 
says, blowing smoke in the breeze’s face. “And what I have to write about 
lately is stuff that would ... notoffend them necessarily, but … they’re from a 
different lifestyle than me. To be honest I haven’t been writing because I 
finally care what someone thinks.”
 