
Intimate photographs of Madonna’s wedding to her first husband Sean Penn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/seanpenn> are among the lots up for auction 
at the pop singer’s star-studded benefit show in Miami on Friday night.

The three photographs taken by Herb Ritts in Malibu in 1985 will be sold, 
along with prints from Madonna’s infamous 1992 book Sex and artwork by Tracey 
Emin from the superstar’s private collection, to raise funds for herRaising 
Malawi <http://www.raisingmalawi.org/#home> organisation.

Comedian James Corden will be master of ceremonies at the event, billed as “an 
evening of music, art and mischief”, in which Madonna will revive her bawdy 
cabaret show, Tears of a Clown,first performed in Australia earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/11/madonna-clowns-around-at-melbourne-show-after-three-hour-delay>
. The singer shared a photo of herself dressed in a pink clown suit on 
Instagram earlier this week to tease her performance at the Faena Forum in 
Miami Beach.

A Girl Has to Have Options..........,,,T.O.A.C. Coming soon to Art Basel Dec 
2!!! ! 🎨💘🎉😂🎉💘 Insert Clown Emoji! 🎉😂💘🎉😂💘🎉😂@raisingmalawi.org 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BNUnfLHhhi_/>

A photo posted by Madonna (@madonna) on Nov 27, 2016 at 9:34am PST

Other lots up for auction include a private game of poker with actors Edward 
Norton and Jonah Hill, a week in Leonardo DiCaprio’s Palm Springs home, a 
private dinner performance by the magician David Blaine, and artworks by Ai 
Weiwei, Richard Prince, Cindy Sherman,Julian Schnabel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julian-schnabel>, Marilyn Minter and 
Damien Hirst.

But the chance to mingle with celebrity guests, including Sean Penn, comedian 
Chris Rock and singerAriana Grande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ariana-grande>, comes at a high price, with 
tickets starting at $5,000 for seating at the event and rising to $150,000 for 
a “philanthropist package” that includes a premium table for 10, access for 
four people to a VIP cocktail reception and a photograph with Madonna.

Lapo Elkann, the 39-year-old grandson of Giovanni Agnelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jan/24/guardianobituaries.italy>, the 
late billionaire industrial magnate who was chief executive and controlling 
owner of Fiat, has donated a customised Fiat 500 described in the auction 
catalogue as “a car inspired by Madonna that invokes the Miami of over-the-top 
style, baroque prints, glitz and glamor”.

Elkann, has recently been charged with falsifying his own kidnapping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/lapo-elkann-agnelli-family-faking-kidnap-fiat>
 as part of an alleged ploy for ransom money, according to police inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmadonna-art-collection-benefit-raising-malawi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6219a951e9e1615b90690fe92e672fc3ca55568f%2F0_0_1997_3000%2F1997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Madonna's%20art%20collection%20and%20more%20on%20sale%20at%20starry%20benefit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmadonna-art-collection-benefit-raising-malawi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Madonna%27s%20art%20collection%20and%20more%20on%20sale%20at%20starry%20benefit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmadonna-art-collection-benefit-raising-malawi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6219a951e9e1615b90690fe92e672fc3ca55568f%2F0_0_1997_3000%2F1997.jpg>
 Madonna on her Rebel Heart tour – the costume is one of the items up for grabs 
at her charity benefit. Photograph: Kevin Mazur/Getty Images for Live Nation 
The event comes amid Art Basel Miami Beach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/30/art-basel-miami-beach-boom-culture-transformed-city>
, the biggest art fair in North America, which attracts super-rich art 
collectors and celebrities from across the world.

Guests will also have the opportunity to bid on a trip to Malawi with Madonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna>, a portrait session with 
photography duo Mert Alas and Marcus Piggott, and the star’s Swarovski crystal 
encrusted flapper dress, as worn on her Rebel Heart tour.

The singer’s first Tears of a Clown concert, in Melbourne, saw her enter the 
stage riding a tiny tricycle and singing a cover of Stephen Sondheim’s Send in 
the Clowns. Over the two-hour show, she recalled visiting her mother’s grave, 
tearfully discussed losing custody of her 16-year-old son, Rocco, to her second 
ex-husbandGuy Ritchie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/guy-ritchie>, and 
visiting her then-husband Penn in jail.

The auction of Madonna and Penn’s wedding private photos – jointly donated by 
the pair – reflects their renewed friendship in recent years. Their four-year 
marriage was beset by rows and his clashes with the paparazzi. At their wedding 
ceremony in 1985, Penn scrawled “Fuck off” in the sand at the media helicopters 
flying overhead.

Madonna's folly in Malawi | Claire Provost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/30/madonna-malawi-charity> 
All proceeds from the evening will benefit Raising Malawi 
<http://www.raisingmalawi.org/#home>, the non-profit organisation founded by 
Madonna in 2006, which is building a new paediatric surgery and intensive care 
unit in the country, named after the singer’s adopted daughter, Mercy James, 
set to open next year.


“Founding Raising Malawi is one of the most meaningful things I have done in 
my life,” said Madonna. “Raising Malawi’s evening of art, music and mischief at 
Art Basel will support our latest project to establish Malawi’s first 
paediatric surgery and intensive care unit. I’m excited to give others the 
opportunity to be part of this undertaking that will ultimately save lives and 
help the children of Malawi.”

“This fundraiser is critical to supporting Raising Malawi’s goal of improving 
access to high quality pediatric healthcare in Malawi, one of the poorest 
countries in the world,” said Sarah Ezzy, executive director of Global 
Philanthropy Group, which manages Raising Malawi.
 