
Steven Soderbergh's new movie Magic Mike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/magic-mike> has turned greased-up A-list 
buttocks into cinema gold: the tale of the male stripping fraternity has taken 
$39m in the US in its opening weekend. Bare bums are big business, but it 
hasn't always been this way as a quick glance over the history of the "genre" 
will tell you.

We all know the nude male form is essentially ridiculous, built only for 
floppy comedy. Hollywood recognised this quickly, and kept sexy male stripping 
to a minimum in early cinema. Even by the 1960s, this attitude remained. So 
when Oliver Reed and Alan Bates got it all out in 1969'sWomen In Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/30/women-in-love-censors-classification>
, their naked frolicking had to be dressed up as "wrestling".

It wasn't until the 1980s that male stripping became a "thing". Arnold 
Schwarzenegger had spent most of the 70s walking around in budgie smugglers, 
and Michael Ontkean went full chilly burlesque on the ice in Slap Shot, but it 
was only in the 80s that others caught up: a male performer serving up his 
penis on a tray to Tom Hanks in Bachelor Party, and Michael Keaton getting an 
eyeful in Mr Mom. Stripping even made it to the Oscars with John Cleese's 
Russian-spouting, baggy-briefed performance for Jamie Lee Curtis in the 
triple-nominatedA Fish Called Wanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36363/fish-called-wanda>. But they all 
obeyed the first rule of male screen stripping: nobody wants to see the bits.

The movie which turned the world of shedding clothes for cash into wholesome 
family fun came in 1997 â€“ the Citizen Kane of kit-offery; the male stripper 
movie against which all others must be measured:The Full Monty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/69487/full.monty>. Seizing on the 
innate ridiculousness of the male body and trussing it up in a red thong, Mark 
Addy's quivering form showed men that they too could shed their clothes and be 
pointed at by women. Giggling women, granted, but when your box office is 
$258m, who cares!

The instances of A-list women playing strippers are legion: Rita Hayworth in 
Gilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/16/rita-hayworth-gilda-patterson>, 
Demi Moore in Striptease, Natalie Portman in Closer. But after The Full Monty 
that balance was redressed. OK, it was just Ben Affleck having a go in Forces 
Of Nature, and it's probably kinder if we just breeze past that. So now here's 
Magic Mike, a film to make the "genre" legit. That said, the first rule for any 
would-be screen Chippendale remains the same as it ever has: keep your tongue 
in your cheek and junk in your jocks. You're not in a French film.
 