
Mail on Sunday <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> executives are 
standing behind the newspaper’s extensive serialisation of the memoirs of an 
ex-mayor of Doncaster, which claimed to give “a worrying glimpse of the real Ed 
[Miliband]”.

In a front-page story and across five pages inside 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2914876/Bombshell-memoir-Miliband-s-former-ally-reveals-Ed-set-fire-carpet-bought-prayer-mat-cover-asked-think-brother-better-looking-me.html>
, the newspaper published what it billed as a series of “bombshell” claims by 
Martin Winter, a one-time friend of the Labour leader who fell out with the 
party after leaving office in 2009.

Under the headline My 9½ weeks of Calamity Ed, the serialisation recounts 
stories about how “bumbling oddball” Miliband accidentally set fire to a carpet 
and bought a prayer mat to cover the damage, and privately “agonised about his 
better looking brother David”.

Winter, who helped Miliband to win the Doncaster North seat in May 2005, wrote 
that his 10-year-old daughter gave his former ally a lesson in economics and 
how Miliband nearly missed a meeting withGordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> by locking himself in a 
house.

However, the most politically toxic claim was that Miliband and Ed Balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> knew about the economic crash of 
2008 a year before it happened but kept it a secret.

A spokesman for Miliband said: “This report is untrue. It is tittle-tattle, a 
third-hand report of a conversation more than seven years ago. Complete 
nonsense. No one had any sense of the scale of the global banking crisis which 
emerged in 2008.”

A spokesman for the shadow chancellor also denied the claim made by Winter, who
resigned as Doncaster mayor in March 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/mar/13/childprotection-localgovernment>
 after Balls, then children’s secretary, ordered the council to bring in a new 
management team after the deaths of seven children in the area.

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> figures pointed out that 
Winter was lambasted in the Mail on Sunday in 2009 in a piece on Doncaster, a 
town described by the paper at the time as “the rotten borough they call the 
Haringey of the north”.

But senior Mail on Sunday insiders stood by the serialisation. “It’s good 
stuff, entertaining,” said one executive, conceding that it was “quite 
conceivable” people may never have heard of Winter.

“He may be obscure but Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> isn’t. [Winter] is not a 
famous person himself but he happened to have interesting periods with someone 
who went on to be famous.”

In a leader column, the Mail on Sunday said Miliband’s “accident-prone and 
clumsy bumbling, his awkwardness with children and poorly chosen gifts are 
exactly what one might expect from a Hampstead intellectual suddenly confronted 
with the outside world”.

It added: “Of course, we are all human, and there are worse failings. But Mr 
Winter’s central revelation is much worse. It is not just that Mr Miliband 
burned a hole in his host’s carpet. It is that he might burn a hole in the 
nation’s future.”

Calls to Winter for a response went unanswered on Sunday. The Mail on Sunday 
said his memoirs, titled Fallout: By Martin Winter, The Man Who Made Ed 
Miliband An MP, go on sale in April.

John Wellington, the Mail on Sunday managing editor, declined to confirm 
whether Winter was paid for the serialisation: “Anything like that would be 
confidential. We don’t discuss payments.”

Damian McBride <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/damian-mcbride>, who was 
special advisor to then-prime minister Gordon Brown at the time, rubbished 
Winter’s claim that Miliband and Balls knew about the economic crash a year 
before it happened but kept it secret. “In all the countless conversations 
about whether to call an election in 2007, not once did the prospects of the 
economy come up. Not once,” he said on Twitter.
 