
Mail Online grew revenues by more than 40% to £62m in 2014, almost completely 
offsetting the advertising and sales decline at the Daily Mail andMail on Sunday
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday>.

Parent Daily Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> & General 
Trust, reporting annual results for the year to the end of September, said the 
growth in digital advertising revenues was expected to continue to offset the 
decline in print ad revenues at its newspaper titles.

The Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday reported a 5% decline in total revenue to 
£536m. Print advertising revenues fell 5% while circulation revenues dropped 4%.

Total ad revenues across the Mail businesses hit £252m, a 4% year-on-year 
increase (£9m). Within this,Mail Online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> grew ad revenues by 46%.

The company said the Mail Online’s revenue growth of £19m year-on-year 
outstripped the £10m decline in print advertising revenues.

The growth in Mail Online, which just exceeded a management target of £60m in 
revenues for the financial year, stabilised total revenues across the Mail 
businesses to just a 1% fall at £598m. Overall operating profit at the Mail 
businesses grew 13% to £71m. Daily commuter freesheet Metro’s revenues fell 3% 
to £75m.

Profits for Metro are combined with daily deals business Wowcher, which saw 
revenues grow 73% to £24m, which fuelled a 92% surge to £14m.

The newspaper operations are part of DMG Media, which also includes operations 
and income such as DMGT’s stake in regional newspaper business Local World. 
Overall profits for the division rose 19% to £95m year-on-year.

Mail Online has become a huge business in its own right; in the past year, it 
has expanded into the US and Australia, employing more than 600 staff.

“The increased digital investment in Mail Online was more than offset by lower 
costs, notably production, distribution, marketing and central support services 
at the Daily Mail and the Mail on Sunday, and reduced losses at Wowcher,” the 
company said.

DMGT received £15m from its 39% stake in David Montgomery’s Local World.

The company said its print and digital newspaper business could return to 
overall revenue growth as soon as next year.

“I expect the Mail businesses to move into regular reporting of net growth in 
the next one to two years,” said Stephen Daintith, finance chief at DMGT. He 
said Mail Online would be looking at hitting about £80m in revenues next year, 
although this is not a hard target, and £100m by the end of 2016.

The growth drive comes with a significant cost implication as Mail Online’s 
headcount continues to swell, with numbers up 35% from 460 to 620 year-on-year.

Of that, 370 are editorial staff, with 250 journalists based in the UK and 120 
in the fast-growing US operation.

Daintith said the recruitment drive would continue as long as the business 
continued its fast rate of growth.

“Expect to see continued investment in Mail Online and don’t be surprised to 
see headcount continue to grow,” he said. “Where there is an overseas market 
that it makes sense for an editorial and sales office, we are ready to do that.”

He said there was no focus on making Mail Online profitable in its own right. 
“We don’t talk about profits in Mail Online individually, as we look at it as 
part of a content platform, a source of news and reporting entertainment across 
newspapers and websites,” he said. “It is not really that meaningful to think 
about the individual profitability of Mail Online. What is more important is 
the profitability of the Mail businesess, and there we have seen much impoved 
margins.”

Ends • To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 