
The Mail on Sunday <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> has 
apologised for and corrected a story that said “Muslim gangs” were behind an 
attack on an immigration enforcement van in east London following a complaint 
to the press regulation body Ipso.

The newspaper published a story in July 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3174610/Welcome-East-London-gang-slashes-tyres-immigration-raid-van-officers-showered-eggs-high-rise.html>
 headlined “Welcome to east London: Muslim gang slashes tyres of 
immigration-raid van before officers showered with eggs from high rise”.


According to the story, Muslim youths had carried out the attack in the same 
week that David Cameron had called on the Muslim community to support the 
“British way of life”.


It quoted an unnamed witness who claimed to have seen five or six youths slash 
the tyres of the van with kitchen knives after it brought a dozen immigration 
officials to Shadwell to detain three people. “I think they were local Muslim 
hoodies just doing a prank, but it’s not funny,” the witness was quoted as 
saying.


Management consultant Miqdaad Versi complained to the Mail on Sunday, which 
responded with a letter 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/07/30/daily-mail-muslim-crime-gang_n_7903736.html>
 saying it had “intended no disrespect to the Muslim religion”, but did not 
correct its story. Versi then took his complaint to Ipso, saying the article 
was based on conjecture and the religion of the gang was not relevant to the 
story.


Following the complaint, the Mail on Sunday agreed to rewrite the story 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3174610/Welcome-East-London-gang-slashes-tyres-immigration-raid-van-officers-showered-eggs-high-rise.html>
 to remove the references to Muslims andcarry a correction both in the paper 
and online 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/article-3241640/Clarifications-corrections.html>
.

The correction said: “An article on July 26 said a gang of Muslim youths was 
responsible for damaging Home Office immigration enforcement vehicles in 
Shadwell, eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, in the week the 
prime minister appealed to Muslims to help combat extremism. Muslim readers 
have asked to point out that the youths’ religion was unclear and, in any case, 
irrelevant to the story. We apologise for any offence caused.”


Versi, who is assistant general secretary of the Muslim Council of Britain but 
brought the complaint in a personal capacity, welcomed the correction.

“The coverage of Muslims in mainstream media continues to be very negative and 
there are too many sensationalist headlines that generalise about Muslims. This 
story in particular was both inaccurate and referred to Muslims when it was 
irrelevant to the story,” he told the Guardian.


He said that following the complaint, John Wellington, the managing editor of 
the Mail on Sunday, had attended a conference on media coverage of Muslims and 
Islam. Wellington was unavailable for comment.
 