
Mail Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online>, theguardian.com 
and Telegraph.co.uk all posted new internet traffic records in October, another 
busy news month with major stories including the deaths of Muammar Gaddafi and 
Apple founder Steve Jobs.

Mirror Group Digital also enjoyed strong traffic growth in October, with 
Independent.co.uk the only one of the five national newspaper publishers that 
report monthly ABC internet audience figures to see a month-on-month decline in 
daily unique browsers. The launch of Apple's iPhone 4S also helped boost 
newspaper website traffic in October.

Mail Online, the UK's most popular newspaper website for the 13th month 
running, grew monthly users by 16.85% to 78,994,874. Daily traffic increased by 
12.3% to 4,563,492.

Mail Online has increased the number of users coming to its site by 57.83% 
compared to October last year.

Guardian.co.uk, the Guardian News & Media website network that includes 
MediaGuardian.co.uk, increased daily browsers by 12.23% compared to September 
to 3,275,624 – a new record traffic high. On a year-on-year basis the number of 
daily browsers has grown 57%.

The GNM website network publishes figures on total monthly users every other 
month. However, according to unofficial figures theguardian.com is understood 
to have topped 60 million monthly uniques for the first time.

Telegraph.co.uk increased monthly users by 19.31% compared to September to 
45,310,524 in October. Daily browsers climbed 14.94% month on month to 
2,292,052.

Independent.co.uk saw a 7% month-on-month dip in its daily users in October.

Independent.co.uk – which unveiled a major overhaul of its web strategy late 
last month, including a "freemium" access model for international users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2011/oct/31/theindependent-digital-media?INTCMP=SRCH>
 – reported a 5.46% month-on-month fall to 13,874,442 users in October.

Daily unique browsers dropped by 7.08% to 611,488 last month, according to the 
latest officially audited ABC web circulation figures published on Thursday.

However, the Independent website posted a 11.45% gain in unique browsers in 
October compared to the same month last year.

The Mirror Group Digital network of websites, which includes mirror.co.uk and 
3am.co.uk, showed the largest growth in monthly browsers among national 
newspapers that report ABC web figures, up 25.53% compared to September to 
15,796,147. Daily browsers grew by 17.22% month-on-month to 710,695.

Mirror Group Digital had 35.23% more monthly users in October than compared 
with the same month in 2010.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 4,563,492

Month-on-month change: +12.31%

Year-on-year change: +65.41%

Monthly browsers: 78,994,874

Month-on-month: +16.85%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 3,275,624

Month-on-month change: +12.23%%

Year-on-year change: +57.43%

Monthly browsers: N/A

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 2,292,052

Month-on-month change: +14.94%

Year-on-year change: +33.07%

Monthly browsers: 45,310,524

Month-on-month change: +19.31%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 710,695

Month-on-month change: +17.22%

Year-on-year change: +34.06%

Monthly browsers: 15,796,147

Month-on-month change: +25.53%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 611,488

Month-on-month change: -7.08%

Year-on-year change: +10%

Monthly browsers: 13,874,442

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 