
Mail Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> had a shade under 
100 million monthly browsers in January, as the traffic growth of the world's 
most popular newspaper website showed no sign of stopping.

The Associated Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> 
website network attracted 99,218,476 monthly browsers in January, a 17.88% 
increase compared with December, according to the latest Audit Bureau of 
Circulations figures published on Thursday.

Mail Online's daily browsers rose 19.57% month-on-month in January to 
5,784,946.

The Guardian remained the second largest newspaper website in the UK in 
January, with daily unique browsers rising 22.31% month on month to 3,592,387.

Guardian.co.uk, the Guardian News & Media website network that includes 
MediaGuardian, recorded 63,171,662 monthly online browsers. No percentage 
figure was given comparing it with December, as Guardian.co.uk no longer 
reports month-on-month comparisons for its monthly browsers.

The biggest fall among UK national newspapers reporting monthly website 
traffic figures was Independent.co.uk, which suffered a 17.09% decline in 
monthly online browsers to 13,126,707. Daily unique browsers fell by 20.52% 
month on month to 602,856.

Mail Online also retained its title as the most popular newspaper website in 
the world for a second month in January, according to the latest comScore 
figures.

The website had 51.7 million monthly unique users in January, against 47.9 
million for the second-placed New York Times.

Mail Online widened the gap from December, when it first overtook the New York 
Times according to comScore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/jan/25/dailymail-internet?INTCMP=SRCH>
 with 45.3 million against 44.8 million.

The discrepancy between the ABC and comScore figures is because the official 
UK newspaper industry auditing body has access to all figures directly from the 
publishers. By contrast comScore relies on a panel of web users to estimate 
figures, and excludes traffic from computers in internet cafes and educational 
establishments, and from mobile devices and tablets.

Associated Newspapers' Metro website network is starting to gain significant 
scale with 352,888 daily online browsers and 8,570,724 monthly online browsers 
in January – up almost 50% year on year.

News International's Sun website continued to show solid growth with 1,471,788 
daily online browsers and 24,055,155 monthly online browsers, month-on-month 
increases of 9.9% and 8.69% respectively.

Mirror Group Digital, the Trinity Mirror website network that includes 
3am.co.uk and MirrorFootball.co.uk, saw double-digit month-on-month increases 
in daily online browsers and monthly online browsers – to 882,972 and 
19,092,360 respectively.

Telegraph.co.uk increased daily online browsers by 14% month on month to 
2,458,826, while monthly browsers increased by 13% year on year to 48,292,476.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 5,784,946

Month-on-month change: +19.57%

Year-on-year change: +81.48%

Monthly browsers: 99,218,476

Month-on-month: -17.88%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 3,592,387

Month-on-month change: +22.31%

Year-on-year change: +56%

Monthly browsers: 63,171,662

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 2,458,826

Month-on-month change: +14%

Year-on-year change: +43.26%

Monthly browsers: 42,699,603

Month-on-month change: 13.1%

Sun Online

Daily average browsers: 1,471,788

month-on-month change: +9.91%

Year-on-year change: N/A

Monthly browsers: 24.055,155

Month-on-month change: +8.69%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 882,972

Month-on-month change: +21.51%

Year-on-year change: +46.51%

Monthly browsers: 19,092,360

Month-on-month change: +17.05%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 602,856

Month-on-month change: -20.52%

Year-on-year change: +7.52%

Monthly browsers: 13,126,707

Month-on-month change: -17.09%

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 