
Mail Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> topped 80 million 
monthly online browsers for the first time in November in a busy news period 
when theguardian.com also broke new traffic records.

The UK's most popular newspaper website continued its remarkable climb with 
monthly users up by 7.57% compared with October, to 84,977,460 – an increase of 
65% compared with November last year, according to the Audit Bureau of 
Circulations report published on Thursday. Daily users of Mail Online topped 5 
million, an 11.6% climb on the previous month.

Guardian.co.uk, the Guardian News & Media website network that includes 
MediaGuardian.co.uk, also recorded a rise in traffic last month, with monthly 
users rising to 63,589,633 in November. Daily online users reached 3,699,492 in 
the period, up 12.94% month-on-month.

The Mirror Group Digital network of websites and Metro.co.uk also enjoyed a 
traffic boost last month, while the number of users of Telegraph.co.uk and the 
Independent website fell.

The Trinity Mirror website network, which includes 3am.co.uk and 
MirrorFootball.co.uk, reported a 3.22% rise in monthly browsers in November, to 
16,304,642. Daily traffic grew 6.76% to 758,729.

Telegraph.co.uk fell back last month after reporting a new traffic record for 
October, slipping 1.07% to 44,825,059. Daily users grew 2.42% in the same 
period, to 2,347,059. Traffic on the Telegraph site has grown 36% since 
November last year.

Independent.co.uk, which relaunched on 31 October, saw monthly users fall 2% 
month on month to 13,596,368. However, daily users were up 12.20% in the 
period, to 686,062.

Mail Online

Daily average browsers: 5,094,469

Month-on-month change: +11.64%

Year-on-year change: +73.29%

Monthly browsers: 84,977,460

Month-on-month: +7.57%

theguardian.com

Daily average browsers: 3,699,492

Month-on-month change: +12.94%

Year-on-year change: +59.12%

Monthly browsers: n/a

Telegraph.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 2,347,502

Month-on-month change: +2.42%

Year-on-year change: +36.15%

Monthly browsers: 44,825,059

Month-on-month change: -1.07%

Mirror Group Digital

Daily average browsers: 758,729

Month-on-month change: +6.76%

Year-on-year change: +42.03%

Monthly browsers: 16,304,642

Month-on-month change: +3.22%

Independent.co.uk

Daily average browsers: 686,062

Month-on-month change: 12.20%

Year-on-year change: +22.53%

Monthly browsers: 13,596,368

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 