
Three major labels are suing Russian social network vKontakte, claiming that 
the company has deliberately fostered "large-scale" music piracy on its service.

Sony Music Russia, Universal Music Russia and Warner Music UK have filed 
separate lawsuits 
<http://www.ifpi.org/news/Record-companies-file-legal-proceedings-against-vKontakte>
 in the Saint Petersburg & Leningradsky Region Arbitration Court, working with 
locla industry body NFMI and global organisation the IFPI on the cases.

The labels claim that vKontakte, which has 143m registered users globally, 
including 88m withinRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, is 
storing a large catalogue of music uploaded by its users, and has refused to 
strike licensing deals with the rightsholders.

"VK's music service, unlike others in Russia, is an unlicensed file-sharing 
service that is designed for copyright infringement on a large scale," said 
IFPI chief executive Frances Moore in a statement.

"We have repeatedly highlighted this problem over a long period of time. We 
have encouraged VK to cease its infringements and negotiate with record 
companies to become a licensed service. To date the company has taken no 
meaningful steps to tackle the problem, so today legal proceedings are being 
commenced."

The IFPI believes that the widespread availability of downloadable music on 
vKontakte is harming licensed digital music services in Russia, including local 
players Yandex and Trava, and global services iTunes and Deezer.

The IFPI's most recent figures show Russian recorded music revenues of just 
2.2bn roubles (£37.3m) in 2013, putting it outside the top 20 countries in the 
body's global rankings.

vKontakte declined to comment on the lawsuits when contacted by The Guardian, 
on the grounds that it has not yet received the claims filed by the labels.

vKontakte has been a thorn in the side of the music industry for some time. In 
November 2011, US industry body the RIAA waslabelling the site as a "notorious 
market" for piracy 
<http://www.riaa.com/newsitem.php?content_selector=newsandviews&news_month_filter=10&news_year_filter=2011&id=B966B360-22F9-C11E-B7A3-50777A8122E7>
 that was "specifically designed to enable members to upload music and video 
files, hundreds of thousands of which contain unlicensed copyright works".

This week's lawsuits are not the first time vKontakte has been taken to court 
for facilitating copyright infringement, however.

In February 2012, the company lost a case brought by Russian music firms SBA 
Publishing and SBA Production 
<http://www.thecmuwebsite.com/article/russian-facebook-clone-liable-for-copyright-infringement/>
, with the verdictupheld by the Russian appeals court 
<http://ifpi.org/news/ifpi-welcomes-court-ruling-finding-vkontakte-liable-for-copyright-infringement>
 in May that year. A few months later, vKontakte wasfined in another copyright 
infringement case 
<http://musically.com/2012/10/12/russian-social-site-vkontakte-fined-again-for-copyright-infringement/>
, before beingrefused leave to appeal 
<http://ifpi.org/news/ifpi-welcomes-final-court-decision-against-vkontakte> in 
November 2012.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fmajor-labels-vkontakte-russia-music-piracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F3%2F1396519083659%2Fbe486de2-d610-452a-98d6-3ab3dc9220c0-1020x774.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20labels%20sue%20Russian%20social%20network%20vKontakte%20for%20'large-scale'%20music%20piracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fmajor-labels-vkontakte-russia-music-piracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20labels%20sue%20Russian%20social%20network%20vKontakte%20for%20%27large-scale%27%20music%20piracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Fapr%2F03%2Fmajor-labels-vkontakte-russia-music-piracy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F3%2F1396519083659%2Fbe486de2-d610-452a-98d6-3ab3dc9220c0-1020x774.jpeg>
 vKontakte is Russia's equivalent of Facebook. 
The IFPI claims vKontakte has refused to tackle the issue of copyrighted music 
stored and shared through its social network, but the company has said 
otherwise in the last year. In June 2013, local news sites reported that a 
number ofsongs by global artists including Justin Bieber, the Rolling Stones 
and Adele 
<http://musically.com/2013/06/18/russian-social-network-vkontakte-removing-copyrighted-music-tracks/>
 were being removed by vKontakte.

In December 2013, founder Pavel Durov claimed that vKontakte was willing to 
take down music in response to requests from labels. "If some music companies 
wish their content to be deleted from VK, we, as always, are willing to comply 
with their wish," hetold TechCrunch 
<http://techcrunch.com/2013/12/27/nine-big-music-labels-plan-to-sue-vkontakte-the-facebook-of-russia-over-6000-illegal-music-tracks/>
.

"On the other hand, we are also ready to seek mutually beneficial ways to 
monetise their content. This year we managed to find such a solution for video 
content and we are optimistic about the audio section of VK as well."

In March this year, reports suggested that vKontakte was preparing to 
introduce "content identification 
<http://torrentfreak.com/russias-facebook-prepares-to-make-peace-with-ustr-over-piracy-140308/>
, which will be used to monitor and promptly delete published content protected 
by copyright", although these plans have not dissuaded the major labels from 
launching their legal action.

The lawsuits come at a sensitive time for vKontakte. Its founder Pavel Durov 
resigned earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/02/founder-pavel-durov-leaves-russian-social-network-site-vkontakte>
, citing pressure from the site's Kremlin-linked owners since its ownership 
structure changed in 2013. The previous year, Durov had refused to close down 
groups on vKontakte that were organising protest marches against Russian leader 
Vladimir Putin.

In April 2013, vKontakte's offices were searched by investigators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/18/russian-internet-social-media-network>
, as a fund belonging to oil mogul Ilya Shcherbovich acquired 48% of the 
company. Then, in January 2014,Durov sold his shares in the company to telecoms 
executive Ivan Tavrin 
<http://www.theverge.com/2014/1/31/5363990/how-putins-cronies-seized-control-over-russias-facebook-pavel-durov-vk>
, whose company MegaFon is controlled by Russian businessman Alisher Usmanov – 
who already owned 40% of vKontakte, and has close ties to the Kremlin.

"The freedom of action of the chief executive in managing the company has 
considerably decreased. It has been harder and harder to remain with those 
principles on which our social network is based," wrote Durov in a statement 
posted on his own vKontakte page earlier this week, as he resigned.


More recently, vKontakte has been in the news for offering a job to NSA 
whistleblower Edward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2013/aug/02/vk-russian-facebook-edward-snowden-nsa>
 after he was granted temporary asylum in Russia, as well as being criticised 
forhosting homophobic groups like Occupy Paedophilia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/11/russia-violent-anti-gay-groups-vkontakte-lgbt-sochi>
 which used its social network to lure gay men to venues where they would be 
attacked.

Durov may now focus on Telegram, the encrypted messaging app startup that he 
launched with brother Nikolai, which is based in Berlin. The app recentlyadded 
5m new users in a single day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/24/telegram-messaging-app-whatsapp-down-facebook>
 following the announcement that Facebook was buying rival WhatsApp.
 