
The bestselling Turkish novelist Elif Shafak has called for writers to 
“connect across borders”, evoking a “turbulent period in world history in which 
storytellers, east and west, need to speak louder, bolder”.

Shafak is one of a group of major authors to have joined Pen International’s 
new “writers circle”, signing up alongside writers including Salman Rushdie, 
Colm Tóibín,Alexander McCall Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alexander-mccall-smith>, Margaret Atwood and 
Ian Rankin to offer financial support to Pen’s work defending freedom of 
expression around the world.

Pen, which launched a similar “publishers circle” in 2011 
<http://www.pen-international.org/support-us/the-pen-publishers-circle>, said 
the new group would allow it to “better respond to the increasing threats faced 
by writers across the globe, and to develop access to literature”.

Shafak said that Pen had supported her own case when she was accused of 
“insulting Turkishness” in her bestseller The Bastard of Istanbul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jul/24/fiction.voicesofprotest>.

“I have seen firsthand how significant and valuable it was to feel Pen’s 
support by my side, intellectually and psychologically, and I have never 
forgotten it,” said Shafak. “Though solitary creature we writers might be in 
our hearts, there are moments when being lonely is the last thing we want. As 
humanity retreats into mental ghettoes and cultural divisions, it is extremely 
important that writers, poets, intellectuals connect across borders to promote 
literature, the love of books, freedom of speech and free circulation of ideas 
and stories.”

The acclaimed Lebanese author Hanan al-Shaykh, another member of the circle, 
said she had pledged her support because “freedom of expression is like 
breathing: deny it, and you suffocate”.

“This is why I have pledged my support to Pen International’s new writers 
circle, an initiative to strengthen solidarity among writers and freedom of 
expression around the world. I hope other writers will join me in this new and 
worthwhile venture,” said al-Shaykh.

Pen International also used the platform of this week’s 81st Pen Congress in 
Quebec to announce that ski instructor and English tutor Rebecca F John has won 
its award for new writers. John, from Swansea, beat writers from Germany, 
Romania, Canada, Flanders and South Africa to win the $1,000 Pen 
International/New Voices award. John’s writing has previously been shortlisted 
for the Sunday Times EFG short story prize, and her first short-story 
collection has just been released by independent Welsh publisher Parthian Books.

The Pen prize is for unpublished writers between 18 and 30, and is intended to 
encourage new writing, and to provide “a much needed space for young and 
unpublished writers to promote their work”.

Life of Pi author Yann Martel, a member of the new writers circle who 
presented John with the award, spoke of the importance of the prize’s promotion 
of emerging writers. “We are nothing without stories. A century without 
stories, without its writers, is a forgotten century, one accessible only to 
forensic historians and archaeologists,” he said. “And so we need at each 
generation our allotment of writers who will start building that mirror of 
ourselves without which we see nothing, understand nothing.”
 