
After all the furore over Kraft's purchase of Cadbury (and subsequent factory 
closures) and other foreign takeovers of UK household names, insurance has 
become the latest industry to end up in foreign hands. Much of it has been 
quietly taken over by overseas firms without anyone batting an eyelid, the only 
exception being thesale of Aviva's RAC breakdown service to US private equity 
giant Carlyle 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/jun/23/rac-sold-to-us-private-equity-firm-carlyle?INTCMP=SRCH>
 last year.

Vince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>, the UK 
business secretary, is worried about foreign takeovers and has called for 
tougher rules. He won't be pleased by a new report that shows the majority of 
Britain's general insurance companies - which sell car and household policies 
etc - are now foreign owned.

The report, UK Financial Services: Ownership, Value and M&A Developments, 
produced by IMAS Corporate Finance on behalf of TheCityUK and UK Trade & 
Investment, found that 55% of the largest insurance groups, valued at over 
£100m, are owned by overseas firms, many of which are listed in the US.

Overall, 153 general insurance firms in the UK are controlled by overseas 
investors. The US is the top foreign investor accounting for over 40%, followed 
by Bermuda with 12%, Japan and Germany.

The five biggest foreign-owned general insurers in the UK are Axa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/axa>, Allianz, AIG, Aegis and Munich Re.

2011 was a year to remember for insurers, which got hit by record claims for 
catastrophe losses. Not surprisingly there was also a lot of M&A activity. 
Aviva sold RAC to Carlyle for £1bn last June (shortly after there were rumours 
of a £17bn offer from Zurich forAviva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> which never materialised), 
while US-based Hanover snapped up Lloyd's insurer Chaucer for £313m.

For insurance brokers, it was an unusually quiet year, though. The one big 
deal was US broking giant Gallagher buying Heath Lambert, the 170-year-old 
Lloyd's broker.

There is more M&A to come this year, as the industry battles with major 
regulatory changes. Chris Cummings, chief executive of TheCityUK, said: "There 
will be a continuation of a buoyant M&A market." The US will continue to 
dominate, but watch India, China, Brazil five years from now, he said, as they 
become bigger players in the UK insurance market.

Financial services make up 9% of the UK's GDP, while insurance alone accounts 
for £2.5% (or £32.4bn in 2010).
 