
Common decency says that I should feel only sympathy for the families of 
Sellafield workers who areseeking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/frontpage/story/0,,2078958,00.html> a full public 
inquiry into the use of their late relatives' body parts by BNFL doctors and 
scientists. I prefer the uncommon variety.

Fetishising the physical remains of dead people is uniquely irrational. 
Science cannot disprove the existence of the soul. But we may be certain that 
it does not require rotting organs and stone cold limbs to thrive after our 
demise.

The only obviously beneficial uses for corpses are as suppliers of spare parts 
<http://www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk/articles/article.aspx?articleId=562> to the 
injured living or as research specimens. We should all be proud if a deceased 
loved one's body can help to provide new life or comfort to a suffering human 
being. To want to keep it intact is selfish.

The Sellafield relatives' fury that they were not asked to consent to the use 
of body parts for research is clearly sincere. So, I imagine, was the anguish 
of parents caught up in theAlder Hey scandal 
<http://society.theguardian.com/alderhey/story/0,,450736,00.html>. But then 
health secretaryAlan Milburn <http://www.alanmilburn.co.uk/home/>'s description 
of the retention of dead babies and foetuses for research as "grotesque" was at 
best injudicious.

The really outrageous aspect of the Alder Hey scandal was that Â£5m of public 
money was paid out in compensation and the myth reinforced that dead bodies are 
sacred and worthy of special reverence. How many synthetic objections to 
obviously sensible uses of the dead has that encouraged?

People may be forgiven for imagining that such treatment is a hallmark of 
civilisation when their government and the law agree. But such squeamishness 
belongs in the era of William Burke and William Hare, thebody snatchers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2/classic/A702802> who supplied the dissecting 
tables of Edinburgh Medical College between 1827 and 1828.

We have learned since that a plentiful supply of cadavers is essential to 
medical and scientific progress. Yet, despite our clamour for ever more 
sophisticated medicines and surgery, too many of us remain wedded to the voodoo 
terror that harm will befall us if our bodies are not disposed of whole.

It is a too blatant case of mass hypocrisy, and government and the scientific 
establishment should say so loudly and often.

The best possible use of the Sellafield bodies was to facilitate research into 
the effects of radiation. The deceased suffered no additional pain. Their 
relatives should be encouraged to understand that they performed a valuable 
posthumous service.

The Human Tissue Act of 1961 
<http://www.uktransplant.org.uk/ukt/about_transplants/legislation/human_tissue_act/human_tissue_act.jsp>
, which rules that doctors may not retain organs without permission, is 
outmoded and anti-scientific. Research scientists and doctors need freedom to 
assume consent. There should be exceptions for people whose faith dictates a 
different approach, but it is not unreasonable to require them to opt out.

It is not the purpose of government to indulge superstition. The real scandal 
about British body parts is that so few of them are used to help the living. 
Which is crueller: cutting up the dead or allowing a sick child to die for lack 
of compatible transplant organs? A minister with the courage to offer the 
virtuous answer would achieve more than any number of public inquiries.
 