
When it comes to African music, Glastonbury stands taller than most A-list 
rock'n'roll festivals. Way back in 1982, the percussion wig-outs of Nigeria's
King Sunny Ade <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2005/apr/19/worldmusic> were a 
revelation to me: music, I realised, didn't have to involve pasty-faced white 
guys playing guitar, bass and drums. Since then, such heavyweights asFela Kuti 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/fela-kuti>, Amadou and Mariam 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/amadou-and-mariam>, Ali Farka Touré 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2006/mar/08/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>, 
Salif Keita <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/salif-keita>, Tinariwen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tinariwen> and Oumou Sangaré 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/apr/20/worldmusic> have all graced 
Glastonbury.

African music-heads will have noticed that most of those acts are from Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>. That's no coincidence: the country is 
a music powerhouse, fertilised over the centuries by the griots (or bards) with 
their epic poems and lineages stretching back generations, the dazzling 
intellectual life of the campuses at Timbuktu and Djenné, the explosion of 
Cuban and jazz-influenced popular music in the 1950s and 60s, and all the 
biennales and youth weeks that were designed to build Mali's sense of 
nationhood after independence in 1960.

That heritage has given us a country, like Ireland or Jamaica, famed for its 
music. So last September, when all music apart from Quranic chanting was banned 
by armed jihadi groups in the northern two thirds of Mali, Glastonbury felt 
compelled to react. "It just seemed like we had to show some solidarity," says 
Nick Dewey, chief booker for the festival, which starts at the end of this 
month. "We felt we needed to communicate the situation: a lot of people didn't 
know anything about it. Offering some of its musicians the chance to open up 
the Pyramid stage seemed a nice idea "

The singer-songwriter Rokia Traoré <http://www.rokiatraore.net/>, lyrically 
lucid and musically iconoclastic, will be kicking things off on Saturday. 
"Glastonbury's support goes straight to the heart," Traoré says. "But even now 
that the ban on music has gone, there's still so much to do – to make sure 
Malian musicians can live off their art and contribute to the renewal and 
evolution of the country."

Bassekou Kouyate <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/bassekou-kouyate> – a 
virtuoso on the tinyngoni, the granddaddy of every rock guitar ever strummed – 
will serenade all those sore Sunday lunchtime heads with a set on the Pyramid 
stage, dishing out honeyed notes like a particle accelerator, and dressed like 
a potentate in resplendent African robes. AnotherAfrica Express 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/africa-express> favourite, Jupiter and Okwess 
International 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jun/11/jupiter-okwess-hotel-univers-review>
 from Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of Congo, are opening on the main 
stage on the Friday.Jupiter Bokondji 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/26/jupiter-bokondji-africa-express-congo>
, who started out in a band called Bongo Folk, may not be Malian, but he knows 
all there is to know about battling obstacles to follow your musical dreams, 
having lived through his own country's civil war in 2003; he stayed, but his 
bandmates fled.

Fatoumata "Fatou" Diawara 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/video/2012/apr/27/fatoumata-diawara-sowa-video>
, the brightest new star in Mali, is playing at Saturday lunchtime on the West 
Holts stage. Earlier this year, Fatou gathered together a multi-ethnic array of 
Malian musicians to recordan irresistible song called Mali-ko (Peace) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=elwA7SHM8_U>. The track has become the most 
visible and widely covered of the many musical reactions to the Malian crisis, 
which last year saw armed Islamists and Tuareg nationalists fighting over the 
north. Coupled with a military coup in the south, this consigned a once-lauded 
African democracy to the scrapheap.

Representing the north of Mali, Tuareg rockers Terakaft will be on the Spirit 
of '71 stage on Sunday – although in their case, it's more about the spirit of 
'63 or '91, the years when the Tuareg people rose up to fight for their freedom 
and culture. "It was a great shame when the Islamists banned music in our 
country," says Sanou Ag Ahmed of Terakaft. "Alcohol, cigarettes, music – they 
banned it all. We need the freedom to sing about what we see and about what's 
happening back home. We're not dogs. We love everyone, Malians, Africans, and 
we don't like war. What use is war?"

A DJ set at Silver Hayes (formerly the Dance Village) by Mo DJ 
<http://www.mo-dj.com/>, one of the finest turntablists from the Malian capital 
Bamako and a regular at Africa Express, will wrap up the Malian presence. Dewey 
and his wife, Emily Eavis, daughter of festival founder Michael, have no 
intention, however, of plunging Glastonbury into the political debate that 
still rages in and around Mali. It's a wise approach given that even 
journalists, academics and analysts have trouble fully understanding the crisis 
that continues to grip the country despite the French army's expulsion of the 
armed Islamist militias in March.

"The whole point of the festival," says Dewey, "is to have people from 
all over the world – every type of music and performer, every age group, from 
all classes. So it's not a question of us taking a political stance. It's just 
about saying, 'You might not be able to play music at home, but you can come 
and play it here.'"
 