
The Booker prize judges didn’t go “looking for diversity” this year, said 
chair Michael Wood, butthey were “slightly relieved” to find it 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/man-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-revealed-312406>
: and it’s evident in the fact that American domination hasn’t come to pass in 
quite the waysome people feared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/sep/18/booker-prize-us-writers-end>
 when the prize was opened up in 2014. Four of the six authors are indeed 
resident in the US, as against two in the UK, but they include the first 
Jamaican-born writer to be shortlisted, Marlon James, for his many-voiced, 
kaleidoscopic portrait of Jamaica’s turbulent recent history,A Brief History of 
Seven Killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>
; and only the second Nigerian, Chigozie Obioma, illuminating Nigerian society 
through a tale of four brothers,The Fishermen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/13/the-fishermen-chigozie-obioma-review>
.

Marilynne Robinson, the elder stateswoman of American literature whose quietly 
profound meditation on American history and identity, Lila, had seemed a sure 
thing for the shortlist and a strong contender for the award itself, hasn’t 
made it through; in her place is the more mainstream author Anne Tyler, whose 
20th novel,A Spool of Blue Thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/04/a-spool-of-blue-thread-anne-tyler-review>
, which she has said will be her last, is the strongest seller on the list so 
far. It’s another of her trademark excavations of family relationships down the 
generations, selected over a harder-edged investigation of family, origins and 
escape, Irish author Anne Enright’s The Green Road – a brilliantly wide-ranging 
and piercingly astute novel which may have lost out for its diffuse structure.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fman-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-writers-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442326897554%2Fa87d06fa-2f68-4376-9b50-77e7924dfc10-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20Booker%202015%20shortlist%20showcases%20tales%20of%20a%20globalised%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fman-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-writers-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20Booker%202015%20shortlist%20showcases%20tales%20of%20a%20globalised%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fman-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-writers-analysis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442326897554%2Fa87d06fa-2f68-4376-9b50-77e7924dfc10-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sunjeev Sahota, author of The Year of the Runaways. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod 
for the Guardian 
Globalisation is a strong subject in this truly global list – its 
intellectual, aesthetic and philosophical implications are ceaselessly 
interrogated in Tom McCarthy’sSatin Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/11/satin-island-tom-mccarthy-review-connected>
, in which a corporate anthropologist known only as “U” muses on the 
interconnectedness of the modern world, from internet habits and traffic 
patterns to transnational corporate domination and looming ecological disaster. 
The other British contender, Sunjeev Sahota’sThe Year of the Runaways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/19/the-year-of-the-runaways-sunjeev-sahota-review-political-novel>
, couldn’t be more different in style and structure: it’s a big, generous, 
social-realist novel about young Indians escaping the subcontinent for a 
perilous existence in Sheffield, trying to wrangle a new life in Britain 
through student visas and sham marriages, or taking a life-or-death risk with 
people smugglers.

But in following the individual stories of migrants it addresses the most 
pressing issue of our times, the globalisation of desperation and poverty: life 
in the black economy of Sheffield, its insecurity, exploitation and 
hierarchies, isn’t so different from that in India. As the world shrinks, 
austerity bites and just getting by gets harder everywhere, the old support 
systems for new arrivals in Britain are atrophying. The prose is global too: 
the book is peppered with Indian slang. Lifting the lid on a parallel Britain 
as well as on the hopes and dreams of the people journeying here, it’s looking 
more relevant by the day.

This is dark material, as the judges have admitted – the books on the shortlist
“are pretty grim”, said Wood 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-34255672> – though one of 
Sahota’s many achievements is the humane spirit and lively comedy that lift his 
novel above any accusations of worthiness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fman-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-writers-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442327090768%2Fb7013f5b-d9d8-4eb7-8264-0a6dc8d6333c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20Booker%202015%20shortlist%20showcases%20tales%20of%20a%20globalised%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fman-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-writers-analysis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20Booker%202015%20shortlist%20showcases%20tales%20of%20a%20globalised%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fman-booker-prize-2015-shortlist-writers-analysis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442327090768%2Fb7013f5b-d9d8-4eb7-8264-0a6dc8d6333c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hanya Yanagihara, author of A Little Life Photograph: Sophia Evans for the 
Guardian 
 Blacker than black, and perhaps the most divisive novel on the list as well 
as the early favourite, is Hanya Yanagihara’s overwhelming epic tale of the 
lifelong effects of sadistic child abuse,A Little Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/05/a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-review>
: 750 pages written around a day job in what the author has described as a 
“fevered” 18 months.

It’s had readers and critics sobbing over its heightened portrayal of good and 
evil, selfless love and twisted perversion, and combines a pitiless scientific 
eye for what flesh can be subjected to with an ethereal sense of how art can 
make the spirit soar. The main character, a brilliant but tortured lawyer, is 
caught in a vice of shame and compulsion that - however much a reader may wish 
for uplift or resolution – cannot be escaped. Personally, I’m uneasy about its 
combination of aspirational glamour and sordid voyeurism, but this is a book to 
inspire strong feelings and long conversations, on a list full of promise.

 * To buy any of the shortlisted books, or the full Man Booker Prize 2015 
shortlist for £60 (RRP £80.94), go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/category/view/s/the-man-booker-prize-shortlist-2015/id/327?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call0330 333 6846 <>. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone 
orders min. p&p of £1.99.  