
Police in one Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama> city said 
they helped stage a man’s arrest so that he could really just kneel down and 
propose to his terrified girlfriend.

With the help of two officers, Daiwon McPherson, 33, tricked his girlfriend, 
Shawna Blackmon, into thinking he was on the run and had a gun. The officers 
converged on the couple and other members of their biker community outside a 
gas station on Friday night. Blackmon said the scenario seemed real.

Public proposals: true romance or unwarranted coercion? | Dean Burnett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/aug/16/public-proposals-true-romance-or-unwarranted-coercion-olympic-podium-proposal>
“I was scared,” Blackmon, 28, told WPMI-TV <http://bit.ly/2hmoPUW>. “I said he 
was going to jail, they are going to shoot him.”

A video viewed nearly 10m times online by Monday shows the officers rushing up 
to the couple with stun guns, ordering McPherson down. Blackmon, terrified, 
stands between them with her hands up. Then, McPherson asks her to take his gun 
from his pocket. She pulls out an engagement ring instead and is overcome with 
emotion as one of the officers holsters his stun gun and hugs her.

“I really wanted to bring the bike life and the police together,” McPherson, 
who is in a motorcycle group,told Al.com <http://bit.ly/2hpWJbL>. “I can’t 
believe I actually pulled this off.”

The stunt has launched a lively online debate about whether this was a public 
relations win for the Mobile police department or a risky escapade that could 
have gone wrong.

Police spokesman Terrence Perkins said McPherson approached police earlier in 
the day with the idea, which was run up the chain of command for approval from 
an assistant police chief.

Perkins, who attended the stunt to ensure all went smoothly, said no guns were 
involved and added that the Tasers weren’t loaded. Police also made sure the 
scene was safe by informing all other on-duty officers about the scene before 
the fake call went out.

“At no time was he placed in any danger or anyone on the scene,” Perkins said. 

Perkins said police have received some negative comments but that the positive 
feedback far outweighed the negative. “It actually showed us outside the 
capacity of writing tickets. It showed that we do have a human side as well,” 
the police spokesman said.
 