
Literature isn’t a game of King-of-the-Mountain, but a book prize can be, 
since so much reputational capital (and sometimes a much-needed sales bump) is 
at stake. And so, those prone to talking about books in terms more appropriate 
to sports competitions will probably say that America wonthe 2015 Booker 
longlist round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/29/man-booker-prize-2015-bill-clegg-longlist-13-writers>
. It is the country most represented on the longlist, with five entries. But 
looking at the list that way only reveals how limited a lens country borders 
are starting to be, in looking at books, even just books in English.

Were I to personally organise the list into reductive teams, I’d prefer to 
divide the books here into Old and New. Drafted to the Olds would be the books 
whose writers, regardless of place of birth, have established reputations in 
western letters:Anne Enright <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anne-enright>,
Marilynne Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/may/30/marilynne-robinson>, Andrew 
O’Hagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/06/andrew-ohagan-love-poetry-seamus-heaney>
,Tom McCarthy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tom-mccarthy>, and Anne Tyler
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anne-tyler>. The New team would draft those 
writers on this list who are still what you could call up-and-coming 
reputation-wise, regardless of whether they are debut writers or seasoned 
novelists:Marlon James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/10/brief-history-of-seven-killings-marlon-james-review>
,Laila Lalami <http://lailalalami.com/about/>, Hanya Yanagihara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/26/hanya-yanagihara-i-wanted-everything-turned-up-a-little-too-high-interview-a-little-life>
,Sunjeev Sahota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/19/the-year-of-the-runaways-sunjeev-sahota-review-political-novel>
,Chigozie Obioma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/13/the-fishermen-chigozie-obioma-review>
,Anuradha Roy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/27/sleeping-on-jupiter-anuradha-roy-review-hypocrisies-indian-society>
,Bill Clegg <http://portraitofanaddict.com/>, and Anna Smaill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/14/the-chimes-anna-smaill-review>.

Man Booker prize 2015: US literary agent among 13 writers on longlist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/29/man-booker-prize-2015-bill-clegg-longlist-13-writers>
Even if I admit that slicing things up this way provides only limited insight 
– and I do – this arrangement on my cutting board reveals certain things. First 
of all, numbers-wise, it shows us the Booker judges are more interested in New 
books than Old ones. (Jonathan Franzen goes unlaurelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/27/jonathan-franzen-purity-novel-misanthropy>
 for perhaps precisely this reason.) It also shows us that the politics of 
reputation in the literary world still skew towards, well, white people, in 
that the established reputations belong to them. And on some level, be it 
conscious or not, the Booker judges have leveraged the prize to confer more 
reputational capital on writers of colour.

This is not precisely a “new” trend for the Booker, which has always had a 
habit of bringing New-type authors to greater public attention. But perusing 
Booker longlists going back five years, this does appear to be the most 
racially diverse list in recent memory. Which tells you that after years of 
(righteous) complaining about the lack of diversity of these prizes and the 
overall whiteness of literature, people are actually listening.

That hasn’t stopped most news items on the list from leading with an Old 
writer’s candidacy or with Bill Clegg’s. Clegg is,as the Guardian’s Mark Brown 
points out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/29/man-booker-prize-2015-bill-clegg-longlist-13-writers>
, “interesting because he is best known for pushing other writers and for 
securing million-dollar deals in his role as an agent”. His inclusion on this 
list is also probably its biggest surprise to certain literary observers, in 
part because the book still isn’t out yet so only a limited number have read it.

The Man Booker longlist: imaginative global reach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/29/man-booker-longlist-imaginative-global-reach>
I have only, myself, read about half the books on the longlist, and not the 
Clegg novel. I particularly enjoyed Robinson’s Lila and Yanagihara’s A Little 
Life. But my definite favourite among the ones I’ve read is Marlon James’s A 
Brief History of Seven Killings, a multi-vocal novel which charts late 
20th-century Jamaican history and politics through the rise of a drug gang and 
the people whose lives it destroys. (An attempted assassination of Bob Marley, 
whom the novel simply calls “the Singer”, anchors the plot.) James’s ability to 
whip between the distinct experiences, cadences, and emotional registers of his 
characters is dizzying. It gives new lifeblood to that hackneyed phrase “tour 
de force”. It was that oft-praised thing, a “novel of great ambition”, but 
unlike most of those it actually delivers on the promise by being a gripping 
read, with barely a word wasted.

Yet James’s book never garnered as much attention in the United States as it 
deserved. It was a nominee for the National Book Critics Circle Award, but it 
did not win. It was well-reviewed everywhere, but failed to catch on saleswise. 
The reason, perhaps, was that the audience for American literary fiction, as 
cosmopolitan as it likes to style itself, still has trouble with “ambitious 
books” that are not about white middle-class issues, and especially ones that 
are not set in their own country. Maybe that’s just another sign that the 
Booker judges really are right, this year, to point them in the direction of a 
more varied set of concerns.
 