
Edinson Cavani is Louis van Gaal’s No1 choice to fill the vacancy left by 
Robin van Persie, who will complete his move from Manchester United to 
Fenerbahce on Monday. Any prospective deal for Paris Saint-Germain’s Cavani may 
involveÁngel Di María going the other way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/paris-saint-german-target-manchester-united-angel-di-maria>
 as the French club want the Argentinian and Van Gaal is considering allowing 
him to go.

The departure of Van Persie, who should be unveiled at Fenerbahce’s stadium on 
Monday, leaves Wayne Rooney as the only recognised goalscorer at Old Trafford. 
PSG’s Cavani has been a long-term target for United’s manager who is 
strengthening his squad in the current transfer window.

Manchester United get Southampton’s Morgan Schneiderlin for £24m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-southampton>
In central midfield Bastian Schweinsteiger has been signed from Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/bastian-schweinsteiger-goodbye-bayern-munich-manchester-united>
 and he is expectedto be followed by Southampton’s Morgan Schneiderlin on Monday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-southampton>
. Each should be part of the United squad that flies to Seattle on Monday 
afternoon to start the summer tour of the US.The Italy right-back Matteo Darmian
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/11/manchester-united-bastian-schweinsteiger-morgan-schneiderlin-louis-van-gaal>
 has already been signed and,along with Van Gaal’s first close-season 
acquisition Memphis Depay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/08/manchester-united-memphis-depay-dream-chaser>
, will be on the plane for the four-match trip that represents United’s sole 
competitive football before Tottenham Hotspur arrive at Old Trafford on 8 
August for the start of the season.

The targeting of Cavani underlines how Van Gaal is seeking to add elite 
players in his bid to hit the ground running when the new campaign commences. 
Di María had an uneven first season at United following his British record 
£59.7m arrival last summer. Van Gaal is open to letting the winger leave if he 
can be a makeweight in acquiring Cavani.

The goalkeeper David De Gea could still miss the trip to the US after Iker 
Casillas left Real Madrid for Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/iker-casillas-real-madrid-la-liga-porto>
 at the weekend.

If a deal for De Gea were to involve Sergio Ramos coming the other way from 
Real, the goalkeeper may not take the flight to Seattle. Ramos, meanwhile, 
would be another elite player landed by Van Gaal.

If Cavani and Ramos could be added then Van Gaal would have only the 
goalkeeper position to address this summer. Víctor Valdés, who is already at 
United, is one option.
 