
1) Manchester City’s title challenge is still on

Before the game Pep Guardiola said: “Today we can make further progress by 
beating one of the best and most consistent sides in the league. Today’s match 
is our last here in 2016 and we want to say goodbye with a great performance. 
If we can do that we have moved back above one of the big rivals for the 
title.” After a torrid first halfthis was how the contest ended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 as City transformed from an aimless bunch to a menacing proposition that 
steamrollered Arsenal in the second period. Given that Guardiola’s men were 
watery despitedefeating an insipid Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/manchester-city-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 on Wednesday here and before that werehammered 4-2 at Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/leicester-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, a victory was required for morale and to keep up the chase of Chelsea at the 
top of the Premier League. Now they are second.

2) No Stones but still no clean sheet

John Stones was dropped following the 4-2 debacle at Leicester City and in the 
following outing against Watford no goals were conceded for the first time 
since the end of October. That 2-0 victory may have appeared vindication of the 
decision to leave out the £48m central defender yet after five minutes of this 
match Arsenal had sucker‑punchedManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> to lead 1-0 via an Alexis 
Sánchez-Theo Walcott combination. Of the need to keep sides out, Stones said: 
“Some people are claiming that defending is a dying art but we are defenders 
first and foremost. We need to get back to keeping clean sheets again and 
winning matches.” City did the second part and, given that they failed the 
first bit, Stones may be recalled for the trip to Hull City on Boxing Day.

3) Was the Gündogan tribute over the top?

As the City players strolled out for the start each wore the shirt of Ilkay 
Gündogan, which features his name and number, back-to-front. This was to send 
best wishes to the midfielder who will miss the remainder of the campaign 
because of cruciate knee ligament damage sustained in the win against Watford. 
How City – or any side – wish to show solidarity with an injured colleague is 
their choice, of course, but it did jar a little. Especially given that 
players, unfortunately, are continually struck down and have to come back from 
the maladies which are part of the hazards of being a professional footballer. 
Was this over the top? The reaction on social media, particularly Twitter, 
suggested so, though this is hardly an arena of calm and considered opinion.

4) Will Arsenal do an Arsenal again this term?

Arsène Wenger <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> said before 
kick-off: “At Everton our performance was there but we paid a little bit 
physically. We want to bounce back straight away after a disappointing result.” 
That was also a faltering display at Goodison Park as they were defeated 2-1 
and Wenger’s hopes for domination in this match were dashed. Before half-time 
Arsenal ran through City with ease, posing them questions for which Guardiola’s 
team had little answer. After the break this all changed. City were the pacy, 
devilish bunch and Arsenal the side who lacked direction and the spirit to 
arrest it. This Jekyll-and-Hyde persona has become the story of the Gunners’ 
12-year title drought. Is this about to happen yet again? The auguries are not 
good.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Freferees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Referees%20are%20protected%20like%20lions%20in%20the%20zoo'%2C%20says%20Wenger%20after%20loss%20to%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Freferees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Referees%20are%20protected%20like%20lions%20in%20the%20zoo%27%2C%20says%20Wenger%20after%20loss%20to%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Freferees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video&media=>
‘Referees are protected like lions in the zoo’, says Wenger after loss to 
Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/18/referees-are-protected-like-lions-in-the-zoo-says-wenger-after-manchester-city-loss-video>
5) City bespoke striker-less 

Guardiola’s latest configuration had the dedicated No9, Kelechi Iheanacho, on 
the bench and Raheem Sterling, a career wide-man, spearheading the XI. 
Beforehand the manager said: “To win we must attack, control what we try to 
build. The way we want to play, with these players, adapting to the absence 
that we have.” The glaring miss in attack was the suspended Sergio Agüero. Yet 
in Iheanacho and Nolito, also a replacement, the head coach had two players 
accustomed to operating there. Sterling did play at centre-forward when at 
Liverpool but the way he scooped a header wide with the goal gaping may have 
had Guardiola rueing the decision. After the break Sterling was moved out to 
the right and the result? From his natural berth he scored a fine winner. 

Raheem Sterling completes Manchester City turnaround against Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report> 