
Ashley Young <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-young> says he has 
not given up on his international career despite not having played for England 
for more than two years but admits he has not had any contact with Roy Hodgson 
this season.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/28/premier-league-10-talking-points-weekend-action>
Young has started just once for Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> this term after 
impressing in Louis van Gaal’s first season in charge and although he was under 
consideration for a call-up in May he was not selected by Hodgson due to a 
slight injury and advice from the Old Trafford medical department that rest 
would better serve the 30-year-old winger.

Over the summer Young’s Manchester United future was cast into doubt when Van 
Gaal said, “He had a fantastic season. But he is not a Neymar”, buthe agreed a 
new three-year deal in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/07/ashley-young-contract-manchester-united>
, although he has been largely restricted to appearances from the bench this 
term.

As a result he is not expecting to be included when Hodgson names his squad 
for next month’s Euro 2016 qualifiers against Estonia and Lithuania on 
Thursday, despite an impressive cameo against Sunderland on Saturday, but he 
dismissed any suggestions that he would rule himself unavailable for 
international duty in the future.

“I am not to sure about the England situation. I am as in the dark as you,” he 
said. “I know I have to play well for United to have a chance and then you hope 
theEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager comes 
knocking on the door. If that happens it happens but at the moment I am 
concentrating on United.

“I am always going to make myself available as long as my legs can carry me 
around the pitch. I will never think about retiring from England until I retire 
from football completely at club level. That is not going to happen soon. I 
feel fit if the call comes then it comes. It was a long time ago. Roy Hodgson 
was in touch at the end of last season. I had a slight problem with my 
achilles. I was disappointed not to join up.”

Despite just one Premier League start, Young was selected in Manchester 
United’s 2-1 Champions League loss to PSV Eindhoven earlier this month – a 
match marred by Luke Shaw’s double leg break and a defeat that means 
Wednesday’s encounter with Wolfsburg takes on extra significance forthe Premier 
League leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/27/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-sunderland>
.

“It is important to get a win against Wolfsburg. If you want to win the 
Champions league then you have to win your home games,” added Young. “It was a 
disappointing start to the European campaign especially the possession and 
chances we had in Eindhoven that really was disappointing. We have start 
winning in the group now.

“Luke’s injury was very disappointing. I have been in touch with him and been 
speaking to him and he seems very positive. The manager has said how surprised 
he was how positive he is but that is the type of kid he is.”
 