
Ángel Di María’s move from Manchester United to Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> moved a step closer as 
the Argentina winger underwent a medical in Doha on Tuesday.

The Aspetar sports hospital in Qatar posted pictures on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Aspetar/status/628598523886305281> of Di María ahead of 
his medical. The 27-year-old was given permission to fly to Qatar for talks 
with PSG officials after United agreed a €63m (£44.3m) fee with the French 
champions for the midfielder.
Aspetar سبيتار (@Aspetar) 
#AngelDiMaria <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AngelDiMaria?src=hash> in Aspetar, 
Doha for a medical test ahead of a proposed move from@ManUtd 
<https://twitter.com/ManUtd> to @PSG_inside <https://twitter.com/PSG_inside> 
#Doha <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Doha?src=hash> #Qatar 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Qatar?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/Sqo7v9tg3u 
<http://t.co/Sqo7v9tg3u>
 <https://twitter.com/Aspetar/status/628598523886305281> August 4, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Aspetar/status/628598523886305281> 
“I am very happy to join PSG. What I know about PSG is that it is a team that 
won all the possible trophies in France last season,” Di María was quoted as 
saying by BeIN Sports.

“This is very important for the club. I also know that I want to overcome the 
obstacle that is the quarter-finals of the Champions League. I am going to try 
to bring the best of my abilities to put myself at the service of this team. We 
are going to try and go as far as possible in the Champions League.”

United signed Di María from Real Madrid for £59.7m last summer, but after an 
encouraging start his form dipped drastically and he only started one of the 
final 10 games of last season.

Zlatan Ibrahimovic: Ángel Di María can help PSG win Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/26/zlatan-ibrahimovic-angel-di-maria-psg-champions-league-manchester-united>
The former Benfica winger was left unsettled after an attempted burglary on 
his Cheshire home in February.

Since then, Di María and his family have been living in a city-centre 
apartment in Manchester owned by the former United defender Phil Neville.

Di María said as recently as June that he wanted to stay at United, but it 
became apparent that he had his heart set on a move to the French capital in 
the last couple of weeks.

Barcelona coach Luis Enrique wants Manchester United target Pedro to stay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/04/luis-enrique-wants-pedro-stay-barcelona-manchester-united>
The Argentinian was due to report for duty  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/26/angel-di-maria-manchester-united-paris-saint-germain>
during the second leg of United’s pre-season tour of the United States on 25 
July, but failed to show.

After United’s 2-0 defeat to PSG in Chicago on Thursday, Laurent Blanc said 
both clubs were close to striking a deal for the player.
 