
Ashley Young was left bemused at not starting Manchester United’s 2-1 defeat 
at Bournemouth on Saturday afterLouis van Gaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal> had indicated the 
30-year-old would be in the XI.

Young has not been selected since the end of last month when he started the 
1-1 draw at Leicester City. Yet despite being named in the squad for each of 
the following three fixtures Young remained an unused replacement in the
goalless draw with West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/manchester-united-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
 United, the 3-2 defeat at Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/08/wolfsburg-manchester-united-champions-league-match-report>
 in the Champions League and thedefeat by Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/12/bournemouth-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
.

Steve McClaren and Louis van Gaal show topsy-turvy nature of management | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/16/steve-mcclaren-newcastle-united-louis-van-gaal-manchester-united>
Young had been carrying a minor injury, though he was passed fit to start 
against Bournemouth and again ended the defeat on the bench. This was 
understood to have been a surprise to Young who had expected to play.

Van Gaal’s decision not to start him at right-back against Wolfsburg had also 
been unexpected. Instead the Dutchman opted to give Guillermo Varela his full 
debut in a game United had to win to be sure of qualifying from the group to 
the last 16. Two minutes before half-time the manager could have again fielded 
Young when Matteo Darmian was replaced but instead Van Gaal sent on Cameron 
Borthwick-Jackson, an 18-year-old with only 14 minutes of senior football for 
the club.

David de Gea: there is no dressing room discontent at Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/manchester-united-de-gea-dismisses-player-unrest>
As well as United dropping into the Europa League their poor form has left 
them six points behind the leaders, Leicester City, and many are questioning 
the morale at the club. YetDavid de Gea has claimed the mood is fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/17/manchester-united-de-gea-dismisses-player-unrest>
.

“There’s a great atmosphere,” the goalkeeper said. “The dressing room is very 
together and united. I think that’s really important in a team if it wants to 
achieve big things. That’s what we all want, to stay up near the top, and to 
get to April and be in a position where we can win the league. ”

De Gea also defended captain Wayne Rooney, saying “when things are going badly 
it’s always him who speaks up and encourages us. He’s the club captain and he’s 
the one who has to do the talking and motivate us. That’s what he always does.”
 