
Ashley Young understands why he has a reputation for diving but the Manchester 
United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> winger has 
offered no apology for the high-profile incidents in which he has been accused 
of cheating. Instead, the 28-year-old says that referees have the 
responsibility to make correct decisions.

Young has been embroiled in several controversial diving episodes during his 
United career, with the former manager,Sir Alex Ferguson, accepting that the 
winger can go down too easily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/apr/20/alex-ferguson-has-word-ashley-young>
.

This season, during the 2-0 win over Crystal Palace in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/14/manchester-united-crystal-palace-premier-league>
, Young was booked for diving in the area by Jon Moss before the official later 
adjudged he was fouled by Kagisho Dikgacoi, who was sent off as United won a 
penalty. Last monthDavid Moyes said he would speak to Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/06/ashley-young-diving-david-moyes>
 – as he also stated following the match against Palace –after he won a penalty 
when playing against Real Sociedad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/nov/05/real-sociedad-manchester-united-champions-league>
, taking a tumble in the area from a faint tug by Markel Bergara.

Asked if he realises he has attracted a reputation for diving, Young said: "Of 
course I understand what you're saying and everyone is going to have their say 
on it, but I've spoken to the previous manager and current manager, the 
referees are giving decisions and that is where I think it lies. It's been 
talked about [to me] but that's in-house. I'm not going to comment on what's 
been said.

"I think it's one to ask the referees – they're the ones who are giving 
free-kicks and penalties. I remember getting booked against Palace and then won 
a penalty. Against Real Sociedad it was another penalty that was given. 
Referees have got tough decisions to make, they have a tough time out there 
making decisions, but they have made the right decisions, I think."

Young denied being affected by negative publicity. "I don't take notice of the 
headlines or the debates," he said. "That's obviously for the media to debate 
and people to have their say on it and everyone is entitled to have their say 
on it. For me, the referees have made decisions and that's it."

So far, Young's season has been uneven, with him not always being selected by 
Moyes butafter starting Tuesday's 1-0 win over Shakhtar Donetsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/10/manchester-united-shakhtar-donetsk-champions-league>
, which confirmed United as Group A winners before next week's knockout stage 
draw, he is determined to find consistent form that would also secure a place 
in Roy Hodgson's England squad for the 2014 World Cup.

"You always want to play in the biggest tournaments, whether that's at club 
level or international level," said Young. "So of course I want to be on that 
plane. Right now I'm not thinking about the World Cup, I'm thinking about 
playing for United. Obviously, it's been disappointing I've not been involved 
as much as I would have liked. Every player in the squad wants to play and I'm 
no different to that but it's up to the manager, so I've just got to keep doing 
the things that are right in training and take my chances when I'm given them – 
we'll have to see if the manager picks me again."

United travel to Young's previous club, Aston Villa, on Sunday, with the 
champions 13 points behind the leaders, Arsenal, and seven from aChampions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> berth. Having 
lost their last two league games 1-0, Young is conscious the side have to 
refocus. He said: "We want to build some momentum, we're going into an 
important part of the season at Christmas and new year, which are full of 
games. We have got plenty of points to pick up so I think if we can build on 
this result we could keep the momentum going all the way through to the new 
year."

He is expecting a hostile reaction at Villa Park. "Yeah, of course I am. I 
don't mind a bit of stick when I go back there but I'm delighted with how [the 
Shakhtar match has] gone and we'll build on the result and look forward to 
Sunday's game," he said.
 