
Name: Manic Pixie Dream Girl.

Age: Seven.

Appearance: Every woman from every match.com commercial ever made, but with 
bigger eyes and a more feverish ukulele obsession.

Hey, I've heard of this. Of course you have. Ever since AV Club writer Nathan 
Rabincoined the term in 2007 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/the-bataan-death-march-of-whimsy-case-file-1-emeli-15577>
, it's become a catch-all description for the sort of idealised kooky female 
archetype who breezes into about 80% of all indie movies and rescues the male 
protagonist from a life of existential ennui with her endearing yet massively 
impractical commitment to living in the moment.

Like Natalie Portman in Garden State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/may/06/dvdreviews>.Yep. Or Kirsten Dunst 
in Elizabethtown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6EA-O7kHiGM>. Or Zooey 
Deschanel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/zooey-deschanel> in anything 
that Zooey Deschanel has ever appeared in. She's a quirky, one-dimensional free 
spirit who serves no other purpose than to bimble into a mumbling man's life 
and brighten it up with her annoyingly upcycled joie de vivre. She's a glamour 
model for men who read Camus, basically.

How very noughties. Not really. These characters have been in films for 
decades. Barbra Streisand was arguably a Manic Pixie Dream Girl in What's Up, 
Doc? As was Goldie Hawn in Butterflies are Free and Jeanne Moreau inJules et Jim
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jules-et-jim>.

So Manic Pixie Dream Girls would still exist even if the term didn't? Indeed. 
And yet Rabin hasasked us nicely to stop using the term 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/07/15/im_sorry_for_coining_the_phrase_manic_pixie_dream_girl/>
, because we're doing it wrong.

We are? Apparently we've misappropriated it. "In 2014, calling a character a 
Manic Pixie Dream Girl," he says, "is nearly as much of a cliche as the Manic 
Pixie Dream Girl trope."Annie Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall>
, for example, has been called a Manic Pixie Dream Girl, even though Rabin 
points out: "Allen based a lot of Annie Hall on Diane Keaton, who, as far as I 
know, is a real person and not a ridiculous male fantasy."

What do we do now, then? Rabin's advice to writers is: "Try to write better, 
more nuanced and multidimensional female characters."

Do say: "Manic Pixie Dream Girls are a reductive fantasy that have no place in 
fiction."

Don't say: "We need more films about sensible women who come into men's lives 
and teach them important lessons about diverse portfolio investments."
 