
Refugee activists interrupted the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> men’s tennis final, 
unfurling a banner demanding the closure of the controversial Manus Island 
immigration detention centre.

With Novak Djokovic leading Andy Murray 4-3 in the second set, protesters 
walked down to the court wall at the Yarra River end of Rod Laver Arena, 
draping the banner over sponsors’ logos, with the aim of having it captured by 
television cameras and broadcast around the world.

The banner read “Australia Open for refugees” with the hashtag #shutdownmanus 
written underneath. It also carried a recreation of the Australian Open logo.

Two women who jumped on court were arrested, while at least another four 
people - wearing handmade “Australia Open for Refugees” shirts - were evicted 
from the match.

Channel Seven refused to show the protest on TV, but thousands of pictures and 
video clips circulated online.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaFksyZ-Q4gI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaFksyZ-Q4gI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaFksyZ-Q4gI&media=>
The match was delayed for five minutes.

The group behind the protest said in a statement: “We have created this 
international media spectacle today to expose the torture, abuse, and horrific 
conditions that are being perpetrated on Manus Island”.

“We will not be silent. We are drawing a line with this issue. If we allow 
this to happen, there is no end to what this government is capable of.”

The Manus Island <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> 
detention centre has been an especially controversial part of Australia’s 
offshore detention regime.

Two men died in the centre last year, one man bashed during a riot, and 
another from a preventable infection, while regular reports detail violence 
within the centre, including rapes of detainees and the use of solitary 
confinement to punish those deemed ‘non-compliant’.

Practical issues to do with inadequate health care, detainees being given 
expired medicines and food and a lack of running water have also dogged the 
centre.

Currently, there are 1,035 men held on Manus Island. Some have been there 
since August 2013 and have not had their refugee status determinations made.
 