
Americans are becoming less religious 
<http://www.pewforum.org/2015/11/03/u-s-public-becoming-less-religious/>, but 
what are we to make of the fact that so many still believe in God? A recent Pew 
report found that the share of those who think there is a divine power has 
declined only slightly, from 92% to 89%, since 2007. But we shouldn’t be 
viewing this as a counterweight to the rising tide of secular millennials. The 
bare percentage of people who profess belief in a god has never been a good way 
of defining religious commitment.

My Atheism does not make me superior to believers. It's a leap of faith too | 
Ijeoma Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/24/atheism-does-not-make-me-superior-to-believers-its-a-leap-of-faith-too>

To make the flattening statement that 89% of Americans profess “belief in God” 
does a disservice to the country’s bewildering tangle of theological 
complexity. Some people believe in a personal, intervening god as defined by a 
religious creed. Others believe in a deist god, a cosmic watchmaker who wound 
up the universe and then stepped back. Still others think of God as an 
impersonal cosmic force, as nature personified or as the even vaguer “ground of 
all being” posited by philosophers.


Even if all these people use the word “God”, they use it to mean entirely 
different things, so it’s misleading to group them together as if they shared 
something in common.

Among those who believe in a personal god, there’s a vast spectrum of opinions 
about what this being wants and desires, from liberal to ultra-conservative and 
everything between. Some religious denominations unapologeticallysupport 
marriage equality 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/07/02/where-christian-churches-stand-on-gay-marriage/>
; others haven’t even gotten as far aspermitting women to be clergy 
<http://www.jewishledger.com/2015/11/orthodox-group-bans-ordination-hiring-of-women-rabbis/>
.

The same divide exists on abortion, stem-cell research, environmental 
protection, war versus pacifism, economic inequality and any other issue you’d 
care to name. Given that religious views aren’t based on evidence but on 
conflicting claims of unprovable revelation, this is just what we should expect.

If you look beneath the surface, it’s easy to see that every major faith - 
even the dogmatic, creedal ones that present themselves as orderly ranks of 
orthodoxy - isa riotous diversity 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2008/07/a-riotous-diversity> of 
clashing beliefs. What’s taught from the pulpit often haslittle connection 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/24/us/24religion.html> with what members 
actually believe.

The debate and dissension within conventional religions, as well as the 
ongoing rise in the numbers of the unaffiliated, show that traditional models 
of faith are crumbling before our eyes. The time where a religious authority 
could issue a decree and expect it to be obeyed without question is passing. It 
may have worked when churches had a stranglehold on their members’ access to 
information, butthey’ve lost that power 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2014/05/is-the-internet-killing-religion/>
, much to their frustration.

Instead, more people are making up their own minds apart from tradition and 
authority. They’re increasingly unafraid to think for themselves, ask questions 
and come to their own conclusions, even when those conclusions conflict with 
received dogma. This applies to both the outright atheists and agnostics as 
well as the people who consider themselves theists but no longer identify as 
affiliated with organized religion. (Perhaps the most interesting data point is 
that, while younger and more secular generations are driving the trend,older 
generations are also showing a slight but noticeable dip in religiosity 
<http://www.patheos.com/blogs/daylightatheism/2015/05/how-low-will-it-go/>. 
It’s likely that a more open atmosphere is helping people finally give voice to 
doubts that they’ve always had but never felt free to express.)

Even if America never becomes a majority-atheist country, the growth of 
religious diversity and disaffiliation is a good thing. A wider diversity of 
faiths will help everyone appreciate the importance of secularism and 
church-state separation.

It will also temper the theocratic ambitions of politicians: the more 
different factions we have, the more likely it is that they’ll cancel each 
other out so that no one has the power to impose its doctrine on others. For 
skeptics, it means that debunking popular superstition will be aiming at a 
moving target, but I’ll take that over religious hegemony any day.
 