
The Royal Shakespeare Company's 50th anniversary revival of Marat/Sade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/23/marat-sade-anthony-neilson-review?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in Stratford-upon-Avon has prompted mass walkouts.

An average of 30 people a night are reported to have left Anthony Neilson's 
new production of Peter Weiss's play before the end, with one audience member 
describing it as "utter filth and depravity". As well as enactments of 
waterboarding and skin being burnt, Neilson's revival features a simulated 
sodomy with sex toys and the Marquis de Sade being tortured with a stun gun.

Kate Day, a 25-year-old who left during the interval, said: "It was utter 
filth and depravity. The rape scene came just before the interval and many 
people did not return for the second half. There are ways one can stimulate an 
audience with dignity and guile, but this performance lacked any such wit. I 
think they have got it badly wrong. I don't blame people for walking out. They 
took it too far this time."

Set in a mental asylum during the French revolution, Weiss's play shows 
inmates re-enacting the last days of political agitator Jean Paul Marat's life 
under the direction of the Marquis de Sade, a role currently played by Jasper 
Britton.

Peter Brook's original production 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/features/maratsade-the-play-that-began-a-stage-revolution-2365086.html>
 starred Glenda Jackson and is now considered one of the 20th century's seminal 
productions. Though it courted controversy and walkouts during its run at the 
Aldwych theatre in 1964, the production proved a success on Broadway, running 
for 145 performances and winning the Tony award for best new play. Brook later 
directed afilm adaptation <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0060668/>.

The RSC's artistic director, Michael Boyd, defended the production, but 
admitted that it had the potential to cause offence. "It's a controversial play 
because the subjects it explores – insanity, individuality, sexuality, the 
abuse of power, freedom versus control – are just as sensitive today as they 
were in the 1960s.

"Theatre should bring people together and take the risk of sharing 
sensitivities in public," said Boyd.

In his three-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/21/marat-sade-review?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
the Guardian's Michael Billington wrote: "My objection is to the overkill in 
the actual staging. Unable to leave well alone, Neilson bombards us with shock 
effects." Citing Antonin Artaud, the theatre theoretician whose Theatre of 
Cruelty underpins Marat/Sade, Billington dismissed the production as "Artaud 
for Artaud's sake."

A spokesperson for the RSC said: "Everyone who booked was sent a letter in 
advance about the nature of the play, and many people are expressing positive 
comments."
 