
American comedian Margaret Cho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/29/margaret-cho-interview-donald-trump-robin-williams-tina-fey>
 has accused the makers of the new Absolutely Fabulous movie of “yellowface” 
after Scottish actor Janette Tough was cast as a new “Japanese fashion 
designer” character named Huki Muki.

Tough is best known for playing schoolboy Jimmy Krankie in the long-running 
comedy duoThe Krankies <http://krankies.com/>. Cho said she was “very 
disappointed” that producers had not chosen an Asian actor to play the role.

“I love AbFab but #YELLOWFACE is something I cannot watch – I just can’t,” she 
tweeted. “It’s sad when heroes are no longer heroic. Too bad. #racism.”
Margaret Cho (@margaretcho) 
I love AbFab but #YELLOWFACE <https://twitter.com/hashtag/YELLOWFACE?src=hash> 
is something I cannot watch - I just can't. It's sad when heroes are no longer 
heroic. Too bad.#racism <https://twitter.com/hashtag/racism?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676525936523632641> December 14, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676525936523632641> Margaret Cho 
(@margaretcho) 
#YELLOWFACE <https://twitter.com/hashtag/YELLOWFACE?src=hash> is racism. 
Sorry. It's unacceptable. Not now. I was thrilled about#abfabmovie 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/abfabmovie?src=hash> but now I just can't be. I'm 
very disappointed.
 <https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676524635693813760> December 14, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676524635693813760> Margaret Cho 
(@margaretcho) 
We've tried to shame racism out of existence but I guess some people really 
don't care. They're shameless but NOT BLAMELESS.
 <https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676530491437158400> December 14, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676530491437158400> Margaret Cho 
(@margaretcho) 
It's hard enough to get into film and TV as a person of color - and when roles 
written for us are played by white actors - it's an outrage.
 <https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676528372386672640> December 14, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/676528372386672640> 
Why is ‘yellowface’ wrong yet pantomime dames are OK? | Helen Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/yellowface-pantomime-dames-jimmy-krankie-ab-fab>
Cho first tweeted the yellowface accusation on Monday, but has continued to do 
so after coming in for criticism from Twitter trolls. Some accused her of 
racism herself, while others suggested she had deliberately sparked the furore 
to promote her current European tour, which includes two shows in London this 
week.
Margaret Cho (@margaretcho) 
“@Builder2k13 <https://twitter.com/Builder2k13>: @margaretcho 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho> what you have just said is racist by 
mentioning the colour of the person.” Yes I'm racist.
 <https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/677082669084209154> December 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/677082669084209154> Margaret Cho 
(@margaretcho) 
It's interesting how defensive some get when people of color point out racism.
 <https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/677177307728080897> December 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/677177307728080897> Margaret Cho 
(@margaretcho) 
Getting off Twitter for awhile to feed the homeless kids on my block(who 
happen to be white).I'm not racist+I am sickened by the accusation.
 <https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/677179549663240192> December 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/margaretcho/status/677179549663240192> 
The Twitter storm has also sparked debate in the media, with The Guardian’s 
Helen Lewis pondering whether yellowface was any worse than pantomime dames in 
drag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/yellowface-pantomime-dames-jimmy-krankie-ab-fab>
, andThe Telegraph’s Radhika Danghani controversially suggesting 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/ab-fab-film-yellowface-isnt-racist---its-called-acting/>
 that white actors taking Asian roles were merely “acting”.

“It’s hard to judge the Ab Fab movie without even seeing a trailer, but 
looking back at the TV shows, I don’t doubt that Huki Muki will be a 
wonderfully amusing character,” wrote Danghani. “No doubt the role will make 
fun of the fashion industry, Eddie and Patsy – and yes, perhaps even Japan.

“Do we really want to live in a world so politically correct that no races or 
nationalities can be subjected to good-natured humour, and every actor has to 
display the same identity traits as the roles they play?”

Ab Fab: The Movie, shot in October and out on 1 July 2016, is tipped to see 
Jennifer Saunders’ Patsy and Joanna Lumley’s Edina swapping their fashion hound 
London lifestyle for the French Riviera, after being blamed for a major 
incident at a high profile launch party. Julia Sawalha, June Whitfield and Jane 
Horrocks are also returning from the cast of thehit BBC TV sitcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/apr/21/absolutely-fabulous-edina-patsy>
, with fashion figures such as Kate Moss, Lily Cole and Cara Delevingne all 
making cameo appearances.
 