
“At the moment the big fashion is for crime and horror,” comic novelist Marina 
Lewycka <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marinalewycka> tells me over 
coffee and pastries, “but when I go to the pictures and it’s something scary, I 
can hardly watch. I like to be cheered up by things, and it’s not because I 
think the world is OK, it’s because I think the world is so awful.”

Had someone set about imagining what sort of English novelist the daughter of 
Ukrainian refugees, born in a British-run camp in Germany in 1946, might turn 
out to be, it is unlikely they would have guessed right: when we think of 
writers from the former Soviet Union, we are far more likely to think of angst 
than jokes. But over the course of five novels, starting whenA Short History of 
Tractors in Ukrainian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/mar/19/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
 became a wildly unlikely smash hit just over a decade ago, Lewycka has made a 
name for herself in the world of comic fiction. She won the Bollinger Everyman 
Wodehouse prize for comic fiction in 2005 (the prize is a Gloucestershire Old 
Spots pig); the only woman to have won in all its 16 years.

Her latest book, The Lubetkin Legacy, which has been shortlisted  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/23/marina-lewycka-wodehouse-prize-paul-murray-hannah-rothschild-the-lubetkin-legacy>
for the same prize, is out this month and is built around the parallel lives of 
Berthold and Violet, two lonely souls living in the same London block of flats. 
Developers are circling, or rather attacking the cherry trees outside with 
chainsaws, and poor Berthold, a failing actor whose mother Lily has just died, 
is so terrified of being thrown out by the council that he moves another old 
lady in to impersonate her.

“Finding something funny in the bedroom tax was a challenge,” says Lewycka. “I 
suppose it’s a Yorkshire thing, but when things are bad you have to think about 
how to make them funny, because that’s how you survive. So I look for comic 
situations and think: what else could happen that’s really awful?”

Inna, the Ukrainian widow befriended by Lily in hospital, gets to crack the 
novel’s first jokes – a barrage of complaints about “bleddy foreigners”, “Any 
Cheese” (the NHS) and male doctors wearing pink. However, within the homophobic 
xenophobe beats the heart of an ally, and co-crusader against the “under-bed 
tax” and its author: “Mister Indunky Smeet. You know this devil-man?”

As in all Lewycka’s books, many of the jokes are linguistic – malapropisms and 
mispronunciations from characters speaking English as their second language (or 
in her other novels, from children). Such humour would surely not flow so 
readily from the pen of someone who did not have a different mother tongue 
herself: Lewycka learned English at school, and says “being bilingual is very 
good because it makes you listen. My father was a very good linguist but my 
mum’s English was awful. It was quite funny. When we had a bunch of foreigners 
in the house I would secretly listen to them talk, and even when I was quite 
little I’d be thinking that they weren’t speaking proper English.”

Once I thought writing would change the world. Now I think the best thing you 
can do is cheer people up a little bit

But it took a long time for Lewycka, whose first novel was published when she 
was 58, to find her distinctive voice. She studied languages – English, French 
and Russian followed by more English at university – and started a PhD, but had 
30 years of unpublished work, a file full of rejections and a career in PR and 
higher education behind her by the time she signed up for a creative writing 
course. The book she began,A Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian, drew on 
her relationship with her elder sister and the late-life romantic adventures of 
their father.

Earlier attempts at fiction, she says, were stifled by a stuffy narrator. Then 
she discovered the first person, and how to tell a story from the characters’ 
point of view. InTwo Caravans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/apr/01/featuresreviews.guardianreview> 
she used nine voices, including a dog’s, but she now thinks this was overreach, 
and the new novel has just two. Its finest moments are Berthold’s, and include 
him bumping into his nemesis from the council in the Oxfam changing room, his 
mother’s eco-funeral and the day he dresses up as a coffee bean, when the 
jobcentre’s threats escalate to a point where he can no longer turn down work.

Had she been published when she was younger, Lewycka says her fiction would 
have been quite different. “I thought you had to be a proper writer with a 
capital W,” she explains. “I would have been much more serious and 
philosophical, and possibly more modernist – I would have played with forms and 
so on, whereas now I’m very happy to be entertaining. I suppose when I was 
younger I thought writing would change the world, but I don’t think that any 
more. I think the best thing you can do as a writer is to cheer people up a 
little bit for an hour or two.”

Lewycka’s mother, who died before her first book was published, came from a 
bourgeois background but drove a forklift truck under the Soviets. Despite 
having trained as a vet, she never had a career in the UK, but worked 
occasionally as a cleaner. However she was, says Lewycka, “on the whole content 
to be in England, because she thought everywhere else was a lot worse, which 
indeed it was. She could see her daughters getting a good education, and free 
cod liver oil and orange juice – postwar England was great.”

I’m a bit too soppy, I think my books would be much more exciting if I could 
do a straight bad person and real fear

It is Lewycka’s “great pride” that despite her championing of this golden age 
for social democrats, she has featured in the Daily Mail book club twice. She 
thinks subtlety is the key to attracting those who might not share her 
politics, and while that is not the first word that springs to mind when 
reading her bedroom tax satire – with its subplot, stewarded by Violet, 
tackling the equally timely topic of offshore banking – Lewycka wraps her 
messages in her stories and characters with care. Her heroes are flawed, she 
finds anger offputting, and is “not good at doing villains, really,” she says. 
“I’m a bit too soppy, I think my books would be much more exciting if I could 
do a straight bad person and real fear.”

She has spent most of her adult life, as well as part of her childhood, in 
Yorkshire (her former husband was an engineer with the National Union of 
Mineworkers). She currently divides her time between Sheffield and London, 
where her partner is. Her daughter, an epidemiologist, and three grandchildren 
are in New Zealand. But she remains strongly loyal to the north of England, and 
declares herself upset by the growing divide with the south: “When I get off 
the train you can just see how poor everybody is.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmarina-lewycka-finding-something-bedroom-tax-was-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf0a6d6f3412857df932db9dd1f6bbeef69d26e1%2F0_223_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marina%20Lewycka%3A%20%E2%80%98Finding%20something%20funny%20in%20the%20bedroom%20tax%20was%20a%20challenge%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmarina-lewycka-finding-something-bedroom-tax-was-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marina%20Lewycka%3A%20%E2%80%98Finding%20something%20funny%20in%20the%20bedroom%20tax%20was%20a%20challenge%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmarina-lewycka-finding-something-bedroom-tax-was-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf0a6d6f3412857df932db9dd1f6bbeef69d26e1%2F0_223_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Lewycka, centre, discussing herA Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian with a 
reading group in Leicestershire in 2007 Photograph: David Sillitoe for the 
Guardian 
Though Lewycka doesn’t shy away from politics, and was happy to attack the 
financial sector in her previous novel (Various Pets Alive and Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/01/various-pets-alive-marina-lewycka-review>
), as well as this one, she tells me to leave her remarks about teaching public 
relations off the record, before changing her mind: “No, actually you can put 
this on the record. I worked in PR, but I felt it was like teaching the dark 
arts, like black magic – once something is contaminated by it, it can’t be 
cleaned.”

When I ask about the situation in Ukraine there is another outburst as she 
jabs her finger and says, half-ironically, “I blame the media! When a story 
dominates the headlines, people are encouraged to take sides: you know, ‘This 
person’s ghastly, this person’s a saviour’. But now all the people who were 
touted as saviours turn out to have accounts in Panama. Of course Ukraine isn’t 
going to join the EU, of course this lot of gangsters is as bad as the last 
lot, but it’s disappeared from the headlines so people don’t know.”

Various Pets Alive and Dead by Marina Lewycka – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/01/various-pets-alive-marina-lewycka-review>
Her parents were western Ukrainians but she doesn’t toe the anti-Russian line, 
and two years ago wrote anarticle  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/10/ukraine-and-west-hot-air-hypocrisy-crimea-russia>
 in which she declared herself filled with rage and despair at western 
“cynicism and hypocrisy”. In it, she accused Britain and others of playing into 
Putin’s hands and predicted that there would be no civil war. Today she says 
she is “heartbroken” that her country – where she has family, including a 
cousin she talks to about politics via Skype – remains a pawn in the east-west 
game.

When she visits the country, no one knows where to place her. “My Russian 
A-level was an absolute disaster because it means I can speak Russian and 
Ukrainian but can’t really tell which is which – I muddle them up,” she says. 
“Ukrainian is a lot like Russian, but with Hs instead of Gs, so it’s much 
softer-sounding, you’d say ‘Sherlock Holmes’ in Ukrainian but ‘Sherlock Golmes’ 
in Russian. Also the Russians have a way of swallowing some of their 
consonants, which I can’t really do.” The sonorous way she enunciates “Golmes” 
is amusing, but according to her, the funny voice is a one-off: “People invite 
me to things thinking I’m going to be witty and sparkling, and I’m often quite 
shy.”

Not everyone finds Lewycka’s sense of humour appealing. A scathing review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/mar/19/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
 of her first novel in this newspaper accused her of vulgar stereotyping, while
We Are All Made of Glue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jun/28/marina-lewycka-made-glue-review>
, which had an Israel-Palestine theme, wascriticised elsewhere 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/5720962/We-Are-All-Made-of-Glue-by-Marina-Lewycka-review.html>
. She has never matched the success of her prizewinning first book, which sold 
1m copies, but to her disappointment has never been filmed.

Ukraine and the west: hot air and hypocrisy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/10/ukraine-and-west-hot-air-hypocrisy-crimea-russia>
Jokes, she thinks, can’t take too much analysis – it’s a case of observing 
what makes you laugh. Her influences are classics:Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare> (Berthold in the new novel is 
a fan),John Cleese <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-cleese>, Only 
Fools and Horses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/nov/23/only-fools-and-horses-lawson>
. “Comedy is the great gift of the English to civilisation really,” she says.

At 69, Lewycka writes vivdly about ageing human bodies, with their uneven 
colours, odours and shapes (Berthold’s first glimpse of his love interest’s 
legs reveals “ankles swollen with mauve-coloured scabs that looked like flea 
bites. Oh horror!”). She once wrote self-help books for carers, and nursed her 
own mother before she died.

“I met a lot of old people and I really loved them and their bolshiness,” she 
says. “There’s a point when you grow old, when you just give up trying to 
please and be nice. You think, ‘OK, I’ve only got a few years left and I’m just 
going to go for it,’ and that’s a very exciting turning point. I’m nearly 
there.”

• The Lubetkin Legacy by Marina Lewycka is published by Fig Tree at £14.99. To 
order a copy for £11.99 go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/414414/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 