
The actor Marion Cotillard <https://www.theguardian.com/film/marion-cotillard> 
has issued a statement denying involvement in the forthcoming divorce of Brad 
Pitt and Angelina Jolie. Rumours of a relationship between the star of La Vie 
en Rose and Pitt, with whom she appears in upcoming second world war drama 
Allied, began circulating the same day as the announcement and were followed on 
Wednesday by reports that the actor was pregnant.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fallied-brad-pitt-and-marion-cotillard-in-teaser-for-second-world-war-thriller-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allied%3A%20Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Marion%20Cotillard%20in%20teaser%20for%20second%20world%20war%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fallied-brad-pitt-and-marion-cotillard-in-teaser-for-second-world-war-thriller-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allied%3A%20Brad%20Pitt%20and%20Marion%20Cotillard%20in%20teaser%20for%20second%20world%20war%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fallied-brad-pitt-and-marion-cotillard-in-teaser-for-second-world-war-thriller-video&media=>
Allied: Brad Pitt and Marion Cotillard in teaser for second world war thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/12/allied-brad-pitt-and-marion-cotillard-in-teaser-for-second-world-war-thriller-video>
Writing on Instagram, Cotillard said she was “not used to commenting on things 
like this nor taking them seriously but as this situation is spiraling and 
affecting people I love, I have to speak up”. She wished the “media and the 
haters” a “swift recovery” and highlighted the hurt their conjecture was having 
on herself and her husband, the actor and directorGuillaume Canet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/08/marion-cotillard-guillaume-canet-cannes>
, with whom she is expecting her second child.

Cotillard concluded by extending her thoughts to Pitt and Jolie, “both of whom 
I deeply respect” and saying she hoped they “find peace in this very tumultuous 
moment”.

This is going to be my first and only reaction to the whirlwind news that 
broke 24 hours ago and that I was swept up into. I am not used to commenting on 
things like this nor taking them seriously but as this situation is spiraling 
and affecting people I love, I have to speak up. Firstly, many years ago, I met 
the man of my life, father of our son and of the baby we are expecting. He is 
my love, my best friend, the only one that I need. Secondly to those who have 
indicated that I am devastated, I am very well thank you. This crafted 
conversation isn't distressing. And to all the media and the haters who are 
quick to pass judgment, I sincerely wish you a swift recovery. Finally, I do 
very much wish that Angelina and Brad, both whom I deeply respect, will find 
peace in this very tumultuous moment. With all my love Marion Ceci sera la 
première et seule réaction que j'aurai concernant la déferlante inouïe qui à 
commencé il y a de ça 24 heures et à laquelle je suis mêlée malgré moi. Je n'ai 
pas pour habitude de commenter ni de prendre au sérieux le tas d'absurdités 
déversées à mon sujet mais la situation prenant une telle tournure et affectant 
des gens que j'aime, je me dois de m'exprimer. Pour commencer, j'ai rencontré 
il y a quelques années l'homme de ma vie , le père de notre fils et du bébé que 
nous attendons aujourd'hui. Il est mon amour, mon meilleur ami et le seul homme 
dont j'ai besoin. Ensuite, à ceux qui me prétendent dévastée, je vais très bien 
merci. Ce genre d'inventions aberrantes ne m'affecte en aucun cas. Et pour 
finir, à la "presse", à tous les haters, trolls et consorts qui ont le jugement 
si rapide je vous souhaite sincèrement... un prompt rétablissement. Ceci dit et 
un peu plus sérieusement, je souhaite à Angelina et Brad, deux personnes pour 
qui j'ai un profond respect, de trouver la paix dans ce moment tumultueux. Avec 
tout mon amour. Marion <https://www.instagram.com/p/BKowf3pghWl/>

A photo posted by @marioncotillard on Sep 21, 2016 at 4:43pm PDT

Jolie issued  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/angelina-jolie-files-for-divorce-brad-pitt>
divorce proceedings against Pitt on Tuesday, citing irreconcilable differences. 
The couple married in 2014, having already been together a decade. They have 
six children.
 