
Booking now


■ Marina Abramović: 512 Hours Mindfulness – part meditation, part cognitive 
brain therapy – is the mantra of our times – even the legendary Serbian 
performance artist has adopted it, installing her new exhibition (herself) at 
the Serpentine Gallery six days a week for the duration of the summer. Prepare 
to queue to take part in her site-specific work and "leave your baggage" (in 
every sense) behind.
Serpentine Gallery, London (020-7402 6075), 11 June to 25 August. 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/marina-abramovic-512-hours>

■ Hansel and Gretel "Impossible to be bored" is our northern correspondent's 
take on Lancaster's magical annual promenade performances in Williamson Park. 
This year's al fresco show promises outwitted witches, edible houses and more 
tales from the forest under the shadow of the park's 45m (150ft) Ashton 
Memorial.
Williamson Park, Lancaster (01524 598500), 4 July to 16 August. 
<http://www.citycoastcountryside.co.uk/whats-on/hansel-and-gretel-p717080>

■ Haitink does Bruckner One of the world's greatest conductors, now 
celebrating his 85th year, Bernard Haitink takes on Bruckner's extraordinary 
and immense eighth symphony with the London Symphony Orchestra. An unmissable 
evening led by a musician who has delivered some of the finest Bruckner 
interpretations on record.
Barbican, London (020-7638 8891), 23 October. 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=15796> 

Last chance to see

■ Twelve Angry Men Reginald Rose's 1954 courtroom drama has enjoyed a long 
life from screen to stage and back again, but Bill Kenwright's West End 
production, starring Tom Conti in the Henry Fonda film role (and with strong 
support from Jeff Fahey) has only a week left to run. Deliver your verdicts now.
Garrick Theatre, London (0844-482 9673), until 14 June. 
<http://www.garrick-theatre.co.uk/Twelve-Angry-Men.html>
 