
When Mark Ruffalo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-ruffalo> initially 
broke on to the scene, his nervy awkwardness didn’t scream out, “Please cast me 
in a superhero movie.” But when playing the socially challenged Bruce Banner, 
whose unhinged temperament leads to his transformations into the Hulk, 
Ruffalo’s shiftiness becomes a major selling point.

In this week’s Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, Ruffalo returns 
to the greenest green screen in the business, to alternate between brooding and 
smashing. If you miss Ruffalo just being Ruffalo, without any CG help, here are 
his five best moments.

You Can Count on Me
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXP71dJlnLJQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXP71dJlnLJQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXP71dJlnLJQ&media=>
Ruffalo began acting in the mid-90s but his career was properly launched in 
2000, when he acted against an Oscar-nominatedLaura Linney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/laura-linney> in Kenneth Lonergan’s 
beautifully observed drama You Can Count on Me. He plays the wayward brother to 
Linney’s more settled (at least on the surface) sister, and his hometown return 
causes tension, but also the chance to repair a fractured relationship. This 
scene sets up their dynamic quite perfectly.

The Kids Are All Right
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCx6vherOjqs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCx6vherOjqs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCx6vherOjqs&media=>
Ruffalo received his first Oscar nomination for his performance as a carefree 
womaniser who is forced to grow up when he finds out that he’s a father. 
Ruffalo’s easygoing persona matches the character perfectly, especially when 
he’s playing against Annette Bening’s more structured maternal character. In 
this scene, we see her deal with his disparaging thoughts on education with 
passive-aggressive panache.

The Normal Heart
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKDTFz1h4GY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKDTFz1h4GY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKDTFz1h4GY&media=>
Last year, Ruffalo nabbed a much-deserved Golden Globe nomination for his 
performance in this powerful HBO movie about the rise of HIV in 80s New York. 
He plays a gay writer who desperately tries to open people’s eyes to the 
crisis. In this integral scene, he confronts his straight brother, played by
Alfred Molina <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfred-molina>, and tries to 
make him admit that they are just the same.

Begin Again
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BKWjNTpFSY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BKWjNTpFSY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BKWjNTpFSY&media=>
As a drunken yet charming A&R man trying to sign a talented yet suspicious 
singer, Ruffalo effortlessly gets us on his side in last year’s underrated 
music drama Begin Again. His chemistry withKeira Knightley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/keiraknightley> is finely developed and, as 
expected, the songs are stellar. In this scene, the two flirt and debate over 
authenticity in the industry.

Foxcatcher
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DterNLBrMA2w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DterNLBrMA2w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DterNLBrMA2w&media=>
A second Oscar nomination came Ruffalo’s way earlier this year for his 
supporting role in Bennett Miller’s chilly psychodrama. He plays the concerned 
older brother of Channing Tatum’s vulnerable wrestler, who becomes involved 
with a bizarre wrestling academy led by Steve Carell’s unstable 
multi-milllionaire. Ruffalo has the least showy part, but he disappears into 
his tragic character with ease, as seen in this short clip.
 