
My friend and colleague the photographer Martin Jenkinson has died of cancer 
aged 64. Martin was a former steelworker whose love of photography combined 
with his politics and his belief in social justice, fairness and equality. He 
was responsible for some of the most striking images to have emerged from 
political and industrial struggle in Britain over the last 30 years.

Martin captured steelworkers as they fought for survival, and was the official 
photographer on the People's March for Jobs, in 1981. He was commissioned by 
the National Union of Mineworkers' newspapers the Miner and the Yorkshire 
Miner, and was at the heart of the epic strike against pit closures of 1984-85.

His enduring images include the arrest of Arthur Scargill 
<http://martinjenkinson.photoshelter.com/image?&_bqG=6&_bqH=eJwLLK.stDQp9S0JtjC09Mo3CPUNzgssDq8ydCu2MrcyMjWwMjQAAivPeJdgZ9vi5MSi9MycHDUwN97Rz8W2BMgODXYNivd0sQ0FKfVxyiswCws1cI1MV4t3dA6xLS0uCk5NLErOUHMHKXIHKQqsiEpNKclIq_JJVnMGiTqDRFOLUrzK03IzMpMcAfjTL0M-&GI_ID=>
; the launch of the Women Against Pit Closures movement; and a smiling pit 
striker named Geordie Brealey wearing a toy policeman's helmet as he "inspects" 
battalions of police officers lined up against pickets at Orgreave cokeworks.

He was also commissioned by many other unions, notably the National Union of 
Teachers, to cover their conferences, galas and other events. An active member 
of theNational Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists>, he served on 
its national executive committee. I knew Martin through his union work and my 
own job as industrial reporter with the Yorkshire Evening Post in the 1980s and 
90s. We later worked together on freelance projects.

Martin was born in the Wormwood Scrubs area of west London. His father, 
Leonard, was an electrician and his mother, Anita, did secretarial work. He 
lived in Watford until he was 19 and then spent seven years in Cheltenham. He 
worked in various jobs, including as an apprentice mechanic, warehouseman, 
factory worker, service station attendant and lorry driver.
 Martin Jenkinson worked as a photographer for several unions 
He married Edwina in 1966. Ten years later, they moved to Sheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> with their daughter, Justine, and 
Martin worked in a wire-making factory where he became deputy convenor with the 
Amalgamated Engineering Union.

After being made redundant in 1979, he served a year-long employment placement 
on a local newspaper.Photography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> had been his hobby in 
Cheltenham; in Sheffield it became his profession. When the placement ended he 
turned freelance.

Martin's work appeared in many national newspapers, including the Guardian. He 
was as proud of his portraits and artistic work as of his images of struggle. A 
portrait he took of Scargill was chosen for the National Portrait Gallery 
exhibition Faces of the Century in 1999. He also mounted ambitious personal 
projects such as A Land With People: A Report from Occupied Palestine, 
co-produced in the early 1980s with the deputy editor of theMorning Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/morning-star> newspaper, David Whitfield. 
More recently, he and I covered the strike by three million public service 
workers in November 2011. He leaves an unequalled archive of images and 
documents, which it is hoped will be exhibited.

He is survived by Edwina and Justine, his parents and his brothers, Gerry and 
Jim.
 