 Labour MP Michael Martin looks set to succeed Betty Boothroyd as Speaker of 
the House of Commons after his main rival, Sir George Young, was rejected by 
317 to 241 votes.
Confirmation of Mr Martin's victory will come later this evening when the 
House completes debating the remaining candidates. None are thought likely to 
overtake Mr Martin.

Earlier, Gywneth Dunwoody joined the list of candidates ruled out of the 
contest. She was defeated by 341 votes to 170. Liberal Democrat MPAlan Beith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-beith> was rejected by 409 votes to 
83 and one of the current deputy speakers, Sir Alan Haselhurst, by 345 votes to 
140.

Opening the debate, the father of the House, Sir Edward Heath, presiding over 
the election, angered MPs by insisting that the chamber uses the existing 
electoral system, which has come in for widespread criticism.

He explained that he believed his powers did not extend to changing the 
system. But he expressed "sympathy" for the views of the many MPs who have 
asked for reform.

Conservative MP Andrew Tyrie claimed there was a majority for a change in the 
rules. "We make our own rules in this House," he argued.

Former education minister Gillian Shephard said the "unprecedented number of 
contenders for the Speakership" justified a change.

Many MPs backed a two-stage system, proposed by Tony Benn before the contest 
got under way. They pressed for Sir Edward to allow a vote on whether or not to 
use it, but he refused.

However, Sir Edward did announce the order in which possible Speakers would be 
nominated, as follows: Michael Martin, Sir Alan Haselhurst, Alan Beith,Gwyneth 
Dunwoody <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gwynethdunwoody>, Sir George 
Young, Menzies Campbell, David Clark, Nicholas Winterton, John McWilliam, 
Michael Lord, Sir Patrick Cormack, Richard Shepherd.
 