
America’s National Theatre in Washington is not so well known as its British 
counterpart,despite a long history <http://thenationaldc.org/history> – 
President Abraham Lincoln watched his future assassin John Wilkes Booth play 
Richard III there – and its proximity to the White House on Pennsylvania Avenue.

But when Martin Charnin 
<http://www.playbill.com/person/martin-charnin-vault-0000000114> brings his 
evergreen showAnnie to the theatre on Tuesday night 
<http://thenationaldc.org/events/category/series/annie>, the memories will come 
roaring back.It was on this stage 59 years ago 
<http://blogs.weta.org/boundarystones/2014/06/16/night-west-side-story-opened-washington>
, when Dwight Eisenhower was president, that he appeared in the first 
performance of a musical unlike anything the world had seen before: West Side 
Story.

In his early 20s, Charnin studied art at university and had no training as an 
actor, dancer or singer. But a week and a half after his graduation, he spotted 
an open call ad for the untried show in the New York Times and went up against 
about 2,000 other hopefuls.

Director Jerome Robbins “was looking for authentic juvenile delinquents and I 
thought I could be one of them,” he recalled. “It was astonishing. I had never 
done a musical before and to this day I have no idea why I got the role. I 
guess I was eccentric. I made Arthur [Laurents] laugh when I read some of the 
lines he gave me to do.”

Inspired by Romeo and Juliet, the story of rival gangs, the Jets and the 
Sharks, on New York’s Upper West Side was a unique collaboration:book 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_(musical_theatre)> by Arthur Laurents 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Laurents>, music by Leonard Bernstein 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonard_Bernstein>, lyrics 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lyrics> by Stephen Sondheim 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Sondheim> and choreography by Robbins 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerome_Robbins>. “It had never been done,” 
Charnin said. “It had never been tried out. It was in Jerry, Stephen, Oscar and 
Lenny’s heads. They’d gone into rehearsal in May minus one Jet and I was the 
Jet that they hired in June.

“I learned at the feet of the masters. The thrill was to be taught how to 
articulate vowels and how to sing certain notes in a specific way by Bernstein. 
That was really a treat.”

Charnin took part in one of the show’s wittiest numbers, Gee Officer Krupke! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j7TT4jnnWys>, in which the Jets parody a 
police officer. “I was the first person who ever said ‘Krup you!’ on the 
American stage. I was one of Stephen and Lenny’s most articulate singers. I was 
able to really end my D’s and T’s in my words and that articulation was very 
important, particularly in a number like Krupke where you’re going a mile in a 
minute.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj7TT4jnnWys&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj7TT4jnnWys>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj7TT4jnnWys&media=>
West Side Story <https://www.theguardian.com/film/west-side-story> would soon 
transfer to Broadway and be turned into a classic movie and is still performed 
on stages around the world. But back in hot and humid Washington in 1957, none 
of this was assured and few guessed a theatrical earthquake had begun.

Charnin, a New Yorker, recalled: “Usually what happens in a musical out of 
town is a song is thrown out and a new one is written, but Jerry was working on 
dance moves and little detailed things that he wanted to make sure worked. The 
audience was a tad baffled because nothing like it had ever occurred before. 
The story was being told through the dances and this was the first time it had 
ever happened.

“I think the score is just astonishing to this day and everything else just 
pales by comparison. Even things that I’ve written. I just adored West Side, I 
loved doing it. I did it for a thousand performances and then I began to write.”

He embarked on a prolific career as a lyricist and director in theatre and 
television and is best known for Annie in 1977. Set in the Great Depression, it 
was based on an anthology of theHarold Gray 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harold_Gray> comic strip 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comic_strip> Little Orphan Annie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Orphan_Annie> he bought as a Christmas 
present from the now defunctDoubleday book store 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1997/06/17/nyregion/another-fifth-ave-bookshop-is-felled-by-high-rents.html?pagewanted=all>
 on New York’s Fifth Avenue.

“I guess when you’re in the business of making musicals, you look for ideas, 
you look for source material anywhere,” he commented. “At that particular 
moment in time all of Dickens had been taken, it all had been musicalised. If 
I’d found it in a bubblegum wrapper I guess I’d have tried to get the rights to 
it. I read that book before I gave it away and ultimately ended up not giving 
it away, I was so taken by Harold Gray’s original drawings.”


Annie won the Tony award for best musical. Some 700 to 900 productions of the 
show run each year in the US alone,according to a New York Times report in 2012 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/09/theater/annie-cinderella-and-matilda-come-to-broadway.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1>
, and it comes to Washington on 15-20 March as part of a national tour. Charnin 
said it is especially popular in Japan and he has recordings of the song 
Tomorrow in Japanese, Hebrew, Portuguese, Spanish, Romanian and Greek.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9_dBep_55mI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9_dBep_55mI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9_dBep_55mI&media=>
His first production of Annie cost $800,000; this one is upwards of $4m. He 
has written eight new lines of lyrics. “The fun of it for me is that every time 
I do it, I learn something new about it, and in theory every production that 
precedes the one I’m doing makes the one I’m doing the beneficiary of the stuff 
that I’ve learned. So it keeps growing, it keeps changing.

“But the most important thing from my standpoint is maintaining the root. One 
can say if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it, and that’s basically what this 
production is, even though it does indeed have a brand new set, a lot of new 
orchestration, a totally new company like any new production I’ve ever done, 
which is why I like doing them.”

He enjoys watching productions by school and amateur groups because they tend 
to be true to his original vision. “They interpret it, they don’t reinterpret 
it. If it loses its heart, if it loses its soul and it loses basically its 
story, then I can’t watch it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fmartin-charnin-interview-annie-west-side-story%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3b5203c0113dea06dac831aeafbdbc47d49fcb%2F0_68_700_421%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20Charnin%3A%20he%20wrote%20Annie%2C%20but%20he%20is%20forever%20a%20Jet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fmartin-charnin-interview-annie-west-side-story%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20Charnin%3A%20he%20wrote%20Annie%2C%20but%20he%20is%20forever%20a%20Jet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fmartin-charnin-interview-annie-west-side-story%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb3b5203c0113dea06dac831aeafbdbc47d49fcb%2F0_68_700_421%2F700.jpg>
 The Jets in West Side Story, Charnin third from right. Photograph: Supp 
Charnin was not so impressed by three movie versions made in 1982, 1999 and 
2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/21/annie-review-quvenzhane-wallis-saves-the-day>
, with actors includingAlbert Finney 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001215/?ref_=tt_cl_t1> and Carol Burnett 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000993/?ref_=tt_cl_t2>, Kathy Bates and Alan 
Cumming, andJamie Foxx <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0004937/?ref_=tt_cl_t1> and 
Cameron Diaz <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000139/?ref_=tt_cl_t7>. “The first 
one was OK. The second one made no sense because they did some really bizarre 
things. The third one was a contemporisation – they brought it into the year 
2014 in order to make it something that it really isn’t.

“We wrote a Depression musical and the whole idea was that those doldrums and 
problems very much in evidence before Franklin Roosevelt created the New Deal 
is what the subtext of the play is all about. So when you take it out, you’re 
cutting the fourth wheel off the wagon. It doesn’t work.”

Broadway, not Hollywood, appears to be Charnin’s natural home. He is upbeat 
about the state of theatre, with one important reservation. “I think it’s in 
terrific shape because when you stop and think that on the same street you can 
doHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
 and two theatres away you can do Sweeney Todd and two theatres away from that 
you can do Annie and two theatres away you can doOn Your Feet! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/05/on-your-feet-review-gloria-estefan-musical>
, the Gloria Estefan musical. It’s quite a smorgasbord and it’s always been 
like that. When that is happening we’re all enriched by it.

“The one thing I’m carping about, and I think everybody is, is the price of 
the tickets, which keep climbing. The more inaccessible that the producing 
organisations make it, the more they’re going to make it impossible for the 
theatre to really continue in the way that it should on Broadway. The theatre 
is thriving; the only problem is that it’s costing a hell of a lot of money – 
more money that it really should.”

Charnin, now a grandfather past his 80th birthday, lives in Westchester 
County, New York. This is the 19th time he has directed Annie, which might be 
some kind of record. But asked if he has any plans to retire, he is adamant: 
“Oh God no, I still have shows to write and direct.” Or to put it another way:

When you’re a Jet,
You’re a Jet all the way 
From your first cigarette 
To your last dyin’ day.
 