
Well, it’s happening: Disney has confirmed that in true millennial fashion 
they’ll be remaking Mary Poppins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/14/mary-poppins-to-be-remade-by-disney>
, and there’s nothing any of us can do about it.

But maybe it won’t be as bad as some of us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/commentisfree/2015/sep/15/mary-poppins-disney-film-remake-pl-travers-book>
 (hello) are anticipating. After all,this year’s Cinderella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/26/cinderella-review-kenneth-branagh-cate-blanchett>
 remake warmed our hearts, minds and tear ducts, so maybe with the right cast 
we can look past the fact that this Rob Marshall-directed installment will take 
place 20 years after the original (thus making the infamous run on the bank 
seem like a weird precursor to the second world war or something but hey, look, 
that’s fine), and set our sights on victory.

Mary Poppins: not sugary, but sharp and subversive – on the page and the screen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/commentisfree/2015/sep/15/mary-poppins-disney-film-remake-pl-travers-book>
So who’d be the ideal Mary Poppins candidate? Well, despite Mary being painted 
as another version of Maria Von Trapp – namely becauseJulie Andrews starred in 
The Sound of Music the year before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/02/sound-of-music-at-50> – 
don’t let us forget Ms Poppins’ ability to throw some serious shade. Girlfriend 
dealt harsh truths with major side-eye on a regular basis (cue her slightly 
judgmental “hmm”), so whoever plays her needs to maintain a mix of kindness and 
edge.

My picks? Anne Hathaway <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anne-hathaway> (she 
can hold her own – don’t bring your Hathaway hate here),Emily Blunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emily-blunt> or Amy Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy-adams>. Especially since all three have 
proven their vocal strengths in other musical endeavours – particularlyAmy 
Adams in Enchanted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/dec/14/family.animation>, one of the 
most underrated roles ever to exist. Alternately? Idina Menzel and Kristen 
Bell. Because the power ofFrozen  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/frozen>
compels us.

Does the Mary Poppins sequel sound like something quite atrocious?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2015/sep/15/new-mary-poppins-movie-disney-sequel-anne-hathaway>
As for Burt the chimney sweep? (Will he still be a chimney sweep in the 1930s? 
Also: what aboutthe suffragette song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kvk1NZDFvZU>? Is that just over, now? How is 
that going to work two decades after the fact? Anyway.) Considering Burt 
harboured a playfulness that bordered on flirtiness (which also managed to fly 
completely over our heads as kids – a true art), whoever takes on his role will 
have to do the same, unless we’re about to see a rom-com installment of this 
English tale for children. Which, let’s be honest, would be a nightmare.

Therefore, I suggest these: Neil Patrick Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/16/best-time-ever-neil-patrick-harris-saturday-takeaway>
 (original, clearly),Hugh Jackman  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2014/nov/11/hugh-jackman-on-stage-from-oklahoma-to-the-river-in-pictures>
(obviously) orMark Ruffalo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/24/mark-ruffalo-five-best-moments-film-avengers-age-of-ultron>
. Why? Because Ruffalo has cornered the market in approachable loveliness, and 
surely could master a Cockney accent if it meant making his children proud. 
(Also because Ruffalo should be in everything.) And the last thing we need is a 
gritty, emotionally upsetting instalment of Mary Poppins starring Daniel 
Day-Lewis whose life as a chimney sweep has turned him into the shadow of the 
man he once was.

Although thinking about it, I would totally watch a movie like that.
 