
Massive Attack have announced a special collaboration 
<http://www.mif.co.uk/event/massive-attack-v-adam-curtis> with the film-maker 
Adam Curtis for this year's Manchester international festival. Massive Attack v 
Adam Curtis – described by the band's Robert del Naja as "a collective 
hallucination" – will run for eight performances between 4 July and 13 July, at 
a venue specified only as "city centre".

Given Curtis has said his favourite theme is "power and how it works in 
society", and that he is arguably best known for the Bafta-winningThe Power of 
Nightmares <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/oct/15/broadcasting.bbc>, it 
seems likely his work with Massive Attack – known for the oppressive, paranoid 
nature of their recordings – will extend to more than providing some nice 
videos for their stage show.

Though MIF is offering no information about the content of the collaboration, 
it seems likely that it will appeal to conspiracy theorists given Curtis's one 
statement on the show: "A musical entertainment about the power of illusion and 
the illusion of power."

However, other hands will be at work for the show. Felix Barrett, the artistic 
director ofPunchdrunk <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/punchdrunk> – the 
theatre company known for its "immersive" approach to performance, in which 
audience members are encouraged to wander around a large site – is involved. 
Punchdrunk have previously taken the showsIt Felt Like a Kiss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jul/03/manchester-international-festival>
 – a collaboration with Curtis – andThe Crash of the Elysium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jul/03/punchdrunk-doctor-who-review> to 
MIF. Its involvement suggests "city centre" means the event will take place 
across a large area, rather than in a city-centre hall. The award-winning 
designer Es Devlin is also on board.

Tickets for Massive Attack v Adam Curtis plus previously announced MIF13 
events such as Macbeth and the xx in residence go on sale at 10am on 1 February 
viamif.co.uk <http://www.mif.co.uk> or by phone on 0844 375 2013.

The Guardian is the media partner for Manchester international festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/manchester-international-festival>.

This article was modified on 4 February to note that Es Devlin is working as a 
designer, not a costume designer, on this show.
 