
Back in May 1991, Massive Attack released a groundbreaking single called Safe 
from Harm <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PKtTmZnVhhI>. It merged sampled 
beats, a definably British rap style and a stirring soul vocal into a radical 
musical collage that resonates throughout pop music to this day. Twenty-two 
years later, the song's title has also become a kind of shorthand for the 
central theme of the group's most ambitious project to date: their imminent 
live collaboration at Manchester international festival with the radical 
documentary film-makerAdam Curtis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis>.

"We are exploring a subject that has long interested us both and that we have 
been talking about, on and off, for two years," says Curtis, whose vision is 
driving the project, at least untilMassive Attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack> step on to the stage. "It 
concerns the rise of the modern ideology that we now live in, which is 
essentially managerial. We increasingly live in a world run by modern 
technocrats, whether government thinktanks or data analysts or terror experts 
or the big global internet companies that use algorithms to tell us what we 
want. They are all predicting the future through the data they collect on us, 
and which they then use as evidence to protect us from a future of risk. The 
whole idea, to quote a famous pop band, is to keep us safe from harm."

Curtis sees this increasingly managed society as an extension of "a deeply 
conservative ideology that says it is deeply dangerous to try and change the 
world and thus makes us afraid of moving forward into an uncertain, but 
possibly better, future".
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyv_S8GdylEA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyv_S8GdylEA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyv_S8GdylEA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yv_S8GdylEA>

Billed simply as Massive Attack v Adam Curtis 
<http://www.mif.co.uk/event/massive-attack-v-adam-curtis>, in the manner of an 
old school reggae or hip-hop sound system clash, the multimedia performance, 
which Curtis calls a "gilm" – a cross between a gig and a film – will elaborate 
on these arguments, both conceptually and in terms of the narrative arc of his 
latest film. Its working title, borrowed from a Russian protest song of the 
1980s, isEverything Is Going According to Plan. It is clear that he aims to 
surprise and provoke on a grand scale. Eight shows are scheduled to take place 
in the giant Mayfield Depot, a disused industrial site in central Manchester 
that has just had its walls reinforced to withstand the bass-heavy pulse of 
Massive Attack's music.

If all this sounds like a tall order even for a "gilm", one senses that Curtis 
thrives on this sort of challenge and that he has infected Massive Attack's 
mainman, Robert "3D" Del Naja, with his boundless enthusiasm and the sheer 
audacity of his vision. I meet them both in the lobby of Conway Hall, the 
headquarters of the Ethical Society, and we settle in a drably functional back 
room there. The venue has been chosen by Curtis because it is close to his home 
in Holborn, central London and because it is an apt setting for a discussion 
that returns again and again to the debased state of contemporary democracy.

Anyone familiar with his previous films – from The Century of the Self (2002), 
which looked at how Freud's theory of the unconscious was hijacked by the 
advertising industry, toAll Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2011/may/21/adam-curtis-all-watched-over>
 (2011), which argued that computers have made us less interested in, and more 
ignorant of, the world around us – will recognise this current collaboration as 
another variation on a familiar theme: the invisible forces that shape our 
worldview. Or as Curtis puts it: "It attempts to explain how we have arrived at 
this rigid, ultra-conservative world we now all find ourselves in and that we 
have not yet really seen for what it is."

Curtis's targets include the western elites, who want the existing power 
structures to remain in place, modern technocrats and both the left and the 
liberal media for their inability to suggest a viable alternative, even in the 
wake of the financial collapse of 2008. "I am so bored with investigative 
journalism because it keeps telling me what I know is happening, and everyone 
knows it's happening and everyone shrugs it off. It's the same safe-from-harm 
ideology that the internet also shores up – it's best to just accept this 
insubstantial, rather corrupted world where no one really believes in anything 
any longer except themselves and their friends."

Unlike the many other pop acts that now use cut-up imagery projected on giant 
videos to enhance their songs, Massive Attack's live performance will be a 
central element of the narrative of Curtis's film. It is an inspired pairing: 
Curtis's signature cut-and-sample style of politically informed film-making 
soundtracked live by a group who deployed a similar kind of aesthetic, culled 
from American hip-hop, to energise British pop in the early 90s. The man behind 
the collaboration isAlex Poots 
<http://www.mif.co.uk/news/2013/05/25/the-guardian-online-features-alex-poots-video-interview>
, the visionary director of the Manchester festival, who specialises in 
bringing creative mavericks together and giving them free rein.

"As soon as 3D mentioned that he would like to work with Adam in 2009," he 
says, "it seemed to me like the most obvious choice for a new kind of exciting 
and politically engaged live event. What I noticed early on is that they are 
both producers of a kind. They take different elements and meld them together, 
visually and sonically. There is that sense of collage in each of their styles, 
but also a shared sense of curiosity about the world we live in and the real 
power that is swirling around us and, in a way, controlling us.

"Right now, they are grappling with a way of creating a performance that 
merges a concert and a film and, simultaneously, illustrates that mysterious 
world. If it works, and I think it will, people will be both surprised and 
stimulated. It will not be like any other gig that you have experienced, that's 
for sure."

In person, Curtis and 3D come across as an unlikely double act: one a hip 
Bristolian rapper whose often tangential thoughts are expressed in flurries; 
the other a cherubic, Oxford-educated intellectual whose ideas and theories 
come flowing out of him in a torrent of perfectly articulated sentences. You 
can sense that 3D, whose group is not best known for its prodigious work rate, 
is sometimes slightly fazed by Curtis's creative momentum and the sheer breadth 
and depth of his knowledge. Curtis, on the other hand, seems bemused by the 
free-form approach of the self-made musician who has turned Massive Attack into 
a politically aware group in a pop era defined by the absence of the same. 
("Pop stars!" Curtis mutters at one point, eyebrows raised, as the press 
officer informs us that 3D is late because his driver is stuck in traffic.)

"I'm a huge fan of Adam's films," says 3D, Massive Attack's songwriter and 
ideas man, "and I recognised early on that he was a different kind of 
storyteller, who was cutting and sampling old footage in a surprising way that 
was similar to how we made our music back in the day. We were both using 
elements of the past to say something new and vibrant."

He pauses for a moment to marshal his thoughts. "I have to say that, for a 
long time, our live shows, however much we tried to make them about the here 
and now, always lacked something for me. From working with Adam, I have 
realised that what was missing was a narrative of some kind that brought people 
in and made them see things differently or helped join the dots about the world 
we live in. That's what his films did for me and that's what we both want this 
project to do for everyone who comes and sees it."

Neither Curtis nor 3D seem perturbed by the fact that, with just two weeks to 
go to its much-anticipated premiere in Manchester, the outline of their 
vaultingly ambitious joint project is still taking shape somewhat slowly. 
"We'll get there," says 3D, shrugging, "and when we do, I think people will be 
genuinely surprised."

Both are understandably reluctant to say too much about the show's structure 
and content lest the element of first-night surprise is sacrificed. What I can 
reveal, though, is that Massive Attack's set will be almost entirely comprised 
of cover versions, which will include the aforementioned song,Everything Is 
Going According to Plan <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DDCDsKHCE8s>, 
originally recorded by the Russian musician and anarchistYegor Letov 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/apr/23/obituaries.russia>, as well as a 
Barbra Streisand standard, a Serbian punk song and a real old school classic by 
Bartok.

Curtis describes the film as "an overall narrative that consists of lots of 
smaller individual stories that take you through it in often surprising ways". 
One of those tales is about the British pop artistPauline Boty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2013/apr/27/pauline-boty-pictures>
 and her daughter. "The stories take you through US, Britain, Afghanistan, 
Russia over the last 40 years and there are characters in each story that 
interweave," he elaborates. "We now live in a world which is driven by the 
ideas from the past to such an extent that it makes it difficult to imagine 
another world that has never existed, because you can't. You become possessed 
by the ghosts of the past though the images of the past."

A tantalising trailer promises an even more surprising onscreen supporting 
cast that includes "Donald and Ivana Trump, Nicolae and Elena Ceausescu, Jane 
Fonda and Ted Turner,Hamid Karzai <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/hamid-karzai>
 and his brothers, everyone in Goldman Sachs who made a killing in 2008, the 
neutron bomb, the Siberian punk movement, Bambi and all your worst fears". Add 
to this the guiding presence of immersive theatre pioneersPunchdrunk 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/punchdrunk> and longtime Massive Attack 
collaboratorsUnited Visual Artists <http://www.uva.co.uk/about/biography>, as 
well as the influential stage designerEs Devlin <http://esdevlin.com/>, and the 
show looks even more ambitious than Curtis's film for the 2009 Manchester 
festival,It Felt Like a Kiss 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2009/jun/20/it-felt-like-a-kiss>, for which 
Damon Albarn composed the soundtrack.

How, though, will Curtis and 3D avoid becoming an example of the very thing 
they are critiquing – another staged spectacle in which style triumphs over 
content and everyone goes home quite contented? "Oh, we have a few surprises in 
store on that front, too," says Curtis, mischievously. "I think we both know 
that the approach that we each, in our different ways, made our names with is 
now commonplace. That is what is truly amazing about the modern system – the 
way that it appropriates everything with ease.

"When each of us started out, we were trying to offer an alternative way of 
looking at the world, but now the cut-up is just another tool for the system. 
It is applied to images, numbers, advertising. In that process, anything can be 
used to mean anything just by cutting and juxtaposing. What we are saying is 
that we are guilty to a degree, too, but we are also offering an alternative 
way out."

Which is? "We're not telling you. You'll just have to wait and see."

I ask 3D if pop music, however radical its intentions, is now simply another 
lifestyle choice in this managed world that his collaborator has identified. 
"Well, it's actually very hard these days to break out of a pop system that you 
are just participating in. Increasingly, as a performer, whether on stage or in 
a press interview or on a TV show, you are just participating in a system that 
is essentially about entertaining, but never changing anything. It's not really 
what someone like me, who was so informed by the politics of punk, wanted to 
ever become. But that is where we live now and I guess this show is asking 
questions about that, too."

What, then, do they want their collaboration to achieve?

"I just think we all need to be more alert and aware about what is going on," 
says 3D. "It's an uncertain, very fast-moving time and we are all so busy 
self-managing on social media. It's like we're being swept up in something that 
is about controlling rather than liberating us."

Adam Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/adam-curtis> nods in 
agreement. "What we are saying is: come into this enchanting two-dimensional 
world that we have created, but by the time you leave, you will have hopefully 
realised that it is not just enchanting but a prison. And beyond that prison, 
there is a bigger world outside. The best way for us to do that is to tell a 
story. That's what we are doing, really, telling another kind of story. A ghost 
story about now."

This piece was corrected on 2 July to amend the spelling of "gilm".
 