
There is one certainty in TV: whenever the networks locate a hit, they’ll try 
to replicate it until everyone is sick of it. To that end, ABC justordered a 
revival of 70s staple Match Game 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/04/alec-baldwin-match-game-revival-abc.html?mid=twitter_vulture>
 to join last summer’s surprise hitCelebrity Family Feud  
<http://abc.go.com/shows/celebrity-family-feud>and a new version of that other 
70s game show (and syndication giant) $100,000 Pyramid, which they ordered in 
January 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/abc-orders-100000-pyramid-revival-853545>
. The three shows will all air in a three-hour block on Sundays this summer 
starting 26 June. They’re calling it “Sunday Fun and Games”. What, does some 
drunk frat boy own the copyright on “Sunday Funday”?

Match Game will be hosted by Alec Baldwin, who guides two civilian contestants 
while they try to win cash and prizes with the help of a panel of celebrities. 
Baldwin will read Mad Libs-style sentences and the contestants will try to fill 
in the blank with the same word as the celebrities. For example: “Peter Piper 
picked a peck of pickled peppers, how many peppers did Peter Piper ... blank.” 
(The same format ran asBlankety Blank  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/terry-wogan-dead-remembering-the-first-ever-episode-of-blankety-blank-a6844656.html>
in the UK, hosted by the lateTerry Wogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/terry-wogan>.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN9NdsAeYzI0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN9NdsAeYzI0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN9NdsAeYzI0&media=>
Originally created in the 60s on NBC and played straight, Match Game returned 
on CBS in the 70s. The new version was much funnier, thanks to panelists such as
Charles Nelson Reilly and Brett Somers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vE4HqEToGw>, famous for their double 
entendre-laden banter in completing sentences like: ““Mary felt apprehensive 
about her wedding night because she discovered her BLANK was missing.” Since 
then there have been attempts at a revival in 1983, 1990 and 1998, to little 
success.

The Baldwin-hosted incarnation could be different, considering he’ll have all 
his celebrity friends to call on, including all the comedians that were his 
co-stars on 30 Rock. The network would also be smart to enlistBetty White 
<https://twitter.com/bettymwhite?lang=en>, a national treasure who was also a 
frequent guest in the 70s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CF0O0T4HAP0>. RuPaul 
would also be a good addition, since she’s kept Match Game in the zeitgeist 
thanks to an annual challenge on RuPaul’s Drag Race called Snatch Game where 
the drag queens impersonate celebrities. RuPaul also is hosting a new gameshow 
on Logo calledGay for Play 
<http://www.logotv.com/shows/gay-for-play-game-show-starring-rupaul> that has a 
format similar to Match Game, with six celebrities helping people win prizes.

Last summer all the networks bet big on game shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/27/double-jeopardy-networks-betting-game-shows>
 because they’re cheap, fun and easy to produce.Knock Knock Live 
<http://www.fox.com/knock-knock-live> was an immediate disaster; a revival of 
Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader 
<http://www.fox.com/are-you-smarter-than-a-fifth-grader>was a disappointment; 
and500 Questions <http://abc.go.com/shows/500-questions> was a moderate success.
 Celebrity Family Feud <http://abc.go.com/shows/celebrity-family-feud>, hosted 
by Steve Harvey – who currently hosts a syndicated non-celebrity version of the 
show as well – was the only certified hit, averaging almost nine million 
viewers over its six-episode run.

ABC seems to have settled on a combination of celebrities and game shows, 
which has also proven a success for NBC’sHollywood Game Night 
<http://www.nbc.com/hollywood-game-night>. The $100,000 Pyramid, with Michael 
Strahan <http://www.michaelstrahan.com/>filling in for legendary host Dick 
Clark, will also feature famous people trying to help the plebs win money while 
trying to guess phrases without saying any of the words.

While this seems like a fun night of programming, someone should remind ABC of 
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire <http://millionairetv.dadt.com/>, a smash hit 
that it put on the air five times a week and ran into the ground, unseating it 
from its throne as the most-watched network in the country. The stakes aren’t 
nearly as high with these shows, which will never reach the 30 million viewers 
that Millionaire did at its height, but it just goes to show that with game 
shows, sometimes less of a good thing is ... blank.
 