
Penelope Stanford does her female ancestors a disservice in claiming that 
australopithecine “females [had] little agency in the selection of mates” (
Polygynous apes may explain men of today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/19/polygynous-apes-may-explain-men-of-today>
, Letters, 20 December). A species in which female choice did not underpin mate 
selection, as it does in practically all animal species, would deteriorate 
rapidly under the enfeebling influence of mediocre male genes. She is right 
that polygynous species mean many males with no partners – our own genetic 
record shows far fewer fathers than mothers in any individual’s ancestry – and 
that males will fight each other for reproductive privileges.

But any Palaeolithic proto-human female would never want her own offspring to 
end her genetic line – and feeble sons have little chance of gaining 
reproductive privileges against tougher males. Her solution is to choose males 
who prove themselves capable of dominating other males, so that her sons will 
do the same in the next generation. Polygamy is an excellent solution for 
females to the perennial problem of too few high-quality males. It may not be a 
nice ancestry, I agree, but would she say this explains a lot about the 
behaviour of some females nowadays? I would be surprised.
David Clifford
Cambridge

• Yes, polygynous apes may explain men of today. But in the past there were 
solutions to the problem of surplus males: the navy, the army and the 
monasteries. Today they are sent into politics.
Basil Smith
Dover, Kent

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 