
The government is to delay changes to A-level mathematics and further 
mathematics amid concerns that pupils will not be sufficiently well prepared 
for the new exam.

The changes will be put back a year and teaching will now start in 2017, 
following advice from the exams regulator Ofqual. The delay was confirmed in a 
letter from the school reform minister, Nick Gibb, to Ofqual’s chief regulator, 
Glenys Stacey.

Schools are struggling to get to grips with planned radical changes to 
A-levels. From next yearAS-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aslevels> are being separated from 
A-levels, which will become two-year courses with grades decided by a final 
exam.

The changes are part of the government’s drive to make the exams system more 
rigorous. But some universities have said they want schools to continue with 
AS-levels. Cambridge University has written to schools asking them to stick 
with AS-levels, saying they are vital to the university selection process.

The shadow education secretary, Tristram Hunt, has said Labour will not pursue 
the government’s policy on decoupling, causing further confusion, and wants the 
new AS- andA-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> to be 
delayed across the board until 2017. He has called on the permanent secretary 
at the Department for Education to write to the heads of schools and colleges 
explaining the changes in order to tackle what he says is widespread confusion.

Ofqual said the maths delay meant students on the new courses would benefit 
from having taken new maths GCSEs being introduced in 2015, and would therefore 
be better prepared. The additional year will also allow more time for schools 
to prepare for teaching the new AS- and A levels.

Gibb said in his letter to Ofqual: “While there is a transitional phase for 
all reformed subjects, you have advised that for mathematics the gap between 
the current GCSE and the new A-level is particularly significant. Your concern 
is that the current GCSE does not have the same building blocks as the new GCSE 
to prepare students for the mathematical problem-solving content in the new 
A-level. I know your view is supported by Alcab (A-level Content Advisory 
Board) and by many in the mathematics community.

“I am content to accept your recommendation to defer first teaching of the new 
mathematics and further mathematics A/AS-levels until September 2017. I have 
taken this decision to give mathematics students the best opportunity to 
benefit from the new qualifications at GCSE and A-level, and in particular 
recognition of the importance of mathematics as a route to a wide range of 
valuable higher education courses.”

It remains to be seen whether there will be delays to the introduction of new 
A- and AS-levels in other subjects. In a speech last month to the Westminster 
Education Forum about A-level reform, Stacey said: “We are keeping to the 
timetable for reform, but not slavishly. It is the quality of the qualification 
and the educational outcomes that matter above all.”

She alluded to the confusion surround the decoupling of AS- and A-levels. 
“Should any future government wish to recouple, it can be done, albeit the 
timing of the election is awkward, as new decoupled A- and AS-levels will be in 
schools ready for first teaching in September 2015.”

Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, 
welcomed the delay in introducing the new maths exams. He said: “It takes a 
long time for schools to prepare for a new exam properly. This includes changes 
to teaching programmes, resources and even staffing. Schools need plenty of 
time if they are to do right by pupils, so we welcome this delay. There are few 
more important subjects to get right.”
 