
It starts with a shimmer of something strange and soft 
<http://www.maxrichtermusic.com/en/index.php>, an ambient mist of strings 
that's both electronic and acoustic. Then something weird happens.Out of these 
shifting sonic tides comes an ensemble of violins 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q0DSnxHYu9Y&feature=related> – playing 
fragments of the world's most overfamiliar concerto, the soundtrack to 1,000 
adverts, an on-hold phone favourite that features on every classical 
compilation ever. Yes, it's Vivaldi's Four Seasons – but not as we know it.

This is Vivaldi Recomposed, by genre-hopping, new-music maestro Max Richter. 
So the big, clanging question is: why? Why retouch, rework, and reimagine 
Vivaldi's evergreen pictorial masterpiece? "The Four Seasons is something we 
all carry around with us," says Richter, a German-born British composer. "It's 
just everywhere. In a way, we stop being able to hear it. So this project is 
about reclaiming this music for me personally, by getting inside it and 
rediscovering it for myself – and taking a new path through a well-known 
landscape."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAjY_dy0E3Xw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAjY_dy0E3Xw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAjY_dy0E3Xw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This involved "throwing molecules of the original Vivaldi into a test tube 
with a bunch of other things, and waiting for an explosion". You can hear this 
chemical reaction particularly well at the opening of Richter'sreworked Summer 
concerto <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AjY_dy0E3Xw&feature=related>, which 
has become a weird collision of Arvo Pärt-likemelancholy in the solo violin and 
a minimalist workout for the rest of the strings. "There are times I depart 
completely from the original, yes, but there are moments when it pokes through. 
I was pleased to discover that Vivaldi's music is very modular. It's pattern 
music, in a way, so there's a connection with the whole post-minimalist 
aesthetic I'm part of."

Part of the fun of the album is that your ears play tricks with your memory of 
the original: these familiar melodies do unexpected things, resulting in an 
experience that's both disturbing yet full of strange delights. And imagine how 
it felt for Recomposed'ssolo violinist Daniel Hope <http://www.danielhope.com>: 
having played the original for decades, he – and more importantly his fingers – 
faced a surreal task when he first picked his way through Richter's score.

"It was incredibly thought-provoking," he says. "I had to deal with all the 
curveballs Max throws at you, the way he does things you don't expect." The 
experience clearly messed with Hope's mind. "What really threw me was the first 
movement of Autumn. He pulls the rhythm around, starts dropping quavers here 
and there. You end up with a rickety and slightly one-legged Vivaldi. It's 
incredibly funny. But even in poking fun at the original, there's always 
enormous respect."

The slow movement of Winter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H8GvcwQp-ww> is 
another standout moment for Hope. "It's really out of this world," he says. 
"It's as if an alien has picked it up and pulled it through a time warp. It's 
really eerie: Max has kept Vivaldi's melody, but it's pulled apart by the 
ethereal harmonics underneath it."

Can it all work beyond the recording studio? Audiences at the Barbican in 
London will find out later this month,when Vivaldi Recomposed is given its 
debut performance <http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=13711>, 
with Hope backed by the Britten Sinfonia under the baton ofAndré de Ridder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/sep/14/bbc-now-de-ridder>. If the work 
sends listeners back to the original with new ears, that's all part of the 
point, says Richter. "The original Four Seasons is a phenomenally innovative 
and creative piece of work. It's so dynamic, so full of amazing images. And it 
feels very contemporary. It's almost a kind of jump-cut aesthetic – all those 
extreme leaps between different kinds of material. Hats off to him. That's what 
I'm really pleased with: my aim was to fall in love with the original again – 
and I have."

• The work will be performed at the Barbican, London EC2 (020-7638 8891; 
barbican.org.uk <http://barbican.org.uk>), on 31 October.
 