
Working with children in a school garden is much, much easier than cooking for 
celebrities. I used to be a chef on tour with artists likethe Rolling Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/therollingstones>, Robbie Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams> and Kylie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kylieminogue>. It wasn’t them; it was the 
being away from home. I’d get a call saying, “Can you fly to Australia tomorrow 
for six weeks?” I’d pack in a hurry, settle the bills and then remember to tell 
my husband; now I get separation anxiety after a day.

I didn’t want to be the oldest roadie on the tour bus and this coincided with 
getting our first allotment. I quit the rock’n’roll life and studied 
horticulture and community education while clearing and planting up our 
precious allotment. It was all about vegetables to start with: I wanted to 
spread the grow-your-own message in conjunction with healthy living and eating. 
There are more flowers on the allotment now. We cut the dahlias and sweet peas 
and bring them home, but it is hardly worth it since we spend all weekend and 
most weekday evenings there. I’d sleep there if there weren’t such big spiders 
in the shed.

I work in three schools and run a pre-school gardening group. Growing plants 
helps with children’s self-esteem; once they have that, they can develop in 
other areas. It is all about nurturing, taking turns and sharing, as well as 
more concrete things: “How many peas? How many holes in the module? What shape 
is this pot?” I ask the older children what they want to grow and they quickly 
move on from sunflowers, pumpkins and beans. I’ll say to a group of 
six-year-olds, “Can you just prick out those calendula?” and I’ll turn round 
and it will be done beautifully.

The older generation are into their gardens round here. Grandparents will send 
in seed and the children love it when they come to help in the garden. 
Cross-generational events are so important. I love working in my community 
under the watchful gaze of theAnglican cathedral 
<http://www.liverpoolcathedral.org.uk/>. A couple of years ago we invited some 
care home residents to work with the very young children. Our children were 
just so kind. It was lovely.

Me and my garden: ‘We had six weeks to turn a dog toilet into a community 
garden’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/25/me-and-my-garden-we-had-six-weeks-to-turn-a-dog-toilet-into-a-community-garden>
My favourite spot 

My fairy garden at the end of our allotment. It is quite cottagey with a 
twisty path, beetroot and broad beans among the hollyhocks, and a willow 
tunnel. The most special thing is a ‘Winchester Cathedral’ 
<http://www.davidaustinroses.co.uk/winchester-cathedral> rose we planted for 
my dad, who died recently.

• How does your garden grow? Email space@theguardian.com <>
 