
Some media events for your diary, beginning with English PEN’s hosting of an 
interview in a London theatre with the prominent Turkish journalist and author, 
Ahmet Altan.

He was formerly the editor-in-chief and main columnist of the liberal daily 
newspaper,Taraf <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taraf>, noted for its 
revelations of Turkish military interventions in politics and as an early 
partner of Wikileaks.

Altan has also written nine novels, including three bestsellers, winning 
several literary prizes plus awards for championing press freedom.

In 2008, he was charged with “denigrating Turkishness” for publishing an 
article dedicated to the victims of the Armenian genocide.

This month, one of Altan’s novels, a thriller entitled Endgame, will be 
published in English for the first time. To celebrate the fact, English PEN has 
joined with the publisher Canongate to stage an interview with Altan by 
Philippe Sands QC.

It is expected to deal with his contribution to Turkish journalism and 
literature along with the threats to freedom of expression inTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.

The conversation will take place at the Arcola Theatre in Dalston on Sunday 30 
August 
<http://www.englishpen.org/event/ahmet-altan-in-conversation-with-philippe-sands/>
, starting at 7.30pm.Tickets available here 
<https://www.arcolatheatre.com/events/ahmet-altan-in-conversation-with-philippe-sands>
.

Media Society: mini Fleet Street and surveillance

On 7 October, the Media Society, in company with the London Press Club, is 
stagingan interview with the editor of the Independent, Amol Rajan 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/7th-october-2015-meet-editor-independent-vertical-fleet-street/>
.


The first and only non-white editor of a national daily will be in 
conversation with Phil Harding. Rajan won’t have to move far because it will 
take place at Northcliffe House, home to his newspaper.


The building is a sort of mini Fleet Street, also housing the Mail titles, 
Metro and the London Evening Standard.

It kicks off at 6.30 for 7pm. Tickets available here via Eventbrite 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-media-societymeet-the-editor-of-the-indie-in-the-vertical-fleet-street-tickets-17791357429>
.

On 19 October, the Media Society, this time in association with the 
Information Law and Policy Centre, will host a panel debate entitled“Whose 
investigatory power is it anyway?” 
<http://www.themediasociety.com/whose-investigatory-power-anyway-security-source-protection-surveillance/>

Speakers will talk about the government’s intention to amend the law on 
communications data with a new investigatory powers bill. They will consider 
the possible dangers for journalism and freedom of expression.

On the panel will be Dominic Grieve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve>, the former attorney 
general; Rachel Logan, of Amnesty International UK; Ewen MacAskill, the 
Guardian’s defence and intelligence correspondent; and barrister Jessica Simor. 
It will be chaired by Judith Townend, director of London university’s Centre 
for Law & Information Policy, Institute of Advanced Legal Studies.

The debate, running from 6.30-8.30pm, will take place at Reed Smith in 
Broadgate Tower, London. Tickets availablehere via Eventbrite 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/the-media-society-whose-investigatory-power-is-it-anyway-security-source-protection-and-surveillance-tickets-17412533356>
.
 