
• Commiserations to culture minister Ed Vaizey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey>, who was dropped by Theresa 
May on Friday evening after six years in the role. He confirmed the news of his 
own “Vexit” on Twitter, saying he was “looking forward to supporting the 
government from the backbenches”.
Ed Vaizey (@edvaizey) 
Looking forward to supporting the government from the backbenches #vexit 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/vexit?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/edvaizey/status/754050191204945920> July 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/edvaizey/status/754050191204945920> 
The affable Tory MP managed to break the record for the longest-serving arts 
minister in May – beating Jennie Lee’s run in the 60s – and made friends 
throughout the creative industries along the way. Among the media names paying 
tribute on Twitter were Simon Schama, Pat Younge, the National Theatre, Sandi 
Toksvig, Miranda Sawyer and Louise Mensch.
 <https://twitter.com/simon_schama>
Simon Schama (@simon_schama) 
@edvaizey <https://twitter.com/edvaizey> dear Ed - an artsfelt thankyou
 <https://twitter.com/simon_schama/status/754347983286759425> July 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/simon_schama/status/754347983286759425> pat younge 
(@tcmbigcheese) 
@edvaizey <https://twitter.com/edvaizey> This is sad news. Driven real change 
on diversity after years of inaction, also a decent bloke.@LennyHenry 
<https://twitter.com/LennyHenry> #keepupthepressure 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/keepupthepressure?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/tcmbigcheese/status/754211524068114432> July 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/tcmbigcheese/status/754211524068114432> National Theatre 
(@NationalTheatre) 
Huge thanks to @edvaizey <https://twitter.com/edvaizey>, who as the UK’s 
longest serving arts minister has been a tireless advocate for culture and the 
arts.
 <https://twitter.com/NationalTheatre/status/754226593711652865> July 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NationalTheatre/status/754226593711652865> toksvig 
(@toksvig) 
@edvaizey <https://twitter.com/edvaizey> We'll miss you. You did good 
listening, and that's so needed, and so rare. Thank you.
 <https://twitter.com/toksvig/status/754214067145965568> July 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/toksvig/status/754214067145965568> Miranda Sawyer 
(@msmirandasawyer) 
@edvaizey <https://twitter.com/edvaizey> Oh Ed, that is a shame. Thank you for 
all your brilliant work for the arts
 <https://twitter.com/msmirandasawyer/status/754057178101739520> July 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/msmirandasawyer/status/754057178101739520> Louise Mensch 
(@LouiseMensch) 
@edvaizey <https://twitter.com/edvaizey> approximately 18 months is a short 
time in politics. You were only minister I was ever jealous of. You will be 
missed v much. xxx
 <https://twitter.com/LouiseMensch/status/754059902159613956> July 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LouiseMensch/status/754059902159613956> 
Vaizey will be replaced by West Suffolk MP Matthew Hancock, who was previously 
the minister for the cabinet office and paymaster general. He will work 
alongsidenew culture secretary Karen Bradley, who replaced John Whittingdale on 
Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/14/xxxx-john-whittingdale-culture-secretary-bbc>
.


• Bradley can apparently claim to have already made an impact in the media, 
however. While part of Theresa May’s Home Office team, she iscredited 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/656823/Winston-Churchill-grandson-Fatty-Soames-twitter-rants>
 (together with Margot James MP) with “converting” her senior colleague 
Nicholas Soames “to the joys of Twitter” – and Fatty Soames has never looked 
back, subjecting fellow-Tories and Labour shadow ministers alike to a stream of 
robustly worded tweeted tirades.



• Monkey guessed The Night Manager, others more plausibly went for War & Peace 
– but in the end the keynote, brand-moulding image on the front of the BBC’s 
annual report,published 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/annual-report> last week, was 
the announcement of the winner in the Great British Bake Off: a fine advert for 
DG Tony Hall’s commitment to diversity, as the photo includes not only Nadiya 
Hussain but also Tamal Ray, and (with Paul Hollywood and Mary Berry pictured 
too) a decent mix of ages. War & Peace, with its all-white and often posh set 
of characters, had to be content with the covers of both the separate brochures 
for BBC Worldwide and financial statements, while the spy drama was, er, not 
very prominent at all. On that basis, the Beeb’s latest prestige adaptation, of 
Joseph Conrad’sThe Secret Agent 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/mediapacks/thesecretagent> (which began on 
Sunday), will be lucky if a single small photo of it appears at the back of the 
Worldwide report. Possibly dreamt up before Hall started to enthuse about 
properly representing women and minorities, it threatens to wreck his 
percentages – of around 10 police officers, anarchists and others in its main 
cast, only Vicky McClure’s Winnie is a woman, and none of them is non-white 
(though one is disabled). Tricky stuff, costume drama.

• The risks, even potentially libellous ones, of live TV subtitling apparently 
based on an audio version of predictive text (sometimes, but not always, 
quickly revised by human beings) were evident again during the hurly-burly of 
what the Times called “the day of the short stilettos”, aka the announcement of 
Theresa May’s first cabinet. Watching it unfold on Sky News without sound in 
the gym, Monkey saw one political reporter quoted as saying “one of the first 
things [May] will do is have a security breach”, and another mysteriously said 
of her former colleague Joey Jones (now in Downing Street in her comms team) 
that he is “one of her ketamine occasions advisers”. Monkey can only pray the 
new PM and her spinner are spared any such ketamine occasions, at least while 
she’s still getting used to the job.

• This article was amended on 18 July 2016 to replace previously published 
text that appeared due to a technical error with the correct copy.

 * An item was removed from this column on 19 July 2016 because it mistakenly 
claimed that the LBC drivetime host Iain Dale had told the Media Masters 
podcast that “5 Live is my station of choice to listen to” and “it would be my 
dream to be on 5 Live”. A link to the podcast was provided, but the writer did 
not listen to the interview. In it, Dale talks in the past tense. He says 5 
Live “was” his station of choice and it “would have been” his dream job. He 
makes clear that he now regards his LBC job as being far preferable given the 
editorial freedoms it allows him. Apologies to Iain Dale.  