
✒ As well as firing the starting gun for the race for his job, Adam Boulton's 
departure as Sky News's political editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/13/adam-boulton-step-down-sky-news-political-editor>
 poses a question about who will chair the channel's party leaders' debate in 
the 2015 general election: he was involved in making the 2010 debates happen 
and plans to continue presenting "key set-piece political events", so there 
appears little chance of him surrendering his election role to his successor. 
If he keeps it, he could be the only one of the 2010 inquisitors to reappear: 
the BBC seems tempted to choose Huw Edwards over David Dimbleby (by then 76), 
and if ITV doesn't drop Alastair Stewart in favour of one of its News at Ten 
anchors, they ought to consider resigning.

✒ Odds on the Boulton succession race are available from William Hill, which 
has the likes of John Pienaar and Tom Bradby trailing behind the Guardian's 
Nick Watt, the Sunday Times's new signing Tim Shipman and prodigal BBC daughter 
Laura Kuenssberg, with Boulton's Sky News understudy Joey Jones as 6/4 
favourite. Somewhat puzzling, though – given his role in Copgate (formerly 
Plebgate), hisStella Creasy Twitter gaffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/dec/11/page-3-davidcameron> 
and the fact that he's not a broadcaster – are the odds for the Sun's Tom 
Newton Dunn, the 2/1 second favourite. Maybe his backers think Boulton's heir 
will have to be another male, public school-educated motormouth?

✒ Does James Harding, erstwhile Times editor turned BBC News boss, miss the 
opinionated cut and thrust of newspaper leader conferences? "Yes," came the 
enthusiastic response when Hardo was asked this afterhis first public speech 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/speeches/2014/james-harding-wt-stead.html> as 
a BBC suitlast week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/14/bbc-news-local-newspapers-james-harding-speech>
. And did he find the BBC's boring old adherence to impartiality "irksome"? 
Probably not the right word, he replied diplomatically – BBC News editorial 
conferences are "story-driven" rather than "opinion-based", apparently. In a 
BBC News video played after his speech, Monkey spotted a trio of Tories – 
Boris, Dave, George – but not a single face from any other major political 
party. Could this be impartiality in action, countering the perceived BBC bias 
to Labour?

✒ If any would-be press barons did contact the Independent last week, after 
the paper discreetly let it be known thatit was looking for a buyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jan/16/theindependent-alexander-lebedev>
, they may have had a disconcerting sense that no one was at home. Evgeny 
Lebedev, its publisher, was making his second trip to Kenya in as many months, 
while Amol Rajan, the editor, was away on honeymoon.

✒ Philip Collins, chief leader writer and columnist at the Times, seems in the 
awkward position of being starkly at odds with his own paper. On Friday, the 
former Blair aide's column (headlined We should keep our noses out – this is 
private) argued that "our interest in the Hollande affair is mere prurience". 
This is clearly not the view, however, of fun-loving editor John Witherow: the 
Times's front page was dominated by a photo of Julie Gayet last Saturday after 
the story broke, and on the day Collins's tut-tutting piece appeared she popped 
up again there, while the foreign section led with a double-page spread (with a 
giant photo including Hollande and his successive lovers Mlles Royal, 
Trierweiler and Gayet) on the latest developments, as if intent on winding him 
up.

✒ Laughter echoed around the land when ITV accused the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> in its submission to the culture select 
committee's inquiry into the corporation's future of repeatedly "aping" it, 
with the guffaws inevitably followed by the words "pot" and "kettle". And a new 
party game emerged, based on identifying the most egregious instances of ITV 
copycatting: was it ripping off Strictly with Dancing on Ice and Dragons' Den 
with Tycoon, before the era of Peter "Pinch 'em" Fincham? Or more recently 
aping MasterChef, Great British Bake Off and Call the Midwife respectively in 
Food Glorious Food, Britain's Best Bakery and Breathless?

✒ Full marks to Equity, meanwhile, for its contribution to the same inquiry, 
which concentrated on the repercussions of continuing BBC cuts for its members. 
Its most concrete complaint centres on "the use of fewer supporting artists … 
in crowd, street and battle scenes in costume dramas" (laudably arguing on 
behalf of non-members, it lamented too that such period offerings now include 
fewer animals). Another point berates the Beeb for ruthless handling of the BBC 
Singers, "reduced from a core group of 24 to 18". The apocalypse scenario 
clearly draws ever closer.

✒ "A new comms era dawns in Whitehall," proclaims Alex Aiken, the 
controversial executive director of government communications, in apiece in PR 
Week <http://www.prweek.com/article/1226731/new-comms-era-dawns-whitehall> 
trumpeting the new Government Communication Service (GCS) being "open for 
business" – he's confident the spin machine is now fit for the digital age, and 
evidently also feels the lingering pong of Andy Coulson has finally been 
eliminated. But did none of his crack communicators notice the perils of his 
choice of abbreviation? After the Guardian's revelations, having a name so 
close to GCHQ makes it sound alarmingly like part of the same seamless, 
sinister operation; and GCS is also an existing medical tag (short for Glasgow 
Coma Scale) for the scale doctors use to measure level of unconsciousness after 
severe trauma. Journalists are now bound to be tempted to use GCS scores – 2 is 
makes incomprehensible sounds, opens eyes in response to painful stimuli, 1 is 
makes no sounds, does not open eyes – for the government as a whole, or 
ministers on the verge of resigning.

✒ Among the titbits that emerged from John Humphrys's Media Society gig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/16/john-humphrys-bbc-too-big-licence-fee>
 last week was the news that, at 70, he has "just been put on the staff of the 
BBC", as a result of its move to regularise terms and conditions. The Today 
anchorman also intriguingly portrayed himself as a born-again book addict, who 
devours "absolutely everything" - most recently Hemingway, Le Carre and Garcia 
Marquez – each evening after switching his phones off. Colleagues are 
understood to be concerned that he may be turning, in a kind of nightly reverse 
Jekyll and Hyde process, into James Naughtie.
 