
✒ Amol Rajan, the Independent's new editor, got his big break as "mic boy" on 
The Wright Stuff, anda glimpse of him at work 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P1zMyl5gYxs> there can now be viewed on YouTube 
– though not yet a clip (surely it can be found?) of Rajan "gliding up to 
George Galloway in a skin-tight red leotard, to re-enact his cat impression on 
Big Brother", one of the memories of the Channel 5 showhe shared in a piece 
marking its 10th birthday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/tv-radio/still-top-of-the-morning-channel-fives-the-wright-stuff-turns-10-2080377.html>
. It was on The Wright Stuff that he met the then Indy editor Simon Kelner, who 
later recruited him, and six years after their encounter was appointed editor 
himself at 29.

✒While Times acting editor John Witherow was wielding the axe last week – 
although the casualties (high-profile names, rumour suggests) have yet to be 
confirmed – the paper's old guard was fighting a rearguard action. It was 
Witherow's shrinking of the role of subeditors, and especially the backbench, 
that drew the ire of former night editor Liz Gerard,in a blog 
<http://subscraft.blogspot.co.uk/> arguing it would now be risky for any sub to 
"put a head above the parapet" (by questioning the Prince Harry "Indian blood" 
splash, say, or "a naked woman [on] the business front"). There might be a 
motive deep in his past for the move, she suggested, seemingly inviting those 
who knew him as a hack to come forth: "Maybe Witherow has a distrust of subs, 
perhaps someone distorted his copy or cut it more than he'd have liked when he 
was a reporter." Times subs from the 80s, when his assignments included the 
Falklands war, will be dusting down their files.

✒It has taken more than four months since the departure of Paul Mylrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/15/bbc-director-public-affairs-paul-mylrea-leave?INTCMP=SRCH>
 (supreme spinner when the Savile scandal broke and George Entwistle resigned), 
but at last the BBC has got round to advertising the post of director of 
communications, who will report to James Purnell, the new director of strategy 
and digital. Perhaps inevitably, the ad is a feast of neo-Blairite jargon, 
calling weirdly for someone with "the right attitude and behaviours … role 
modelling the BBC Values", and adding nostalgic references to "stakeholders", 
"a compelling narrative" and "rapid rebuttal".Julian Payne, the acting comms 
head, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/15/julian-payne-bbc-communications?INTCMP=SRCH>
 is naturally the man to beat, but external hires have been quite the thing 
under new DG Tony Hall.

✒ Typical of the challenges the role model with the right behaviours will face 
is an email circulating at the corporation while unions ballot staff over an 
offer to lower-paid staff. TheBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
claims it can't afford to offer any more, it says, before listing things its 
management were able to pay for: the failed £100m DMI project, eye-watering 
payoffs, consultants' payments, headhunter fees (for the hunt that brilliantly 
produced George Entwistle), car allowances … Altogether it adds up to about 
£130m, backing up the email's argument that management could afford to make a 
better offer. Monkey would not like to bet many bananas against a 'yes' vote on 
strike action.

✒ Vivienne Westwood received a standing ovation at the Cannes Lions last week, 
but only after a flight to the Cote d'Azur that had its frustrations. EasyJet 
passengers were surprised to find themselves sharing their budget flight with 
the fashionista, and Westwood herself was apparently taken aback when asked to 
remove her elaborate footwear to go through the x-ray machine. The shoes were 
bigger than some passengers' hand luggage, Monkey hears.

✒ Today's James Naughtie <https://www.theguardian.com/media/james-naughtie> 
had been doing so well of late, with the hurdle of pronouncing Jeremy Hunt's 
name without a slip-up triumphantly overcome. But then he risked a mention of 
Charles Saatchi's distinctive way of having a row and, oh dear, said Nick Clegg 
was "getting it in the neck" for his comments on the matter.

✒ "The slogan for the BBC's Wimbledon 2013 campaign says: 'It hurts so much 
because they want it so bad.'," writes Newsnight's acting deputy editor Marek 
Pruszewicz pickilyin the in-house journal Ariel 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/ariel/19873617>. "I want badly for it to be grammatical. 
It hurts so badly that it isn't." A fair point, if awkwardly open to question 
itself ("I want badly for it …"?). But Monkey will be keeping an eye on the 
grammatical standards of the snooty late-night show's captions and its team's 
tweets – and it's quite possible that people in the BBC's sport and marketing 
departments will be doing so too.
 