
✒ Ahead of BBC news supremo James Harding’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/17/bbc-news-cuts-digital-james-harding>
 last week of hundreds of job cuts, which were expected to include a cull at 
Panorama, veteran reporter John Sweeney was maturely stoical. “While I ponder 
#BBCRedundancies tomorrow,” he tweeted on the eve of Harding addressing staff, 
he was reading Arthur Koestler’s Darkness at Noon and “Auden’s September 1, 
1939: ‘Mismanagement and grief: We must suffer them all again.’”. Once he and 
the other Panorama reporters were made redundant, however,his approach was less 
sophisticated <https://twitter.com/johnsweeneyroar>: as well as retweets 
slamming BBC managers as “bonkers” and “twats”, his followers were treated to a 
clip of a Dalek zapping a victim (a reference to Dennis Potter’s description of 
Tony Hall’s mentor John Birt) under the heading: “Here’s how BBC boss Lord Hall 
of Birkenhead fired me from #BBCPanorama.”

✒ Media reporters were meanwhile also seething as Harding briefed his staff, 
but on other grounds: several were attending aBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Trust briefing that morning on its 
service review of the corporation’s TV channels, and hence unable to cover the 
job cuts as details of the 415 axed posts broke. Did the two big announcements 
really need to be simultaneous? Wasn’t this exactly the kind of burying of bad 
news (if only temporarily) that Harding would have condemned in his previous 
job as Beeb-bashing Times editor?

✒ Among the trust’s findings that made headlines was data showing that a 
handful of mostly aged programmes dominate evening air-time on BBC1,which was 
slated as too safe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/17/bbc-plays-it-safe-old-shows-eastenders-holby-city-trust-review>
. Tantalisingly, trust member David Liddiment said these whiskery shows are “in 
pretty much every case excellent”, leaving in doubt which series – implicitly 
more than one – he saw as the exceptions. Presumably not the likes of 
EastEnders, Casualty, Antiques Roadshow, Countryfile or The One Show, which 
would leave as contenders … The Voice? Holby City?

✒ While news of Rupert Murdoch’s failed initial bid for Time Warner was 
emerging last week, elsewhere in his empire things were going pear-shaped too. 
To mark the 125th anniversary of the Wall Street Journal, rejoicing staff were 
given goodie bags including WSJ-branded power banks – but one “combusted”, 
forcing managers to order mass unplugging and sheepishly install “drop boxes” 
so they could be returned; and later the ice cream scoops in the same bags also 
proved dodgy, secreting unpleasant oil. Rumours that the entire ostensibly 
bungled giveaway was conceived as a Pandora’s box-style parable about 
capitalism have yet to be confirmed.

✒ Is David Cameron (who says he is waiting to binge on the box set of series 
four) as much of Game of Thrones fan as he claims? Monkey only asks because, in 
reportedly saying Michael Gove’s new job as chief whip made him “the Hand of 
the King”, the PM probably wasn’t fully clued up onwhat that job means in 
Westeros <http://gameofthrones.wikia.com/wiki/Hand_of_the_King>(or indeed aware 
of the fates of those who have held it). Yes, it’s the king’s closest adviser, 
but a briefing on the post in the show’s official guide is headed by the less 
flattering job description, “the King shits, and the Hand wipes”. Apt, then, 
that on his very first day as the Hand Gove should have got trapped in the loo.

✒ Fancy being BBC sports editor, or (as the corporation puts it) “the on-air 
figurehead for BBC Sports journalism 
<http://careerssearch.bbc.co.uk/jobs/job/Sports-Editor-BBC-Sport/8592>”, “for 
sport what Peston is to economics and Robinson is to politics”? If so, next 
Monday is the closing date for applications, but if you’re a print hack it’s 
probably not worth bothering: the last two sports eds, Mihir Bose and David 
Bond, came from newspapers, and let’s say neither adjusted successfully (as the 
Daily Mail kindly put it, Bond “never seemed comfortable in a high-profile 
broadcaster role”). So, with its fingers burnt, the Beeb is likely to favour 
on-air experience, and its chief sports correspondent Dan Roan is seen as the 
front-runner to join the elite squad of super-reporters; but in Monkey’s view 
it would be daft to rule out Paul Kelso, formerly of the Guardian and Telegraph 
but now Sky News’ sports correspondent and hence no Bond-style TV virgin.

✒ Sky News’ coverage of the reshuffle was masterfully handled (even after 
swallowing a fly) by political editor Adam Boulton, but you could be forgiven 
for wondering why he hasn’t switched to his new, evening role by now -it was 
way back in March, after all, that his successor, Faisal Islam, was appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/20/faisal-islam-adam-boulton-sky-news-political-editor>
 (or, as Islam’s boss at Channel 4 News, Ben de Pear, grumpily said at the 
time, chose to “leave the RTS programme of the year and take the Murdoch 
shilling”). Islam will at last appear on air in “late August”, Monkey learns, 
and speculation that the career-long economics/business correspondent has been 
doing an intensive politics course on the quiet seems to be wide of the mark – 
judging by his Twitter feed, it’s the Premier League and World Cup he’s spent 
the past four months studying.

✒ Battle has been joined between, on the one hand, two leading female 
columnists, and on the other, both Woman’s Hour and the Daily Mail. This mighty 
clash began last week when the Radio 4 show’s senior presenterJenni Murray 
penned a why-oh-why for Femail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2694953/Boasting-getting-wasted-drugs-Bragging-lurid-joyless-sex-lives-JENNI-MURRAY-asks-todays-successful-women-rotten-role-models.html>
asking why “today’s successful women [are] such rotten role models”; in her 
just-published book, How to Build a Girl, the Times’s Caitlin Moran “writes 
about sex, sex and more sex”, Murray moaned, while in hers, The Wrong Knickers, 
the Telegraph’s Bryony Gordon was accused of “bragging” about a “promiscuous 
decade of chaos” that included “allowing a man she’d just met ‘do a line of 
cocaine’ off her breasts”. Although Moran has criticised the Mail in the past,
it was Gordon who mounted the counter-attack <https://twitter.com/bryony_gordon>
: “BOASTING& BRAGGING abt drugs& sex!” she tweeted. “Has Jenni Murray read my 
book? & she does knw tht @caitlinmoran’s is a NOVEL,yeah?” Discussing her 
memoir – more confessional than boastful – the same day at a literary salon, 
she found it “very strange” that a Woman’s Hour presenter would launch such a 
frontal and misguided attack on two younger feminists, adding that she’d 
“always preferred Jane Garvey”. Adding to the fun of the feud is the fact that 
Tony Gallagher, now deputy editor of the Mail, was formerly Gordon’s editor at 
the Torygraph.
 