
✒ Battle is at last joined on Monday between Channel 4 News and its new rival 
Sky News Tonight, thanks toSky News’s aggressive decision to put Adam Boulton 
head-to-head against Jon Snow at 7pm 
<http://skynews.skypressoffice.co.uk/press-releases/items/1970-01/3820/adam-boulton-sarah-hewson-host-sky-news-tonight>
. Even bombast-loving BSkyB is unlikely to give the clash the kind of build-up 
its sports channels lay on for football grudge matches, so Monkey must set the 
scene. In February Boulton dismissed Snow’s sidekicks as “muppets … fighting 
over the autocue”; to which C4 News’s editor Ben de Pear responded on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/03/channel-4-news-sky-adam-boulton> 
“if Jon’s co hosts r Muppets (they’re not) u lot r Fraggle Rock”; in another 
tweet, he sniped that the 24-hour channel’s hacks “have the advantage, being on 
Sky, of no one recognising you”. Another source of potential tension is the 
defection of Faisal Islam – Channel 4 News’s economics expert, now re-invented 
as Sky News’s political editor – whose appointment led De Pear to spikily 
congratulate him on deciding to “leave the RTS programme of the year and take 
the Murdoch shilling”. Game on!

✒ Hacks summoned to a “round-table” audience with Simon Cowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> ahead of The X Factor’s return 
had a disconcerting experience. Once the harder questions were over, Cowell 
relaxed, sat back and … while chatting began slowly massaging his nipples 
through his white shirt (he has shelves of big-collar, small-collar and 
collarless ones, he told them). Will it be a good sign or a bad one if he 
starts doing that while watching the wannabes?

✒ Standing in for Craig Brown, the Mail on Sunday’s award-winning chief book 
reviewer, is a tough enough challenge, but made worse when Geordie Greig’s 
paper bills you with the wrong name and indeed sex. Such was the experience for 
Francis Wheen, whose lead review appeared under giant letters identifying him 
as “Frances Wheen”. Could it have been a Freudian slip – Wheen is also deputy 
editor of Private Eye, which can be mischievous about goings-on at the titles 
Paul Dacre oversees.

✒ Since he voiced stunning views on the BBC last November – he said it should 
be smaller, backed licence fee top-slicing, and axing BBC3 and BBC4 to focus 
resources on BBC1 and BBC2 – former veteran Beeb exec Roger Mosey has resisted 
making further “unhelpful” comments on the corporation. But the ample 
chin-stroking time he now enjoys as master of a college in Cambridge – where 
the summer vac is a highly agreeable 116 days, or almost four months – has 
evidently given rise to further thoughts that simply can’t be choked back. 
Despite tweeting last year that he admired “what @iankatz100 has done to 
Newsnight”,Mosey writes in the New Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/media/2014/08/gee-newsnight-it-time-stop-flogging-dying-horse>
 that Katz could now “be flogging a dead horse” due to Paxman’s exit and other 
factors. He proposes an 11pm start time (and “disregard the ratings”), which 
sounds unlikely to happen, but Monkey hears his critical assessment of the 
programme is shared within James Harding’s news empire, not least by members of 
the Panorama team who see themselves as comparatively harshly treated.

✒ For aficionados of televised karaoke, there was nothing new about last 
week’s flap in which Simon Cowell accused the BBC of trying to sabotage The X 
Factor by scheduling Strictly Come Dancing against it when the pro-am ballroom 
series makes its slightly later return. Five years ago a Saturday-night head-on 
collision between the same shows prompted newspaper editorials (“end this 
senseless ratings war!” thundered the Observer) and the summoning of BBC 
director general Mark Thompson to answer questions from the BBC Trust about the 
pile-up – followed by the then trust chairman,Sir Michael Lyons, decreeing that 
the Beeb should focus “on quality and impact, not audience share” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/sep/22/strictly-come-dancing-x-factor>
, ie not competing with ITV. Will there be similar shenanigans once the first 
clash takes place this time?

✒ Just as 1978 was labelled the year of the three Popes, so 2014 is bound to 
become known to Leveson anoraks as the year of the three press regulators: the 
Press Complaints Commission is still chugging on,Ipso is due to launch in a 
week’s time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/aug/29/press-regulation-ipso>
, andImpress last week unveiled its appointments panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/aug/28/press-regulation-newspapers>
. Monkey is not keen on the two new outfits’ monickers – Ipso sounds far too 
close to “dipso”, and one of the meanings of Impress is “press gang” – but the 
presiding figures’ names have been much more cannily chosen. (Sir Alan) Moses 
and (Aidan) White – respectively Ipso chairman and chairman of Impress’s panel 
– really can’t be improved on for men meant to evince integrity, and set the 
bar high for other watchdogs. The BBC Trust, which has notoriously taken its 
time in picking a new chairman, will find it an even harder task if it tries to 
match its press counterparts. Appointing someone for other reasons and then 
rebranding them – Lady Honour would have the right ring, for example – could be 
the only solution.

✒ The threat from BuzzFeed is now lapping at the doors of Westminster’s 
venerable Lobby. On Thursday, Jim Waterson, Buzzfeed’s UK deputy editor, broke 
the news that Ukip’s Clacton parliamentary candidate Roger Lord was, somewhat 
inconveniently, refusing to make way for parachuted in Tory defector Douglas 
Carswell. Waterson, who joined BuzzFeed as the list-loving site’s political 
editor, then tweeted: “As good a time as any to say that BuzzFeed is looking 
for established hacks who want to jump ship and work on off-diary scoops: DMs 
welcome.” Will Lobby veterans, who feed off their cosy insider briefings, take 
the bait?

FOOTNOTE: This article was amended on Thursday 4 September, after Roger Mosey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/roger-mosey> pointed out that he did not 
accuse the BBC of political bias, or call for BBC3 and BBC4 to be merged or for 
the cutting back of its online offering.
 