
• At Friday’s Broadcasting Press Guild prizegiving, Mark Rylance was 
responsible for the oddest winner’s video message in BPG history – and quite 
possibly of any awards ceremony – when he was pictured wrestling with and 
finally being consumed by a giant fish. Awarded an Oscar a fortnight earlier, 
then bizarrely snubbed in the Royal Television Society’s programme awards 
shortlists in the following week (when his performance as Thomas Cromwell 
wasn’t even nominated), Rylance was triumphant again as he accepted hisbest 
actor gong for BBC2’s Wolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/11/wolf-hall-mark-rylance-broadcasting-press-guild-awards>
. He is currently on the New York stage where he is appearing in a play called 
Nice Fish, a fact that sort of explained the big plastic fish’s presence in the 
video for those in the know, though its significance was lost on many of his 
bewildered audience of BPG members and their celebrity guests.

• Alastair Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, 
judging by a PRWeek report, delivered a bombshell last Thursday in which he at 
last admitted that, far from his being the impotent prisoner of the wicked 
media as Tony Blair’s spin doctor in the 90s and early noughties, it had been 
“possible to control the agenda”, by, for example, placing a story on the BBC 
that was followed up in a broadsheet and then the tabloids; though he only 
coughed up to his former power in order to argue that such control is now 
impossible and “it’s not about the media any more” – instead organisations 
should stop fretting about the Telegraph or Mail or broadcasters, and 
“understand it is about them – you have to take ownership of your strategic 
space” (and not bother with silly old PR?). Campbell also movingly declared 
that his trade of “communications” was “an extraordinary, necessary and noble 
thing”, but Monkey was disappointed to learn (though not surprised, as the 
event was organised by his comms firm Portland and the audience was stuffed 
with fellow pursuers of this noble vocation) that this remark was not greeted 
by guffaws, heckling and the throwing of suitable objects – grubby, 
flimsy-looking dossiers, say, or stained 2001 Labour election mugs – on to the 
stage.

• If Tom Newton Dunn was indeed the front-runner for the vacant post of 
Newsnight political editor -betting on the job contest was halted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/mar/01/betting-suspended-on-tom-newton-dunn-becoming-newsnight-political-editor>
 after a run of wagers on the Sun posho - that status will have been called 
into question by the events of last week. Although the fact that Newton Dunn 
regularly expounds Tory views as a late-night Sky News newspaper reviewer 
apparently wasn’t seen as a problem, the red-top’s political editor’s 
responsibility for the front-page story (“Queen backs Brexit”) that elicited a 
complaint to Ipso from the palace will be harder to swallow - when you’re 
negotiating for the renewal of a royal charter, and about to celebrate Her 
Majesty’s 90th birthday (on the back of making something of a Horlicks of 
celebrating her Jubilee), headlines reading “Top BBC job for man the Queen 
hates” would be less than ideal.

• Monkey was tragically unsuccessful last September in urging rapprochement 
talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/sep/06/rebekah-brooks-tony-gallagher-sun-bbc>
 between Charlotte Moore and Kim Shillinglaw (then respectively controllers of 
BBC1 and BBC2), and now, with Mooreelevated to all-channels empress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/19/bbc-controller-bbc1-charlotte-moore-bbc2-bbc4-kim-shillinglaw>
 and Shillinglaw on the way out because the BBC2 controllership has been 
abolished, things appear to have got rather messy. In the course of 
evangelising last week about her plans in her new imperial role, Moore, 
according to Broadcast, “delivered a thinly veiled critique of the service she 
inherited from Kim Shillinglaw” at a party attended by stunned celebs and telly 
folk at the aptly named Serpentine Gallery, and made it clear that her 
immediate priority is revitalising BBC2 (particularly its factual output) and 
making it “confident again” with “a much greater sense of identity”. If only 
Monkey’s autumn offer to act as mediator - one admittedly uninspired suggestion 
was a Team BBC1 v Team BBC2 paint-balling away-weekend that would have allowed 
any hostile feelings to be worked off safely, with talks in the breaks - had 
been accepted, all this unpleasantness might have been avoided.

• It may be true, however, that BBC2 documentaries have recently been 
neglected, since some of these factual programmes might suggest transitional 
snoozing by the commissioners and channel executives responsible. This 
Wednesday, for example, seesBrendan O’Carroll: My Family at War 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/proginfo/2016/11/my-family-at-war>, in which 
the Mrs Brown’s Boys star eccentrically marks the centenary of the Easter 
Rising in mid-March although the 1916 occupation of Dublin’s general post 
office happened in late April; while last week’s The Secret History of My 
Family began with a gravelly voice intoning the words “1830 - Victorian working 
class Britain”, although (as most schoolchildren know) in 1830 Victoria was 
aged 11 and still seven years away from ascending the throne. Nor is the 
seemingly barely-prepared-at-all new early-evening show Too Much TV (was it 
another W1A wheeze that somehow got into the real world?) doing much to help 
the network recapture its reputation as “the brainy channel” - or, indeed, its 
reputation for basic competence.
 