
Sometimes, Mohamed Ahmed gets death threats. But that’s to be expected when 
you’re taking on Isis.

“I say a prayer, and I hope nothing bad happens,” said Ahmed, a 40-year-old 
gas station manager in Minneapolis who spends his free time producing anti-Isis 
cartoons. “If you’re going to blow off the people who kill and behead others, 
you expect the same thing coming back.”

Between 2006 and 2011, nearly 30 young Somali-Americans from Minneapolis left 
the US to fight with al-Shabaab, a terrorist group in east Africa. Recruiters 
for the group had turned to theMinnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/minnesota> city, home to the largest 
Somali community in the US, as a source for young recruits.

Today, the Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> is trying to 
do the same, and Ahmed is among those in Minneapolis trying to stop them.

“Here we are, living in a blessed country, with bounty, access to healthcare, 
work, education, opportunity – where you basically become anything you want to 
become,” said Ahmed, who immigrated to the US two decades ago. “And the kids 
chose to become a Shabaab member, or an Isis member.”

Of all the Americans who have joined or attempted to join Isis, more came from 
Minnesota 
<http://www.startribune.com/minnesota-leads-the-nation-in-would-be-isil-terrorists-from-u-s-report-finds/329942131/>
 than any other state or city.

Ahmed added: “What can we do? That’s the question I asked myself.”

So he started making cartoons.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DytwUkVJCY28&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DytwUkVJCY28>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DytwUkVJCY28&media=>
Consulting with Minneapolis imams, Ahmed uses the Qur’an to craft religious 
messages to show why Isis’s message is wrong. The short cartoon videos feature 
a character named Average Mohamed, a cheery man whose name was no accident. 
Mohamed is one of the most common names in the world. Average Mohamed is meant 
to represent the vast majority of them – the gas station managers, the doctors, 
the farmers, the professors – who reject Isis’s extremist interpretation ofIslam
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>.

“It’s the average people who must fight this war,” Ahmed said. “It’s a game 
changer. As Muslims on the frontline of this issue – whether it’s fighting it 
physically or fighting in my ways with counter ideology – that is a way we are 
closer to victory.”

Ahmed has started taking Average Mohamed’s message into Minneapolis classrooms 
as well. His videos have garnered worldwide attention, fostering meetings with 
the US Department of State and a presentation at a counter-extremism conference 
in London.

“The goal is to go ahead and create enough talking points so we can get to the 
kids before social media gets them,” Ahmed said. “So even though if they do 
start seeing these [Isis recruitment] videos … they know this is the wrong 
path.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC_4HSzYDnJ8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC_4HSzYDnJ8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DC_4HSzYDnJ8&media=>
However, Average Mohamed can only go as far as Mohamed Ahmed’s wallet allows. 
He keeps production costs low by writing scripts and voicing them on his own, 
but the costs of sourcing the animation – between $1,000 and $3,000 – can add 
up for a father of four with a mortgage.

Thanks to a small grant he received last year, Ahmed was able to produce 
several new videos and purchase advertising time on YouTube. For a while, 
Average Mohamed cartoons appeared as targeted advertisements on YouTube, 
gaining hundreds of thousands of views. He hopes to one day launch an app.

“We are starting a conversation,” he said. “Young Muslims – everywhere. 
Globally. Europe, Africa, Asia, the Middle East.”

In Minneapolis, individuals, organizations and government agencies have 
started pouring time and money into counteracting extremist recruitment there. 
Last year, the US Department of Justice launched the $1mBuilding Community 
Resilience <http://www.justice.gov/usao-mn/building-community-resilience> plan 
to combat recruitment. For years,Somali community organization Ka Joog 
<http://www.kajoog.org/about-us/> has been offering after-school activities and 
other programs for Somali-American youth in the Minneapolis area.

 As it stands, even though Minneapolis has proven to be the largest source of 
extremist recruits in the US, the vast majority of the city’s 30,000-strong 
Somali-American community, many of whom came to the US as refugees fleeing 
violence, remain an asset to region.

“I’m very proud of my community up here,” Ahmed said. “When we came, we were 
crawling, and now we are walking. It’s unbelievable. This community is vibrant.”

He added: “We do this work for the sake of our society, but most importantly 
for the sake of our lord. It is the faith in Islam that guides me through this 
work.”
 