
It is London’s biggest non-royal private home, a palace in Highgate with 28 
bedrooms, a 40,000-sq-ft basement and designer orangery. On Thursday the huge 
mansion, Witanhurst, was on the list of several destinations for what was 
billed by political campaigners as London’s first ever “kleptocracy” tour.

Campaigners connected to Russia’s opposition leader Alexei Navalny – a lawyer 
and critic of corruption – hired a bus and gave a guided tour of houses and 
flats in London’s most exclusive districts, properties owned by Russian 
government ministers and wealthy friends of Russia’s president,Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.

“It’s a refuge, a showroom and deposit box,” Roman Borisovich said of 
Witanhurst, standing near its massive red-brick wall. The palace was purchased 
in 2008 for £50m, but the owner was for some time a mystery. Last year the New 
Yorker magazinerevealed that the mansion belonged to Andrei Guriev, 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/06/01/house-of-secrets> a Russian 
tycoon and fertiliser baron who until recently had served in Putin’s senate.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmega-rich-homes-tour-london-oligarchs-russia-alexei-navalny-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0f2cd9234d13d0a31ddda8eb8eacbb380c472d5%2F0_300_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mega-rich%20homes%20tour%20puts%20spotlight%20on%20London's%20oligarchs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmega-rich-homes-tour-london-oligarchs-russia-alexei-navalny-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mega-rich%20homes%20tour%20puts%20spotlight%20on%20London%27s%20oligarchs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmega-rich-homes-tour-london-oligarchs-russia-alexei-navalny-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0f2cd9234d13d0a31ddda8eb8eacbb380c472d5%2F0_300_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 The tour included properties owned by Russian government ministers and wealthy 
friends of the country’s president, Vladimir Putin. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson for the Guardian 
Borisovich is an anti-corruption activist who appeared in the Channel 4 
documentaryFrom Russia With Cash 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/from-russia-with-cash>. Posing as a Russian 
official who had stolen his country’s health budget, he exposed the antics of 
unscrupulous estate agents. He said his latest idea aims to draw attention to 
how dirty money from countries such as Russia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan, 
continues to pour into the west.

Borisovich said he also wanted to highlight how a group of “enablers”, such as 
lawyers, accountants, and bankers, were helping oligarchs launder their 
“ill-gotten gains” by investing the cash in primeLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mansions.

In central London offshore companies owned one in 10 of the houses, he said, 
and shell companies owned £122bn worth of property.

As well as Witanhurst, the tour members visited Eden House, a pleasant villa 
in Highgate. A silver Mercedes was parked in the driveway, near a tasteful 
statue of a boy. The house, they were told, belonged to Andrei Yakunin.

Yakunin’s father, Vladimir, was reportedly close to Putin and until 2015 had 
run the company Russian Railways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/21/eu-vladimir-putin-david-cameron-arms-sale-ban>
. A former KGB officer, Yakunin Sr had sponsored anti-western Russian 
thinktanks.

Yakunin’s neighbour, Andrew, popped out and said he had invited the Russian 
and his wife round for drinks when they moved in a couple of years ago. 
“Funnily enough, they didn’t invite us back,” he said.

He said the Yakunins had installed hi-tech security cameras. They bought the 
house for £4.5m in 2007 via a Panamanian company. “One day I was clipping the 
hedge next to their property. Suddenly I heard a voice from the security camera 
telling me ‘Keep clear! Leave the premises!’”

Were Russian millions a bad thing for London? “Well, I made my money as an 
engineer and a lawyer,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmega-rich-homes-tour-london-oligarchs-russia-alexei-navalny-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F638ba4bb6d79b88202fbb27772ab8fae4c00c5d8%2F0_325_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mega-rich%20homes%20tour%20puts%20spotlight%20on%20London's%20oligarchs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmega-rich-homes-tour-london-oligarchs-russia-alexei-navalny-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mega-rich%20homes%20tour%20puts%20spotlight%20on%20London%27s%20oligarchs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmega-rich-homes-tour-london-oligarchs-russia-alexei-navalny-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F638ba4bb6d79b88202fbb27772ab8fae4c00c5d8%2F0_325_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 Anti-corruption activist Roman Borisovich acts as guide. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson for the Guardian 
Thursday’s London tour had begun just down the road from the Houses of 
Parliament, on Victoria embankment. Borisovich posed with a lifesize cardboard 
cut-out of Russia’s deputy prime minister, Igor Shuvalov. As well as being one 
of the top figures in the Russian governmentShuvalov and his wife, Olga, owned 
two luxury apartments worth £11.4m overlooking the Thames. 
<https://www.occrp.org/en/daily/4207-russia-deputy-pm-owns-us-18-million-flat-in-london-navalny-says>
 The homes cost 100 times Shuvalov’s official salary.

“It’s in Britain’s interests to stop this flow of corrupt money,” said Vladmir 
Ashurkov, a Russian opposition politician,who has received political asylum in 
the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/01/russian-opposition-activist-is-granted-asylum-in-uk>
. Ashurkov said he rejected the argument that foreign money helped the economy. 
Rather, he said, it raised house prices to unaffordable levels and turned 
London into a global centre for money laundering.

Why are rich Russians so obsessed with buying up London property?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/09/rich-russians-buying-london-property-real-estate>
The tour bus trundled past Belgrave Square, in Kensington, known jokingly as 
Red Square because of its association with other high-profile Russians.

The metals tycoon Oleg Deripaska owned No 5; the former oligarch Boris 
Berezovsky, who died in 2013, had several flats at No 26. Roman Abramovich’s 
home, two adjacent townhouses in Chester Square, was a short stroll away.

The smallest house on the tour belonged to Roman Rotenberg; situated in 
Cadogan Lane, Belgravia, it cost a mere £3.3m. Rotenberg’s father and uncle, 
Arkady and Boris Rotenberg, were said to be Putin’s oldest friends and former 
judo partners. Since Putin became president in 2000, the pair had become 
billionaires, supplying pipelines to the state-controlled energy corporation 
Gazprom. In2014 the EU and US sanctioned both of the Rotenbergs in connection 
with the Crimea crisis. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/31/europe-adds-putin-cronies-sanctions-blacklist>

Roman Rotenberg is a British citizen, and now the formal owner of many of his 
father’s companies. On Thursday he did not seem to be at home. There were no 
signs of life outside his mansion, with its handsome Dutch wooden shutters. 
“The US has sanctioned the Rotenbergs,” Borisovich said, standing in the 
cobbled road outside. He added: “Why doesn’t Britain do something?”
 