
It’s an age-old feeling: you’re shopping online and you come across something 
purporting to be this season’s It item. You laugh – both at its appearance 
(comic, ugly, absurd) and the price tag (three figures, possibly more). You 
forget about it, dismiss the state of fashion entirely and get back to work. 
But before long, you’re thinking about it, seriously thinking about it, and 
talking about it – competitively – lulled in by some sort of marketing osmosis 
until you decide you simply have to have it.

It happened with the Vetements DHL T-shirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/19/dhl-t-shirt-vetements-fashion-paris-catwalk>
, which appeared in all its corporate-logo-parodying glory, and sparked 
knock-offs on eBay and Instagram-hashtagged DHL vans – and it’s happening at 
Balenciaga this coming season, with their new It bag: a posh version of Thai 
Sampeng bags in which you may have carried your laundry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fmeme-or-marketing-balenciaga-made-laundry-bag-must-have%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7c2719ed38c1e66ea8c784b9fbd439a875e02e0%2F80_44_1203_1647%2F1203.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meme%20or%20marketing%3F%20How%20Balenciaga%20made%20a%20cheap%20laundry%20bag%20a%20must-have&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fmeme-or-marketing-balenciaga-made-laundry-bag-must-have%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meme%20or%20marketing%3F%20How%20Balenciaga%20made%20a%20cheap%20laundry%20bag%20a%20must-have&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fmeme-or-marketing-balenciaga-made-laundry-bag-must-have%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7c2719ed38c1e66ea8c784b9fbd439a875e02e0%2F80_44_1203_1647%2F1203.jpg>
 Photograph: Matchesfashion.com 
 This bag costs about £975. While it’s less of a spin on the plastic 
rainbow-striped shopping bags than Phoebe Philo’s 2013 blue-and-red checked 
affairs for Celine, and Raf Simons plastic bags for Jil Sander in 2010, it will 
probably go viral. Why?

Ari Spool, formerly of Knowyourmeme and now at Giphy, is a scholar of internet 
virals. “Fashion, and especially fashion now, love the high/low context,” she 
explains. “While the logo and the bag are unremarkable in one sense, the battle 
between high fashion and low references are part of this appeal.” The DHL 
T-shirt – and in theory, the bazar bag byBalenciaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/balenciaga>, which shares a designer with 
Vetements, Demna Gvasalia of the Russian collective – is precisely this: 
unremarkable and referencing something mainstream and mass, or at least outside 
of fashion’s net.

The strange case of Marina Joyce and internet hysteria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/04/marina-joyce-internet-hysteria-witch-hunts-cyberspace>
It also taps into the way the internet influences fashion, with the T-shirt’s 
success akin to a meme, or at least having a memetic quality, judging by the 
shift from product to hashtag. But, as Spool explains, it’s not a meme proper 
“rather it’s a forced meme” and testament to “the power of 
re-contextualisation”, wherein something – a logo, a print, an entire product – 
is taken, repurposed and reproduced, which in course changes its meaning and 
the message. It’s a time-worn tradition
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fmeme-or-marketing-balenciaga-made-laundry-bag-must-have%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d6f02cc1f89c937ef6b4d7fd5f309ce9120015%2F0_20_1031_1009%2F1031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meme%20or%20marketing%3F%20How%20Balenciaga%20made%20a%20cheap%20laundry%20bag%20a%20must-have&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fmeme-or-marketing-balenciaga-made-laundry-bag-must-have%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meme%20or%20marketing%3F%20How%20Balenciaga%20made%20a%20cheap%20laundry%20bag%20a%20must-have&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fmeme-or-marketing-balenciaga-made-laundry-bag-must-have%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d6f02cc1f89c937ef6b4d7fd5f309ce9120015%2F0_20_1031_1009%2F1031.jpg>
 The model Sarah Snyder in a Vetements DHL T-shirt. Photograph: 
sarahsnyder/instagram 
Ikea chic and Talking Heads suits – Balenciaga gets the Vetements treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jun/22/ikea-chic-and-talking-heads-suits-balenciaga-gets-the-vetements-treatment>
The message, says Spool, is to have a laugh at our expense: “A few years ago, 
Dis magazine specialised in putting commercial, everyday objects into shoots 
with a fashion context” – things like Crocs, or medical equipment – “and before 
long, people were wearing them on the Lower East Side and Orchard Street,” she 
says. The same thing is starting to happen with this bag – real-life £3 
versions of the bag are already on Instagram, hashtagged #Balenciaga, which, 
though knowing in their pursuit, are also perpetuating the trend.

Memes in fashion crop up periodically. Earlier this year, a teenager printed 
the entire script of Jerry Seinfeld’s Bee movie (already a Tumblr-generated 
meme) onto a T-shirt viacopypasta 
<http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/bee-movie-script-according-to-all-known-laws-of-aviation>
. Normcore, argues Spool, was memetic for a brief period before being co-opted 
and diagnosed by trend forecasters. In the 1990s, John Varvatos propelled the 
babydoll dress into infamy but was probably inspired by Courtney Love, grunge 
and the dime-store dress look.

These are memes in the purest sense because they happen organically, 
accidentally and without contrivance. “Appropriation is not mimetic, it is a 
marketing strategy,” says Spool. “By writing about it, you are playing right 
into their hands.”
 