
When I was 19 I lived in New York City, and one day I stumbled across Gay 
Pride in Central Park, which changed my life. I'd never lived out of Ireland 
before and was quite naive, I suppose. I didn't know many gay people or too 
many eccentric types and there I was, a little Irish girl surrounded by happy 
homosexuals, as Cyndi Lauper sang "True Colours".

That was in the summer of 1997, around the time when it became legal for gay 
couples to adopt. A couple came out and made a rousing speech about the 
problems they had faced, and then their two-year-old son ran out on stage, 
which was very emotional. People were crying all over the place. These men 
having a baby was just so monumental.

It was such a colourful, eye-opening day - everyone was so unashamedly 
exhibitionist. All the Pride events in London that I go to are just like that, 
but this first one stands out for me.

A great example of a festival that has something for everyone is the Lambeth 
Country Fair in Brixton, where I used to live; farmers set up stalls next to 
jerk-chicken vendors. It's the only place in Lambeth where kids can feed cows, 
but there's also a massive reggae arena so it attracts such a varied crowd. Me 
and loads of mates went there last year and just chilled out listening to live 
dub all day in the sunshine.

I've also been going to Fruitstock since it started a couple of years ago. 
It's very family-orientated, very safe and middle class: not quite like the 
reggae stage at Brockwell Park, which is a little bit rougher round the edges. 
Fruitstock was packed last year, but the year before I saw Gilles Peterson 
there playing a really summery set. It was a hot day anyway, which always makes 
everyone happy in London, but at that festival you're always guaranteed a great 
mood.

There's also Radio 1's Big Weekend, of course, which is the largest free, 
ticketed festival in the UK. We always get quite massive bands, but we're 
trying to make it even bigger this year. Dundee loved it last year - I played 
my biggest gig ever there, DJ-ing before the Zutons on the Sunday night. I was 
absolutely petrified at first, but by the end I really got into it.

There's something about the freeness - it brings a mood of everyone being in 
the same boat. Everyone has the chance to see the same music and have the same 
experience ... in a dream world, all festivals would be free.

Â· Annie Mac's Mash Up is on Friday nights (10pm-midnight) and Sundays (9-10pm) 
onRadio 1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-1>
 