
The European parliament will on Monday debate a call – backed by a petition 
signed by 1.2 million people – to scrap animal research in the EU. The proposal 
has alarmed scientists, who worked for six years to set up the 2010 European 
directive that controls animal experimentation and welfare in the EU.

Researchers fear that the petition, which was drawn up by the Italian-based 
Stop Vivisection <http://www.stopvivisection.eu/> European citizens’ 
initiative, could sway many newly elected MEPs who would then press the 
European commission into scrapping the directive which, in the UK, is enshrined 
in an amendment tothe 1986 Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/operation-of-aspa>.

“Without the directive, research using animals would be blocked and that would 
have terrible consequences,” said Nancy Lee, senior policy adviser at the 
Wellcome Trust. “New medicines for Alzheimer’s, heart disease, cancer and other 
conditions could no longer be tested. Similarly, new drugs for animals would 
also be blocked.”

This view is backed by Dame Kay Davies, director of the MRC functional 
genomics unit at Oxford University. “Removal of the directive would be a 
significant step backwards both for animal welfare in the EU and for Europe’s 
leading role in advancing human and animal health,” she said in last week’s
Nature.

Other citizens’ initiatives, which require a minimum of a million signatures 
before they are heard by the European parliament, have included calls for 
improved water supplies and stricter speed limits inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

At the meeting in Brussels, MEPs will listen to speeches from the initiative’s 
organisers before Françoise Barré-Sinoussi, the French Nobel laureate and 
virologist, outlines the importance of animal research in the development of 
new medicines.
 