
Suffragette review – a valuable, vital film about how human rights are won
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/suffragette-review-votes-women-carey-mulligan-abi-morgan-bonham-carter>
It has taken a decade to get off the ground, but as Suffragette received its 
UK premiere as the opening film of theLondon film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival>, the film’s director 
revealed that she was determined not to be knocked off course in her quest to 
make her 10-year “passion project”. “A film is never easy,” said Sarah Gavron, 
“but this was a tough proposition because we wanted to stick to our guns. We 
pushed through all the obstacles.”

Gavron was speaking at a press conference before Suffragette’s gala screening 
in London’s Leicester Square, and scriptwriterAbi Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan> added: “A film that is fronted by 
an ensemble of women, and they are not being funny or romantic, is hard. That 
became a huge obstacle.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444301821716%2FKP_524078_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffragette%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffragette%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fsuffragette-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444301821716%2FKP_524078_crop_640x480.jpg>
Suffragette tells the story of the militant campaign in support of women’s 
voting rights in the UK, and features Carey Mulligan – who appeared at the 
press conference only three weeks after the birth of her first child - as a 
laundress called Maud Watts, a fictional working-class character whose struggle 
is the centre of the drama. Suffragette also features Meryl Streep as Emmeline 
Pankhurst, Natalie Press as Emily Davison, the activist who died at the 1913 
Epsom Derby; andHelena Bonham Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/helena-bonham-carter> as Edith Ellyn, an 
amalgamation of more than one prominent suffragette.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fsuffragette-london-film-festival-meryl-streep-carey-mulligan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444232037499%2Fefb3631d-2516-491d-a826-bdd6c3a79e10-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meryl%20Streep%20defends%20feminist%20credentials%20as%20Suffragette%20opens%20London%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fsuffragette-london-film-festival-meryl-streep-carey-mulligan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meryl%20Streep%20defends%20feminist%20credentials%20as%20Suffragette%20opens%20London%20film%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fsuffragette-london-film-festival-meryl-streep-carey-mulligan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F7%2F1444232037499%2Fefb3631d-2516-491d-a826-bdd6c3a79e10-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Streep and Mulligan with Sarah Gavron and Abi Morgan. Photograph: LEON 
NEAL/AFP/Getty Images 
The film-makers explained their decision to focus on a peripheral figure in 
the suffragette struggle, and a fictional one at that. Streep said: “The great 
achievement of the film is that it’s not about women of a certain class; it’s 
about a working girl, a young laundress, who looks like us, and the 
circumstances of her life were out of her hands, completely.” Mulligan, whose 
character joins the suffragettes’ campaign after years of toil in a laundry, 
suggested that this focus meant that it was more relevant to contemporary 
audiences than a straight historical biopic. “It doesn’t feel like a 
documentary about the past, it feels like a film about today. I always felt 
it’s resonance was about where we are now, and its achievement is to mark what 
these women did, and what they gave to us. Of course, we still live in a sexist 
society, but the film allows us to look at where we are today.”


However, despite the film’s positive message about female empowerment – inside 
the film industry, as well as in the wider world – Suffragette has found itself
dogged by an unexpected furore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/05/meryl-streep-backlash-suffragette-t-shirt-slogan>
 over T-shirts the cast wore for a magazine photo-shoot –bearing the words “I’d 
rather be a rebel than a slave” – taken from a line Pankhurst says in the film, 
at which some African-American commentators took offence,suggesting the 
contribution of non-white campaigners was being ignored 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/05/suffragette-film-publicity-campaign-erasure-feminism>
. Morgan addressed the controversy by saying: “It would be a pity if the 
negative connotations of that conversation – and it is an important 
conversation – overshadowed the true and sincere intentions of the film, which 
is to empower all women, globally, to look for equality for all women. That to 
me is the really important narrative. But the discourse is really important, 
and it is vital we keep talking about it.”


Streep also responded to questions over her refusal to describe herself as a 
“feminist” in a recent interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/02/meryl-streep-on-feminist-question-im-a-humanist>
. “There is a phrase in the film – ‘Deeds not words’ – and that is where I 
stand on that. I let the actions of my life stand for what I am, as a human 
being. Contend with that, not the words.”

The film’s status as something of a political hot potato was reinforced by the 
declaration of activist group Sisters Uncut to stage a protest at the premiere 
event againstcuts to domestic violence services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/03/domestic-violence-refuge-crisis-women-closure-safe-houses>
.
Emma Jones (@EmmaPJones) 
#suffragette <https://twitter.com/hashtag/suffragette?src=hash> premiere just 
decided to ignore protesters. V British. All v polite#deadwomencantvote 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/deadwomencantvote?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/RRGJCS4M3j <http://t.co/RRGJCS4M3j>
 <https://twitter.com/EmmaPJones/status/651806928839049216> October 7, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/EmmaPJones/status/651806928839049216> 
Having described this year’s edition of the London film festival as “the year 
of strong women” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/01/london-film-festival-2015-will-be-year-of-strong-women>
, festival director Clare Stewart said that Suffragette “first and foremost, 
tells an important story made by British women”, and that given thecommitment 
to diversity by the British Film Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/08/film-bfi-diversity-rules-access-to-lottery-funding>
, the festival’s parent body, giving the film the opening slot felt “entirely 
appropriate”. She said: “The issue over gender equality, especially in the film 
industry, has become an increasingly important one. It’s clear there is talent 
everywhere, but not a lot of opportunity.”


In accordance with its powerful themes of gender struggle, empowerment and 
solidarity, the production has also made much of its female-dominated creative 
team, led by director Gavron (previously best known for the film adaptation of 
Monica Ali’s Brick Lane) and scriptwriter Morgan, whose film work includes The 
Iron Lady, Shame and The Invisible Woman. Gavron said that the cast and crew 
had formed “an immediate bond”. “There was an unusual sense of camaraderie,” 
she said. “Partly it was because we were telling a story everybody felt very 
passionate about, but also because there was an unusual balance: we had men, 
and we had women, in key positions, and that was exciting.”

However, Streep did have harsh words for forces in the film world that she 
considered negatively influenced audiences’ appreciation of films that might 
appeal to women. Saying she wanted to investigate “buzz”, and how people 
decided which films to see, Streep cited thereviews aggregator site Rotten 
Tomatoes <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/> for its skewed gender balance, saying 
she tabulated 168 women critics and bloggers on the site, as opposed to some 
760 men. “If the Tomatometer is tilted so completely to one set of tastes, it 
affects box office, absolutely... the word isn’t ‘disheartening’, it’s 
‘infuriating’. Because people accept this as received wisdom. It isn’t fair. We 
need inclusion. It has to be equal.”
 