
A Scotland Yard commander assaulted and falsely arrested a man in a "wholesale 
abuse" of his powers, a court heard on Friday.

Ali Dizaei took advantage of his position as a senior Metropolitan police 
officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/sep/30/ali-dizaei-reinstated-met-police> 
to further his own interests, jurors were told.

Prosecutor Stephen Wright QC said 49-year-old Dizaei "bullied" and 
"threatened" Waad Al-Baghdadi, an Iraqi, in a row over payment for a personal 
website.

He then wove a web of lies in the aftermath of the row, which happened outside 
a west London restaurant, Southwark crown court heard.

Wright said actions such as Dizaei's had a "corrosive" impact "between citizen 
and police generally".

Opening the Crown case, Wright said: "He was, in fact, pursuing a citizen for 
his own personal motive."

The actions amounted to "wholesale abuse of such power by a senior officer", 
he added.

Jurors had already been told Dizaei was being retried for the offences.

Dizaei, from Acton, west London, denies charges of misconduct in a public 
office and perverting the course of justice. Wearing a dark blue suit with a 
white shirt, he sat in the dock taking notes as the prosecution opened.

The two offences are linked to a confrontation at the Persian Yas restaurant 
in Hammersmith Road, Kensington, in July 2008.

The prosecution followed an investigation by officials from the Independent 
Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Complaints Commission (IPCC).

Mr Justice Saunders told jurors to focus strictly on the evidence, saying: 
"You will hear that this is a retrial because it may be that witnesses will be 
asked what was said at the previous trial.

"You are not concerned with what happened at that trial, nor are you concerned 
with any other hearing."

The first charge alleges Dizaei is responsible for misconduct in a public 
office by threatening Baghdadi and by "purporting to arrest and detain" him, 
knowing he did not have reasonable grounds.

The second charge alleges that the father of three "did a series of acts which 
had a tendency to pervert the course of public justice" by falsely alleging in 
oral and written statements that he had been the victim of an unprovoked 
physical assault.

The Â£90,000-a-year senior officer is a former president of the National Black 
Police Association <http://www.nbpa.co.uk/>.

Dizaei was born in Tehran, where his father headed the traffic police and his 
grandfather was an assistant commissioner.

He said police work was his destiny and joined Thames Valley police after 
attending boarding school and City University Law School. In 1999, he joined 
the Metropolitan police and was promoted to superintendent, based in 
Kensington, west London.
 