
Foreign candidates will for the first time be allowed to apply to be the head 
of theMetropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police>, 
but the government has signalled that it no longer sees it as the top job in 
British policing.

The successor to Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bernard-hogan-howe> will be selected by a 
panel that includes the head of Britain’s version of the FBI, Lynne Owens, the 
director general of the National Crime Agency.


She chose that job instead of running to be Met commissioner and has the power 
to issue the commissioner with orders. Law changes mean a police chief from one 
of four other countries can apply for the role. But non-police officers, such 
as ex-military chiefs, cannot.

Hogan-Howe, announced his retirement in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/sir-bernard-hogan-howe-to-retire-as-met-police-commissioner>
. The six weeks it has taken to place the advert to find his successor means 
his replacement may not be in post by the time he stands down in February 2017.




The home secretary, Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd>, confirmed the advert would 
go out on Wednesday.

The advert sets out the criteria for the next commissioner and says the 
successful candidate will need to:

 * Show evidence of successfully leading transformational change in a 
challenging financial climate. 
 *  An understanding of changing crime and threat patterns, and the protection 
of the most vulnerable; 
 * Show evidence of a lasting commitment to respecting and valuing difference 
and inclusion. 
 *  Have experience of working successfully with national and local government 
and an understanding of the wider political, social and economic context. 
 *  Have a successful track record of working with diverse communities to 
achieve positive outcomes. vikram dodd (@VikramDodd) 
The ad for the new Met commissioner will go out today , Home Secretary Amber 
Rudd tells a conference of police chiefs
 <https://twitter.com/VikramDodd/status/798832634579193856> November 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/VikramDodd/status/798832634579193856> 
The appointment of the Met commissioner is by royal warrant and essentially 
made by the home secretary, who is supposed to take into account the views of 
the mayor ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

Among the favourites to replace Hogan-Howe is Sara Thornton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/30/hogan-howe-met-police-chief-race-gets-under-way>
, the chair of the NationalPolice <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> 
Chiefs’ Council and former head of the Thames Valley force, which borders 
London. Thornton – who technically holds the rank of assistant commissioner in 
the Met – has been described as the former prime minister David Cameron’s 
favourite police chief.

The other favourite is Mark Rowley, an assistant Met commissioner who oversees 
counter-terrorism. In that role he has got to know key politicians who will 
choose the next commissioner, namely Rudd, Theresa May and the London mayor, 
Sadiq Khan. Rowley was previously chief constable of Surrey.

Also considering a bid are Stephen Kavanagh, the chief constable of Essex 
police and previously a Met officer, and Cressida Dick, who left the Met to 
join the Foreign Office.

Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> sources say the Cheshire chief 
constable, Simon Byrne, who has senior-level experience in the Met, is also 
mulling a bid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fad-for-new-met-chief-signals-start-of-race-to-find-hogan-howe-successor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe500a0482676aacdf21f68d1fdf4577428f38fb8%2F0_117_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Metropolitan%20police%20chief%20job%20open%20to%20foreign%20candidates%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fad-for-new-met-chief-signals-start-of-race-to-find-hogan-howe-successor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Metropolitan%20police%20chief%20job%20open%20to%20foreign%20candidates%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fad-for-new-met-chief-signals-start-of-race-to-find-hogan-howe-successor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe500a0482676aacdf21f68d1fdf4577428f38fb8%2F0_117_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Mark Rowley is among the favourites to replace Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe. 
Photograph: Olivia Harris/Reuters 
The job comes with a £276,000 salary but the new commissioner faces swingeing 
budget cuts and the task of repairing the damage to the force’s reputation after
a report showed it bungled a high-profile inquiry into allegations of 
historical sex abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/operation-midland-riddled-with-met-police-errors-report-finds>
 by establishment members, which ended with no charges.

Who should be the next Metropolitan police commissioner? | Duncan Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/metropolitan-police-commissioner-bernard-hogan-howe>
Police chiefs from Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the US as well as the UK 
would be allowed to apply, but applicants have to have served as a police 
officer. This means applicants from the military would not be considered.

Rudd has called on police chiefs to look outside the service when recruiting 
their new personnel. Addressing police and crime commissioners and chief 
constables at a conference in London, she said: “You must recognise that talent 
does not only come from within police ranks.

“It can be found elsewhere too, in both the public and the private sector.” 


Rudd cited the direct entry scheme, which allows candidates from outside 
policing to join the service at certain ranks.


“These men and women bring expertise from the worlds of finance, the civil 
service, the military and business. Expertise that can make a difference,” the 
home secretary said.


Rudd stressed the scheme’s intention was not to take away top jobs from 
existing police or to put them out of reach of eligible candidates from within 
forces.


She ruled out imposing targets for direct entry recruits, but told the 
audience: “I urge you to see it for what it is: an opportunity to bring in 
talented leaders from different sectors.”

 