
Forty years ago, when the most influential British police chief of the postwar 
era, Robert Mark, took over as theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> commissioner, he made a 
celebrated and shocking remark. "The basic test of a decent police force is 
that it catches more criminals than it employs," Mark said. Then he added: "And 
the Met is failing that test."

The four-year jail sentence for misconduct and perverting the course of 
justice that was imposed yesterday onCommander Ali Dizaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/08/ali-dizaei-guilty-metropolitan-politce>
 is easily the most serious case of corrupt abuse of police power in London 
since those distant days. Commissioner Paul Stephenson was right to admit in 
his response to the verdict that it tarnishes the reputation of the Met as a 
whole. Dizaei's conviction is a reminder that abuse of power is always a danger 
in any police force in any society, even the most heavily scrutinised force in 
Britain today. And a reminder, too, that the independent police complaints 
system, anathema to Mark and to all advocates of letting the police run their 
own show, can actually nail the guilty as effectively as any disciplinarian.

Dizaei was something new in the police. He did not operate behind walls of 
secrecy, as criminals in uniform did in the past. On the contrary, he was 
flamboyant, brazen even. His high-profile role as London's most senior ethnic 
minority officer, as head of theNational Black Police Association 
<http://www.nationalbpa.com/>, and his willingness to make allegations of 
racism against senior ­colleagues in a force whose institutional racism had 
been exposed in theMacpherson inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lawrence>
, means his conviction will have repercussions of many kinds. The case can 
hardly be left where it is. At the very least, Commissioner Stephenson and the 
various London police authorities have some explaining to do. It won't do to 
fall back, as the police did in Mark's day, on the claim that Dizaei was just 
"one bad apple".

By coincidence, Mark's comment about the Met failing the test was quoted in 
the annual Political Quarterly lecture last night by Sir Ian Blair, the former 
commissioner. Sir Ian's role as one of Dizaei's major targets may need to be 
looked at afresh in the light of yesterday's verdict. But his lecture 
highlighted both the importance of an effective system of police 
accountability, underlined by the Dizaei case, and the dangers of a system 
which encourages senior officers to play to the political gallery. Sir Ian is 
absolutely right to warn that the Conservative proposal for elected police 
commissioners is explosive. But the status quo is not up to the job either. 
British policing is in need of a sober rethink, but a general election 
law-and-order arms race between the parties is not an encouraging way to begin, 
in spite of all the urgent issues highlighted by the Dizaei case.
 