
On 19 November 2014 the journal Nature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/focus/mouseENCODE/> published the conclusions of 
a study carried out by the Encode international consortium, comparing the 
systems controlling gene activity in mice and in humans. The four articles on 
this topic found new similarities but also differences. However, this was only 
the visible tip of a massive undertaking that gave rise to a dozen publications 
in all, in five different journals.

Laboratory mice are much in the news, in the scientific world at least. A 
month earlier the journal Science explained how genetic engineering and new 
transplant techniques have kindled hope of understanding and treating cancer. 
Researchers set forth their dream of genetically modifying a mouse or 
implanting a human tumour in order to reproduce a patient’s condition and find 
the right molecules for their treatment.

However at the end of October the New England Journal of Medicine published an 
account of three clinical trials of prospective tuberculosis treatments 
<http://www.nejm.org/medical-research/tuberculosis> that was much less 
flattering for the rodents. Researchers had tested three new drug regimens that 
had worked well for mice; on humans they proved a complete failure. “These 
trials cost at least $200m,” says Dr Clifton Barry. “In a way, it’s to be 
expected. Research is expensive. But this setback was foreseeable, like all the 
others we’ve seen in the past 40 years involving tuberculosis and mice. Yet no 
one seems particularly bothered.”

Barry, 52, is a key figure in his field. Heading the tuberculosis research 
programme at the National Institute of Health 
<http://www.niaid.nih.gov/labsandresources/labs/aboutlabs/lcid/tuberculosisresearchsection/Pages/barry.aspx>
, based at Bethesda, Maryland, he has published many articles on the subject, 
in particular relating to mice. But in the past three years he has lost 
patience with the little animals. “They’re fine for ordinary work like 
toxicology trials. Perfect for checking that no unwanted side-effects crop up 
when we try a new molecule. But it’s a complete mistake to think they represent 
a good model of human disease,” he adds.

They’re fine for ordinary work ... But it’s a complete mistake to think they 
represent a good model of human disease

Tuberculosis <https://www.theguardian.com/society/tuberculosis> in mice is 
simply not the same as in humans, as he explains. Mice do not cough, nor are 
they contagious. More importantly when humans breath in the Koch bacillus, it 
triggers an immune response. White blood cells surround the bacteria and 
aggregate forming granulomas. The resulting fibrous mass contains the bacilli, 
but does not kill them. Some 2 billion people on Earth are healthy carriers of 
the disease. In some cases they ultimately develop the disease, but most them 
never even find out what they are harbouring. For mice the picture is quite 
different: there are no healthy carriers and no granulomas. The bacterium 
attacks the organism, progresses and finally prevails.

Barry spent years investigating this crucial difference, convinced that a 
grasp of the mechanisms at work in mice would contribute to understanding the 
disease in humans. But three years ago a South Korean scientist asked him to 
test an antibiotic, Linezolid, previously used to treat respiratory conditions. 
“He assured me that he had obtained spectacular results on his patients,” Barry 
recalls. “I was doubtful. I tried it on mice and got no result. But he insisted 
so much I finally organised a human trial. I was amazed. The previous 
treatments had been discovered without animal experimentation. Forty years on, 
it was the same […] This disease claims almost 2 million lives every year. I 
couldn’t go on looking after mice any longer. It’s a dead end.”

So are mice a trap? Has medical research all over the world taken the wrong 
course? Our question prompts a smile from Xavier Montagutelli, head of the
animal facilities at Institut Pasteur 
<http://www.pasteur.fr/en/research/developmental-and-stem-cells-biology/units-groups/central-animal-facilities>
, in Paris. He explain how these small mammals came to play such an important 
part in laboratory research. Gregor Mendel started breeding mice in the 
mid-19th century, but his bishop thought such work unseemly in an Augustinian 
friar. So Mendel switched his attention to sweet peas. In 1902 the French 
scientist Lucien Cuénot picked up this work and applied it to mice. Meanwhile 
Clarence Little in the US created a “pure-strain” mouse. “He noticed that mice 
were not adversely affected by consanguinity, unlike rabbits or hamsters,” 
Montagutelli says. “So you can obtain identical individuals and test any 
hypothesis.” For each step forward in medical science, researchers took 
advantage of the rodents’ characteristics, charting their reaction to 
infectious disease or radiation, environmental upsets or genetic modification.

Mice have many advantages for research, as Montagutelli explains. “They are 
small and inexpensive, they reproduce quickly – every three months you obtain a 
new generation – and they age quickly too, making them ideal for studying 
age-related complaints. We know how to freeze their embryos, sperm and ova. We 
now know how to manipulate their genes, adding one, knocking out another, and 
replace a base pair to see what happens. They are remarkable tools.”

A quick look at the list of Nobel prizes for medicine confirms their 
contribution: discovery of sulphonamides in 1939; penicillin, 1945; yellow 
fever vaccine, 1951; polio vaccine, 1954; cellular origin of retroviral 
oncogenes, 1989; HIV-Aids virus, 2008; not to mention prions in 1997. Each time 
mice played a key part. In the 1980s nearly one-in-three Nobel prizes for 
medicine were awarded to work on mice. “In genetics, cancer, immune response, 
embryonic and nervous systems and infectious diseases … in short in most 
fields, mice are valuable,” Montagutelli adds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmice-clinical-trials-human-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426848596128%2Fbde7c684-5fe0-4890-86ad-10708a296371-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mice%20losing%20their%20allure%20as%20experimental%20subjects%20to%20study%20human%20disease&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmice-clinical-trials-human-disease%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mice%20losing%20their%20allure%20as%20experimental%20subjects%20to%20study%20human%20disease&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmice-clinical-trials-human-disease%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426848596128%2Fbde7c684-5fe0-4890-86ad-10708a296371-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Could the era of scientific testing on rodents be approaching its end? 
Photograph: Tetra Images/Alamy 
While at Institut Pasteur, we also met Jean-Marc Cavaillon, head of the 
cytokines and inflammation unit, and a specialist in toxic shock. “There is a 
problem”, he says very simply. He has just returned from a conference in Seoul 
and shows us his presentation. Here is a monoclonal antibody that treats a 
lymphoma in mice, but would send a human being to intensive care. Here again is 
an anti-inflammatory drug that is good for a rodent but deadly for us. “These 
are just a couple of examples. Mice are great for basic research, for 
understanding overall patterns and grasping mechanisms. But once you start 
modelling a human disease to find the right treatment, you run up against major 
differences between us and mice,” he asserts.

Shaw Warren, a US paediatrician and professor at Harvard Medical School, was 
responsible for striking the most deadly blow against humble lab mice. In 2003 
he had just completed a sabbatical at Institut Pasteur, where he had studied 
the behaviour of mouse and human cells in a given milieu, alongsideCavaillon. 
On returning to Boston he joined up with several other researchers to launch a 
programme observing gene behaviour in the event of septicaemia, the sort of 
infection that all hospitals dread. He spent five years on painstaking work 
that he believed was original and relevant. But when he came to publish his 
findings the leading journals objected that they had not been compared with the 
baseline rodent model.

Undaunted Warren brought new members into the team, now 39 strong, and 
systematically compared the genes affected by septicaemia, as well as two other 
inflammatory conditions, burns and physical injuries. He hoped to obtain a 
comprehensive map. But the contrary was all too apparent: “the responses in 
corresponding mouse models correlate poorly with the human conditions”, the 
team reported. Which might explain the failure of 150 molecules for combating 
septicaemia, tested at great expense over the past 10 years and marketed on the 
grounds that sick mice seemed to respond favourably.

Published by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences in February 
2013 <http://www.pnas.org/content/110/9/3507.abstract> the article unleashed a 
storm of criticism. This was of course partly due to its conclusions, which 
seemed likely to contaminate all the branches of medicine dealing with 
inflammation, from cancer to Alzheimer’s. But also because the New York Times 
revealed thatNature and Science had rejected the article 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/12/science/testing-of-some-deadly-diseases-on-mice-mislead-report-says.html?_r=0>
.

Mice are great for basic research ... But once you start modelling a human 
disease, you run up against major differences

Opponents of lab mice produced more and more evidence. Paracetamol and aspirin 
are both deadly to mice. Thalidomide, prescribed for pregnant women in the late 
1950s to alleviate morning sickness, resulted in many thousands of congenital 
malformations, despite having been successfully tested on mice. They pointed 
out that the obese, sedentary rodents found in laboratories can only be used to 
model humans in a similar condition, certainly not the healthy individuals on 
which research supposedly focuses. They emphasised that 95% of the drugs 
thought to be promising after experiments on mice, fail when subjected to 
clinical trials. Furthermore, the number of new drugs being developed has never 
been so low, yet their cost has soared (over $4bn per molecule reaching the 
market is a common estimate). Not to mention those who condemn such practices 
on the grounds of cruelty to animals, stressing that 15m mice perish annually 
in US labs and a further 7m in Europe. “It may seem a lot,” Montagutelli 
agrees, “but it’s only equivalent to 1.6 mice for every European who dies.”

The furore ultimately died down and two years later life goes on. “There’s the 
weight of history, all the accumulated skills, and the production facilities 
which cannot be stopped just like that,” says science historian Jean-Paul 
Gaudillière and a specialist on mice. Researchers need to publish too. “With 
their short life cycle mice are a boon for producing articles. ‘Publish or 
perish’: the old saying is truer than ever today,” he adds.

However, everyone agrees that practices must change for the sake of good 
science. Yann Hérault, head of theMouse Clinical Institute 
<http://www.ics-mci.fr/en/> near Strasbourg, is counting on the arrival of new 
lineages to diversify the genetic heritage of the animals being studied. “For 
decades we’ve been selecting them to make analysis as accurate as possible, but 
we’ve lost in breadth,” he says. Barry has switched to another model, now using 
marmosets. Fellow researcher JoAnne L Flynn prefers crab-eating macaques. “It’s 
a difficult choice,” she says. “Monkeys are terribly expensive [about $5,500 
compared with $20 for a mouse], they take up much more room, require specialist 
staff, don’t lend themselves to the same genetic engineering and only have one 
baby a year. Added to which they cough and are consequently contagious. We have 
to take a lot of precautions to protect our health.” We ask how she can 
sacrifice them under these conditions. Flynn is lost for words, so Barry chips 
in: “It’s a wrench. They’re close to us and highly evolved. I’d much rather 
not, but in the meantime humans are dying.”

Other researchers dream of biotechnology taking the rodents’ place. “What with 
animal models being pushed to their limits and the financial crunch, 
governments and the pharmaceutical industry have had to change their policy,” 
says François Busquet, who heads theCentre for Alternatives to Animal Testing 
in Brussels <http://cms.uni-konstanz.de/leist/caat-europe/>.

Cavaillon and Warren have yet another suggestion. “Instead of focusing on the 
supposed similarities between mice and humans, perhaps we should be looking at 
their differences. Mice are 100,000 times more resistant to bacteria than we 
are. That’s an established fact, which could serve as inspiration,” says 
Warren. “Rather than making mice like humans, we could do the opposite,” the 
Frenchman adds. Perhaps things are finally looking up for lab mice. 

This article appeared in Guardian Weekly, <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly> 
which incorporates material from Le Monde
 