
In a career of more than four decades, Michael Douglas has played president, 
gay icon, stockbroker and everything in between, picking up two Academy Awards 
and five Golden Globes in the process. That he can be bland (Ant-Man 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/film/ant-man>) or just plain bad (And So It Goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/24/and-so-it-goes-reiner-keaton-douglas-review>
) may come as a surprise to those unfamiliar with his awful romantic comedies 
and his surfeit of forgettable thrillers. Still, he inevitably comes back with 
a performance that is nothing short of phenomenal.

Here are five memorable highlights from his eclectic career. Post your 
favourites below.

Fatal Attraction
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIAsBghop-hw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIAsBghop-hw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIAsBghop-hw&media=>
“Tense” is how one critic described this 1987 film – quite the understatement. 
Douglas hadn’t fully captured critics’ hearts at this point in his career, but 
his brilliant performance in Adrian Lyne’s flashy, trashy thriller was the 
turning point. He plays a conceited character who is victimised by a sexually 
aggressive woman – a trope he would reprise twice more (in Basic Instinct and 
Disclosure) to complete a steamy trifecta of erotic thrillers.


Wall Street
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Da1tDKFfno&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Da1tDKFfno>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Da1tDKFfno&media=>
Douglas was given the lead role in Wall Street, despite director Oliver Stone 
having been discouraged by everyone in Hollywood from choosing him. But Douglas 
put in the performance of a lifetime as Gordon Gekko – and won the best actor 
Oscar for it. The evil charm he builds throughout the movie culminates in the 
legendary “greed is good” speech, which is now firmly established in popular 
culture – Australian prime minister Kevin Rudd called those responsible for the 
financial crisis “the children of Gordon Gekko”.

Falling Down
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-eREiQhBDIk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-eREiQhBDIk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-eREiQhBDIk&media=>
In this dark comedy about social alienation, Douglas plays William “D-Fens” 
Foster, an out-of-work white-collar divorcee who snaps, and heads out on a 
spree of unrestrained violence against society at large. Falling Down was 
controversial, not least because of its frank depiction of the racist, 
aggressive “angry white male” stereotype.

Wonder Boys
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZMASxQ-lsB0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZMASxQ-lsB0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZMASxQ-lsB0&media=>
Despite its good reviews, multiple awards, soundtrack by Bob Dylan and stellar 
ensemble cast, Wonder Boys was a box office flop – most likely due to the
terrible marketing campaign 
<http://variety.com/2000/film/news/inside-moves-189-1117781947/>. Douglas plays 
a professor and writer going through a mid-life crisis, constantly stoned and 
depressed, and struggling to write a 2,000-page novel which includes the 
genealogy of every character’s horse.

Behind the Candelabra
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df9CjJBwbLOc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df9CjJBwbLOc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df9CjJBwbLOc&media=>
“Too gay” for cinemas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/07/steven-soderbergh-liberace-film>, 
the Liberace biopic Behind the Candelabra was released as a television movie in 
the US. It won several awards and had thehighest audience rating for a TV movie 
since 2004 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/tv-ratings-hbos-behind-candelabra-559136>
, but the lack of a theatrical run meant that neither Douglas nor Matt Damon 
could be Oscar-nominated for it – a shame, considering that both performances 
were universally praised. The romantic, skittish and bratty Liberace was a 
tricky role, but Douglas made the film an irresistibly entertaining, rampant 
affair.

 