
An erotically charged encounter between three of Britain’s most celebrated 
actors is at the heart of this autumn’s season at theDonmar Warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/donmar-warehouse>, as the London theatre 
revives Les Liaisons Dangereuses.

Christopher Hampton’s play, adapted from the 18th-century French novel, hasn’t 
had a major production in 30 years in the UK since Alan Rickman seductively 
arched his eyebrows at Juliet Stevenson and Lesley Manville as the sexually 
scheming Vicomte de Valmont, vying with his female rival the Marquise de 
Merteuil. Valmont will be played by Dominic West, famed for his roles in US TV 
shows The Wire andThe Affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/20/dominic-west-the-affair-sky-atlantic>
 as well as varied stage roles, while his co-stars include the Oscar-nominated 
Janet McTeer and Downton Abbey star Michelle Dockery.

The Temple review – an immaculate reimagining of the Occupy London protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/28/the-temple-review-simon-russell-beale-donmar-warehouse-st-pauls>
The revival will be directed by the Donmar’s artistic director Josie Rourke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/josie-rourke>, who told the Guardian: “I 
don’t think I have a particularly radical take on it, because it’s simply a 
great play … I’m figuring it out. You have to get the chemistry right, and with 
Janet and Dominic as that rivalrous, sexually charged pair I’m 80% of the way 
there, because they’re so brilliant.”

She acknowledged how intimate the production would be in the 250-seat theatre, 
saying: “You are so close – it’s one of those spaces where you have to decide 
whether or not the character’s fingernails are dirty.”

Abi Morgan, who expertly synthesised the personal and political in her scripts 
for The Iron Lady, Brick Lane and the forthcomingSuffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/06/cast-and-crew-suffragette-film-meryl-streep-carey-mulligan-helena-bonham-carter>
, is to meanwhile see her early playSplendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/may/30/theatre1> revived. The story of 
a photojournalist at the heart of a coup in an eastern European state, and her 
interactions with the dictator’s wife, her friend and her interpreter, it 
features another piquant cast in Zawe Ashton, Sinead Cusack, Michelle Fairley 
and Genevieve O’Reilly.

“Plays are becoming more and more unfashionable,” said Rourke, adding that the 
revival was to help make the work part of “the conversation” in 2015. “It’s a 
great play that didn’t quite have its moment … the world has turned since [it 
was written] but the moment is no less relevant.”

Elsewhere in the programme, former Royal Court director Dominic Cooke is to 
helm the first UK production of Teddy Ferrara, a play by frequent Cooke 
collaborator Christopher Shinn. Rourke said she’d been courting Cooke ever 
since she began work at the Donmar in 2012, calling him “Christopher Shinn’s 
great interpreter … he really understands playwrights; he’s one of the great 
directors at working below the waterline with a playwright to really shape and 
bring a play to life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Flondon-theatre-donmar-warehouse-revives-les-liaisons-dangereuses-autumn-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433327039896%2F15338f21-43df-47eb-97ef-561f555bf9a4-1679x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Dockery%2C%20Dominic%20West%20and%20Janet%20McTeer%20to%20star%20in%20Les%20Liaisons%20Dangereuses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Flondon-theatre-donmar-warehouse-revives-les-liaisons-dangereuses-autumn-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Dockery%2C%20Dominic%20West%20and%20Janet%20McTeer%20to%20star%20in%20Les%20Liaisons%20Dangereuses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F03%2Flondon-theatre-donmar-warehouse-revives-les-liaisons-dangereuses-autumn-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F3%2F1433327039896%2F15338f21-43df-47eb-97ef-561f555bf9a4-1679x2040.jpeg>
 ‘It’s one of those spaces where you have to decide whether or not the 
character’s fingernails are dirty’ … Josie Rourke at the Donmar. Photograph: 
Linda Nylind 
Loosely inspired by the real-life suicide of a gay student at a US university, 
Rourke said that as well as being an exploration of campus politics, the play 
looks at “a series of conversations about young American identity … if you’re a 
young person in America now who is trying to find their voice, it’s quite a 
loud world”.

The theatre company will also travel to America in the autumn. New York’s St 
Ann’s Warehouse, which moved from its original church location to a spice 
milling factory in Brooklyn in 2000, is to move again in the autumn and launch 
with a Donmar production.

Phyllida Lloyd’s all-female take on Henry IV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/12/henry-4-review-harriet-walter-kingly-power>
, with Harriet Walter in the lead role, will transfer to the new theatre in the 
shadow of the Brooklyn bridge; in a five-star review, the Observer’s Susannah 
Clapp called the London production “tremendous … roughs up expectations on 
front after front”. St Ann’s previously hosted the transfer for the Donmar’s 
all-femaleJulius Caesar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/dec/05/julius-caesar-review>, the 
cast of which broke the ground for the new venue.

With West et al, Rourke continues the theatre’s predilection for Hollywood 
stars in intense close-up. She directed Tom Hiddleston playing a gore-flecked
Coriolanus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/18/coriolanus-review-donmar-warehouse>
 last year, with that production airing in cinemas this autumn. Previous 
A-listers to have graced its stage have included Nicole Kidman, Ian McKellen, 
Jude Law and Ewan McGregor.
 