
The Vietnam war whistleblower Daniel Ellsberg and the film-maker Michael Moore 
have launched an international campaign to demand the release of Bradley 
Manning, the American soldiercharged with passing classified material to 
WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/06/bradley-manning-charged-iraq-killings-video>
.

Demonstrations are planned in the US, Canada and Australia over the next three 
days in support of Manning, an army intelligence analyst who is being held at a 
military prison in Virginia.

The leaks include a cache of documents – published in the Guardian as the 
Afghan war logs <https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-war-logs> – drawn from 
76,000 pages of military records made public by WikiLeaks to challenge the US 
government's assertion that the fight against the Taliban is being won.

WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> says it will release 
thousands more pages of similar documents soon.

Manning, 23, is also accused of involvement in WikiLeaks' exposure of a video 
of a US helicopter attack on apparently unarmed Iraqis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/05/wikileaks-us-army-iraq-attack> 
in a Baghdad street. Two Reuters employees were among those killed.

Manning was arrested in May after apparently boasting in instant messages and 
emails to a high-profile former hacker, Adrian Lamo, that he passed on the 
video and documents. Lamo said he turned in the soldier out of concern for 
national security.

Ellsberg, who leaked the Pentagon papers to the New York Times that laid bare 
the extent of US government duplicity in its claims to be winning the Vietnam 
war, said Manning was defending the constitution in revealing the truth about 
the conflicts in Iraq andAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

"Soldiers' sworn oath is to defend and support the constitution. Bradley 
Manning has been defending and supporting our constitution," he said.

Moore plans to broadcast the main protest event live on his website 
<http://www.michaelmoore.com>. He said the US military was being hypocritical 
in its attempts to discredit Manning and accuse WikiLeaks by asserting that 
making the secret documents public endangered the lives of Afghans 
collaborating with coalition forces.

"To suggest that lives were put in danger by the release of the WikiLeaks 
documents is the most cynical of statements," Moore said.

"Lives were put in danger the night we invaded the sovereign nation of Iraq, 
an act that had nothing to do with what the Bradley Mannings of this country 
signed up for: to defend our people from attack. It was a war based on a 
complete lie and lives were not only put in danger, hundreds of thousands of 
them were exterminated.

"For those who organised this massacre to point a finger at Bradley Manning is 
the ultimate example of Orwellian hypocrisy."

Among others who have thrown their weight behind the campaign are a retired 
army colonel, Ann Wright, and a retired CIA analyst, Ray McGovern, who is 
described as having regularly prepared daily security briefings for former 
presidents Ronald Reagan and George HW Bush.

The US protests are being held in 18 cities. The primary event, in California, 
is organised by Courage to Refuse, which describes itself as a coalition of 
soldiers and civilians who encourage resistance by members of the forces to the 
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

The US defence department has established a team of intelligence analysts, FBI 
agents and others to combat WikiLeaks' threat to release tens of thousands more 
pages of documents.

The Daily Beast has reported that the operation, known formally as the 
Information Review Task Force, is being run by Brigadier General Robert Carr of 
the Defence Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon's equivalent of the CIA.

Carr's principal assignment is to attempt to establish which documents 
WikiLeaks has and to limit the damage in Afghanistan as well as diplomatically.

The Daily Beast says the team is also gathering evidence that might be used to 
prosecute the WikiLeaks founder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/11/wikileaks-founder-assange-pentagon-manning>
, Julian Assange, on espionage or other charges.
 