
At readings and book events, the Dutch-born author Michel Faber sometimes 
brings along a pair of red leather shoes, and places them in the front row. The 
shoes belonged to Eva Youren, his wife of 26 years, who died in the summer of 
2014, having been diagnosed with incurable cancer of the bone marrow six years 
previously. He brought them to the London launch of his long-awaited novelThe 
Book of Strange New Things 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-strange-new-things.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, published just a few months after her death. The book, which he had been 
working on for a decade, and which Eva refused to let him set aside as the 
cancer took over their lives, is about a preacher who travels from a failing 
Earth to a newly discovered planet where the aliens are hungry for the word of 
God, and his attempts to bond with these strange new beings while maintaining 
his connection with the beloved wife he has left so many light years away. The 
shoes were an almost unbearable symbol of his recent loss: “I wanted them to 
embody her sprightliness and her vivaciousness, so I chose the last pair of 
shoes that she really loved, that she didn’t get to wear that much.”

Somehow the challenge of caring for her did something to my chemistry. I think 
it made new pathways form in the brain

He also read from the poems he had begun writing shortly before her death, and 
continued to write as he grieved. Now collected inUndying: A Love Story 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/undying.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, they chart the ravages of her illness and treatment, the intimacies of caring 
for her, the awful practicalities and the emotional abyss of a funeral and its 
aftermath. From his debut novelUnder the Skin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/under-the-skin-2.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, about a homesick alien hunting hitchhikers in rural Scotland, through his 
no-holds-barred neo-Victorian epicThe Crimson Petal and the White 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/crimson-petal-and-the-white-2.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, Faber has been a writer of singular vision who combines a dark, offbeat 
sensibility with an unnerving directness of tone – and the poems are no 
exception. They range from the affectionately domestic to the “alarmingly 
grim”, as he admits. “Nipples”, written before Eva’s death, describes the huge 
“horror movie” welts springing up across her skin: “Nipples all over you. 
Excited peaks of plasma … /Your flesh is riotous with the pleasure / of 
predatory cells.” “You Were Ugly” looks first at “your bedbound body seventy 
five kilos / of spoiling meat” before being reminded by funeral photos of the 
“routinely, ravishingly lovely” woman she once was.

“Everyone deals with grief differently, and there are going to be people who 
just don’t wish to go where these poems are going to take them,” says Faber. 
“But for those people who are perhaps frustrated by some of the evasiveness and 
sentimentalism of the way our culture handles illness and death and grief, 
maybe these poems will give them a vicarious voice.”

Review: The Courage Consort by Michel Faber
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/09/fiction.reviews2> 
The poems are also the first work Faber has published without Eva’s editorial 
input: she was his first reader and a “fearless critic”, in what Faber 
describes as “a three-way relationship: me, Eva and the work”. “That feels 
very, very strange,” he says now. “It is so much a part of who I’ve been for 
the past 26 years to show her everything I’ve written and ask for her advice.” 
Eva supplied characters for the novellaThe Courage Consort 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/courage-consort.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, demanded a “more luminous” ending forThe Book of Strange New Things, and 
helped to shape the mood and plot of all his books. “I would have been a 
different writer without her,” he says. “I might have written an uncompromising 
novel that was admired by the chap from the TLS, but I’m not convinced I would 
have reached the number of people I’ve reached. Eva always wanted me to be more 
inclusive; she was always curious whether it was possible to embrace just a few 
more readers by being just a little kinder, by giving them a little bit more of 
what they wanted.”

“In the early years together, Eva and I had some intellectual collisions where 
I would be insisting ‘this is just the way I want it, I don’t care if people 
can’t relate to it’, and she would be saying ‘would it hurt so much to tweak it 
just a little?’ I’ve ended up being a writer who is quite uncompromising and 
distinctive in a way that would usually doom the work to a very small 
readership, and yet by my standards I’ve got quite a large readership. It 
wasn’t large enough for Eva’s liking - she always wanted it to be bigger - but 
I think it’s extraordinary, how many people have read those books.”

It was she who first persuaded Faber to put his work forward for publication; 
when they met in Melbourne in 1987, he was writing in tiny longhand on foolscap 
paper, using house paint instead of Tipp-Ex to make revisions, and preferred to 
spend his nursing salary on second-hand LPs rather than get his manuscripts 
typed up. He had already written and set aside several books, including a “very 
hardline feminist” novel. “My first wife was gay before I met her so my whole 
circle of friends were lesbians,” he says. “There was a lot of anti-male 
feeling in my environment. I was like an honorary female.” Eva challenged him 
to read her his stories, and then “told me exactly what her misgivings were, 
with no concern for the possible fragile ego of a writer. And because I don’t 
have a fragile ego as a writer, I was thinking, ‘This is the woman for me’.”

Under the Skin: why did this chilling masterpiece take a decade?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/06/under-the-skin-director-jonathan-glazer-scarlett-johansson>
Both had been through unsuccessful early marriages, and broken away from 
religious immigrant parents; for Eva, Jehovah’s Witnesses, and in Faber’s case, 
“very war-damaged” Dutch Baptists who emigrated from the Netherlands to 
Australia in 1967 when Faber was seven, leaving behind other siblings. His 
father had been a Nazi collaborator and his mother almost starved to death in 
the winter of 1945: “You can imagine the guilt and horror that hung around in 
the atmosphere of our home.”Eva’s parents had fled persecution in Poland, and 
“they just loaded all that Holocaust dysfunction into the way they brought up 
their children. They brought it with them.” Faber’s childhood is now “lost in 
the black hole of forgetfulness”, he says. “That’s why I create new worlds in 
my stories. If I tried to mine a Knausgaardian seam, the book would be three 
and a half pages long.” But he concedes that the darkness his work taps into is 
“the same stuff that people who write autobiographically are drawing on, except 
that I’m only sensing the connections rather than observing them.”

It was Eva who suggested a second migration: to the highlands of Scotland, and 
a remote farm that became the location forUnder the Skin. Faber was often sick 
in Australia, with migraines triggered by the intense sunlight, but “I would 
have gone anywhere Eva wanted to go. It could have been Siberia.” In 1998, 
Faber published his first short-story collection,Some Rain Must Fall, with the 
Scottish indie Canongate 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/some-rain-must-fall.html/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
;Under the Skin followed, then The Crimson Petal and the White, a rewriting of 
one of his paint-spattered manuscripts from younger days. Pre-empting the 
fashion for Victoriana, it seemed like “commercial suicide”; but became a 
bestseller and was made into a BBC mini-series. The book’s success changed 
their lives, providing financial security during Eva’s illness, but also 
sending Faber on an epic book tour of the States that caused him to become 
“rather unhinged … Lacking the necessary layers of skin.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fbooks-interview-michel-faber-undying-a-love-story-under-the-skin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F216cc8c42e654c0c3a466b84aeccf6d81f20a23f%2F0_0_2880_1542%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michel%20Faber%3A%20'I%20would%20have%20been%20a%20different%20writer%20without%20my%20wife'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fbooks-interview-michel-faber-undying-a-love-story-under-the-skin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michel%20Faber%3A%20%27I%20would%20have%20been%20a%20different%20writer%20without%20my%20wife%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Fbooks-interview-michel-faber-undying-a-love-story-under-the-skin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F216cc8c42e654c0c3a466b84aeccf6d81f20a23f%2F0_0_2880_1542%2F2880.jpg>
 Scarlett Johansson inUnder the Skin (2013). Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar
He had experienced periods of depression and mental fragility before. “I was 
so despairing and so distressed for so much of the 90s, convinced that I would 
end up possibly homeless or as some kind of fringe dweller.” For Faber, that is 
whatJonathan Glazer’s 2013 film version of Under the Skin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/13/under-the-skin-scarlett-johansson-peter-bradshaw>
 – not, as he says, an adaptation of the book as such, “but my God, is it 
inspired” – caught so well: “My own sense of being doomed not to make it. 
Wanting to move away from the alien that I had been as a younger person, but 
feeling that I didn’t have what it took to become fully human. That was the 
core of the book for me, that journey from alienness to humanity.” Like all his 
books,Under the Skin is dedicated to Eva – “for bringing me back to Earth”. Her 
support wasn’t just literary, emotional and practical: it was cosmic as well.

Cancer changed that, of course. One poem in Undying, “Helpmeet”, describes 
feelings of inadequacy and helplessness that will be familiar to anyone whose 
partner has had a terminal diagnosis, but must have been particularly sharp for 
Faber: “These were the ways I helped you / in the early days of your ordeal: // 
Feeling guilty. / Feeling anxious. / Feeling small. / Banging my head, for 
real, against a wall.” By the closing lines, the dynamic of their relationship 
has been reversed: “Broken and remade, I was what I had vowed / I could not 
ever be: your rock.”

Flesh-creeping
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/01/fiction.reviews2> 
“Early on in her cancer journey, I was convinced that I was going to let her 
down because I just wasn’t big or brave enough to do for her what I felt a 
partner would need to do,” Faber explains. “Once she made it clear that 
regardless of how I coped or failed to cope she wanted to be with me, something 
shifted. When Eva became dependent I ceased to suffer from depression, I think 
because I was really needed. I didn’t have the leisure to lie in bed thinking, 
‘Can I get up and face the scary universe?’

“Since Eva’s died I’ve not been depressed. I’ve been distraught and sad and 
devastated and unhappy, but that’s different from depression. Somehow the 
challenge of caring for her andbeing her helpmeet – I think it did something to 
my chemistry. I think it made new pathways form in the brain.”

The Book of Strange New Things, begun before Eva’s diagnosis, also underwent a 
radical shift. Faber started it in the wake of the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, 
when “I was so fed up with the almost invincible idiocy of the human race that 
I fantasised about writing a book that had no humans in it. So I was going to 
write a novel entirely set on another planet.” Then he hit on the idea of a man 
and woman “separated by an unimaginably vast distance. I thought of one of them 
going to another planet and the other one staying behind”. Peter, who travels 
to the Planet Oasis to preach to the Oasans, began life as a stand-in for the 
writer, who every day vanishes into his study and the unpassable distances of 
his own mind. Eva “lived on Planet Earth, and dealt with all the messy shit of 
daily life, and I was on Planet Art, creating my books in my sanctum sanctorum”.
Millais’ Ophelia Updated 3 by Eva Youren 
When Eva got sick, the novel changed again: “It became much more about loss 
and the miracle of the body and also the tragic fragility of it, all in one.” 
One of the many unbridgeable differences between human and Oasan is that the 
aliens’ bodies lack the ability to repair themselves – if damaged in any way, 
they simply rot, like fruit. “Eva had one of the few cancers remaining that 
can’t be fixed. Which is horrifying, but shines a spotlight on the fact that 
almost everything that goes wrong with us can be fixed. We are immensely 
privileged to inhabit these little fleshy vehicles.” As the book took shape, 
“Eva was giving me her usual splendid feedback while knowing, of course, that 
she was in the Oasan camp rather than in the human camp”.

Ironically, Faber had decided long before Eva’s diagnosis that The Book of 
Strange New Things would be his last novel; that he wanted to give Eva – a 
painter, photographer and writer – “the chance to do her creative thing”, while 
he would “live on her planet more”. He is now working on finishing her short 
stories – “I want the soul and sensibility to be Eva’s to the maximum extent 
possible. I’ll see what I can manage” – and looking for an audience for her 
late photographs, which combine landscapes with medical scans of her body. “I 
think she had extraordinary talents and I don’t believe I’m saying that because 
she was my wife and I loved her.” He is also writing a “huge” biography of her, 
for consolation and personal record rather than publication. “The poems, too, 
are a way of capturing in time a state that is, thankfully, not eternal – 
unless you’re Miss Havisham,” he says. “Eva wanted me to find love again. And, 
two years on, I have, with the writerLouisa Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/louisa-young>, who’s grieving the loss of 
her late fiance and writing a memoir about him. It all feels strangely balanced 
and tender.”

He and Eva went through a lot of the phases of grieving while she was still 
alive, he says. “A brooding, incurable cancer gives you plenty of time to stare 
at death before it takes you. She was very concerned that when she died I would 
revert to type: withdraw from the world and stare into a black hole of my own 
grief and never come out of it. She had expended so much love and energy into 
making me more connected with others, that I felt I owed it to her to go out 
there and be more connected than ever. I don’t believe in an afterlife, I don’t 
believe she’s up there looking at me, but I want to live in such a way that if 
she were alive she would be proud.

“And in a way I am living on her planet more now. I’m still trying to write a 
bit: I don’t know if I can do both. I would like to think that in the future, 
if something has to give it’ll be the writing, rather than being a human among 
other humans.”

• Undying: A Love Story 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/undying.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Michel Faber is published by Canongate.
 