
The art and craft of lettering flourishes in Britain today thanks to a lineage 
of pioneers in which Michael Harvey, who has died aged 81, was an important 
link between a generation ofEric Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/jul/22/art.art>'s pupils and one 
with a more experimental attitude. His own work combined freedom and 
discipline, and his successive phases of activity, in printing, publishing, 
architecture and fine art, helped to expand the range of applications for 
characterful letterforms.

Born to Roman Catholic parents, Leslie and Betty, in Putney, south-west 
London, Harvey failed to excel at Ewell Castle school, near his family's home 
in Epsom, Surrey, leaving at 15 without taking any final exams. He had begun 
early to imitate Disney figures and draw bombers taking off, and joined Drawing 
& Tracing, a firm offering these services to engineering companies, before 
undertaking national service (1950-52), where he made models and painted signs 
in Gill Sans, a typeface designed by Gill.

He found Gill's autobiography in Leatherhead public library and was smitten by 
its call to live independently as a craftsman. Harvey decided to make lettering 
his primary activity. In 1954 and 1955, he spent summers with Gill's first 
apprentice,Joseph Cribb <http://www.ericgill.org.uk/member/herbert-joseph-cribb>
, at Ditchling, East Sussex, and then took off to Dorset when his teacher and 
mentor Gordon Smith, at Epsom and Ewell school of arts and crafts, told him that
Reynolds Stone <http://www.reynoldsstone.co.uk>, the eminent wood engraver who 
had himself briefly been a Gill pupil, wanted an assistant for cutting letters 
on gravestones and similar commissions.

Harvey married Pat Hills, the niece of his boss at Drawing & Tracing, in 1956. 
After one winter in a farm cottage, they found a flat in Bridport, Dorset, and 
he commuted the seven miles to Stone's home in Litton Cheney on a drop-handle 
bicycle. Early on, he briefly adopted a blazer and tie as a courtship strategy, 
but soon abandoned them in favour of long hair, beard and sandals. He liked the 
unpretentiousness of Bridport, with its fine buildings and boats, and remained 
there for the rest of his life.

To earn more, he worked at night drawing book jackets for leading London 
publishers. Stone recommended Harvey toRupert Hart-Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/dec/10/guardianobituaries> and he took 
his portfolio round others, finding work with Heinemann, Chatto & Windus, 
Michael Joseph, Collins, Hamish Hamilton, Methuen, Cambridge and, in what he 
called "the most fruitful relationship", the Bodley Head, withJohn Ryder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jan/26/guardianobituaries> as art 
director. Among Harvey's approximately 1,500 titles wereGraham Greene 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/02/20/specials/greene-obit.html>'s hardbacks 
for Bodley Head, and Montaillou and other works by Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie for 
Scolar.

Berthold Wolpe <http://www.myfonts.com/person/Berthold_Wolpe/>, who started 
designing for Faber and Faber in 1941, set the pattern for bold hand-lettered 
book jackets, within which Harvey developed in a personal style that moved 
beyond Gill's restraining influence, often using outline letters, with a 
suggestion of shadow. His designs stand out for their precision, fanciful 
invention and controlled energy, a reflection perhaps of the jazz music that 
Harvey loved and which provided the background to his solitary work.
 Michael Harvey found work with many publishers, producing around 1,500 titles 
Harvey's teaching career began at Bournemouth and Poole College of Art and 
Design <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/design> in 1961, the year he 
ceased working for Stone. He stimulated the creativity of students in the 
old-fashioned curriculum, but later reforms took students too far away from 
practical experience for his liking. He returned to teaching at Reading 
University in the 1990s, prising the students away from their computers to draw 
on a large scale and work with type.

In 1966, Harvey's Zephyr <http://www.fonts.com/font/p22/zephyr> typeface was 
issued in metal by the Ludlow Typograph Company, and in the 1980s he designed 
faces for exclusive use by the Tate Gallery (never implemented) and for the 
Bodley Head, before launching more fully into commercial type design. Ellington 
(named after Duke Ellington) was an all-purpose design for the Monotype 
Corporation that he began in 1983 and took seven years to complete. Harvey was 
delighted when it was used for a headline, "1001 Nights of Erotic Pleasure", in 
the News of the World. He adapted Ellington as a sans serif face called 
Strayhorn, named after Ellington's longtime musical arranger,Billy Strayhorn 
<http://www.billystrayhorn.com>.

In 1990, Harvey was invited by the senior designer at the software company 
Adobe to contribute to their range of digital typefaces and learned how to 
design on a computer. Many fonts flowed thereafter, often identifiable by their 
jazz players' names. He enjoyed himself, designing the practical and the 
playful alike, and in 2000 set upFine Fonts <http://www.finefonts.com> with 
Andy Benedek to market their designs.

Commissions for carved lettering continued in the background and Harvey 
achieved wider fame with the majestic capitals on the staircase of the National 
GallerySainsbury Wing 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/history/about-the-building/about-the-building/*/viewPage/6>
 in 1989. In 1970, the Scottish poet and artistIan Hamilton Finlay 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/ian-hamilton-finlay-1093> had telephoned 
him out of the blue and invited him to collaborate on printed and carved 
versions of his terse and witty texts. Harvey's hand stands out among the many 
fine letterers and illustrators who contributed to Finlay's garden at Little 
Sparta/Stonypath and the printed posters and cards of his Wild Hawthorn Press.

Harvey's genial personality, his handsome gothic face framed by wavy white 
hair and neatly trimmed beard, lit up gatherings of printers, publishers and 
designers such as the Double Crown Club and theWynkyn de Worde Society 
<http://www.wynkyndeworde.co.uk>. He expanded his range into digital colour 
prints of Bridport, issued as a postcard book, and watercolours. He wrote a 
number of books, including Adventures With Letters (2012), which he designed 
and published as a record of his life and work, accompanied by a witty and 
typically modest commentary. In 2001 he was made an MBE for services to art.

Pat and their three daughters, Catherine, Rachel and Georgina, survive him.

â€¢ Michael Harvey, lettering designer, born 11 November 1931; died 18 October 
2013
 