
Michael Cheika has accused Eddie Jones of tarnishing his legacy with his 
“vitriolic” comments about Australia during the series whitewash over the 
Wallabies last summer, and deniedclaims England were disrespected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
 by the Australian media during the tour.

Jones, whose side will equal their record winning streak of 14 if they beat 
the Wallabies on Saturday, stepped on to the offensive before the 3-0 series 
win in June, revealing his plans to play “Bodyline” rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/09/australia-not-worried-by-england-bodyline-threats-michael-cheika-rugby-union>
, and claimedhaving his bag searched at Brisbane airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jun/03/eddie-jones-airport-bag-search-transit>
 was part of a “coordinated” plan to help the Wallabies win the first Test.

Rugby union autumn internationals: talking points from the latest action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/28/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points-from-the-latest-action>
The England head coach was then incensed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/eddie-jones-australian-pundits-disrespectful-treatment-england-fox-promo-stephen-hoiles>
 by Fox Sports’ Stephen Hoiles, whose lines of post-match questioning were 
laced with sexual innuendo, and accused the Australian broadcaster of a 
“disgusting and demeaning” promotional video in the build-up to the first Test.

Jones’s comments were, on the whole, directed at the press but Cheika believes 
his former Randwick team-mate overstepped the mark. “There was a lot of vitriol 
about Australia – his home nation where he coached and where his opportunities 
were given to him to catch and grow up as a coach and play,” said Cheika. 
“Personally, if you’re looking to leave a legacy somewhere, you don’t want to 
hit back at it, do you?

“I certainly wasn’t [disrespecting England] and the players weren’t. I don’t 
think the media did either. [Hoiles] gave him a serve as a joke in a press 
conference. I think he has called him sinceand said it was a joke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/16/stephen-hoiles-sorry-for-inappropriate-and-offensive-question-to-eddie-jones>
. I think [Hoiles] was a bit rattled by it as he’s only new in the media. For a 
kid like him it’s his career. It might be fun and games for the other guy, but 
for a kid like [Hoiles] he is trying to build his career, but there was no 
disrespect. That’s the way she rolls.”

After England had won the series with their second Test triumph in Melbourne 
the New Zealand head coach, Steve Hansen, accused Chiekaof being bullied by 
Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/eddie-jones-australia-michael-cheika-steve-hansen>
. Cheika, however, defended his refusal to enter into a war of words with Jones 
at the time.

“In June, maybe I gave the opportunity to see how a former Australian would 
deal with it. It was a bit like a goal-scorer who scores against his old team. 
I suppose it is always difficult where you go back against a team you have 
coached before and don’t know how to play it,” he said.

“Do you stay reserved or get stuck into them? I know what I would do. But 
that’s the choice he makes if he thinks it’s best for his team.”

Following England’s win over Argentina, Jones said he would be meeting the 
referee on Saturday, Jaco Peyper, to discuss Australia’s scrummaging and last 
week appeared to strike his first blow nine days before the Wallabies arrive at 
Twickenham – describing the Pumas as the second best team in the Rugby 
Championship despite finishing fourth.

After Australia’s 27-24 defeat by Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/ireland-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 on Saturday, Cheika shrugged off Jones’s scrummaging jibe but was more angry 
that his side lost the penalty count 13-3 and said he would be seeking a 
meeting with Alain Rolland, the World Rugby referees chief.

But asked if he had heard from Rolland, Cheika said: “No I haven’t. He hasn’t 
got back to me. You’ll have to ring him and ask him where it’s at. I can’t be 
answering questions on his behalf. I made my calls the other night, and the 
ball’s in their court now. If they do want to get back to us, I don’t know.”

Elliot Daly has been banned for three weeks following his red card during 
England’s 27-14 win over Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 on Saturday.

Daly, who accepted that he had committed an act of foul play, was sent off in 
the fifth minute of the match for tackling Argentina’s Leanardo Senatore in the 
air.

A statement from World Rugby’s disciplinary committee read: “The disciplinary 
committee found that Mr Daly had acted recklessly and that the offending 
merited a mid-range entry point based on World Rugby’s scale of seriousness, 
which carries a six-week playing suspension. There were no aggravating factors 
and that there were a number of mitigating factors (including Mr Daly’s 
acknowledgement of wrongdoing, expression of remorse to the injured player and 
his good conduct at the hearing) such that his playing suspension be reduced by 
three weeks.”

Nathan Hughes is available for England’s final autumn international against 
Australia on Saturday after taking a full part in training. Hughes missed the 
victory over Argentina with a foot injury but has beencleared to replace Billy 
Vunipola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/england-billy-vuniploa-six-nations-knee-ligament-operation>
 in the back row against the Wallabies at Twickenham in what would be his full 
Test debut.

Vunipola has been ruled out for at least three months after undergoing knee 
surgery, jeopardising his participation in the Six Nations, andEddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> has already described the 
Fijian-born Hughes as the “obvious” replacement at No8.

“Nathan has done really well in camp since he joined, last week’s injury 
aside,” the forwards coach Steve Borthwick said. “Billy is a tremendous player 
who has done really well for us and has been a big figure in our team. But 
injuries are an opportunity for other players and what we’ve seen throughout 
this series is players coming in and taking chances presented by injury. This 
is another one of those opportunities. We have a lot of quality back-row 
forwards in the squad.”
 