
Michael Peña <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Pe%C3%B1a> was five years 
into his career when his then-manager called him into her office one day. 
“You’re not funny, Mike,” she said. “That’s what I’m hearing.” Even from this 
distance, more than a decade later, the actor is prone to give a small, sad 
shake of the head at that story. “Maybe I really wasn’t,” he says softly. “I 
don’t think she was being mean.” An upwards inflection at the end of the 
sentence leaves the point moot.

It is worth recalling the words of that manager while watching Ant-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ant-man>, an oddball addition to the Marvel 
movie stable.Paul Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-rudd> plays the 
hero, who has access to a serum that enables him to shrink to insect-size while 
retaining enormous reserves of strength. But it is Peña, as hishyperactive chum 
Luis, full of plots and plans and snappy talk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uEGkLqzNBEU>, who brings the house down. His 
comic timing is effortless but precise. He can make a line uproarious simply by 
accelerating his delivery, or modulate the laugh by leaving an extra beat 
before responding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmichael-pena-ant-man-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436881691070%2F5e687257-f571-4637-9845-f1f63139dda0-1020x742.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Pe%C3%B1a%3A%20'I'm%20not%20funny.%20I%20just%20point%20out%20what's%20funny%20in%20others'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmichael-pena-ant-man-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Pe%C3%B1a%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20funny.%20I%20just%20point%20out%20what%27s%20funny%20in%20others%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmichael-pena-ant-man-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436881691070%2F5e687257-f571-4637-9845-f1f63139dda0-1020x742.jpeg>
 Michael Peña with ‘that guy’ – Jake Gyllenhaal – in David Ayer’s End of Watch. 
Photograph: Allstar/StudioCanal 
When I last met Peña three years ago, he seemed reserved and defensive, with 
little of his on-screen warmth.End of Watch, the film he was promoting back then
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2012/nov/22/jake-gyllenhaal-end-of-watch-video>
, had been gruelling to make, as is customary with any machoDavid Ayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/16/david-ayer-something-maternal-about-tank-in-fury-brad-pitt>
 action movie. (Peña also starred in the director’s recent tank-bound second 
world war dramaFury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/26/fury-review-stirring-macho-tank-drama-brad-pitt>
.) And it had taken a while for the actor to establish a rapport with his 
co-starJake Gyllenhaal <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> on 
set, to whom he referred during our interview as “that guy”, gesturing at the 
End of Watch poster with his thumb.

Ant-Man review – really, really small superhero slips between the cracks | 
Peter Bradshaw's film of the week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/16/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-marvel> 
Put his improved mood today down to the more escapist slant of Ant-Man, a 
smoother relationship with his co-star this time around or simply an upswing in 
his own fortunes. (He has a stack of high-profile movies in production 
including Ridley Scott’sThe Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/08/the-martian-matt-damon-ridley-scott>
 and a big-screen version, à la 21 Jump Street, of the old TV cop showCHiPs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6hzt9RA_VQ>.) He is 39, with a lightly 
padded, lazily boyish face, and a moustache-and-goatee combo in boot-polish 
black. He is dressed in a grey shirt, black trousers and dark blue suede shoes; 
he swings his legs up in front of him on the chaise longue so that he is 
sitting almost in profile. But look at the socks: stripy, silly, multicoloured. 
They’re the socks you put on when things are going your way.

Of course, Ant-Man has had its share of troubles. Peña signed up for the film 
because he was eager to work with its director and co-writer,Edgar Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/edgar-wright> (Shaun of the Dead, Hot Fuzz). 
“His films have their own way of being. Their own life. It was a no-brainer.” 
ButWright walked away from the project immediately prior to shooting when 
creative differences emerged between him and Marvel executives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/17/simon-pegg-on-edgar-wright-ant-man-departure>
. “Movies go from one person to another,” says Peña with a “what-can-you-do?” 
shrug. “It still feels to me like an Edgar movie at its core.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel's%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ant-Man%20trailer%3A%20Paul%20Rudd%20and%20Michael%20Douglas%20in%20Marvel%27s%20latest&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fant-man-trailer-paul-rudd-marvel-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436372227619%2FKP_346355_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch the Ant-Man trailer – video 
The picture’s comic energy is most abundantly in evidence whenever Rudd and 
Peña are together on screen: the former is laconic; the latter fizzing and 
sparking like a human catherine wheel. “That wasn’t how the character started 
out,” he tells me. “He was more like me at first.” Easygoing, that is. Softly 
spoken. Smouldering. “But that wasn’t working. Paul and I realised it would be 
cool to play up the Abbott-and-Costello, Laurel-and-Hardy kinda thing. Focus on 
the opposites.” When I remark that their double act works a treat, he looks 
disproportionately thrilled. “Oh yeah? Right on, brother!”

He beckons me over, pulls out his mobile phone and shows me a video of the man 
on whom he based Luis: a friend-of-a-friend named Pablo. I watch Pablo holding 
court at a barbecue, filling the gaps between words with superfluous chirrups, 
like a child colouring right to the edges of the page. His hands carve crazy 
shapes in the air as he babbles. That’s Luis alright. How did Pablo receive the 
news that he had been immortalised in aMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> movie? “He was, like, ‘Oh that’s 
cool, that’s cool, man, so basically, yeah, wassup-wassup-wassup …’ He doesn’t 
care. He’s got his own life.”

Paul Rudd on Ant-Man, being Hollywood’s go-to nice guy and growing up with 
English parents in Kansas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/paul-rudd-ant-man-hollywoods-nice-guy-english-parents-kansas>
It isn’t the first time Peña has modelled a character on a real person. The 
drawling, slow-motion goofiness of the millionaire baseball-team owner he 
played in the HBO seriesEastbound & Down 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wJoaNDPWC0g> was inspired by a man he met 
while on a cruise with his wife and their six-year-old son. “This guy looked 
like he had a lot of money. He was all, ‘Uh-huh, uh-huh, isss cool, isss cool 
…’” The shopping mall security guard inObserve and Report 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T-1Nb6nWfLk>, with his bling and his perm, was 
written as African-American; Peña, the son of Mexican immigrants, thought it 
would be funnier if he played it as though hethought he were black. “I saw this 
little guy in a documentary about pimps. He was saying, ‘Man, you gots to love 
yo beeches …’ I thought, that’s him. That’s the character.’” He prefers to work 
that way, he says, from the outside in. “What’s funny isn’t really me. What I 
do is point out what I find funny in others.”

Either way, it’s Peña getting the laughs. He can switch in a flash to sombre 
drama – he has played two fathers hit by the death of their child, first in the 
Oscar-winningCrash <>, then in Gracepoint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/12/gracepoint-got-one-thing-right-ending>
, the US remake of Broadchurch. He was also bravely undemonstrative in his only 
leading role to date, as the labour leader and activistCesar Chavez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/15/sxsw-2014-audience-awards> in the 
biopic of the same name. But throw in roles such as the fake sheikh inAmerican 
Hustle <> and a disgruntled elevator man taking revenge on his Bernie 
Madoff-style boss in Tower Heist, and that’s a lot of comedy for someone who 
isn’t funny. Did he hear his manager’s put-down as a challenge?

“I think I did. I decided to go away and work on it and find a way in.” That’s 
his style. “I remember my seventh-grade chemistry teacher told me I’d never 
amount to anything. I thought, ‘Hmm. OK.’ That gave me motivation to prove her 
wrong. I had to work hard because high school was crowded. Getting special 
attention was difficult.” He moved schools a lot in Chicago – I make it 12. 
“Twelve? Let me see … St Catherine … St Nicks … Hubbard …” I sit there while he 
sweetly counts out his schools on his fingers. “Ten!” he says with a triumphant 
laugh. “But that’s still a lot.” Why so many? “Well, at one school, there was 
this nun who thought I was a smart-ass because I was always done with my work 
early. She kept giving me Cs even when I got 100%. Mum took me out of that 
school.” And the others? “She just kept moving me,” he says, sounding a touch 
bewildered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmichael-pena-ant-man-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883143198%2F831c4dcf-4fd9-465d-bf25-2527549c822f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Pe%C3%B1a%3A%20'I'm%20not%20funny.%20I%20just%20point%20out%20what's%20funny%20in%20others'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmichael-pena-ant-man-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Pe%C3%B1a%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20funny.%20I%20just%20point%20out%20what%27s%20funny%20in%20others%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmichael-pena-ant-man-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F14%2F1436883143198%2F831c4dcf-4fd9-465d-bf25-2527549c822f-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘I’m not a good follower’ … Michael Peña with Jeremy Renner in David O 
Russell’s American Hustle. Photograph: CAP/NFS/Capital Pictures 
He queries my description of his childhood neighbourhoods as “tough”. “They 
weren’t really tough. Just poor. There was a lot of gang stuff. I saw people 
die right in front of me. It’s normal when it’s all you know. I didn’t realise 
I lived in the ghetto until we moved out.” Ten years ago, he went back there 
with an ex-girlfriend. “I was telling her, ‘I’ve lived some tough shit. It was 
totally rad.’ But it had all been gentrified. “She was, like, ‘Oh yeah? Were 
the lines real long at the coffee shop?’”

“I went into acting ass-backwards: instead of loving it and then getting paid, 
I got paid and then loved it

Peña managed to resist the gangs. (“I’m not a good follower.”) Acting got him 
out of Chicago, but it wasn’t anything as exalted as a calling. He did it for 
the money. His mother was ill so he started going up for auditions. “I tried to 
pay for her care, but I only became successful after she passed away.”

It wasn’t until a few years ago that he started owning up to the real reason 
he started acting. “I went into this thing ass-backwards. Instead of loving it 
and then getting paid, I got paid and then loved it. I started checking out 
great movies. I must’ve seen A Streetcar Named Desire 100 times. I want to be a 
part of things of that calibre. I want to leave a good impression.” That one is 
safely in the bag. But he still has ambitions left to fulfil. Last time we met, 
he was wishing that someone would cast him as the lead in a romantic comedy. 
He’s still waiting. “I think that could be cool. I could be a regular guy who’s 
just funny.” He thinks for a moment. “When Juan Met Sally? Something like that?”

Ant-Man is released on Friday.
 