
Tottenham striker Mido remains unrepentant despite being banned for six months 
by his own football federation for a touchline row with Egypt coach Hassan 
Shehata. He will now miss the African Cup of Nations final against Ivory Coast 
on Friday following the furious exchange with Shehata which marred Egypt's 2-1 
semi-final victory over Senegal.

Mido and Shehata came close to exchanging blows when he was taken off with 11 
minutes to go and made his displeasure clear with a verbal tirade against his 
coach, who responded in kind. He later apologised to the Egyptian fans, despite 
them chanting "Mido out" following the altercation, but would not back down in 
his dispute with Shehata. "I was angry when Shehata decided to replace me. I 
was not that bad and if I had stayed on I would have scored a goal," insisted 
Mido.

As it was, his replacement Amr Zaki netted with his first touch, a powerful 
header, to give the tournament hosts victory. "I am sorry for the fans but I am 
not sorry for Shehata," he added.

Afterwards the Egyptian press called for the striker to be sent home for 
showing such disrespect and Shehata took the decision despite being left with 
only three recognised strikers - one of those being 39-year-old Hossam Hassan - 
for the final against Ivory Coast.

Shehata's confidence in second-choice striker Amr Zaki will have been boosted 
when Zaki scored within moments of replacing Mido to send Egypt through. And 
Egypt assistant Shawky Gharib insisted: "Each player is treated the same and if 
we can change any player we want it for the benefit of the team. The Egypt team 
is not about Mido, it is about 23 players."

Tottenham, meanwhile, were today waiting to learn whether the striker will be 
available for selection for Sunday's Premiership clash at Sunderland. Unless 
the Egyptian FA has a dramatic change of heart Mido will miss the pinnacle of 
the African tournament, but it is not the first time he has crossed swords with 
national chiefs.

Mido was recalled to the Egypt squad for their World Cup qualifier against 
Libya last March after being banned from the national team in September 2004. 
He claimed a groin problem had prevented him from playing against Cameroon in a 
World Cup qualifier but he turned out for Roma within 24 hours, to the fury of 
Egypt's fans.

Spurs have also confirmed that striker Grzegorz Rasiak has moved to 
Southampton on loan for the rest of the season before sealing the deal 
permanently in the summer for Â£2m. "We signed Grzegorz at a time when we knew 
we needed cover for Mido by way of a second target man," said coach Martin Jol. 
"I have talked with Grzegorz and I know he is unhappy about his time with us 
and that is to be expected. I too am disappointed that it has not worked out 
better, but it is right that both sides now move on."
 