
Presidential candidate Mike Huckabee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mikehuckabee> revealed today that he has 
never tasted beer, according to a journalist for the Des Moines Register. The 
reason: he never liked the smell.
Kathie Obradovich (@KObradovich) 
Huckabee says he’s never tasted beer. Not opposed to it, just never liked the 
smell.@GovMikeHuckabee <https://twitter.com/GovMikeHuckabee> #iacaucus 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/iacaucus?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/KObradovich/status/689512825564213249> January 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/KObradovich/status/689512825564213249> 
But placing the merits and demerits of beer aside for one moment - and lord 
knows there are strong arguments on both sides - it’s fair to say the former
Arkansas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arkansas> governor is hardly the 
first of the 2016 US presidential field to be forced by the rigors of the 
campaign to reveal questionable or curious habits of eating and drinking. Here 
are nine more:

 * Former Maryland governor Martin O’Malley has been known to keep an odd good 
luck charm in his suit pocket during the last two Democratic debates – a crab 
cake sandwich from his favorite Baltimore Inner Harbor eatery. O’Malley 
reportedly has no desire to end this tradition, or acquire a new, fresh 
sandwich, despite his competitors’ repeated complaints about the smell. 
 * Perhaps the most surprising revelation among Hillary Clinton’s leaked 
emails is that the former secretary of state kept up a steady correspondence 
with the CEO of Nestle and was known to pitch him up to five jokes a day in 
hopes of landing one a coveted spot on a Laffy Taffy wrapper. Among Clinton’s 
most illuminating suggestions: “Q: Did you hear about the trousers taking the 
slacks to court? A: Yeah, it was a pants-suit.” 
 * Earlier this year, the makers of Ben and Jerry’s ice cream pitched a new 
branded flavor to the campaign of their fellow Vermonter Bernie Sanders. The 
idea was eventually scuttled after it was revealed that Sanders views ice cream 
as the decadent opiate of the corporate class. 
 * Following last week’s Republican presidential debate, Jeb Bush was seen 
sitting on a curb slowly eating a single slice of pizza with his head hung low. 
 * In an impromptu speech delivered in an Iowa City Seven-Eleven, Dr Ben 
Carson declared that as an undergrad at Yale, he personally discovered the 
burrito. When pressed to clarify this statement, Dr Carson claimed to have also 
invented the follow-up question. 
 * Ohio governor John Kasich has had the same popcorn kernel stuck between his 
back molars since 2002. Several dentists have suggested that Kasich have the 
kernel removed, but the candidate has demurred, claiming that without it, he 
wouldn’t know what to do with his tongue all day. 
 * Rick Santorum’s campaign staff regularly spreads peanut butter on his gums 
before public appearances, as the senator’s attempts to lick his gums clean 
create the illusion that the senator is thinking about the words he wants to 
say next and what they mean individually and when combined together into a 
sentence.

 * When asked whether he had a favorite guilty pleasure snack, Senator Marco 
Rubio responded that there is nothing he enjoys more than kicking back with a 
big bowl of whatever food people in Iowa find the most relatable. 
 * Current Republican front-runner Donald Trump keeps large quantities of bird 
seed in his pockets at all times, claiming that “it really is a fantastic way 
to gain a pigeon’s trust”. When asked why he needed to do so, Trump said he’d 
rather talk about the important issues facing modern America, like how Ted Cruz 
was born in Canada.  