


England are having to deal with a couple of unforeseen issues before 
Saturday’s game against Australia. The first is the risk of complacency, having 
already enjoyed the unprecedented luxury of a3-0 series win over the Wallabies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
 in June. The second is making sure their wing Jonny May keeps away from set 
pieces, the Gloucester maverick having emerged as the world’s worst scrummager 
against Argentina.

Mike Brown, England’s full-back, is confident England will remain firmly 
focused as they seek to secure a record-equalling 14th successive Test victory 
but he and his team-mates are still shaking their headsat May’s attempt to 
assist his prop Mako Vunipola <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oS9OTXqRhbE> at 
an England scrum in the second half of the Test against Argentina.

Michael Cheika retaliates by accusing Dan Cole of illegal scrummaging
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/england-dan-cole-eddie-jones-australia-michael-chieka-illegal-scrum-rugby-union>
Instead of binding on to his second-row in his role as an emergency flanker, 
May ended up in completely the wrong place, sticking his head between 
Vunipola’s legs and wrapping his arm around the startled loosehead’s thigh. The 
resultant clip has caused much merriment across social media and inside the 
England dressing room.

“It’s madness,” said the scrum-half Ben Youngs. “It’s amazing he’s played 
rugby all his life but doesn’t know where his head’s supposed to go when he 
plays No7. Mako was a little bit confused when he saw Jonny’s head pop between 
his legs. Luckily we got the ball in and out.”

May’s unconventional methods also extend to the training pitch, where he has a 
habit of going awol if Eddie Jones’s back is turned. “He seems to disappear 
from training every now and again to go to the toilet,” adds Brown, whose 
duties at full-back include keeping an eye on his wandering wing. “Eddie turns 
around and says: ‘Where the hell has Jonny gone?’ Then he trots back in like 
nothing’s going on.

“The best way to describe him is to say he’s like a puppy; really 
enthusiastic, bounding around. You have to keep him on a tight leash sometimes 
and give him direction – well that’s what I end up doing anyway. I don’t think 
he knows what’s going on half the time. Who knows what’s going on in his head? 
He’s an interesting character, one I’ll probably never experience again but 
it’s great to be playing a sport with so many different types of people. Jonny 
can be frustrating at times but he’s a good bloke to have around and he scores 
tries other guys can’t.”

Youngs also reckons England’s tight forwards will forgive the 26-year-old if 
he sticks to what he does best: “Scrummaging is not his forte but give him the 
ball on the edge of the pitch and he’ll finish for you. Jonny’s such a gifted 
athlete and the ground he can cover in such a short space of time is 
incredible. You don’t want him to overthink things too much – just give him the 
ball and let him do his thing.”

This autumn May has scored tries against South Africa and Argentina, extending 
his Test record to eight tries in 21 appearances having missed the summer tour
following knee surgery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/07/jonny-may-england-knee-surgery>.

Brilliant Ireland inject hope into Lions’ brutal All Blacks assignment | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/28/ireland-lions-all-blacks-england-scotland-warren-gatland>
Despite having to reshuffle their back three again following Elliot Daly’s red 
card and suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, England are determined not to allow themselves to become distracted.

“The only danger for us is allowing complacency to set in,” Brown said. “We 
talk about it as a team all the time. I don’t believe this side would ever let 
that creep in because of the squad we have and how desperate we are to achieve 
things. If we felt something like that was creeping in for an individual or as 
a group, I think the senior players would squash it pretty quickly.”

Equalling England’s record for successive Test wins would be no small 
achievement, as would staying unbeaten for an entire calendar year, but Brown 
insists that is not the squad’s primary motivation. “We just want to win every 
game. As a sportsman you are very narrow-minded. The coaching staff look at the 
future; we are just focused on the next job, which happens to be Australia.

“I guess at the end of your career there are things you’ll look at like grand 
slams or winning streaks but our main goals are to be the No1 team in the world 
and to win the World Cup. When we’ve done that we can start talking about 
things. Winning streaks don’t really mean much until you’ve won a World Cup and 
you’re the No1 side in the world.”
 