
On another sunny Monday afternoon in Monaco the bluntly named Beefbar tinkles 
with the clink of glasses and cutlery as the well-fed ladies and gentlemen of 
Monte Carlo settle in for a long lunch. Thick steaks and thin flutes of 
champagne drift past but Milos Raonic, instead, thinks hard and talks in 
intricate detail about a life stretching from the Balkans to his adopted home 
of Canada to the grass courts of England.

Raonic, the world No9, sounds reflective as he yearns to fulfil a boyhood 
dream at Wimbledon. “It was a fantasy to become a tennis player,” he says. “But 
it’s like that dream you have when you wake up in the middle of the night and 
you’ve just been holding up theWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> trophy. I had those. Was I ever 
realistic about it? No. But who is realistic at 12 or 13?

“My perspective and goals have changed. If you look back at interviews I did 
at 16 I said I’d like a solid career as a top-50 player. Then I did that and 
I’ve been in the top 15 or top 10 a very long time. I feel I’m even better now 
and my goals have adjusted as I’ve seen what I can get out of myself.”

I dreamed about holding the Wimbledon trophy. Was I ever realistic about it? 
No. But who is realistic at 12 or 13?

Raonic is probably the only tennis pro able to pepper an interview with 
informed artistic references to Ai Weiwei and Andy Warhol. But, having reached 
the last four at Wimbledon in 2014 and come so close to his first grand slam 
final whenpushing Andy Murray to five sets in the semis of the Australian Open 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final>
, Raonic pulses most with sporting belief. His decision to employ John McEnroe 
as a coaching consultant this summer suggests Raonic has more than just his 
huge serve to make a serious challenge at Wimbledon.

McEnroe, who won Wimbledon three times, told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/30/sports/tennis/john-mcenroe-a-coach-you-cannot-be-serious.html?_r=0>
: “I think he could win it. Hopefully I can give him a better understanding of 
how to take advantage of his attributes, his size.”

Raonic is intelligent and more complex than he might appear in his 
occasionally bland press conferences. He reacted to McEnroe’s announcement of 
their new partnership by suggesting: “Every coach I have is an adviser. And 
it’s my job personally, out of everything I hear, to weigh what it’s worth and 
what is best for me. I’m the CEO of Milos RaonicTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis>.”

That statement has its roots in the finance degree Raonic started as a means 
of curbing his parents’ doubts about his decision, aged 18, to become a 
full-time tennis pro seven years ago. On court Raonic can sometimes seem as if 
he’s using a cleaver with his serve – while, here in the Beefbar, he appears 
less a butcher than a fluid thinker.

Raonic has three coaches but he is interesting in suggesting that each has a 
specific role. If McEnroe will add grass-court savvy and the guile of a 
seven-time grand slam winner, Carlos Moyá and Riccardo Piatti offer different 
attributes. “Coaching is really important at this level,” Raonic says. “Carlos 
is so much more laid-back than me. He has the Majorca mentality and he’s taught 
me not to give importance to things that might mentally drain me and which 
don’t really matter.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmilos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90a7226531484e946254c9da1d6a18fdf2ce4f70%2F0_0_1913_3101%2F1913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milos%20Raonic%3A%20%E2%80%98Pete%20Sampras%20was%20my%20idol%20and%20I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20win%20Wimbledon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmilos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milos%20Raonic%3A%20%E2%80%98Pete%20Sampras%20was%20my%20idol%20and%20I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20win%20Wimbledon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmilos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90a7226531484e946254c9da1d6a18fdf2ce4f70%2F0_0_1913_3101%2F1913.jpg>
 Milos Raonic took Andy Murray to five sets at this year’s Australian Open. 
Photograph: William West/AFP/Getty Images 
Raonic admits that his intensity means he wears a mouthguard to stop himself 
from grinding his teeth – and so the relaxed presence of Moyá, a world No1 for 
a fleeting period, is beneficial. But Raonic stresses that McEnroe and Moyá are 
distinct from Piatti. “There’s a shorter shelf life with ex-players. A former 
player can help you – but it comes from their personal experience on tour. 
Whereas Riccardo, who is a coach through and through, likes to be on court six 
hours.

“A retired player doesn’t like to be on court just for the sake of it. But 
Riccardo will enjoy coaching a five-year-old. The kid will hit the ball 
everywhere and Riccardo will run around and pick up balls for two hours before 
he coaches me. To be honest he probably enjoys that aspect more than working 
with pros. It’s a very different mentality to a couple of former players giving 
you their experience. But it’s important to have both.”

Raonic’s potential to win a grand slam was evident this year in Australia. He 
beat Roger Federer in Brisbane and then Stan Wawrinka at the Australian Open – 
before leading Murray two sets to one in an epic semi-final. “I was playing 
great,” he remembers. “It was definitely the best tennis I’ve ever played. But 
problems with my adductor started in the third set. I felt a tightness but told 
myself: ‘OK, this is probably just fatigue … keep going.’ Then, in the fourth, 
it was quite painful and became a hindrance.That match against Andy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9eKVuu_nupw> gave me more heartache than any 
other because if I had stayed healthy I had a good opportunity to win it. It 
also hurt because last year I had to deal with so much injury.”

He rose to No4 in the world before injuries derailed his 2015 season. “I was a 
little depressed about it all,” he admits. “There was always a grey area – 
maybe you can play the match if you don’t practise. Nothing was concrete and I 
had to stop the season early and try to get the injury behind me.”

Raonic appears injury-free now but his semi-final appearance two years ago 
marks the only time he has progressed past the third round at Wimbledon. His 
suspicion of the surface remains. “Nobody plays their best tennis on grass. 
It’s about managing how much worse you play. Just because it’s slipperier the 
surface is so tough. I’ve had to learn to accept that it’s as hard for my 
opponent.”

In 2011, during a second-round match at Wimbledon against Gilles Müller, 
Raonic slipped and fell. “That put me out for three months. It was on Court 
Three. For the next few years I always requested not to play on Court Three. I 
said: ‘Please, I don’t want to think about this court. Put me on any other 
court.’ The next time I played it was the year I made the semis [in 2014]. That 
year I hit the ball hard. Before I would try and place it – and then I started 
hitting it really hard. It was great until I was very disappointed in howI 
played in that semi [against Federer] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/04/roger-federer-wimbledon-milos-raonic>
. Wimbledon has taught me the most valuable lessons of all the slams. It has a 
different aura – and Wimbledon is definitely the tournament I’m most in awe of. 
Also, Pete Sampras was my idol and that’s another reason I’d love to win 
Wimbledon.”

Raonic’s preparations begin next week at the Aegon Championships  
<https://www.lta.org.uk/major-events/aegon-championships/home>at The Queen’s 
Club. “Last year was the first time I played Queen’s and I really liked it. It 
has great courts, great facilities and it’s definitely the best place to 
prepare for Wimbledon. I also like the fact it’s closer to [London’s] city 
centre so you can go out and keep your mind fresh before you close off yourself 
in a house in Wimbledon.”

Wimbledon has taught me the most valuable lessons of all the slams. It has a 
different aura

Queen’s Club will begin his liaison with McEnroe and it’s a mark of how far he 
has come since he was coached by his father in Richmond Hill, Ontario. “We had 
a deal at Blackmore tennis club. At peak time it would be $36 an hour for a 
court so my dad spoke to the managers and they said you pay a basic amount for 
the month and you can use the courts when they’re free. My dad coached me from 
6 to 8 in the morning and 9 to 11 at night. Those were the two slots when it 
was guaranteed we could get on to court. I was nine years old so I was happy to 
be up late.”

Raonic is now able to appreciate how hard it was for his parents to leave the 
old Yugoslavia for Canada. “When we moved, in 1994, I was three and my brother 
and sister were teenagers. It was a huge change for my parents but they were 
lucky. They both got jobs on the same day.”

His family is of Serbian descent and from Montenegro. “The [Balkan] conflict 
was one part of the decision to move – another was opportunity. The conflict 
pushed them over the line. It was very difficult for them but they did not show 
it to us one bit. Everything was geared to giving us opportunities – and for me 
that meant tennis.”

His father has a PhD in electrical engineering and his mother a masters in 
computer engineering – and, as Raonic says, “they didn’t regard tennis as a 
realistic profession because it’s a bottleneck sport”, adding: “There are a lot 
of financial benefits at the top but it dwindles down fast. It’s tough starting 
out. I remember if you play the Florida Futures there are five matches to 
qualify and you have to win your first round to get any ATP points. It either 
makes you or breaks you.

“You could play four matches and not reach the main draw and you wouldn’t make 
any money. But you have to pay your airfare and if you want to have a true shot 
at it you need a coach. You’re paying meals, accommodation and flights for a 
second person. You’re thinking: ‘I have a match at 11am tomorrow so I’d better 
check out of my hotel because if I don’t win I don’t want to pay an extra night 
here.’ It tests you emotionally. It tests how badly you want it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmilos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecd9568d6ebbed1cffe01d1d84d45cb79613a91%2F0_0_3080_2199%2F3080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Milos%20Raonic%3A%20%E2%80%98Pete%20Sampras%20was%20my%20idol%20and%20I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20win%20Wimbledon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmilos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Milos%20Raonic%3A%20%E2%80%98Pete%20Sampras%20was%20my%20idol%20and%20I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20win%20Wimbledon%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fmilos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcecd9568d6ebbed1cffe01d1d84d45cb79613a91%2F0_0_3080_2199%2F3080.jpg>
 Milos Raonic reached the Wimbledon semi-finals in 2014, losing to Roger 
Federer. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/AP 
“My parents were understanding but the rule was I had to do university courses 
when turning pro. I just thought if I put in the work then things will happen 
for me. I was always like that.”

As we leave the restaurant and head down to the port, Raonic’s more expansive 
interests become clear. “I was introduced to Andy Warhol’s art in New York City 
and that’s one of the reasons I’ve fallen in love with that city. My mother’s 
uncle is probably the most renowned artist in Montenegro. But the rest of my 
family are academic. My two grandfathers and my father were all professors. My 
mother worked at a bank.

“In my upbringing there was not a real understanding of art and how it changes 
people. Art shows where we have been as a race, and the turmoil we have faced 
as human beings. Look at China. Artists are banned. Ai Weiwei had his passport 
taken from him for many years and his work is phenomenal.”

Can tennis be an art? “It is,” Raonic exclaims. “Roger is the most graceful 
artist on court but we are all creative in different ways as we work out how to 
put our games together. It’s hard to measure greatness – in tennis or art – and 
so I don’t know if winning a grand slam is the true definition of a great 
player. But I would love to do something special at Wimbledon. I feel I can 
achieve much, much more this year.”

Milos Raonic will play in the Aegon Championships against Andy Murray and Stan 
Wawrinka from Monday at The Queen’s Club.aegonchampionships.com 
<https://www.lta.org.uk/major-events/aegon-championships/home>
 