
Last year, Mindy Kaling <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1411676/>, the 36-year-old 
Indian-American writer, actor and producer, was asked to present the Emmy 
nominations live on television. She was thrilled, “for one reason, and one 
reason alone. I thought: ‘This might help me get an Emmy!’” Her show,The Mindy 
Project <http://www.fox.com/the-mindy-project> – in which she plays Dr Mindy 
Lahiri, a celebrity- and fashion-obsessed obstetrician and gynaecologist – was 
in its third season and she really, really wanted to win. It was only when the 
president of the awards academy patted her arm and told her,“You know, you’re in
such a tough category”, that it dawned on her that she might not even be 
nominated.

As her co-presenter, Carson Daly 
<http://www.nbc.com/last-call-with-carson-daly>, read out the nominations for 
lead actress in a comedy drama, up popped the faces ofAmy Poehler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-poehler> and Melissa McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melissa-mccarthy> on screen – but no Kaling, 
who stood by Daly’s side, concentrating very hard on maintaining her smile.

It’s an experience detailed in Kaling’s second book, Why Not Me? 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/334654/>, right down 
to her bolting to McDonald’s straight after the ceremony and eating two Egg 
McMuffins, hash browns and a large orange juice alone in the parking lot. “You 
can choose not to write about your embarrassments and things that make you feel 
vulnerable,” she says now, “but it’s not like people can’t see them anyway. 
Most people think that everyone’s life is so easy in Hollywood. And, for the 
most part, life is pretty great. So those moments when you are embarrassed, or 
you feel slighted, or an idiot, or miserable – I think they’re good to write 
about. I mean, really, I cringe when I’m reading it. But it’s really funny.”

Kaling is the sort of relentlessly cheery person who says things like, 
“Everything just gets better! That’s been my experience.” We meet in a sunny 
Los Angeles photography studio, where she’s changed out of the va-va-voom 
outfits chosen by the stylist and into a loose, printed smock, and settled on a 
sofa, a small picnic of Doritos resting between us. Her onscreen persona is 
that of your imaginary best friend – flawed, funny, generous – and it’s a role 
she plays up to: her first book,Is Everyone Hanging Out Without Me? 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/is-everyone-hanging-out-without-me.html>, 
includes a list of “best friend rights and responsibilities”. The new book 
features a charmingly boastful list of “the pros of being friends with me”, for 
instance: “I am one of the best people you could take to your ex-boyfriend’s 
birthday party that you were dreading going to. I am always up for dessert. I 
am always up for skinny-dipping.”

Beneath the pep, Kaling demonstrates a formidable focus. She regularly works 
18-hour days: how else do you create, write, produce and star in your own show? 
The Mindy Project, now in its fourth season and with a clutch ofCritics’ Choice 
Awards <http://www.criticschoice.com> to its name, is sweet, rude and peppered 
with little jolts of strangeness. It will often veer close to well-trodden 
romcom territory, but then take a swerve. Like aKardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian>, Dr Lahiri believes 
she is a “brand”, but she’s also a highly educated, professionally accomplished 
doctor. As one critic put it, she’s a complicated character pretending to be 
simple. “Absolutely,” Kaling says. “I love that description. The show has a lot 
of fun satirising the certain girl who has the wrong fixations. I like that she 
thinks she’s a little bit famous.”

“You know what I’ve noticed lately?” Kaling continues. “There is an 
earnestness and a chipperness to comedy now, more than the sad tale of a 
pessimistic standup comedian. You hear that story less and less.”
 With Chris Messina in The Mindy Project. Photograph: Everett/Rex Features 
Kaling’s own story – an Indian-American girl who became one of the most 
powerful women in TV – is heard even less. Vera Mindy Chokalingam was born to 
Avu, an architect, and Swati, an ob-gyn doctor. Her parents, both Hindus, were 
born in India, met in Nigeria and emigrated to the US in 1979, the year their 
daughter was born. She attended a private high school in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, where she was a conscientious student and an enthusiastic member 
of the Latin Club. She has written about her “powerful and driven work ethic, 
handed down to me from my immigrant parents and my suburban Boston peer group 
of kids with undiagnosed Asperger’s syndrome”.

In 1997, she enrolled at Ivy League Dartmouth College <http://dartmouth.edu> 
in rural New Hampshire. Here, she found that “a chirpy, Indian improv comedian 
who was constantly talking was something of a novelty to the scores of wordless 
men named Brian”. After graduating, she moved to Brooklyn and started gigging 
as a standup. Her break came whenGreg Daniels 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0199948/>, the creator of the American spin-off of 
The Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2007/may/18/iprefertheamericanversion>
, saw her in Matt & Ben, a small off-Broadway play in which she and a friend 
played Matt Damon and Ben Affleck. Daniels hired the then 24-year-old Kaling to 
work on his show, making her the only woman on its writing team. She also 
starred in it, as Kelly, the irrepressibly perky customer service 
representative who likes, in her own words, “Beyoncé, pink (the colour), Pink 
(the singer), basically anything that is awesome, hot dogs, and snowcones.”

I'm often the only woman, and the only person of colour at an event. Me being 
there makes other people look open-minded

But after eight years, during which she wrote 24 episodes, The Office began to 
feel, as she put it, “like the office”. Increasingly hungry to do her own 
thing, she negotiated a development deal with her manager and set to work on 
creating The Untitled Mindy Kaling Project, brimming with confidence and 
outsized optimism. When NBC passed on the pilot, “I sat in my trailer and 
wept.” Finally, however, Fox said yes, and the first episode aired in September 
2012.

As a woman running and starring in her own show, Kaling has taken her place in 
an American cohort that includesLena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham> (Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls>), Amy Poehler (Parks And 
Recreation <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/parks-and-recreation>), 
Ilana Glazer and Abbi Jacobson (Broad City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/apr/14/broad-city-comedy-genius>
),Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> (Inside Amy 
Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/18/inside-amy-schumer-us-standup-box-set>
) andRebel Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/02/rebel-wilson-pitch-perfect-2-bridesmaids-comedy-boys-club>
 (Super Fun Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/16/super-fun-night-rebel-wilson-but-not-as-you-know-her>
) – a list that puts British television to shame.

“It’s very nice,” Kaling admits, “to have a show at a time when a woman who is 
not traditionally beautiful having her own comedy show and being openly 
pro-choice is commonplace. Right now, all my favourite shows star women who, if 
not producing it, created it themselves. I’m glad I’m coming up at this same 
time.”
 With the cast of the US Office. Photograph: NBC-TV/The Kobal Collection 
Last year, Kaling appeared on the cover of US Elle 
<http://s1.ibtimes.com/sites/www.ibtimes.com/files/styles/v2_article_large/public/2014/01/07/elle-women-tv-issue.PNG>
, alongside three other female TV stars. Amy Poehler,Zooey Deschanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/zooey-deschanel> and Allison Williams, all 
white and slim, were shot full-length and in colour. Kaling was shot in 
black-and-white and cropped. The internet duly screamed “racist” and “fattist”. 
Kaling, however, loved the image, and her response was a masterclass in 
self-promotion and humour: “Wishing for more skin on my @ELLEmagazine cover?” 
shetweeted 
<https://twitter.com/mindykaling?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
. “Chris Messina & I are naked on a brand new #themindyproject tonight, ya 
pervs!”

Kaling never set out to become a spokesperson, but simply by being a 
high-profile Indian-American woman who is not size zero, she has been forced to 
become one. She tells me about her frequent invitations on to Hollywood panels: 
“When I get invited, I’m often the only woman and I’m often the only person of 
colour at this event. So if I can’t make it because of my work, I get an 
enormous amount of pressure to come, because if I’m not there, a minority and a 
woman will not be represented. That pressure sometimes is a little unfair, 
because me being included makes other people seem like they’re open-minded and 
diverse.”

Kaling is frequently praised as “real”, a word she bemoans in her new book. “I 
don’t want to be real! When I think of things that are ‘real’, I think of 
income taxes and Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Real is bad! I want fantasy!” She 
is disarmingly honest about her body image. “The fact of the matter is,” she 
writes, “I absolutely do try to conform to normal standards of beauty. I am 
just not remotely successful at it.” Then she counters with a big-sisterly 
note: “I never want to be part of the problem. I want to always be as 
body-positive as girls hope that I am.”

What about the paradox that, by talking about body image, she only invites 
more focus on herself? “Yeah,” she says drily, chewing Doritos. “You know 
what’s funny? If I call myself a cute, chubby girl, the natural kind woman’s 
response is, ‘You’re not chubby! You’re beautiful! And thin!’ And I always want 
to hug the person and say, ‘It’s OK, I identify as someone who is cute and 
chubby – that doesn’t mean I’m not worthy of love and attention and intimacy.’ 
And also, my priorities are not such that I’m mortally offended by someone 
thinking that.”

She thinks for a moment and adds, deliberately: “Insults about the way I look 
can’t be the thing that harms me and my heart the most. It has to harm me the 
least. If I have a daughter, I’m going to tell her that. Far too many women are 
much more hurt by being called fat or ugly than they are by being called not 
smart, or not a leader. If someone told me that I was stupid or that I wasn’t a 
leader, or that I wasn’t witty or quick or perceptive, I’d be devastated. If 
someone told me that I had a gross body, I’d say, ‘Well, it’s bringing me a lot 
of happiness.’ Like, I’m having a fine time of it. Having my priorities aligned 
like that has helped me have a happier life, I think.”
 Presenting the Emmys for a category in which she expected to be nominated. 
Photograph: Reuters 
This happiness bubbles through her writing, much of which reads like a 
particularly juicy email from a well-caffeinated friend: intimate, gossipy, 
irreverent. One section, titled I Love Sex Scenes!, divulges her unabashed 
pleasure in kissing co-stars, with tongues. There’s also a wonderfully candid 
section about her dating a White House aide that reads more like a plotline 
from a female-driven romcom than anyone’s life.

Kaling, who is currently single, happily attests to the pleasures of “a nice, 
well-structured date – that’s one of the great joys in life. Like, an 
uncomplicated but focused series of two events that happens between 7 and 11pm.”

Her relationship with the writer and actor BJ Novak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/02/bj-novak-the-office>, whom she 
met on The Office, has been the subject of endless speculation. The two dated 
on the show, then dated in real life, then broke up, but remain so intriguingly 
close that there are Tumblrs and timelines devoted to their “weird as hell” 
(her words) relationship. A whole chapter of Kaling’s new book is devoted to 
him, detailing their friendship and their most common arguments. The pair have 
now signed a book dealworth a rumoured $7.5m 
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/trade-shows-events/article/66957-bookcon-2015-office-duo-kaling-and-novak-reunite-to-open-bookcon.html>
. A legion of fans are hoping, in When Harry Met Sally style, that the two will 
end up together.

“When people say that, it makes me feel so cool,” says Kaling. “Like, oh, 
people are thinking about me like I’m a character. We are so different and we 
fight a lot, but the gift he [Novak] has always given me is the utter and total 
belief that I am one of the greats. And it is an intoxicating feeling.”

In 2012, on the same day The Mindy Project was greenlit, Kaling’s beloved 
mother died of pancreatic cancer. As an ob-gyn doctor, she had counselled her 
daughter against including medical stuff on the show, “because it’s sad and 
it’s gruesome sometimes, and hard to explain”. Kaling has written only 
glancingly about losing her mother, but tells me evenly, “The only good that 
came from the experience is that it really is as bad as it gets to have a 
parent who dies of cancer. It really doesn’t get worse than that. Like a lot of 
people, I care desperately what people think, but I’m also like, oh well, it 
can’t hurt me too deeply. It’s never going to be as bad as losing your mom. 
Right now, I’m still in the place where I feel so robbed of her that if I write 
about her it would just be a piece about grief and anguish instead of a real 
celebration of what she was like.”

And then she blinks and grimaces, but not with emotion. “I’m wearing these 
enormous false eyelashes,” she says, squinting, gesturing at the lovely but 
absurd fronds. “But they make me feel like… like a fraudulent person. We did 
this for the photoshoot. I don’t always wear lashes on a Saturday afternoon,” 
she insists, sternly. There is a flash of her off-screen persona – she doesn’t 
want to be misunderstood. “I’m really impatient,” she says, “and sometimes my 
impatience, which has been such a useful tool in my professional success, can 
be hugely detrimental to my personal relationships. I can get very brusque.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmindy-kaling-so-heres-whats-funny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441288999113%2Fcf2e9d7a-ddb7-4a3f-b3c3-cebf8d6a9eb2-2060x2055.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mindy%20Kaling%3A%20%E2%80%98Those%20moments%20when%20you%20feel%20an%20idiot%20%E2%80%93%20they%E2%80%99re%20good%20to%20write%20about%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmindy-kaling-so-heres-whats-funny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mindy%20Kaling%3A%20%E2%80%98Those%20moments%20when%20you%20feel%20an%20idiot%20%E2%80%93%20they%E2%80%99re%20good%20to%20write%20about%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmindy-kaling-so-heres-whats-funny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441288999113%2Fcf2e9d7a-ddb7-4a3f-b3c3-cebf8d6a9eb2-2060x2055.jpeg>
 Photograph: Ramona Rosales for the Guardian 
When she began The Mindy Project, Greg Daniels, her former boss from The 
Office, offered some wisdom. “There’s a thousand things he could have told me, 
and his advice was to be kind. I was very surprised at how simple that was, but 
it’s the hardest thing to do. I work very hard, and I expect everyone who works 
for me to work as hard. And I sometimes forget: yeah, but my name’s on the 
show, I’m the one that’s doing interviews, when I go to the airport, people are 
stopping me. So much of the credit of the show [goes to me]. So I think I have 
had to learn.” She hesitates, then says finally, “I think Greg’s advice about 
being kind has been very helpful to me as a boss.”

I ask what’s next: is she happy? “The field that I’m in, I feel very set,” she 
says. “I feel like I’m in a good position because of years and years of work.” 
But that’s not quite the same as being content. “I want so much,” she says. 
“Ever since I was a small kid, I’d make a list of everything I wanted going 
into a new situation.”

And then she rattles off a smorgasbord of ambitions: including writing a 
drama, directing a movie, becoming a mother, “having a small part in a big 
ensemble comedy likeHannah And Her Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hannah-and-her-sisters>, [and living] in New 
York City again full time, but also on the beach in California”.

“So,” she says finally, “there are so many things I want to do, I’m like, I 
don’t know if I can do this all in one life.” A beat. And then she grins: “Good 
thing I’m a Hindu.”

• Why Not Me? by Mindy Kaling, is published by Ebury Press on 12 September at 
£12.99. To order a copy for £10.39, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/334654/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, or call 0330 333 6846.

Main picture: dress, Milly. Bracelet, Kenneth Jay Lane. Ring and earrings, 
Baccarat. Blue dress, Preen. Bracelet, Rachel Katz. Ring, Alison Lou. Earrings, 
Baccarat. Styling: Courtney Madison. Hair: Clariss Rubenstein at the Wall 
Group. Makeup: Kelsey Deenihan at the Wall Group.
 