
ArcelorMittal, the world's biggest steel group, splashed out $810m (Â£435m) 
today for the Brazilian iron ore business of LondonMining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mining>.

The group created by Lakshmi Mittal is paying 50% more than London Mining's 
market value for the Brazilian business alone as it seeks to boost its 
self-sufficiency in raw materials to as much as 85% by 2014-15.

The cash-rich ArcelorMittal has said it plans to increase its iron ore 
production to 110m tonnes by 2012 or virtually double the 60m tonnes it 
produced on its own account in 2007. It said it would consider investing up to 
$700m to raise output at London Mining's Brazilian mines to more than 10m 
tonnes a year from its current output of 1.4m tonnes.

The mines, based in the state of Minais Gerais, about 40 miles from Belo 
Horizonte, are being expanded to increase output to 3.2m tonnes next year. 
ArcelorMittal has embarked on a huge growth strategy, which is partly designed 
to offset the soaring cost of raw materials caused by surging demand in 
emerging markets such as China and India.

The group spent $5.1bn in the second quarter alone on acquisitions, including 
on coal mines in West Virginia, USA, in Australia, India, Russia and South 
Africa. It is also expanding its coal and ore interests in other parts of 
Africa such as Liberia.

This is part of a three-part growth strategy, which includes acquisitions of 
steelmakers in countries such as China, India and Turkey, and expansion of 
existing businesses by adding products.

ArcelorMittal is also known to be courting another Brazilian iron ore business 
called Namisa, which is being sold by CSN. Today's deal also sees it take 
partial control of an iron ore port facility being built in the state of Rio de 
Janeiro.

Aditya Mittal, chief financial officer, said the London Mining acquisition 
would help ensure that "our iron ore base is further diversified in the face of 
tighter supply for raw materials."

On July 30 the group reported a 31% jump in first-half sales to $67.6bn, with 
operating earnings up 35% to $13.1bn. It said third-quarter operating earnings 
would exceed $8.5bn and its capital spending would reach $7bn for the year.
 