
Small suddenly appears to be beautiful on the European football circuit. The 
English may well have been so enraptured by events last week in Croatia it was 
understandable if they did not notice, but the opening set of World Cup 
qualifiers threw up some other scorelines that beggared belief.

Luxembourg, one of the tiniest teams in football, were so bad during the last 
World Cup campaign they failed to register a single point, conceding 48 goals 
along the way. Last Wednesday night they fielded a team that included only two 
professionals, and they won an away game. And it was against Switzerland, a 
team managed by one of the coaching grandees of the modern era, the Champions 
League-winning mastermind Ottmar Hitzfeld. How is this possible? It is 
wonderful enough to make you forget that football is supposed to be all about 
wealth nowadays.

Surprises abounded. It was an extraordinary week for Lithuania. They beat 
Austria, who had just beaten France, which presumably makes them feel they can 
now beat anybody. They top a group in which they could reasonably have expected 
to lie fifth.

International football has suffered in recent years because of the increasing 
might of the self-styled superclubs, and their handsome offspring, theChampions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>, but it has 
regained status thanks to the sheer unpredictability that makes it so much fun.

The Champions League proper restarts this week. It remains, naturally, the 
preserve of the richest and most famous. But it is reassuring to see that 
unfamiliar names routinely gatecrash the party. The wider footballing community 
have over the years got to know clubs such as FC Thun, Artmedia Bratislava, 
Molde and Maccabi Haifa. Even Leeds United were in it once.

This season welcomes three more newcomers. The unlikeliest, FC Bate Borisov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bate-borisov> from Belarus, begin their 
adventure at the home of Real Madrid. They are arguably the most outlandish 
Champions League contenders ever. Their rating, according to Uefa's coefficient 
marking system, is the lowest of any team to have made it into the group stage 
of the competition.

That is some leap to the Bernab√©u. When they drew Real Madrid and Juventus, 
the representatives from Europe's elite teams frankly could not make a sensible 
comment between them on what kind of a challenge awaited them in Borisov, 40 
miles east of the capital, Minsk. 'They must be respected,' said Real's Pedrag 
Mijatovic. 'A good team,' commented Juve coach Claudio Ranieri. In other words, 
we do not know the slightest thing about them.

Unlike most Champions League teams, there is not much in the way of glamour in 
a squad that mainly comprises young, homegrown Belarussians. A handful of cheap 
Russians, one Bulgarian and one Slovenian is as exotic as it gets.

Bate's coach is Viktor Goncharenko, who is only 31 but tough as old boots. 
'You can call me the democrat with dictatorial touches,' he says of his style. 
'Above all I want to see discipline.' It seems to be working. Having damaged a 
cruciate ligament irreparably seven years ago, he went straight into the club's 
coaching system and his rise has coincided with that of the team. He promises 
his players will fight in every game.

No club are as thrilled, as optimistic, to be in the Champions League this 
season asAnorthosis Famagusta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anorthosisfamagusta>. They are the first 
representatives on this stage from the Cypriot League, having joyously 
eliminated the Greeks from Olympiakos to qualify. Once upon a time clubs from 
Cyprus expected humiliation in Europe - Apoel Nicosia once lost 16-1 to Porto. 
But there is the feeling of a new dawn. This season Apoel and cross-town rivals 
Omonia both qualified for the Uefa Cup, at the expense of bigger fish Red Star 
Belgrade and AEK Athens, to enhance the enthusiasm generated by Anorthosis.

The club's official website is understandably pushing their new status. The 
home page already features a table of Group B with Anorthosis proudly at the 
top (above Inter, Panathinaikos and Werder Bremen on alphabetical order).

'For a team from a nation as small as Cyprus and with a budget as small as 
ours, to get into the Champions League is an absolute dream. But dreams need 
work,' stressed coach Temuri Ketsbaia, the former Newcastle player. 'In 
football, you don't achieve your dreams by going to bed at night and waking up 
in the morning to discover that you are in the Champions League. You need to 
work and that's what we will continue to do now that we are in the group stage.'

Famagusta's story is all the more remarkable considering the club exist in a 
strange kind of exile. The place itself has a reputation as a ghost town. Since 
the 1974 Turkish invasion, the city has been largely abandoned. It is 
effectively part of the Republic of Northern Cyprus - which is only recognised 
by Turkey - and there can hardly be an Anorthosis fan living in Famagusta. The 
club now play in Larnaca, at a stadium they built in 1986 but describe as 
'temporary'. They have invited their fans to watch their opening game, in 
Bremen, on a big screen for free.

Chelsea will come across CFR Cluj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cfrcluj>, who are a little miracle from 
Romania. They are the first club from outside the capital, Bucharest, to win 
the domestic championship for almost two decades. Just six years previously, 
the traditional railway workers club languished in the third tier, Divizia C.

Like England, they have a new Italian coach. But unlike Fabio Capello, 
Maurizio Trombetta's track record is nonexistent. This is his first appointment 
as a head coach, having just been promoted from his role as assistant. It is a 
comedown for the fans who were led to believe the new appointment would be 
someone of international repute, with the names Ronald Koeman and Javier 
Irureta bandied about in the newspapers.

The squad includes a job lot of Argentines, three Brazilians, four Portuguese, 
and a Uruguayan, so the Romanian club should bring their own Latin flavour to a 
group that includes Chelsea's Deco and Roma's Francesco Totti.

Lets hope they all have a memorable trip to the capital of Transylvania.
 