
Ever since the legendary hefty goalkeeper William “Fatty” Foulke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/oct/24/joy-of-six-celebrating-big-boned-footballers>
 prompted the first chants of “Who ate all the pies?” around the turn of the 
20th century, little has amused undoubtedly svelte football supporters more 
than goading players who are carrying a bit of extra timber. Irony is low on 
their list of priorities when it comes to the childish and admittedly hilarious 
matter of holding Frank Lampard’s early puppy-fat years against him for the 
rest of his career, which is why the reaction whenGonzalo Higuaín 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/gonzalo-higuain-moves-napoli-juventus>
 appeared inJuventus’s friendly win over West Ham United 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O3fqd50Lfzk> looking … how to put this 
diplomatically … looking as if he had spent the past few weeks injecting 
custard and foie gras into his veins was no surprise.

Fine, that is overly harsh. Yet it was in keeping with the response to the 
striker’s debut appearance on a baking hot Sunday afternoon at the London 
Stadium, with plenty of folk sounding as if nothing would satisfy them more 
than to chase a topless Higuaín round a dressing room while brandishing a wet 
towel, watching him squeal and jiggle in terror. Tickle him and watch sweets 
tumble from his armpits! Shake him and marvel at the chocolate falling from his 
pockets!

Crazy transfer fee of Gonzalo Higuaín leads us into theatre of the absurd | 
Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/27/crazy-transfer-fee-gonzalo-higuain-theatre-absurd-football>
Nowhere was this body shaming more pronounced than in Naples, where Napoli 
fans, livid with the striker for joining Juve, greeted the sight of the £75m 
man looking like a 300lb Homer Simpson minus the muumuu with unbridled joy, 
draping a Higuaín shirt over a pot-bellied mannequin in the club shop. 
Meanwhile an app lampooning Gonzalo the Gluttonous has been released inArgentina
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina>, making big play out of his 
unfortunate habit of squandering big chances in finals.

Terrific fun, of course, but there is a fair chunk of exaggeration taking 
place here. Hell hath no fury like a football fan scorned and there is a chance 
people are making themselves feel better by allowing their imagination to run 
wild, building up the image and idea of plus-size Higuaín as Argentina’s answer 
to Big Jon Parkin until he is nothing more than a pork chop on legs, the plot of
Shallow Hal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZWvgEOoV3U> in reverse.

Seeing a supposedly elite athlete looking out of shape on his first appearance 
since helping Argentina reach theCopa América final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/26/chile-win-copa-america-argentina-match-report-penalty-shoot-out>
 is an opportunity to bring him down to our level, where we flick through photo 
albums with horror, reassuring ourselves the camera adds 10lb or that the light 
was bad or that we never look good on a Tuesday morning. A Google search for 
“fat celebrities” brings up 20,200,000 results in 0.76 seconds. Mocking the 
famous is a cherished part of our culture.

Even then, it is no more than a fleeting feeling of superiority. There is a 
temptation to portray Higuaín’s plight as a peculiarly South American thing, to 
stereotype an entire continent as a hive of excessive party animals. The 
original Ronaldo has a lot to answer for in this regard. On the eve of the 
Olympics a picture emerged of Rafael Nadal alongside Ronaldo, who has certainly 
enjoyed his retirement.

The best Brazilian player since Pelé scored the goals that won the 2002 World 
Cup, forming a formidable attacking trident with Rivaldo and Ronaldinho, whose 
weight also fluctuated while he was playing in Europe. He was labelled “fat and 
lazy” by the Spanish media when relations turned sour at Barcelona in 2007 and 
Max Allegri, Higuaín’s manager atJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, dropped the Brazilian at 
Milan. Eventually Ronaldinho joined Flamengo in 2011. “He wanted to make a life 
choice by going to Brazil,” Allegri said, choosing his words carefully.

Ronaldo and Ronaldinho are rightly remembered and celebrated more for their 
extraordinary skills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/feb/14/ronaldo-retires-brazil-real-madrid-internazionale>
 than their expanding waistlines but lax conditioning can backfire, as 
Chelsea’s Diego Costa discovered when he began pre-season below his physical 
peak last summer. A rotund charmer’s appeal stretches only so far. There was 
disquiet in Brazil when Walter, a jobbing striker whose body mass index 
classified him as obese,teetered on the edge of their World Cup squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/mar/05/brazil-world-cup-2014-diego-costa-spain-neymar>
 in 2014.

As the game grows more physically challenging, clubs are demanding greater 
discipline from their players. Pep Guardiola has stamped his mark at Manchester 
City by outlawing flabbiness, the most revolutionary move from a foreign 
manager in England since Arsène Wenger invented water in 1996.Samir Nasri is 
set to become the first casualty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/28/samir-nasri-friendlies-weight-issues-pep-guardiola-manchester-city>
 of Pep’s fat camp.

Samir Nasri left out due to weight issues, says Manchester City’s Pep Guardiola
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/28/samir-nasri-friendlies-weight-issues-pep-guardiola-manchester-city>
Nasri’s fate brings up the possibility that this is not a South American 
trait. After all, who can forget Real Madrid fining the former Italy striker 
Antonio Cassano for every gram he was overweight? Or Wayne Rooney’sresponse to 
an abusive tweet in 2013 
<https://twitter.com/waynerooney/status/298085914175995905>: “haha fat. U have 
more fat on ur face than i have on my body fatso. Go the gym. Fat boy.”

The previous Argentinian striker at Juventus, Carlos Tevez, denied allegations 
he was overweight when he arrived in Turin in 2013 before dominating Serie A 
for two seasons and, for all the crowing over Higuaín, Napoli fans should be 
warned that Luis Suárez was accused of being too heavy when he made his first 
appearance for Barcelona after his ban for biting. Luis Enrique, his manager, 
was unmoved. “He is a naturally stocky player,” he said. “If you want, we’ll 
give him liposuction but I don’t think he needs it.” Suárez’s amused team-mates 
nicknamed himEl Gordo – The Fat One – but the Uruguayan finished the season by 
firing Barça to the treble.

What those teasing Higuaín forget is that it will not take him long to shed 
the pounds. Here is a player who scored 36 goals for Napoli last season, which 
explains the source of their anger. They will not be laughing if his signing 
brings Juve their first Champions League since 1996.

• This article was amended on 15 August 2016. The legendary hefty goalkeeper 
was called William “Fatty” Foulke, not Foulkes as an earlier version said.
 