
Britain’s athletes arrive at the final day of these European Championships 
still confident that they can top the medal table for the first time in the 
event’s 76-year history. Although they are cheek-to-cheek with France with 
seven golds apiece, the weight of Sunday’s programme is firmly on their side.

They are strong favourites in two of the four relay finals, and have live 
opportunities in the others. Greg Rutherford, the Olympic champion, is fancied 
in the long jump. Then there is Mo Farah, who races in a 5,000m featuring only 
two of the world’s top 50 in 2014 – the highest ranked being his team-mate Andy 
Vernon, whomhe overcame with something to spare in the 10,000m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/13/mo-farah-european-championships-andy-vernon-10000-m>
.

During the past few days Farah has been taking it easy, relaxing with massages 
and ice baths and challenging team-mates to games of Fifa on the PlayStation. 
On Sunday he is the athletics equivalent of a striker who has rounded the 
keeper and has an empty net in front of him. It is impossible to see him 
missing.

But Farah admits that before the 10,000m he felt more worried on the track 
than he has for a long time. “For sure I felt vulnerable,” he says. “I was 
asking myself questions. Am I ready? I was looking round thinking, ‘who is in 
shape?’ I’m just human and sometimes you doubt yourself when things are not 
going so well.”

Farah’s victory was not as comfortable as many expected, but he intends to 
make a more emphatic statement in winning what would be his fifth European gold 
medal. “It would be awesome to get out there and give it some,” he says. “To 
show the guys, all my opposition, everyone who knows I’ve been ill, that I’m 
back.”

Having collapsed twice this year – at the end of the New York half-marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/16/mo-farah-second-new-york-half-marathon>
 through exhaustion, and last monthafter training because of an infected tooth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/11/mo-farah-collapse-airlift-european-championships>
 – the 31-year-old has been reminded of how temporary and fragile a career can 
be. “It hits you and you are just like ‘Oh’,” he says. “If it was just myself I 
wouldn’t think too much but I’ve got kids and a family – that’s when you start 
to think a lot and say to yourself: ‘Wow.’ And it’s scary.”

For the first time, he is mulling his end game. “I love the sport and making 
my country proud,” he says. “But I have a family life and my girls are growing 
up fast. So I see myself in the next four to five years trying to spend more 
time with them.”

Farah will race over two miles in the Diamond League at Birmingham’s Alexander 
Stadium next Sunday, and then over 13 miles in the Great North Run on 7 
September, but says the eager young Kenyans, such as the 21-year-oldCaleb Ndiku 
– who looked so impressive in coasting to the Commonwealth Games 5,000m title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/27/commonwealth-games-2014-adam-gemili-100m>
 – will have to wait to face Farah. “I will definitely be ready for them next 
year,” he says, with a wide grin. “I just have to run 52 seconds for the last 
lap.”

Adam Gemili, who flew under the 20-second barrier to win 200m gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/15/adam-adam-gemili-gold-european-athletics-championships-2014>
 on Friday, is confident the men’s 4x100m team will see off all rivals. Gemili 
missed Saturday’s heats – when Britain qualified second-fastest behind Germany 
in a sprightly 38.26 – but will return for the final and insists: “We are 
favourites going in and I believe we have the speed and ability to take the 
title.”

Britain’s 4x400m men, who qualified fastest for the final in 3min 00.65sec 
despite resting Matthew Hudson-Smith and Conrad Williams, are also happy to 
talk up their chances. “I’m very excited, because we have a very good team and 
the prospects of us winning is very high,” said Hudson-Smith, a silver 
medallist in the 400m. “I cannot wait. To get two medals would be an absolute 
dream.”

The women’s 4x100m team qualified second quickest in 42.62sec but France, who 
took their heat in 42.29, look the ones to beat. And while the bookies have 
Ukraine as the favourites in the women’s 4x400m, a British team without both 
Christine Ohuruogu and the 400m hurdles gold medallist Eilidh Child qualified 
just behind them in 3:28.44 and could yet trip up the odds.
 