
One of the first things you learn when you study art is that there is “good 
art” and “bad art”. “Good art” will get you an A-grade if you copy it 
meticulously as part of your art class, while “bad art” will not. The people 
who decide the difference between these two types of art are generally long 
dead men in books and, if you’re especially unlucky, your teachers.

Arts and culture being 'systematically removed from UK education system'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
You learn that there’s a canon (although you probably won’t call it that) of 
good art that you’re not really meant to criticise, even if you privately think 
it is rubbish (unless it’s contemporary art, in which case feel free to dump as 
much disdain on it as you like – there’s a braying chorus to back you up). This 
way of teaching is intimidating, and boring, and does nothing to inspire young 
people, many of whom have had very little contact with the arts.

The government’s pushing of the English baccalaureate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/14/schools-gcse-ebacc-ofsted-nicky-morgan>
 – which hasno creative component 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/nov/02/arts-leaders-concerns-ebacc-schools>
 at all – in schools has seen a narrowing of our arts curriculum. There has 
been a sharpdrop in students taking arts-based GCSEs 
<http://www.culturallearningalliance.org.uk/news/gcse-stats-whats-the-real-picture-for-the-arts-in-schools/>
, andin arts teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
; and it appears thatlow-income students taking arts subjects at degree level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/sep/26/arts-degrees-wealthy-humanities-university>
 are very much in the minority. In other words, we have an arts divide.

The Warwick commission report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/17/creativity-and-culture-not-open-to-all-review-finds>
, released last year,found that 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/research/warwickcommission/futureculture/finalreport/warwick_commission_report_2015.pdf>
 the best-educated and least ethnically diverse 8% of society make up a third 
of gallery visitors, and “higher” social groups account for 87% of all museum 
visits. Yet in this climate of rampant social inequality, there have been 
suggestions that museums reintroduce entrance fees – despite the fact that 
studying creative subjects has a positive impact on student attainment across 
the board, including maths and literacy. Students from low-income families who 
take part in arts activities in school arethree times more likely to get a 
degree 
<http://www.culturallearningalliance.org.uk/evidence/the-case-for-cultural-learning-key-research-findings/finding-3-getting-a-degree/>
.

I was lucky to be taken to galleries from a young age: we had a house full of 
art books and a mother who paints. But I was also lucky to have a great art 
teacher. He made Roman decorative art interesting by conjuring up an image of 
the warrior druids lined up on the shores of Anglesey; he told us how 
Magritte’s fragmented bodies might be areflection of his mother’s death by 
drowning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jun/21/rene-magritte-tate-liverpool-surrealism>
. My teacher let a 16-year-old boy do his final project on what it felt like to 
be on pills, and gave him a B. He made art relevant to our lives.

René Magritte: beyond surreal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jun/21/rene-magritte-tate-liverpool-surrealism>
This happened at degree level too, notably when we were asked to compare a 
painting by Joshua Reynolds (a white man in a red coat practically straddling a 
cannon) and a picture of the rapper 50 Cent (black, holding a gun). The teacher 
argued that the Reynolds was superior because of the stoicism it captured, but 
the class were having none of it. “50 Cent’s been shot nine times,” said one 
guy. “What’s more stoic than that?”

Some will use this anecdote to argue that an arts education is useless and 
profligate, and serves no wider purpose, but they’d be wrong. It’s important 
that we analyse the visual culture around us, and that includes pop culture. 
Better to question the distinctions between good and bad art, than lording it 
on your high horse.

Which is why, when it comes to opening up the arts, the internet is such a 
godsend. I cried tears of laughter when I first came across the blogUgly 
Renaissance Babies <http://uglyrenaissancebabies.tumblr.com/> (tagline: “the 
kids aren’t alright”), showcasing the worst infant figure painting the period 
has to offer. Meanwhile,Renoir Sucks at Painting 
<https://www.instagram.com/renoir_sucks_at_painting/> is a hilarious and 
subversive commentary on artistic taste. This tongue-in-cheek group has got the 
internet analysing the differences between what is good and what is saccharine 
and sentimental. We should salute them.

Art history memes are everywhere. Those of the “Medieval reactions 
<https://twitter.com/MedievalReacts>” variety – mocking the cackhanded and 
surreal artistic output of the middle ages – are especially funny. It doesn’t 
matter how revered the painter is, either. Online, the Last Supper diners are 
said to have asked the waiter for “a table for 26 <http://twicsy.com/i/GHBwuj>” 
– so that they could all sit on the same side of the table.

Because of the internet young people today are probably looking at more 
paintings than ever. They are more engaged, more enthusiastic, more 
questioning. It’s exciting and inspiring to see, and teachers should be 
harnessing this power to educate.

The death of David Bowie this year led to many of us reflecting that the 
well-trodden trajectory of the star and his contemporaries, fromworking-class 
kid to art student to creative visionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/suburban-british-asian-kids-david-bowie-hero>
, no longer really exists. Thanks to the abolition of the student grant system, 
the introduction of tuition fees, and the cultural dominance of the privately 
educated, any modern-day Bowies would these days find themselves standing 
outside a great many closed doors. And that is a tragedy.
 