
Can’t wait until Wednesday, can you, I’ve got serious Olympics withdrawal. 
How amazing would it be if ourparalympians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> completely thrashed the 
Americans? Not in a bad nationalistic way, that was the brilliant thing about 
Rio – you realised there’s a kind of inspirational nationalism that means you 
can shout about living in a country with people likeMo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah> in it. I don’t see how you can be 
a bad nationalist if you like Mo Farah.That smile when he crossed the line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/21/mo-farah-wins-the-double-double-gold-medals-video-highlights>
? I don’t think I’ve ever felt that patriotic, and coming after all the Brexit 
doom and gloom.

It’s just been the most fantastic uplift, you think, maybe Britain actually is 
quite great if it producedLaura Trott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-trott> – she made my summer, anyway, 
and it’s got to make people respect Britain a bit, hasn’t it, when we got three 
times their medals. Well, everyone knows the French are sore losers.

It’s such a change to feel proud. You watch Nick Skelton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/veteran-showjumper-nick-skelton-olympic-gold-big-time>
, so brave and inspirational, and think, “The Chinese can sticktheir power 
station <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c>”, don’t you, 
we’ll just make one ourselves, like in the old days, maybe everything is going 
to be OK, after all. Look atPeaty and his nan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/rio-2016-adam-peatys-grandmother-olympicnan-celebrates-win-on-twitter>
, we’ve got to be getting something right.

Modern tribes: the bride
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/30/modern-tribes-bride-> 
I don’t see what’s so BNP about being proud of winning. What I can’t stand is 
the naysayers, trying to twist everything that’s great about celebrating being 
part of a first-rank, winning nation that just proved it’s a world-beater to 
look as if it’s some sort of horrible triumphalism. Would they ratherAndy 
Murray had been beaten by that Argie guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/14/andy-murray-v-juan-martin-del-potro-olympic-mens-tennis-final-live>
? So go and live in Argentina.

Nothing wrong with being proud of your country, and our winners are so modest 
and lovely compared with the rest of them, it just makes you think, maybe we 
should get behindHS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2>, build some more 
houses. Well, if that sounds like the East Germans, then fine, it just goes to 
show that there’s nothing little England about old-fashioned patriotism.
 