
At least six civilians and four militants have been killed in an attack on two 
hotels in the centre of the Somali capital Mogadishu by Islamist militants.

Al-Shabaab <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> claimed 
responsibility for the attack on the Wehliya hotel and said it had also laid 
siege to another hotel in the city, the Siyad, where gunfire and explosions 
continued into the night near the presidential palace.

 Umar Ali, a police officer, told Reuters from near Wehliya hotel: “Three 
fighters have been shot dead and another blew himself up inside the car bomb 
that hit the gate. The operation here is finished. So far, we know six 
civilians died.”


 The hotel in the centre of Mogadishu, near the fortified government district, 
is frequented by top government officials but the identities of the dead were 
not immediately clear.

Mohamed Osman, a guest at the Wehliya who was breaking his Ramadan fast at a 
restaurant inside when the attack began, said he had been shot in the leg.


 Another police officer, who gave his name as Abdirahman, confirmed the Siyad 
was under attack.


The Islamist militants have stepped up their attacks during  Ramadan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/21/al-shabaab-detonates-car-bomb-outside-somalian-intelligence-compound>
 and the attack on Friday came as people settled down to break their daylight 
fast.

Al-Shabaab is fighting to overthrow Somalia’s western-backed government which 
is propped up and protected by the 22,000-strongAmisom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/29/somalia-fight-against-al-shabaab>
 force.

A year after Westgate, Nairobi traders are desperate for tourists to return
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/20/westgate-attack-nairobi-al-shabaab-kenya-traders-tourists>
Al-Shabaab attacks seek to counter claims that they are close to defeat after 
losing territory in the face of anAfrican Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> and Somali government 
offensive, regular US drone strikes against their leaders, and defections.

The militants have carried out a string of revenge attacks in neighbouring 
countries – including the September 2013 attack on theWestgate shopping mall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/oct/04/westgate-mall-attacks-kenya-terror#undefined>
 in the Kenyan capital Nairobi, which left at least 67 people dead, and the 
April massacre of nearly150 students in Garissa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/02/kenya-attack-survivors-garissa-al-shabaab>
, in Kenya’s north-east.

Somalia has been racked by instability since the collapse of Siad Barre’s 
hardline regime in 1991 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/may/06/clansandcrisisinsomalia>.
 