
Autumnwatch 2016 
8pm, BBC2

With the leaves turning red, it’s time for Chris Packham, Michaela Strachan 
and Martin Hughes-Games to return with the wildlife perennial. This time 
around, the trio are at the RSPB’s Arne reserve in Dorset. Here, they introduce 
footage of bickering sika deer, offer an update on the eagle chick featured in 
Springwatch, and report on the remarkable story of a conservationist who’s 
taken to the air with migrating Bewick’s swans. Continues tomorrow, Wednesday 
and Thursday.Jonathan Wright

Saving Africa’s Elephants: Hugh and the Ivory War 
9pm, BBC1

There is a template for environmental consciousness-raising shows: elegiac 
footage of an endangered beast and a wistful voiceover pre-emptively mourning 
their extinction. This two-parter presented by Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall 
doesn’t do that, instead pursuing the ivory trade that threatens the African 
elephant, from Mozambique to Kenya to Hong Kong – via the UK, where 182 
seizures were made last year alone.Andrew Mueller

Cold Feet 
9pm, ITV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fmonday-best-tv-autumnwatch-2016-saving-africa-elephants-cold-feet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0761e67a01c24aec874272565fe60110128aff90%2F0_167_4536_2722%2F4536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Monday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Autumnwatch%202016%3B%20The%20Walking%20Dead%3B%20the%20Cold%20Feet%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fmonday-best-tv-autumnwatch-2016-saving-africa-elephants-cold-feet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Monday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Autumnwatch%202016%3B%20The%20Walking%20Dead%3B%20the%20Cold%20Feet%20finale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fmonday-best-tv-autumnwatch-2016-saving-africa-elephants-cold-feet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0761e67a01c24aec874272565fe60110128aff90%2F0_167_4536_2722%2F4536.jpg>
 Matthew (Ceallach Spellman) and Adam (James Nesbitt) in Cold Feet. Photograph: 
Ben Blackall/Big Talk Productions / ITV 
How to conclude a revived comedy drama that’s nestled snugly back into 
primetime telly’s bosom? Prepping the next (now commissioned) series by 
rounding off some storylines and setting up a few new ones is the obvious 
answer, and the textbook method is to gather the characters at a bittersweet 
occasion. But what’s this? Tina’s surprise party for Adam leads to a 
life-or-death crisis? Surely there won’t be another shock exit to match poor 
Rachel’s 2003 car crash?Jack Seale

The Walking Dead 
9pm, Fox

Even in an undead apocalypse, the biggest rotters are always human. That’s 
been the underlying theme of The Walking Dead for six increasingly successful 
seasons, and the seventh kicks off with newest baddie Negan – a biker warlord 
played by Jeffrey Dean Morgan – resolving a much-debated cliffhanger by 
bludgeoning a beloved character to death. Has Rick (This Life’s Andrew Lincoln, 
now a very hard-boiled Egg) finally met his match?Graeme Virtue

Supergirl 
8pm, Sky1

A second season for comic-book adventurer Kara Zor-El (Melissa Benoist) as she 
flies back on to our screens, just in time to discover the contents of the 
mysterious pod that smashed into the outskirts of National City. Not that 
there’s time to dwell on that most extreme of Kinder Egg toys: an emergency 
family reunion is in the offing, when it takes a Supergirl-Superman tag-team to 
tackle a plummeting spacecraft set to slam into a luckless city below.Mark 
Gibbings-Jones

SAS: Who Dares Wins 
9pm, Channel 4

It’s formulaic, but this special-forces reality challenge isn’t without 
interest. More striking than the physical challenges are the mental ones: the 
instructors are adept at testing psychological faultlines, and a couple of 
recruits face some soul-searching tonight. That said, the physical stuff is 
grim enough, particularly “The Sickener”, a sort of free-range, open-ended 
torture session that only ends when four challengers have dropped out.Phil 
Harrison

Sleuths, Spies & Sorcerers: Andrew Marr’s Paperback Heroes 
9pm, BBC4

This episode will console those who have endured the scorn of friends who have 
never seen Game Of Thrones but can nonetheless assure you of what puerile 
rubbish it is. Marr explores the fantasy genre from Tolkien to Ursula K Le Guin 
and explains how fantasy is not just a form of ventilation for the creative 
imagination but a mirror of our own reality, its power struggles, tragedies and 
moral quests.David Stubbs

Film choice

The Madness of King George, (Nicholas Hytner, 1994), 6.45pm, Film4

Alan Bennett’s accomplished reworking of his stage play is both a handsome 
historical drama of skulduggery at court and a moving study of the man inside 
the ermine. Nigel Hawthorne’s George III is magnificent, lurching from nobility 
through wild-eyed tantrums to wretchedness in a primitive psychiatric ward.Paul 
Howlett

Live sport

Test Cricket: Bangladesh v England 4.45am, Sky Sports 2 The fifth day of the 
first Test from Chittagong.

Cycling: Tour of Hainan 6.15am, Eurosport 1 Coverage of the third stage of the 
Chinese road race, a journey from Haikou to Chengmai.

League One Football: Bury v Bolton Wanderers 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1 Third-tier 
Greater Manchester derby action from Gigg Lane.
 