
Two major fund management firms have backed an influential shareholder group 
in publicly criticising corporate governance atSports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sports-direct-international> and 
demanding change at the top of the retail group.

Legal & General Investment Management said it would be voting against the 
re-election of all Sports Direct’s non-executive directors, including the 
chairman, Keith Hellawell, whom it has voted against for the past two years.

Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aberdeenassetmanagement> said it would 
also be voting against the reappointment of Hellawell, as well as chief 
executive Dave Forsey and acting chief financial officer Matt Pearson.

Both shareholder groups said they would be supporting a trade-union-backed 
resolution that calls for an independent review of labour practices at the 
retail group, in the wake of a highly critical parliamentary report and an
investigation by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

L&G’s move comes after the Investor Forum, a shareholder group with combined 
assets of £14.5tn, ratcheted up pressure on Sports Direct by publicly 
criticising the retailer’s corporate governance failings.

It is the first time that the Investor Forum, set up two years ago, has aired 
concerns about a company in public. The group has 40 members and represents 27% 
of Sports Direct’s independent shareholders, including L&G, Aviva, Standard 
Life and Fidelity.

“Governance failings are clearly resulting in declines in operating 
performance and long-term shareholder value,”said the Investor Forum 
<http://media.wix.com/ugd/1cf1e4_92f4632de08048fd8f551d92adc5158b.pdf>, 
deploring the lack of progress. It called for a clear plan of action to begin 
rebuilding the confidence of shareholders and others.

Shareholders will have to consider how they vote at the retailer’s annual 
general meeting on 7 September “with great care”, the investor group said, 
after the sportswear chain was hit by aseries of damaging revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
 about the treatment of workers and its business practices.

Sacha Sadan, director of corporate governance at L&G Investment Management, 
which holds a 1% stake in Sports Direct, said it supported the Investor Forum 
stance and that “all shareholders should send a strong signal to Sports Direct 
calling for change”.

“We will be voting against the re-election of all non-executive directors, as 
we believe that Sports Direct needs a stronger body of independent 
non-executive directors to ensure the business is run in the interest of all 
shareholders. We are disappointed that there have been no new non-executive 
board appointments in the last five years.”

Aberdeen Asset Management, which owns less than 0.5% of the retailer’s stock, 
said in a statement: “Like many investors, we have been in dialogue with Sports 
Direct for some time. Its [AGM] is the latest formal interaction, and offers an 
opportunity again to press for constructive change.

“The company’s well-chronicled problems and [Mike Ashley’s] comments to the 
select committee have highlighted the need to upgrade the senior management 
team. Sports Direct is a multimillion-pound business that would benefit from an 
injection of new talent with the skill sets required to run an enterprise of 
its size and complexity.”

For the first time this year, independent shareholders will hold real sway at 
Sports Direct’s AGM, under new regulatory rules governing companies that have a 
controlling shareholder with a stake of 30% or more. In the past, founder and 
executive deputy chairmanMike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, who owns a 55% stake, was 
able to outvote any detractors. But now the election of non-executive directors 
must be approved separately by minority shareholders. To go against their 
wishes, Sports Direct would be forced to hold another vote between three and 
six months later. While he could out-vote minority shareholders at that point, 
such a move would be highly contentious.

In an effort to win over its critics, Sports Direct announced earlier this 
week that it wouldopen its doors to the public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/24/sports-direct-allows-public-to-attend-annual-general-meeting>
 on the day of the AGM, held in Shirebrook, Derbyshire.

Andy Griffiths, the executive director of the Investor Forum, welcomed the 
plan for an open day but said the group had not received an “appropriate level 
of commitment to respond to investor concerns and, as a result, the usual 
options have been exhausted.” “We do not take this step lightly,” he said.

In July, it was announced that thousands of warehouse workers would receive 
back pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
 totalling about £1m after the retailer admitted breaking the law by not paying 
the national minimum wage. AGuardian investigation last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 exposed the fact that Sports Direct workers were being paid less than the 
legal requirement. The company and its employment agencies face fines of up to 
£2m.

The Investor Forum called on the retailer to carry out a “wide-reaching 
independent review of the entire governance practices at the company”, as 
recommended by a parliamentary select committee, not just its employment 
practices. It also called on Sports Direct to review corporate governance and 
board oversight and effectiveness, acquisition strategy and associated due 
diligence, and the oversight of key supplier relationships and the management 
of its store portfolio.

The group said it did not regard the review of employment practices being 
carried out by RPC, Sports Direct’s lawyers, as independent, echoing the views 
of other shareholders. The recently announced external board evaluation “fails 
to reflect the breadth and magnitude of reform that is required”, it said.

On Monday, it emerged that Sports Direct pays a company owned by the brother 
of Mike Ashley to deliver online purchasesto customers outside the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/sports-direct-pays-mike-ashleys-older-brother-international-delivery>
.

Britain’s largest union, Unite, called on Sports Direct to tackle “endemic 
abuses” within its employment agencies and move longstanding agency workers on 
to direct, permanent contracts. Unite, which has been leading a campaign 
against “Victorian” work practices at Sports Direct, is urging shareholders to 
back the AGM resolution for an independent review into work practices.

The Unite assistant general secretary, Steve Turner, said: “Sports Direct has 
achieved a rare feat in uniting the City, politicians and Unite in the need to 
address deep-seated problems with its work practices and corporate governance.”
 