
More than a third of graduates regret going to university, and half reckon 
they would have landed their current job without having to study for a degree, 
according to damning research into the finances of the millennial generation.

English universities to raise tuition fees for first time since they trebled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/20/english-universities-to-raise-tuition-fees-for-first-time-since-they-trebled>
The research by insurance company Aviva was published days before hundreds of 
thousands of A-level students discover if they have obtained the grades needed 
for their desired university course. In the report, entitled Generation Regret,
Aviva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avivabusiness> warns that many will 
wish they had never bothered attending university, given the level of debt they 
will accumulate.

It found that 37% of those who went to university regret doing so given the 
amount of debt they now have. A total of 49% said they could have got to where 
they are in life without the benefit of a university degree.

The research was condemned by universities, which pointed to separate data 
published at the same time showing a high level of satisfaction with university 
and college courses. The annual National Student Survey, covering responses 
from 312,000 final-year students, found an overall satisfaction rating of 86% 
this year, the same as last year.

But Aviva said financial woes force many to question the value of a university 
education. It said that millennials – aged 18-35 – estimate that they will take 
11-12 years to repay their student debts, and that every month they are 
scrambling to make ends meet.

“Aviva’s findings suggest that millennials have just £156 to spare at the end 
of each month after essential living costs and face repaying hefty student 
loans,” it said, adding that a third of millennials feel they have to carry 
more of a financial burden for higher education than older generations.

Less than half of students confident their degree will pay for itself
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/03/less-than-half-of-students-confident-their-degree-will-pay-for-itself>
Louise Colley of Aviva said: “The financial hangover from university has led 
many in this age group to question whether in hindsight they made the right 
decision and how much value it has brought to their current position. With 
relatively low disposable incomes and significant debt to tackle, millennials 
don’t have it easy when managing their finances.”

Universities dismissed the findings, which they said were based on narrow 
survey data. Aviva interviewed more than 2,000 people aged 18-55 as part of its 
regular family finances report, “with additional interviews among 18-35s taking 
the total in this age group to 1,073 for the spotlight on millennials”.

However, official data shows that graduates are on average more likely to be 
in employment and earn more than non-graduates. The government’s Graduate 
Labour Market Statistics: 2015 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/518654/bis-16-232-graduate-labour-market-statistics-2015.pdf>
, published in April this year, continue to show that, in general, graduates 
are more likely to be in work and earn much more than non-graduates over a 
working lifetime.

Across the working age population, graduates earned £9,500 more than 
non-graduates on average. These gaps were narrower for the young population, 
with graduates earning £6,000 more than non-graduates.

An IFS study <http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8235> from April this year on 
graduate earnings also showed that graduates are much more likely to be in 
work, and earn much more than non-graduates.

Have tuition fees stopped you from attending university?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/03/have-tuition-fees-stopped-you-from-attending-university>
The National Union of Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students>
, while declining to comment specifically on the Aviva findings, said that too 
many students have been condemned to a lifetime of debt. Sorana Vieru, the NUS 
vice-president for higher education, said: “The £9,000 fees system is a failed 
experiment and has not driven up quality or sustainably funded institutions as 
promised.

“In just one year the government has scrapped maintenance grants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/01/abolition-student-maintenance-grant-poorest-university-loans-tuition-fees>
, NHS bursaries, cut the disabled students’ allowance to the bone, changed loan 
repayment terms to make graduates pay back their loans faster and is now 
planning a further rise in tuition fees. We urgently need to review this 
unsustainable funding system which will force students into a lifetime of debt.”
 