
One in six young people in the UK are spending six months out of work, 
education or training, according to new research that suggests government 
figures are underplaying youth unemployment.

Official figures have shown a drop in the proportion of Neets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/20/neets-continue-to-fall-as-jobs-market-improves>
 – young people not in education, employment or training – as the economy has 
recovered from recession since mid-2011.

But the new analysis tracks young people for longer than the official snapshot 
figures and suggests a large proportion are still shut out of the jobs market 
and education for extended periods.

The researchers, who released their report ahead of the latest official Neet 
figures on Thursday, warned that such long spells out of education or work can 
scar young people’s prospects for the rest of their lives.

The analysis, published by the youth employment and education charity 
Impetus-PEF <http://www.impetus-pef.org.uk/>, found an average of 1.3 million 
16- to 24-year-olds, or 17% of the age group, spend six months Neet. That 
contrasts withofficial figures 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peoplenotinwork/unemployment/bulletins/youngpeoplenotineducationemploymentortrainingneet/february2016>
 showing that in the final three months of 2015, 11.8% of young people were 
Neet.


The chair of the Social Mobility Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/social-mobility-and-child-poverty-commission>
, Alan Milburn, said the new figures drew attention to young people at risk of 
being forgotten.

“This research places much-needed focus on a significant population of young 
people who are often overlooked and under-supported,” he said.

“Social mobility is not just about getting graduates into the professions but 
making sure that every child in the UK is given the chance to follow a path 
into education or employment for the long term.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fmore-youngsters-shut-out-of-work-or-training-study-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb82792804efb73748298370ebf5fb76aceedee4%2F0_0_756_443%2F756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20youngsters%20shut%20out%20of%20work%20or%20training%2C%20study%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fmore-youngsters-shut-out-of-work-or-training-study-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20youngsters%20shut%20out%20of%20work%20or%20training%2C%20study%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fmore-youngsters-shut-out-of-work-or-training-study-finds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb82792804efb73748298370ebf5fb76aceedee4%2F0_0_756_443%2F756.jpg>
 Official figures show the proportion of Neets has fallen over the last four 
years Illustration: Office for National Statistics 
The Learning and Work Institute <http://www.learningandwork.org.uk/>, which 
carried out the research for Impetus-PEF, analysed groups of young people over 
a three-year period to get a long-term picture that is not provided in the 
official figures, which record the number of Neets at a particular moment in 
time. The researchers used the same Labour Force Survey figures as the Office 
for National Statistics for its Neet numbers.


The researchers also found 700,000 young people, or 10%, were spending a year 
out of employment, education and training.


Impetus-PEF hopes its new youth jobs index, to be updated annually, will give 
a wider picture of youth unemployment and keep the government focused on 
helping the most disengaged young people, even as headline employment 
statistics improve.

Andy Ratcliffe, the charity’s chief executive, said: “More than a million 
young people in this country are wasting six months not working or learning. 
This can have knock-on effects for the rest of their lives, reducing their 
opportunities and earnings.

“So while we should celebrate the good news that the number of young people 
who are out of work or education has been falling in recent years, we need to 
make sure those young people who spent long periods Neet don’t miss the party. 
Helping the young people furthest from work is essential to meeting the 
government’s manifesto commitment to abolishing youth unemployment.”
 