
Aaron Eckhart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aaron-eckhart> is a movie 
star; he has played opposite Julia Roberts and Gwyneth Paltrow. Right now, 
though, he's rehearsing in a community centre in Clapham, and when we walk 
round the corner to Starbucks, no one recognises him. Perhaps this helps to 
explain why he comes across as quite so defensive. Eckhart, who lives in Los 
Angeles, is here to appear in Lindsay Posner's revival of Oleanna, David 
Mamet's take on political correctness. The play caused a storm when it 
premiered in 1993, especially in America, where in the more fervent and 
contested atmosphere the experience apparently led to couples leaving the 
theatre fighting.

Eckhart is well-primed to play John, the professor whose attention to a female 
student (played by Julia Stiles) leads to accusations of sexual harassment and 
so to loss of his job, his family and his dignity. He first came to notice in 
Neil LaBute's 1997 film, In The Company of Men , playing Chad, a handsome 
executive who seduces a deaf junior colleague just because he can. A 
contemporary version of a Restoration drama, the film appeared to take an 
agnostic view of Chad's behaviour and became wildly controversial.

Lindsay Posner's casting presumably seeks to harness the arrogant masculinity 
Eckhart displayed in that movie. Certainly, the actor seems to feel no 
ambivalence about John, no distance from him: 'I find my character very 
attractive: brilliant and energetic, full of life, on top of his game, very 
active, very sexual, very engaging, a great performer, a great teacher. Kids 
are drawn to his classes and I think many of his students are infatuated with 
me. I think there's a good chance other things have been going on, maybe not 
with this particular person. I am still in my sexual prime.'

He looks at me very directly. The last Eckhart interview I read was a kind of 
extended pant, in which he had apparently flirted with the interviewer and she 
had become convinced there was a powerful, and more to the point, mutual 
attraction. 'Oh, that was a great interview. She was in love with me,' he says 
with some satisfaction. 'But it was silly,' I say. 'It was all about her.' 'So, 
make this all about you.'

I am, regrettably, largely immune. Sure, he has a power jaw, and piercing blue 
eyes and blond surfer looks. But there's too much of his character about him. 
This may of course be temporary; he is currently immersed in the process of 
becoming John. 'I'm in rehearsals right now. And it's hard to divorce myself 
and my point of view. So it's kind of weird doing interviews. After reading 
this interview, you could prob ably say, "Well, he's a real this, that and the 
other." But I am absolutely with my character, on his side.'

Some people think that Mamet is also on John's side, to the detriment of the 
argument: how ambivalent a play does Eckhart think Oleanna is? 'To me it's cut 
and dried. It's about power.' Then, slightly confusingly, he adds: 'Both 
characters are cloudy; they both do things that are wrong, take chances they 
shouldn't. But I think you have to ask here, does the punishment fit the crime? 
Political correctness is people taking power from others. That's why the play 
is significant, why it still has legs. Because what is life about? Money, power 
and sex. And it all comes down to power, anyway.'

That seems rather a cynical point of view, I suggest, for a man brought up as 
a Mormon. 'You see, this is why the play's valid, because you're writing this 
article, and the way people are going to read this is that I'm a cynic. Then 
everyone who reads it will have power over me. That's why you really should not 
do any interviews at all, because you lose your power, you give your power 
away.'

For a time, it looked as though Aaron Eckhart was headed for serious stardom. 
He played the biker boyfriend in Erin Brockovich and Gwyneth Paltrow's lover in 
Possession . (He and Paltrow famously did not get on. 'Gwyneth, in my opinion, 
is...' he says now, pausing for effect, 'one of the public's favourite 
actresses.') Something, though, seems to have gone wrong. 'I wasn't ready for 
it. I was more comfortable being an outsider, but I feel as I grow older I will 
be more at ease in that role. I think it's all there, man, there's nothing I 
don't think I can do.'

You sense a huge, frustrated ambition in him, a conviction that his potential 
hasn't been recognised, let alone realised. 'I'm feeling that everything I've 
done is just a preamble. I'm not even in the first trimester of my life, my 
birth. I really want to do some great work.'

Much of his best stuff to date, as he would be the first to acknowledge, has 
been in relatively low-budget or art-house movies, often with Neil LaBute, whom 
he met at Brigham Young, the Mormon university in Utah. LaBute's 
confrontational and unapologetic style seems to suit him. 'Anything that's been 
inspiring or that I've been proud of has been in controversial territory. I've 
done things that have been more entertaining and crowd-pleasing, and I've not 
been happy with those.'

What he seeks to do when he acts, he explains, is 'to shine a light on the 
difficult side'. But when I suggest that this may make him suited to playing 
bad guys, he becomes defensive: 'I don't like playing bad guys. Or it's not 
that I don't like... I'm not... I'm better than that. You know what I'm saying? 
I've got more to offer than just playing the bad guy, like in my last movie. 
It's, it's crap.' (He doesn't specify which movie he means, but we can safely 
assume it's John Woo's Paycheck , which reviewers variously described as 
muddled, derivative, flat and lightweight.)

He needs a breakthrough film - 'I still feel that nobody knows who I am. I 
need a movie that hits' - and suspects that his best hope may lie with LaBute, 
with whom he has already made four movies. 'We feel we've grown up together, 
and we want to do something great together.' They make an odd couple: the 
bear-like intellectual LaBute, and the handsome surfer, who conveys something 
at odds with his wholesome looks, something a bit bewildered and angry and 
capable of lashing out. They're working on a script; they'd talked on the 
telephone about it the previous evening. He won't say what it is, but it's a 
reasonable guess that it's some kind of a family drama, because he says on 
several separate occasions during the interview that this is the kind of film 
he is keenest to do.

Eckhart's own family brought him to England from California at the age of 13 
in 1981, following his father's job, in computers. They lived in Cobham, 
Surrey, where he attended the American Community School. 'I wanted to shoot 
myself. It was raining, we lived in a small flat, I had to take the bus. I'd 
just started surfing, getting into girls, not getting beaten up. I mean, 
bringing a kid over... However, within a year I discovered I could go anywhere 
in Europe, because my dad felt guilty about bringing us to England.'

Despite the centrality of the family to his religion, Eckhart has yet, in his 
late thirties, to acquire one of his own. 'Yes, I do feel I need to get on with 
it. It's difficult, because you're working extended hours, in different 
countries, and it's difficult to have relationships - that are meaningful, 
anyway. I'm leaving it in the hands of the heavens, because I'm at my wits' 
end.'

He gets quite indignant when I suggest that his faith might be prescriptive. 
'It's ridiculous. Religion gets a bad rap because it says take care of your 
body and tells you how to do that and when people hear that in the context of a 
religion they say it's limiting and fascistic. You're looking at it in the 
wrong way, I'm sorry. You're coming in with a very biased argument. I mean, I 
can go and have a drink, but why would you want me to have a drink, when you 
know it's going to do me harm?' He has given up smoking, drinking, and, with 
the drinking, brawling. 'I got into a lot of fights and stuff. Alcohol is 
really the fuel, I'm a better person not doing it.'

Set for canonisation, then, I say, to round things off, but he says 
defensively: 'That doesn't mean you're boring.' Aaron, I never said it did.

Â· Oleanna runs from 15 April at the Garrick Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, London WC2 For tickets telephone 
0870 890 1104
 