
A 500-year-old brewery is selling off its vats, pumps and bottling lines at 
auction as its billionaire Singaporean owner prepares to turn the site into 
luxury flats.

The Mortlake brewery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jan/07/closing-breweries-glancey>
 in south-west London began brewing beer for the local monastery in 1487 and is 
thought to be among the oldest continuously operating businesses in Britain.

The site, including millions of pounds of brewing equipment, was sold for 
£158m last year by global drinks firm ABInBev to developer Reselton, part of 
the property empire of Kwek Leng Beng.

It is to be turned into a luxury riverside residential development stretching 
along 200 metres of the Thames at Richmond.

Auctioneer Eddisons, which is managing the sale, said it expects a number of 
global brewing firms to compete for equipment including 2,000-litre brewing 
vats, malt blowers and bottling lines.

The equipment was usedto produce brands such as Budweiser and Michelob at a 
rate of 60,000 bottles an hour until it halted production last year.

ABInBev had first earmarked the brewery for closure in 2009 
<http://the%20brewing%20firm%20first%20earmarked%20the%20site%20for%20closure%20in%202009%20as%20it%20sought%20to%20make%20savings%20following%20its%20creation%20via%20the%20merger%20of%20inbev%20and%20anheuser-busch./>
 as it sought savings after its creation via the merger of InBev and 
Anheuser-Busch.

Before its modern incarnation churning out beers for the mass market, the 
Mortlake brewery boasted a long and colourful history at the heart of the 
development of British brewing.


From its 15th-century monastic beginnings, the brewery did not grow into a 
commercial business until the 18th century with the advent of steam-driven 
machinery.

In the 19th century, it brewed beer to be delivered to British troops in India 
and the Crimea, before being bought at the end of the century by the Watney 
family.

The Watney brewery that grew out of this acquisition went on to produce Red 
Barrel, one of the best known beers of the 1960s and 70s, with the site renamed 
the Stag brewery.

Watneys briefly rebranded its famous beer “Red” in an attempt to appeal to 
young leftwing protesters against the Vietnam war.

The rebrand, which ultimately failed, was backed by advertising campaigns 
featuring lookalikes of Fidel Castro, MaoZedong 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mao_Zedong> and Nikita Khrushchev quaffing ale.

In its modern incarnation, under the ownership of ABInBev since 1991, the 
brewery operated using modern brewing equipment manufactured by firms such as 
Steinecker and Siemens.

Eddisons said it was accepting bids for individual pieces of equipment or for 
all of the brewery’s assets, which ABInBev left behind when it sold the site.

The auction will take place in January, wiping away the last traces of 
Mortlake’s association with beer.

Because Mortlake’s did not start commercial operations until 200 years after 
it came into existence, it is not considered the UK’s oldest brewery.

That honour goes to Shepherd Neame, founded in 1698 in Kent, although the 
318-year-old brewery is still a spring chicken compared with the Weihenstephan 
brewery in Germany, which began making beer in 1040.
 