
Britain’s manufacturers are struggling to recruit skilled workers and keep 
pace with global technology, according to an industry report that criticises 
the government for lack of support.

Three-quarters of companies say they have faced difficulties finding the right 
workers in the last three years, according to business group EEF. It warns a 
skills shortage is putting productivity growth at risk and adding to pressure 
on manufacturers as they battle a host of pressures in domestic and overseas 
markets.


The report comes just weeks after the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) 
cut its forecast for potential productivity 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/efo/economic-fiscal-outlook-march-2016/>, 
or what workers in the UK can produce an hour, triggeringwarnings of damage to 
living standards, wages and government tax receipts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/17/budget-2016-osborne-chances-of-delivering-surplus-50-50-ifs>
.

Quality and quantity of candidates lacking
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fuk-manufacturers-struggling-recruit-skilled-workers-eef-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3f18e9968e014fe4c863c0e2631098abc505b60%2F0_0_764_402%2F764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Most%20UK%20manufacturers%20are%20struggling%20to%20recruit%20skilled%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fuk-manufacturers-struggling-recruit-skilled-workers-eef-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Most%20UK%20manufacturers%20are%20struggling%20to%20recruit%20skilled%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fuk-manufacturers-struggling-recruit-skilled-workers-eef-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3f18e9968e014fe4c863c0e2631098abc505b60%2F0_0_764_402%2F764.jpg>
 Proportion of companies reporting reasons for their recruitment difficulties. 
Illustration: EEF Skills Survey 2015-16 and 2012 
The latest evidence of skills shortages adds to gloomy news from the 
manufacturing sector, which hasslumped into recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/cbi-industrial-trends-survey-manufacturing-still-in-recession>
 in the face of tough export markets, steel plant closures and turmoil in the 
oil and gas industry.

The EEF says the struggle to find the right people with the right skills is 
compounding those problems. It predicts demand for skills will rocket and urges 
the government to launch grants for apprenticeships and reform the education 
system to ensure leavers’ skills match needs of businesses.

Technology is manufacturing globally, with increasing automation of production 
in sectors such as car-making. In turn, that has increased demand for new 
skills such as programmers for robots. In the wider economy there have been 
warnings of large-scale job losses from the so-called fourth industrial 
revolution. The World Economic Forum haspredicted more than 7m jobs are at risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/women-to-lose-out-in-jobs-revolution-wef-warns>
 in the world’s largest economies over the next five years as technological 
advances in fields such as robotics and 3D printing transform the world of work.

The EEF claims that ministers are not matching industry’s efforts to tackle a 
skills crunch, such as in-house training programmes and competitive pay 
packages. “We still struggle to find a sufficient number of candidates to 
satisfy the demands of our sector, and too many candidates lack the skills that 
manufacturers need,” said EEF’s chief executive, Terry Scuoler. “Had 
manufacturers not already been taking action, we would arguably now be over the 
cliff-edge, not just approaching it.”

Two-thirds of manufacturers cited a lack of technical skills among applicants 
and almost as many, 64%, said there was an insufficient number of candidates, 
according to the EEF’s survey of 239 companies.

Hard-to-fill posts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fuk-manufacturers-struggling-recruit-skilled-workers-eef-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1834405dc3c3763dc88103ccc45be1ecc51e13d7%2F0_25_793_401%2F793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Most%20UK%20manufacturers%20are%20struggling%20to%20recruit%20skilled%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fuk-manufacturers-struggling-recruit-skilled-workers-eef-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Most%20UK%20manufacturers%20are%20struggling%20to%20recruit%20skilled%20workers%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fuk-manufacturers-struggling-recruit-skilled-workers-eef-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1834405dc3c3763dc88103ccc45be1ecc51e13d7%2F0_25_793_401%2F793.jpg>
 Proportion of vacancies cited as ‘hard-to-fill’ in 2011, 2013 and 2015. 
Illustration: EEF using UKCES Employers Skills Survey 2011, 2013 and 2015 
The group also highlights government figures showing that the proportion of 
hard-to-fill vacancies in manufacturing remained at 35% in 2015 – unchanged 
from 2013 and worse than in 2011 when it was at 30%. Thosefigures from the UK 
Commission for Employment and Skills 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ukces-employer-skills-survey-2015-uk-report>
 put hard-to-fill vacancies for all sectors in the UK together at 33%.

The EEF predicts recruitment difficulties will intensify given manufacturers 
expect their demand for skilled workers to rise over the next three years. 
Almost six in 10 (59%) expect to need more production-related technical skills 
and almost half expect to need more staff with IT skills, according to the
skills report 
<https://www.eef.org.uk/resources-and-knowledge/research-and-intelligence/industry-reports/skills-report-2016>
.

Overall, 72% of companies said they were worried about acquiring the skills 
their business will need in the next three years. Companies in the survey said 
they were offering training and flexible working to help, with eight in 10 
planning to recruit manufacturing and engineering apprentices in the next 12 
months.

The EEF used its report to renew its complaints over the cost to employers 
from a new national living wage coming in this week and an anticipated 
apprenticeship levy due to start next year. It also demanded more help on 
skills from the government, which has pledged a “march of the makers” and less 
reliance on consumer spending to fuel economic growth.

Responding to the report, the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills 
<http://discuss.bis.gov.uk/pressoffice/> (BIS) said the government was working 
closely with manufacturers to raise productivity and had already cut red tape 
and invested £6.9bn in the UK’s research infrastructure.

A BIS spokeswoman added: “We are supporting employers up and down the country 
to address skills challenges by pressing ahead with our reforms to education, 
skills training and higher education, making sure every young person has the 
skills employers need now and for the jobs of the future. That includes with 
the new apprenticeship levy putting employers back in the driving seat.”
 