
Most British savers retiring between July and September last year fully cashed 
out their pension pots after rule changes, the financial markets regulator 
said, feeding concern they are not seeking financial advice.


 Under the new rules announced in April 2015, individuals no longer need to 
buy an annuity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/27/changes-pensions-mean-to-you>, 
or income for life, at retirement with their pension savings and can instead 
buy more flexible retirement products or take it all out as cash.

 However, some in the pensions industry remain concerned that people could 
make poor investment decisions and be financially crippled in old age if they 
fail to get quality advice.

 Those with a little more money put aside could also fall into a higher tax 
bracket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/29/lamborghini-tax-pension-changes-annuities>
 if they take too much out at once.

 Pursuing its analysis of the impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/17/hundreds-of-thousands-of-people-empty-pensions-pots-since-relaxation-of-rules>
 of the rule changes, the Financial Conduct Authority on Thursday released the 
second in a series of quarterly reviews detailing how individuals are using the 
new freedoms.

 In its report, the FCA said 120,969 pensions, or 68% of those accessed during 
the period, were cashed out, of which the vast majority – 88% – were for pot 
sizes of £30,000 or less.

 Just 13% of retirees opted to use their savings to buy an annuity, the FCA 
added, while 30% of people had taken some or all of their money using drawdown 
products.

 A spokesman for the Treasury said savers should “take their time, shop around 
and understand their options before making a decision”, pointing to the 
government’s freePension Wise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/apr/11/pensions-guidance-worth-taking> 
guidance service.

 Of those who fully cashed out a pot of £250,000 or more, one in five did so 
without seeking professional advice or using the Pension Wise service, Old 
Mutual Wealth, a unit of insurer Old Mutual, said.

 “This is concerning as they would likely have been subject to a substantial 
tax hit on the withdrawal and there is the potential that they did not fully 
understand the tax implications of their decision,” said Jon Greer, pensions 
technical expert at Old Mutual Wealth.

 Citing previous research undertaken with pollsters YouGov, Greer said much of 
the money may have been used to invest in buy-to-let property but increases in 
the tax paid on second homes would likely curtail demand in future.
 