
Locals say the village of Boreraig <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boreraig> is 
haunted. At night, if you sit on the beach, they say you can hear voices as 
well as the sounds of livestock. Forcibly and violently vacated in 1853 as part 
of theHighland Clearances <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highland_Clearances>, 
the ruined crofting settlement casts a mournful eye over the Sea of the 
Hebrides and North Atlantic Ocean.

All of which made our whoops of joy at the descent to the coast suddenly seem 
a bit inappropriate.

This is mountain biking on the Isle of Skye. Scotland's open access laws 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/4246923.stm> mean everything you see you 
can attempt to ride. Yet at every turn you come up against a land battling to 
contain the vastness of its scale and the weight of its past.

Our plan to leave the maelstrom of London for a weekend of back-to-basics, 
challenging cycling morphed into two days of epic singletrack biking laced with 
the feeling that we were riding ground that hadn't been touched by two wheels 
before. To say we were out of our depth is something of an understatement.

There was little hint of how far we would end up travelling when we were met, 
fresh from the overnight sleeper, at Inverness station by Kat and Euan from
Highlands and Islands Adventures <http://www.handiadventures.co.uk>. Euan made 
it sound like nothing more than a pop to the corner shop. Except there aren't 
many corners on Skye and there aren't many shops. In blissful ignorance, we 
threw our bags into the Jeep, loaded our bikes on to the roof and sped off into 
the gathering clouds.

By 10.30am the next morning these clouds were obscuring the view and testing 
our nerves. We had climbed up to ride the Quiraing, a series of brutal-looking 
rock formations in the north of the island, near the Trottenish Ridge. Quickly, 
the severe drop on the right-hand side of the trail became obscured - but not 
before a sheep was spotted slipping and rolling downwards.

Whipping along a trail - which mutated from mud to rock garden to waterfall to 
grass to scree- all skills were called into play. Hanging on to the bike was 
not an option - you had to ride it hard and think on your feet. Dropping down 
out of the cloud, we rode past lochans with the sea in our sights, bursting out 
on to a road covered in mud, grinning broadly.

Euan's knowledge of the trails on Skye is exhaustive. Trying to ride the 
island without him would have been dangerous. He also had the knack of knowing 
when to call it a day. We had been pushed solidly out of our comfort zone - a 
steak and one of the 250 malt whiskies on offer at theSligachan Hotel 
<http://www.sligachan.co.uk/> was his immediate prescription. 

The hotel sits on its own in the middle of the island - its location harking 
back to its creation in the 1830s as a droving establishment, when around 6,000 
head of cattle were sent from Skye to the mainland each year. From the hotel's 
front door, you can ride a trail deep into the heart of a glacial valley. Cycle 
for 10 minutes, look back and the hotel has disappeared. It's easy to be alone 
on Skye.

Which is why, when we met four hikers over the course of three hours the next 
day, some of our party could be heard to grumble about the "crowded trails".

We had left the Jeep in a field and set off towards Boreraig, following a 
trail the marble miners had used 200 years before us. The rocky, slender path 
took us up steep climbs and down big slabby descents and across moorland dense 
with bracken.

Cresting the final hill we gazed down upon the deserted village – roofless 
ruins and stumps of stone-wall pens - resolutely resisting the elements. And 
then the brakes were off and we screamed through bog and mud to the 
fossil-heavy beach. The scene was of two worlds colliding: four dirty mountain 
bikers sat next to their modern machines against a backdrop of ghosts and 
dinosaurs.

Essentials

The Caledonian Sleeper run by ScotRail  <http://www.scotrail.co.uk/>operates 
an overnight service from London to Inverness. Prices for a return ticket start 
at £110. You can take your bikes on the train if you book ahead but if you'd 
rather hire one on arrival,Base Camp Mountain Bikes <http://www.basecampmtb.com>
 in Laggan is a good bet.

Bespoke mountain bike tours of Skye by Highlands and Islands Adventures 
<http://www.handiadventures.co.uk> can be booked throughout the year. The price 
for a long weekend is £300 per person.

If driving you can catch a ferry to the island from the port town of Mallaig 
to Armadale on Skye withCaledonian MacBrayne <http://www.calmac.co.uk>. Fares 
start at £3.65 one way.
 