
Michael Rosen <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michaelrosen> is a busy 
man. Almost without fail the writer, broadcaster, poet and former children’s 
laureate manages to publish about half a dozen books every year. The day after 
this interview took place, two of them were published at once – one a book of 
poetry, the other a book about refugees. A third has come out since, and 
there’ll be three more before Valentine’s Day.

And yet we’re meeting to discuss a book published 27 years ago. We’re Going on 
a Bear Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/05/how-we-made-bear-hunt> is one of 
Rosen’s great successes, a children’s book that’s won awards, sold millions of 
copies, and been spun off into a dizzying array of peripheral products: there’s 
the book, the sticker book, the board game, the calendar, the theatrical 
adaptation – and now, this Christmas, the film.

I meet Rosen inside a building dedicated to getting it finished on time. Three 
whole floors are stuffed with men and women obsessing over imperceptibly small 
details in frames that will soon become Channel 4’s festive highlight: a 
sumptuous half-hour animated presentation of Bear Hunt with the voices ofOlivia 
Colman <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/olivia-colman>, Mark Williams 
and – as the bear – Rosen himself. It’s a prestigious adaptation, one you 
suspect has been designed to become aSnowman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/17/howard-blake-bill-alexander-snowman>
-style staple. Not bad for a book that’s only 34 pages long, I tell Rosen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026c9185b6786a66e85aad17609ed1580405673e%2F0_273_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman!%20Let's%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman%21%20Let%27s%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F026c9185b6786a66e85aad17609ed1580405673e%2F0_273_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘If it was just what’s in the book, it’d last about four minutes’ … We’re 
Going on a Bear Hunt. Photograph: Channel 4 
“That’s what people said about Where the Wild Things Are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/maurice-sendak-interview>,” he 
says, as wiry and energetic at 70 as he’s ever been. “That book takes even less 
time to read – and that’s a feature film. I think of this as a development, not 
an adaptation. If you just made an animation of the book, it’d only last about 
four minutes and 30 seconds.”

Anyone with a child under the age of 25 is likely to know the story. Some 
children and their dog decide to go out for an adventure. They travel through 
rivers, mud and forests – and then, inside a gloomy cave, they stumble across a 
bear who chases them all the way home again. At least that’s how it goes in the 
book. The animation adds a dose of festive sadness. I put it to Rosen that he’s 
declawed his fearsome antagonist, making him a more sympathetic character for 
the purposes of mass entertainment.

“Not so fast, Kowalski!” he yells, grabbing a copy of the book and pointing to 
the inside back cover. Sure enough, once the story is over – once Rosen’s words 
have ended – illustrator Helen Oxenbury has painted a picture of the bear 
trudging along a beach by himself at dusk. “I would say that there’s some 
regret there,” says Rosen of the bear.

“To you this may sound like hyperbole, but Helen has done what Rembrandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/rembrandt> does. She’s conveyed 
emotion through the shape of a body. Children see the bear here and say, ‘He 
only wanted to play’, or ‘He’s sad because he’s on his own.’ They provide their 
own scenario.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09eac99ca2372b3f63c3c83877cdabefbda39e5b%2F838_149_1249_1562%2F1249.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman!%20Let's%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman%21%20Let%27s%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09eac99ca2372b3f63c3c83877cdabefbda39e5b%2F838_149_1249_1562%2F1249.jpg>
 Starring voice … Olivia Colman. Photograph: Fred Duval/FilmMagic 
The book itself almost didn’t exist. It was initially a folk song that Rosen 
had adapted and used in his performances at schools. “The boss of Walker Books 
saw me do it and said, ‘That would make a very good book.’” At first Rosen 
declined, but was eventually persuaded – something that has clearly not been 
forgotten. “The publisher sent me a letter saying they wanted to make an 
animation,” he says. “They gave me a checklist of what kind of involvement I’d 
like: none, teeny-tiny bit, a tiny bit, a little bit, a little bit more, quite 
a lot, or being a meddlesome arsehole. I ticked ‘meddlesome arsehole’ straight 
away.”

Although he’s keen to stress he wasn’t the primary scriptwriter, Rosen will 
admit to giving plenty of notes. “A book is different to a movie,” he says. “A 
picture book is shared with parents or siblings or whatever. As an author and 
illustrator and editor, you arein loco parentis, you’re acting as the parent. 
But when you do a film, it’s not as simple. There may not be parents in the 
room.”

So you can’t take as many risks? “You can see with some children’s films where 
they’ve got it wrong. You can debate the big fish scene in Pinocchio, for 
example. Kids will tell you how scared they were by it, usually when they were 
in the cinema, so you could argue that Disney got it slightly wrong.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9094775176a63ee2c96a3aba1c567b5f59d64108%2F0_60_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman!%20Let's%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman%21%20Let%27s%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9094775176a63ee2c96a3aba1c567b5f59d64108%2F0_60_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Echoes of Rembrandt … We’re Going on a Bear Hunt. Photograph: Channel 4 
Bear Hunt isn’t the first time Rosen’s work has ended up on screen. I’ve been 
a fan ever since seeing him on Channel 4 schools programmes in the 1980s, on 
the big square TV that was wheeled into class whenever our teachers fancied a 
break. Slightly embarrassingly – and this is the first time I’ve ever done this 
with an interviewee – I’ve brought one of his books to get signed. It’s You’re 
Thinking About Doughnuts, the story of a boy who gets trapped in a museum. 
Channel 4 should adapt this one next, I say.

“I know!” he says. “In fact, someone took an option on it, then along came 
Night at the Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/dec/22/actionandadventure.comedy>. I 
never found out whether he pulled a fast one on me. My kids went to see it and 
said, ‘It’s been nicked.’ So I went to see it and thought, ‘Well, not really.’ 
The film says it’s loosely based on a picturebook someone did of a kid in a 
dinosaur museum. My guess is the two were swirling around, and they didn’t want 
to hand out oodles of dosh, so they just gave it to the guy in New York who’s 
written this nice book about dinosaurs.”


Rosen also writes a blog, largely revolving around education. The week we meet,
Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 has just announced her plans to reintroduce grammar schools. What are his 
thoughts? “It’s probably one of the worst decisions ever made by any government 
at any time, apart from going to war,” he says, becoming even more expressive 
then usual. “It embeds class difference.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c7518868b6ec816a0bf65d5cfe87562592d7213%2F1593_476_1441_1801%2F1441.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman!%20Let's%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Move%20over%2C%20Snowman%21%20Let%27s%20have%20a%20cuddly%20Christmas%20with%20Bear%20Hunt%20instead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fwere-going-on-a-bear-hunt-michael-rosen-channel-4-christmas-animation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c7518868b6ec816a0bf65d5cfe87562592d7213%2F1593_476_1441_1801%2F1441.jpg>
 ‘It’s all Helen!’ … Michael Rosen. Photograph: Roberto Ricciuti/Getty 
Weren’t you an old grammar school boy, though? “Yes, but three quarters of the 
kids in my area weren’t. If you go to a grammar school, you’re unconsciously 
taught that you’re better than all these other people. In fact, I was worse at 
maths than probably at least the top 30%. But somehow or other, perhaps because 
my parents were teachers, I got hauled into the grammar.

“People think education is two plus two equals four, but it’s also finding out 
where you stand in the world. When you have mass education going through 
selection, these are the insidious things taught to you. You wake up at age 30 
and wonder why you keep telling yourself that you can’t do something, and you 
don’t even know you’re thinking these things until you piece it all together.”

Back to Bear Hunt. I tell Rosen how much my son enjoys the book, how it taught 
him the words bear and dog. “That’s all Helen,” he replies, crediting the 
illustrator once again. “This is Helen creating all these little subplots. 
That’s why the book is so deep. It’s an incredible achievement – her brilliant 
skill in conveying emotion through line and colour.”

Now that Rosen is on his way to becoming a perennial Christmas favourite, I 
ask which of his numerous other works have the potential for adaptation. “I 
would think that every single one would be a magnificent film,” he says, eyes 
bulging with enthusiasm. “Particularly the ones that only sold five copies.”

• We’re Going on a Bear Hunt is on Channel 4 at 7.30pm on Christmas Eve.
 