
One of the MPs behind the damning report into Kids Company  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/kids-company-collapse-mps-pacac-report-blame-negligent-trustees>
has admitted he has “misgivings” about its conclusions and believes his fellow 
committee members had wrongly “rushed to judgment”.

Paul Flynn, the Labour MP for Newport West, said in hindsight he would have 
softened thereport’s  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmpubadm/433/43302.htm>
scathing judgment that the charity’s governing trustees were to blame forits 
collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/21/kids-company-faces-investigation-over-financial-collapse>
 last August. His change of heart came following a private meeting with a 
former trustee – after the report had been published.

The report accused the board of “negligent financial management”, of ignoring 
auditors’ warnings, and failing to hold Kids Company’s charismatic chief 
executive and founder,Camila Batmanghelidjh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/camilabatmanghelidjh>, to account.

It also warned that the trustees could be disqualified from future charity 
board appointments underimminent regulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/feb/03/the-charities-act-what-you-need-to-know>
 designed to prevent or punish misconduct and mismanagement.

MPs blame 'negligent' trustees for Kids Company collapse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/kids-company-collapse-mps-pacac-report-blame-negligent-trustees>
But Flynn said his discussions with the former trustee, who he declined to 
name, had led him to conclude that the parliamentary administration and 
constitutional affairs committee (Pacac) report should have been more generous 
to the charity’s governing board.

It is understood the trustee met with Flynn and the Pacac chair, the Tory MP 
Bernard Jenkin, on Tuesday, the day after the report was published.

The trustee, Flynn said, had been “benign and well meaning” and had given a 
lot of time and money to the charity: “We rushed into judgment on the trustees. 
We did not appreciate the difficulties that trustees have.”

It is understood the trustee had presented evidence to the MPs that the board 
had rigorously monitored Kids Company’s finances, strategy and management over 
the last few years.

Asked whether Pacac should have interviewed the trustees formally before 
publishing its findings, Flynn told the Guardian: “I accept, having met one of 
the trustees, that that is a fair criticism.”

Kids Company’s former chair of trustees, Alan Yentob, said: “I welcome this 
late admission by Paul Flynn, after finally meeting with a trustee ofKids 
Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>, that the select 
committee’s accusation of negligence was rash.

Kids Company: ministers must explain why they 'overrode civil service'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/kids-company-ministers-overrode-civil-service-bernard-jenkin>
“I hope the voices of the key workers and experienced and well-respected 
clinicians and evaluators will now be heard and that a fair and proper process 
can establish the truth behind a charity which has done so much to support so 
many disadvantaged children and young people.

“I stand by the trustees’ statement published last week and also point out 
that the Metropolitan police havedismissed all 32 allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/28/police-drop-kids-company-abuse-investigation>
 that they were investigating, allegations which led directly to the charity’s 
closure.”

A statement issued by former Kids Company trustees last week criticised the 
Pacac report as “inaccurate, unbalanced and irresponsible” and failing to 
conduct a thorough investigation of the evidence.

Jenkin defended its findings, saying that while he understood individual 
trustees might feel unfairly vilified, ultimately the board was legally 
accountable for the charity, and the committee had no doubt that the trustees 
had failed in their duty, despite their hard work and good intentions.

Jenkin said he and other Pacac members had talked privately to more than one 
former Kids Company trustee during the inquiry about their experiences. While 
they had not been formally recorded, these conversations were taken into 
account during the committee’s deliberations.

He told the Guardian: “The idea that we should avoid any implication of 
responsibility for the trustees would simply be to avoid the lessons that all 
trustees need to understand.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fmp-paul-flynn-involved-kids-company-report-misgivings-over-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7687fc92bc4f4aab24ff2cc7101ec8b3feee7388%2F0_0_3100_1859%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MP%20involved%20in%20Kids%20Company%20report%20has%20'misgivings'%20over%20verdict&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fmp-paul-flynn-involved-kids-company-report-misgivings-over-verdict%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MP%20involved%20in%20Kids%20Company%20report%20has%20%27misgivings%27%20over%20verdict&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fmp-paul-flynn-involved-kids-company-report-misgivings-over-verdict%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7687fc92bc4f4aab24ff2cc7101ec8b3feee7388%2F0_0_3100_1859%2F3100.jpg>
 Paul Flynn said he was disappointed that the Kids Company report failed to 
highlight the key role he believes David Cameron played. Photograph: Fiona 
Hanson/PA 
Asked whether it was fair that individual Kids Company trustees might be be 
barred as a result of the report, he said: “I would be very surprised if any of 
these trustees would actually be struck off as a result of what happened.”

However, Flynn’s admission will cause concern over the robustness of the 
inquiry. One MP on the committee admitted to the Guardian: “One of the 
weaknesses of select committees is we have not got the time to do the thorough 
investigations we need to.”

Yentob was the only one of the eight trustees to be interviewed by the 
committee, at astormy public hearing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/15/kids-company-chiefs-deny-cash-willy-nilly-camila-batmanghelidjh>
in October alongside Batmanghelidjh during which he denied there had been 
failures of governance. Yentob afterwards submitteddetailed written evidence 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/public-administration-and-constitutional-affairs-committee/kids-company/written/23582.html>
 defending the trustees’ actions, but believes this was ignored by the 
committee.

Flynn’s reservations came to light after he tweeted a response to a blog post 
<https://andrewpurkis.wordpress.com/2016/02/03/wilfully-blind-or-incompetent-a-trustee-responds/>
 by a former charity commission board member, Andrew Purkis, who had argued 
that the recentPacac report into charity fundraising 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmpubadm/431/43102.htm>
, which was also highly critical of charity boards, had failed to take into 
account the complexity of the trustee role.

Flynn tweeted <https://twitter.com/PaulFlynnMP/status/695256519231848448>: 
“Very powerful arguments. Since the report was published I have met a KC 
trustee. Agree. We rushed to judgment.”

The Guardian view on Britain’s charities: building trust in trustees | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/01/the-guardian-view-on-britains-charities-building-trust-in-trustees>
Flynn told the Guardian that although the report bore his name and he was 
present for the early part of the meeting where it was agreed on 21 January, he 
did not sign it. “I had so many misgivings about the report,” he said, but 
added he also agreed with much of it.


The veteran MP said he was disappointed that the report failed to highlight 
what he believed was thekey role played by David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/14/cameron-and-gove-showered-praise-on-kids-company-in-18-months-before-its-closure>
, whose high-profile support for Kids Company had, he believed, influenced 
controversial ministerial decisions to issue grants worth millions of pounds to 
the charity.

The report found no evidence that the prime minister directly instructed 
ministers or officials to provide financial support, although it said 
correspondence from No 10 clearly expressed “his personal support for the 
charity” and suggested he proposed meetings between departmental ministers and 
Kids Company representatives to discuss funding issues.

Flynn called for two cabinet ministers, Oliver Letwin and Matthew Hancock, to 
be investigated by the prime ministers’ adviser on ministerial conduct after 
theyoverrode senior civil servants’ advice  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/01/kids-company-ministers-overrode-civil-service-bernard-jenkin>
to pay a £3m restructuring grant to Kids Company just days before its closure.

The trustees comprised experienced figures from business, finance, law, and 
philanthropy. They included Richard Handover, the former chairman and chief 
executive of WH Smith, and Sunetra Atkinson, a philanthropist and ex-wife of 
the actor Rowan Atkinson.
 