
Michael Martin

Martin, the Commons Speaker who is being forced out over his handling of the 
MPs' expenses <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> scandal, 
claimed £56 a month from taxpayers for window cleaning and grass cutting at his 
second home.

Despite receiving a salary of £144,520 and having a grace and favour home 
inside the Palace of Westminster, the Glasgow North East MP billed taxpayers 
for keeping his second property looking tip-top.

On another receipt, he claimed for a new can opener.

The claims were within the rules, and were paid by the Commons authorities, 
but will embarrass Martin, who has already faced criticism over his claims for 
mileage, taxis and groceries.

But as the contest to replace him reaches a crescendo on Monday, the spotlight 
now turns on the 10 MPs who are vying to replace him.

Ann Widdecombe

Prior to today's publication of expenses claims by the Commons authorities, 
Widdecombe insisted the only redactions to her receipts would be to remove any 
personal addresses or bank details for security purposes.

The records show that the former shadow home secretary has indeed left many 
other details uncensored.

Several hotel bills reveal Widdecombe often enjoyed lavish meals and alcoholic 
drinks, but made no attempt to pass on the cost to taxpayers, claiming for just 
the hotel room and some of the meals.

"I wouldn't call the meals lavish, exactly," Widdecombe told the Guardian. 
"The cost was sometimes high because it was for three or four people."

Margaret Beckett

The former Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader and 
foreign secretary charged taxpayers £30 a month for cleaning her windows and 
£44 a week for garden maintenance.

She said: "That is roughly what we claim for cleaning, but the gardener only 
comes every week in the summer months - in the winter it's less often."

In 2005, Beckett also claimed £600 for plants.

Sir Alan Beith

The first MP to formally put his name forward for the post of Speaker has 
already come under fire from the Telegraph for claiming £117,000 in second home 
allowances over eight years.

The paper alleged that his wife, Baroness Maddock, claimed £60,000 in House of 
Lords expenses for staying at the same address.

Receipts show he has also claimed an average of £24 a month for laundry and 
£150 a month for cleaning, as well as £4,700 towards the cost of a £10,158 new 
kitchen, £757 for new appliances and £349.99 for a new TV.

"I've always rented my flat," Beith said. "The reason we had to refurbish the 
1960s kitchen was because we refused a cash offer of £48,000 from the landlord 
which would probably have led to a new kitchen but also meant the rent would 
have gone up from £14,000 to £22,000 a year.

"I paid £4,700 out of my allowance for the kitchen and my wife contributed the 
other half from her Lords' allowance. We would never claim twice for the same 
cost."

John Bercow

The Conservative MP, who repaid more than £6,500 to HM Revenue & Customs after 
confirming that he had not paid capital gains tax when he sold two properties 
in 2003, consistently made claims in round numbers.

He generally claimed £100 a month for food, £100 for utilities, £100 for 
council tax/rates, £50 for telephone costs, £50 for cleaning and £350 for 
service/maintenance.

However, in March 2006 - the final month of the financial year - his claims 
rose to the maximum £400 for food. His utility bill was £110.91, the council 
tax bill £90 and the telephone bill £150.

He charged taxpayers £225 for cleaning, £350 for service/maintenance and £200 
for repairs/servicing.

His office has been contacted for comment.

Sir Patrick Cormack

Along with Beith, Cormack was one of the 13 MPs named by the Telegraph as 
having been offered a windfall worth thousands of pounds to give up their right 
to cheap rent in a deal that led to taxpayers paying substantially more for 
their second homes.

He told the Guardian: "We were all offered the option of a £50,000 windfall to 
stay in the flat, with a much higher rent, but neither I norAlan Beith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alan-beith> took up this offer.

"I was then offered £5,000 to renounce the right of my wife to succeed me in 
the tenancy, which I did accept. I spent the money on the flat on items that I 
didn't think it would be right to claim for."

Cormack said his main home had always been in his constituency, and he had 
always lived in rented accommodation in London.

"For the 20 years, that has been in Dolphin Square," he said.

His additional cost allowance shows that, in 2007, he claimed around £750 
every three months for cleaning, but the request stated that this included 
laundry, dry cleaning, window cleaning and cleaning materials.

Cormack added: "Part of the lease obliges me to have the windows cleaned once 
a month and I have them cleaned every three weeks. I also have a regular 
cleaner."

Last year, he also charged taxpayers £468.50 for a new TV and kitchen knives, 
£160 for replacement bed linen and £200 for a new digital radio.

"When we first established a home in London, so I could have my wife and young 
sons with me there, were no allowances at all, so the only items I've claimed 
for have been replacement items," he said.

"They were all modest purchases, not top of the range anything ... I have 
always sought to get decent things that will have a reasonable life but are not 
extravagant."

In 2006, he received £304 for replacement towels and bed linen and £350 for 
replacement reading lamps.

The previous year, he claimed £1,415 for two new sofas, made two separate 
claims of £230 and £108 for new bed linen, charged £86 for a new kettle and 
kitchen utensils and made two separate claims, of £65 and £186, for replacement 
glasses and crockery.

He also claimed £343 for new bed linen in 2004.

Parmjit Dhanda

The Gloucester MP, who threw his hat into the ring to succeed Martin with a 
warning that none of the leading candidates were offering sufficient change to 
the system, made regular claims of up to £300 a month for food and £100 a month 
for cleaning.

Last year, he also claimed £389 for crockery, £200 for two new bed headboards, 
£849 for a table and chairs, £59 for a desk, £499 for a sideboard and £85 for a 
shoe rack.

In 2004-05, he regularly claimed the £400 maximum food allowance per month.

"I have been totally transparent with my expenses," he said. "They have been 
on my website for about a month.

"You will find some clear principles in my claims. I've never flipped homes, 
even when I was a minister – my main home has always been in my constituency.

"I haven't played the property ladder. I have never avoided taxes, and 
personally I do not employ any family members."

Sir Alan Haselhurst

The deputy speaker repaid £12,000 to taxpayers for his gardening bills after 
beingcriticised over the claims by the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mps-expenses/5311797/MPs-expenses-Alan-Haselhursts-12000-gardening-bill.html>
.

The paper also alleged that the Saffron Walden MP, who is paid £104,050, 
claimed a total of £142,119 in second home allowances since 2001 despite having 
no mortgage on the property.

His receipts show he regularly claimed £249 a month for gardening and £240 a 
month for cleaning. He also charged taxpayers £638.94 for patio repairs last 
year and £468.30 for central heating repairs.

There were two separate claims, of £28 and £68, for repairing a washing 
machine, and £202.10 for pea shingle for driveway maintenance.

In addition, the cleaning of furniture and carpets cost £571.05, new loft 
insulation cost £546.75, and two claims for a chimney sweep were £43 and £75 
respectively.

Haselhurst said: "The £142,119 was a figure the Telegraph arrived by simply 
extrapolating four years' claims to seven.

"It was relatively unfair, because it is not based on the figures published 
today.

"One ought to be fair about what one is comparing. In 1997, my additional cost 
allowance was laid against my London flat, but when I became Speaker the rules 
governing these things meant I was forced to appoint my constituency home as my 
second home.

"In terms of all the allowances claims in 2007-08, I came 582nd out of 646 
MPs, so I wasn't exactly the most expensive, and I was in a similar position in 
each of the two previous years."

Sir Michael Lord

Lord, another deputy Commons Speaker, has also come under fire for claiming 
more than £8,000 over five years for his garden.

The Central Suffolk and North Ipswich MP's expenses claims show he regularly 
claimed the maximum £400 monthly food allowance and £160 a month for cleaning.

Detailed receipts for garden maintenance reveal that Lord charged taxpayers 
for tree work, grass cutting and strimming. He also spent £100 on cleaning 
windows, gutters, downpipes and drains.

In 2006, he spent £2,046 refurbishing a bathroom and charged taxpayers £600 
towards the cost of a replacement table and chairs.

Lord's office has been contacted for comment.

Richard Shepherd

Shepherd threw his hat into the ring for the Speakership after saying he would 
back a motion of no confidence in Martin.

The Aldridge Brownhills MP made no claims for rent or mortgage in 2007-08, but 
he made two claims of £60 a month for food, just over £200 a month for utility 
bills and £230 a month for cleaning.

He also regularly claimed around £200 for garden maintenance.

In addition, he claimed £4,200 for repairing a roof, £6,467 for a new kitchen 
and £705 for tree work. In 2006, he also claimed £2,080 for a replacement 
boiler.

Shepherd said: "My total claims over four years were £44,000, which is an 
average of £11,000 a year. They are one of the very lowest for an MP who lives 
outside of London. I'm in the bottom 30. I've never made claims for furniture 
or furnishings."

Sir George Young

Young, the final candidate for Speaker, was attacked by the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mps-expenses/5364194/MPs-expenses-Sir-George-Young-claimed-127000-on-London-flat.html>
 for claiming the maximum second home allowance on his London flat for the past 
two years.

The paper alleged that the chairman of the standards and privileges committee 
claimed £127,159 between 2001 and 2008 for his flat in Victoria and employs his 
daughter, Camilla, as his office manager.

His records show that, in addition to claiming £1428.92 per month in mortgage 
payments, he regularly claimed around £15-20 a month for food and about £30 a 
week for cleaning.

In 2006, he also claimed £897 towards a dishwasher and a washer dryer.

A spokeswoman for Young said: "Sir George's expenses claims have been 
published on his website for some time, and he has no further comment to make."
 