
The “negligent” trustees of Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>, held in the sway of an 
“unaccountable and dominant” chief executive, were ultimately responsible for 
the collapse of the organisation, according to a damning report by MPs.

Alan Yentob <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob>, the chair of 
trustees at the high-profile charity for 19 years, was criticised for his 
repeated denials that there had been historic failures in its financial 
management. This interpretation, MPs said, was “inaccurate and alarming”, 
highlighting his “continuing inability” to recognise the failures in his duties 
as chair of trustees.

The report by the public administration and constitutional affairs committee 
(Pacac) called for a radical change in charity regulation to prevent a repeat 
of the “extraordinary catalogue of failures of governance and control” that led 
tothe collapse of Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/21/kids-company-faces-investigation-over-financial-collapse>
.


Bernard Jenkin, who chairs the committee, said they had heard “an 
extraordinary catalogue of failures of governance and control at every level: 
trustees, auditors, inspectors, regulators and government”.

MPs were damning about senior politicians from successive governments who 
handed out more than£42m of public money to Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/29/kids-company-ministers-warnings-david-cameron-charity>
 with no robust evidence it was making any positive difference. The Cabinet 
office minister, Oliver Letwin, was criticised for his role in ensuring the 
government gave millions of pounds of funding in the final months of the 
charity’s existence.

The report said the charity’s charismatic founder Camila Batmanghelidjh was 
allowed by trustees to be in total control of the organisation. In 2014 when
Kids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company> was £4m in debt 
and seeking £12m more of public money, Batmanghelidjh personally rejected a 
philanthropist’s offer of “unlimited funding” and a “large human resource”, MPs 
said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkids-company-collapse-mps-pacac-report-blame-negligent-trustees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feab36969d938c8cb18dab4be6eb2a2323f926282%2F0_234_4256_2557%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%20blame%20'negligent'%20trustees%20for%20Kids%20Company%20collapse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkids-company-collapse-mps-pacac-report-blame-negligent-trustees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%20blame%20%27negligent%27%20trustees%20for%20Kids%20Company%20collapse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fkids-company-collapse-mps-pacac-report-blame-negligent-trustees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feab36969d938c8cb18dab4be6eb2a2323f926282%2F0_234_4256_2557%2F4256.jpg>
 David Cameron and Camila Batmanghelidjh in 2010. Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex 
Shutterstock 
The report said Batmanghelidjh told the donor she was turning down the 
financial help because the individual lacked “emotional authenticity” and was 
“not ready to be genuinely philanthropic”. Neither Yentob nor the rest of the 
trustees – none of whom had experience in youth work – were involved in the 
decision to turn down the financial lifeline, underlining “how unaccountable 
and dominant trustees had allowed her to become and how far she was able to 
insist on maintaining personal control”, the report said.

The former trustees of Kids Company issued a critical response to the report 
calling it “inaccurate, unbalanced and irresponsible” and said it was not based 
on a thorough investigation. They accused MPs on the committee of using 
parliamentary privilege to make allegations that would otherwise be subject to 
legal action.

In the report MPs were also damning about senior politicians from successive 
governments.

“Batmanghelidjh and Kids Company appeared to captivate some of the most senior 
political figures in the land, by the force of the chief executive’s 
personality as much as by the spin and profile she created for the charity,” 
the report said.

“As a consequence objective judgments about Kids Company were set aside ... 
There is little doubt that the high-profile support of successive prime 
ministers ... had an impact upon decision-making across Whitehall ... This 
included the authorisation of multiple grants outside of the normal competitive 
process.

“Ministers should not allow charity representatives to exploit their access to 
government in a way that may be unethical.”

The report challenged the comments of Batmanghelidgjh and Yentob, who said 
last week Kids Company had closed because of themalicious and untrue allegations
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/28/kids-company-founder-says-malicious-child-abuse-claims-led-to-closure>
 about sexual and physical abuse within the charity that sparked a police 
investigation. The inquiry by police led to no evidence of criminality.

The MPs, however, said had trustees not allowed the weak financial position to 
persist for so long, Kids Company would not have been so vulnerable to the 
impact of the announcement of the police inquiry last summer.

Key findings in the report, published on Monday, included:

 * “Negligent trustees” repeatedly ignored auditors’ clear warnings about the 
precarious finances of the charity. 
 * There was a clear link between the length of time the chair of trustees, 
Yentob, and Batmanghelidjh had been in power and the failure to correct serious 
weaknesses in the organisation. 
 * It was not until 2015 – after £35m of public money had been given to the 
charity – that the government acknowledged the need for a robust examination of 
its activities and outcomes. 
 * The government knew Kids Company was overstating the number of clients it 
worked with but did nothing about it. 
 * Earlier intervention by the Charity Commission might have helped safeguard 
Kids Company, which provided valuable support to many vulnerable young people. 
Bernard Jenkin, chair of the committee, said: “The committee has heard many 
positive accounts of the valuable work Kids Company did with some very 
vulnerable clients, and of employees who were inspired and motivated ... this 
makes the board’s failure to ensure the charity’s sustainability all the more 
tragic. There has been a litany of allegations of inappropriate ‘therapies’, 
lavish spending and abuse of power – we hope this episode highlights to all 
trustees that protecting the reputation of an organisation is a core element of 
good governance.”

MPs described the “unique, privileged and significant access” to senior 
ministers and prime ministers of successive governments enjoyed by Kids Company 
– which angered other charities doing similar work – and also meant it was 
almost untouchable.

It was a “matter of considerable concern”, the report said, how individuals 
with concerns about the charity remained silent because of its powerful 
connections.

Yentob’s role as a senior executive in the BBC at the time of huge media 
interest in the charity of which he was chair of trustees was also examined.

He has admitted he stood behind the glass with the producer during a BBC 
interview with Batmanghelidjh, and made a phonecall to another BBC journalist 
who was due to make a broadcast about the charity’s difficulties, something 
which the report said was “unwise at best and deliberately intimidating at 
worst”.

Noting Yentob had since resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/alan-yentob-steps-down-bbc-kids-company>
 his main position at the corporation, but still retained substantial 
responsibilities and oversaw substantial budgets, MPs were critical of the way 
the BBC has handled the affair.

Charity trustees are to blame for the fundraising scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/28/trustees-responsibility-charity-fundraising-scandal>
“The proper governance of conflicts of interests and standards of behaviour – 
particularly among its senior executives – is a very senior matter for any 
reputable organisation. That a senior figure could act in this way and it could 
take so long for action to be taken reflects poorly on BBC leadership,” the 
report said.

The report was dismissed by Batmanghelidjh, who told the Guardian that the 
inquiry had been superficial: “I can only have respect for reports that are 
based on as rigorous examination of the facts. I’m grateful the police did that 
[in their investigation into allegations of abuse at Kids Company] and we were 
cleared. I’m sorry that the Pacac MPs didn’t.”

In a statement, the former trustees of Kids Company said: “For the committee 
to conclude that the trustees, auditors, care experts, inspectors, regulators 
and the government all failed ‘at every level’ is astonishing.

“Instead of basing its findings on a thorough investigation of the evidence, 
the committee has naively accepted allegations made in the media and by a small 
number of individuals, some with vested interests in damaging Kids Company and 
its much-praised model of loving care and practical support.

“Practically no weight has been given to the evidence presented to the 
committee by numerous witnesses who were closer to the work of the charity.”

Although the report suggests the charity had poor child protection practices, 
the trustees note that the Metropolitan police – which last Thursdaydismissed 
32 claims against Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/28/police-drop-kids-company-abuse-investigation>
 of sexual and physical abuse after a six-month inquiry – found no evidence of 
safeguarding failings.
 