
A customer relations officer from Ellesmere Port has been electronically 
tagged for two months, given a curfew and ordered to pay £2,440.66 in costs for 
leaving a 15-week-old kitten alone for two days.

What does this tell us about justice in Britain today? Quite a lot, especially 
when you consider that the punishmentTanya Sharples 
<http://www.chestereveningleader.co.uk/news/Ellesmere-Port-woman-is-tagged.5321611.jp>
 was given by Ellesmere Port and Neston magistrates court last week, for the 
48-hour abandonment of Charlie the kitten, is far greater than any penalties 
likely to be received by any bankers or MPs for the damage they have done to 
Britain's financial and political institutions.

Across Britain, people are being punished with historic vindictiveness by 
magistrates' courts and the police. They are being hounded because they fail to 
obey footling laws on wheelie bins, for illegal parking while picking up 
children from school, for waving foreign flags, dog fouling and littering. 
Dover's police chief,Chris Hogben 
<http://www.localrags.co.uk/index.php/News/2009/6/4/No-nonsense-Dover-Police-chief-vows-to-lock-up-litterbugs>
, has announced that anyone caught dropping even a single chocolate wrapper 
will be locked up for 24 hours. Leaving aside the fact that Hogben seems to 
have forgotten the principle that punishment follows conviction, it is worth 
noting that as a society we place greater emphasis on the prosecution of these 
tiny acts of antisocial behaviour than we do on bringing to justice the crooks 
and conmen in this era of Labour corruption.

Astonishingly, the police have already announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/05/police-rule-out-mp-expenses> 
that no MP is likely to be charged, despite evidence, not just of widespread 
venality, but of activities which come very close to theft. As for the bankers, 
they're already back in bonus land. Andy Hornby, the former head of HBOS who 
caused such a calamity at the bank, yesterday became thechief executive of Boots
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/apr/29/hbosbusiness.banking2> with 
a salary and bonus likely to be over £1m per year. I am not saying that Hornby 
has done anything illegal, just that his case conforms to the pattern in which 
the rich, privileged and powerful are able to shrug of these catastrophes and 
continue on their way with almost no shame and little impact on their careers.

Perhaps you have noticed during the recent election coverage the way in which 
MPs have been distancing themselves from the expenses scandal and speaking as 
though it was one of those extreme weather events that occasionally affect 
humanity. The issue is portrayed as a result of the combination of poor 
personal book-keeping, the ambiguities of the fees office and the relatively 
low salary of MPs, but never a failure of personal morality of course.

A free society is based on three essential elements: democracy, liberty and 
justice. Over the last few years I have often questioned whether we have a 
proper democracy and have showed – I hope – that the things we like to call our 
democratic institutions do not guarantee our liberty.

What has become clear in the present scandal is that our system of justice 
favours a powerful few over the many, and is meting out disproportionately 
harsh punishments to ordinary offenders, while letting off those who have done 
so much to cause chaos in our society.

It is an absolute disgrace that we have a chancellor who has flipped his home 
to avoid the very tax that he is responsible for setting and a mark of the 
decline of public standards of accountability that he is still in his job. 
Gordon Brown's failure to publish the report into the affairs ofShahid Malik 
<http://www.newstin.co.uk/tag/uk/126567646> , who claimed over £60,000 on 
properties, beggars belief given his recent undertakings to clean up politics. 
Malik works in theJustice Department 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.justice.gov.uk/about/malik.htm>
: the public needs to be assured his behaviour is of the highest integrity, 
which I am afraid is not at all clear at the moment.

If a woman is made to suffer – excessively in my view – for abandoning her 
damned cat, it must follow that we cannot let off these MPs. Many should resign 
their seats or be forcibly removed by parliament. Police investigations should 
be relentless. All reports by the prime minister's adviser on ministerial 
conduct,Sir Phillip Mawer 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=2&url=http%3A%2F%2Fnews.bbc.co.uk%2F1%2Fhi%2Fuk_politics%2F3197908.stm&ei=3ZMvSrWDE5uZjAeDmaWZCw&usg=AFQjCNEGtA-SfU0wE969Z2Kcd07xgVHWbQ&sig2=ea_72vSSZU-P0VkMVowCsQ>
, should be published. At a time of incessant criminal justice legislation, the 
creation of 3,500 criminal offences, the unendingrise in the prison population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jun/09/labour-prisons-criminal-justice>
, justice must be seen to be done. These politicians should be charged, 
whatever the crown prosecution service's views on the likelihood of conviction. 
Let juries decide on the issue of guilt. Let these men and women stand in the 
dock and answer for themselves.
 