
Tonight Britain's sundry television personalities and non-personalities will 
bundle together in a hotel on London's Park Lane for the BAFTAs. This year the 
award ceremony is to be hosted by Davina McCall and she will doubtless do a 
good job. She is quick, attractive, every TV viewer's imaginary, amusing best 
pal. But she is not, and never can be,Angus Deayton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angus-deayton>. He appeared to have 
been made to host such events. Smooth, without being oily, he was the master of 
the knowing smirk that stopped neatly short of being subversive. A kind of Fred 
Astaire of the autocue, in retrospect it seems as if Deayton might actually 
have been worth the Â£50,000 he was reportedly paid for what may have been his 
final stab at the BAFTA job in 2001.

Most notably his ignominious departure from our screens left a big hole on 
Friday nights. The empty seat at the centre of the popular BBC1 topical quiz 
Have I Got News For You has since been filled by a giddying array of hopeful 
chairmen, but the BBC's wilful game of musical chairs has only served to remind 
us that someone is missing.

This week the strategy behind Deayton's return to our living rooms began to 
emerge. He has already gained praise for his supporting role in the Julia Davis 
sitcom Nighty Night. A show that started out in the marginal territories of 
BBC3, its bottomless pit of black humour has provided just the right sort of 
environment for a disgraced television grandee to make a reappearance sporting 
the beard of a penitent. The horrors and humiliations which are visited upon 
his character, Don, a man who is alternately bemused and aroused by the madness 
around him, have performed the function of a bizarre abasement ritual.

His real-life affairs with, first, a call girl and then a friend of the family 
were exposed in the tabloids. Since then, Deayton calculatedly lay low. Now ITV 
has relaunched him as a prime-time front man. Not only has he secured a job 
hosting a topical news quiz to rival HIGNFY, it became clear he has been chosen 
to present a flagship entertainment 'event' for the summer. Hell's Kitchen will 
run live each night for two weeks and involve chef Gordon Ramsay attempting to 
hone the culinary skills of a succession of celebrities.

Such a high-profile deal is a poke in the eye for BBC executives who many in 
the entertainment industry consider to have been disloyal to Deayton. When the 
sleaze story broke they conspicuously failed to offer him suitable work. 'They 
paid lip service to the idea that it did not matter about his personal life,' 
said one friend, 'but not much happened.'

Deayton had been tied to the BBC in a rare 'golden handcuffs' contract that 
prevented him from identifying himself with other networks. Indeed, among his 
comedy contemporaries the presenter had a reputation for ensuring the level of 
his fee matched his position as a top-flight entertainer. His agent, it is 
rumoured, was always asked to make extensive inquiries about the going rate for 
any proposed 'gig'.

Possibly this was just a sensible way of protecting his professional standing, 
or perhaps it was a response to the long climb up to stardom and away from a 
series of supporting roles (including a period as Rowan Atkinson's straight man 
on a stage tour).

In the event, it was this hard-won 'golden' status that proved the presenter's 
undoing. His long-term relationship with the talented and beautiful 
scriptwriter Lise Mayer, the woman who had co-written with Ben Elton the cult 
comedy show The Young Ones, had established them as the 'golden couple' of 
comedy. Golden coupledom is not always a comfortable state to be in. You become 
a number one target for gossip. There was a lot at stake when his tawdry 
mistake was made public.

Perhaps if he had cut a morally murkier figure, the revelation of his 
misbehaviour would not have been so damaging. After all, his on-screen brand 
was all about an intimated superiority of both mind and values. As in the cases 
of other temporarily de-throned celebrities, such as Jamie Theakston, Hugh 
Grant or even Frank Bough, the 'falling off' is all the more dramatic when the 
star is someone audiences can imagine having tea with the vicar.

Even when Deayton is cast in an acting role he tends to be the affronted 
neighbour, first as Patrick in One Foot in the Grave and now as Nighty Night's 
Don. He is usually the one who is being shocked by the 'goings on' next door, 
not the one doing the shocking.

Comebacks are hard for comics. Audiences have to feel relaxed and safe to 
laugh. Deayton may have been attacked by critics and, occasionally, by 
co-stars, for doing an apparently easy job, but making it look easy was his 
chief skill. As the host of a satirical TV show he had to be prepared with a 
selection of back-up jokes that he could deploy without batting an eyelid. 
Deayton is still regarded by writers as the consummate professional. Producers, 
too, have said that he made their job easier with his understanding of the 
continuity and the editing of a show.

Geoffrey Perkins, a producer and old friend, says Deayton is wonderful to 
write with because he is so organised. 'In the early days we would all just 
call out ideas, but Angus would want to write them down,' he said. 'He has a 
fantastic ability to put words in the right order and he understands comic 
timing perfectly. To say he is a perfectionist sounds slightly as if you mean 
he is pedantic and I would say that he just wants words to be in the right 
order.'

The former producer of HIGNFY, Harry Thompson, once noted that even the 
contents of Deayton's brief case were methodically laid out, while a writer has 
commented that Deayton 'seems to have treated his career in entertainment as if 
it were in banking or something'. All agree that he mediated between Hislop and 
Merton with artistry.

A Radio Times poll recently revealed that viewers would still like to see 
Deayton return to HIGNFY, but the spell has been broken. Paul Merton's dislike 
is explicit, while both he and Hislop, annoyed for some time by the size of 
Deayton's pay cheque, are believed to be angry that his actions undermined the 
satirical fabric of the show.

'Forget the BBC, what was fatal was the lack of support he got from Ian and 
Paul,' said one colleague.

Nothing in the Deayton background would have suggested he was heading for a 
career as TV's nice Mr Sex or latterly TV's naughty Mr Sex. Born Gordon Angus, 
he was the third of three sons and grew up in Caterham, Surrey, attending a 
minor public school. His father was in insurance and his mother was a cookery 
teacher.

An ardent football fan, at the age of 12 he had a trial for Crystal Palace and 
still plays regularly with comedy pals at Highbury on a Tuesday. He studied 
French and German at New College, Oxford, where he also drove around in a 
Triumph Spitfire and made friends with revue types, including the musician 
Philip Pope and the writer Richard Curtis. He first performed at Curtis's 
instigation and went on to form a radio comedy team called Radioactive, 
following a novelty success with a chart-topping Bee Gees parody entitled 
'Meaningless Songs Sung in Very High Voices'.

Eventually given a break as a secondchoice host for the news quiz that was to 
make him a household name, classy dependability became his chief appeal for 
commissioning editors. Maybe there's a limit to everyone's store of 
dependability. His partner Lise has praised him, even in the middle of their 
crisis, for the steady support he offered her during the IVF treatment that 
resulted in the birth of their son Isaac. She appeared even to suggest that the 
strain of this period was partly to blame for his transgression.

At the time Deayton said he 'had been a complete fool' and described his 
conduct as a kind of schizophrenia. He also said there had been a lot of tears, 
a remark that recalled a comment made about him in happier days by Harry 
Thompson who once said, apropos of nothing: 'I can't imagine him crying'.

Close friends all indicate that Deayton has coped with the calamity in his 
life with a Surrey-bred regime of denial. Even after the news broke, Mayer too 
appeared to find events hard to believe such was the confidence her partner 
inspired. 'The Angus you have read about is not the person I know, so it all 
has a very surreal quality to it,' she said.

Whether or not her confidence was well founded, professionally speaking ITV is 
about to put its new shows into a pair of the safest hands around.

 Gordon Angus Deayton

 DoB: 6 January, 1956 
 Parents: Roger Davall and Susan Agnes Deayton 
 Education:  Caterham School; New College, Oxford (BA in modern languages: 
French and German)
 Radio/TV: Radio Active, Alexei Sayle's Stuff, Have I Got News for You?, Hell, 
One Foot in the Grave, Nighty Night
 