
The winner

Predictions for the box-office gross of Mrs Brown's Boys D'Movie were all over 
the map. Pessimists pointed out that bothKeith Lemon: The Film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148902/keith-lemon> and The Harry Hill 
Movie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-harry-hill-movie> had failed to 
convert their significant TV followings into equivalent legions of cinema 
customers. And with the average age of the Mrs Brown TV viewer believed to be 
around 50, the audience didn't suggest itself as one apt to leave its sofa in 
droves for the multiplex. On the other hand, with Lemon and Harry Hill, the 
film-making teams had faced the challenge of converting characters most famous 
for a panel game show (Celebrity Juice) and a playful take on the week's TV (TV 
Burp) into scripted features. Mrs Brown's Boys is already a scripted sitcom, 
and creatively more suited to a big-screen close-up. Could D'Movie's success 
land closer toThe Inbetweeners Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-inbetweeners-movie> than to Lemon and 
Harry Hill?

The achieved result, a £4.30m opening weekend in UK and Ireland, represents 
the top end of industry expectations. It's understandably well down on The 
Inbetweeners Movie's debut of £13.22m including previews of £4.57m back in 
August 2011. But it's a big improvement on the opening salvos of both Lemon 
(£1.20m) and Harry Hill (£550,000). It's also well up on the first frame of 
last summer's Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa (£2.18m including previews of 
£744,000).

Ireland is always included in reports of UK box office, and on this occasion 
will have over-indexed relative to its population size. Mrs Brown's Boys has 
already sold over 5m DVDs in the UK, and D'Movie, positioned to hit retailers 
at the end of October (assuming a standard four-month theatrical window), will 
surely be a huge gifting item this Christmas.

The film was barely professionally reviewed in the UK, achieved by the simple 
expedient of not offering any press screenings. The Daily Telegraph's Robbie 
Collin was one of the hardy few to report from the multiplex frontline, 
describing its plot as "a maudlin and sentimental grind", and observing of one 
ethnically stereotyped scene: "This isn't funny. It isn't even unfunny. It's 
something close to anti-funny."The Guardian's Mike McCahill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/27/mrs-browns-boys-dmovie-brendan-ocarroll-review>
 dubbed the film a "thin stew" and a "flatly indifferent cash-in".

The regional hit
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ9a4PvzlqoQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ9a4PvzlqoQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ9a4PvzlqoQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here for How to Train Your Dragon 2 trailer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z9a4PvzlqoQ>

Released in 134 cinemas in Ireland, Northern Ireland and Scotland, DreamWorks 
Animation'sHow to Train Your Dragon 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/how-to-train-your-dragon-2> opened solidly 
with £604,000 including previews of £79,000. (The film also played previews in 
England and Wales, but those will only be reported after it opens there 
officially on July 11.) Comparisons are tricky, but Pixar's Brave followed a 
similar regional pattern in August 2013, debuting with £820,000 from 143 
locations.

The original How to Train Your Dragon debuted nationwide in April 2010, 
grossing £4.85m including £2.12m in previews. The film went on to a UK total of 
£17.37m, then becoming a notable success on DVD. With all due respect to The 
Nut Job, Earth to Echo and Planes: Fire & Rescue, Dragon doesn't face 
competition from a real big-hitter animation all summer, so DreamWorks 
Animation and distribution partner Fox will be hoping for a strong sustained 
run.

The also-rans

Two wide releases landed in the middle of the chart. Jon Favreau's 
star-packed, food-themed indie flick managed £463,000 from 372 cinemas, plus 
£143,000 in previews. Mamma Mia! wannabe Walking on Sunshine came in a bit 
lower, with £403,000 from 360 venues. Both were positioned as 
counter-programming to the World Cup, aiming for a slight female skew with Chef 
(although a father-son storyline is the emotional hook) and a bigger one for
Walking on Sunshine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/walking-on-sunshine>.

Four years ago, similar attempts at counter-programming (to the 2010 World 
Cup) saw Letters to Juliet land with £587,000 plus previews of £206,000; and 
Killers, starring Ashton Kutcher and Katherine Heigl, kick off with £744,000 
plus £309,000 in previews.

Walking on Sunshine comes from the directors and producers of the StreetDance 
films, but has failed to emulate their success. As for Mamma Mia!, that film 
was based on a long-running stage show that over many years had created a 
hungry audience for a film version, and was also populated with a heavyweight 
cast. Watching Meryl Streep and Colin Firth sing Abba songs was an intriguing 
prospect; seeing the lesser-known cast of Walking on Sunshine take on 80s 
classics clearly represented a must-see prospect for a much smaller audience.

Mamma Mia! opened in the UK with £5.21m plus £1.38m in previews, on its way to 
a towering £68.55m.

The flop

In the UK, golf is a huge participation sport that supports a thriving media 
industry including Golf World, Today's Golfer, Golf Monthly, Golf News and Golf 
International. Would this dedicated niche convert to a cinema audience for a 
biopic celebrating the life of golfing legend Severiano Ballesteros? The answer 
is not, in the case of Seve, which debuts with a weak £47,300 from 159 cinemas, 
yielding an anaemic £297 average. A cinema release in the winter might have 
proved more engaging, since June's late bright evenings are more apt to witness 
golf fans actually playing the sport. UK distributor Entertainment Films is 
more likely to have given priority to the DVD release: arriving in the heart of 
Q4, Seve could prove another rich gifting item this Christmas.

The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeejJiKQe50k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeejJiKQe50k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FeejJiKQe50k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here for Tammy trailer
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eejJiKQe50k>
Thanks to Mrs Brown's Boys D'Movie, box office overall is a decent 29% up on 
the previous frame, which in turn was 19% up on the prior weekend. For that 
reason, you'd imagine cinemas are thriving, but multiplex owners may take a 
different view. The weekend session is a troubling 51% down on the equivalent 
from 2013, when Despicable Me 2 landed in the top spot. Since the start of 
March, weekend box office has been down on the year-ago equivalent frame on 13 
occasions, and up only four times. The summer blockbuster season has suffered a 
significant interruption from the World Cup, and exhibitors will be pinning 
their hopes on the major films arriving in July and August.

The coming weekend, however, seems to offer scant relief, with Melissa 
McCarthy comedy Tammy leading what otherwise looks to be a relatively niche 
field of fresh contenders, including Noel Clarke sci-fi actioner The Anomaly 
and Scandi dark comedy The 100-Year-Old Man Who Climbed Through a Window and 
Disappeared. All are likely to be outperformed by yet more previews of How to 
Train Your Dragon 2 on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.

Top 10 films June 27-29

1. Mrs Brown's Boys D'Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/mrs-browns-boys-movie>, £4,301,306 
from 522 sites (New)

2. The Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fault-in-our-stars>, £1,699,690 from 519 
sites. Total: £6,697,519

3. 22 Jump Street <https://www.theguardian.com/film/22-jump-street>, 
£1,203,390 from 431 sites. Total: £15,096,724

4. Maleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, £819,504 from 488 
sites. Total: £16,564,412

5. Chef <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chef>, £605,976 from 372 sites (New)

6. How to Train Your Dragon 2, £604,325 from 134 sites (New)

7. Walking on Sunshine, £403,490 from 360 sites (New)

8. X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, £319,270 from 310 
sites. Total: £26,482,836

9. Edge of Tomorrow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-edge-of-tomorrow>, 
£315,900 from 254 sites. Total: £7,243,085

10. Jersey Boys <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jersey-boys>, £195,718 from 
436 sites. Total: £1,034,415

Other openers

Cold in July <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cold-in-july>, £156,783 from 
104 sites

Ek Villain, £144,286 from 30 sites

Punjab 1984, £103,195 from 29 sites

A Haunted House 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-haunted-house-2>, 
£48,676 from 14 sites

Seve, £47,294 from 159 sites

Mistaken for Strangers, £40,051 (including £34,432 previews) from 9 sites

Secret Sharer, £14,093 from 9 sites

The Golden Dream <https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-dream>, £11,187 from 
9 sites

Keeping Rosy, £4,416 from 4 sites

Under the Rainbow, £4,100 from 8 sites

Return to Homs, £1,344 from 4 sites

Rock and Roll's Greatest Failure: Otway the Movie, no figures available

Thanks to Rentrak

• More from Charles Gant's UK box office analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/at-the-british-box-office>
 