
It was just after sunset in Altamira, a small town nestled on a curve of the 
Xingu river in the heart of theAmazon rainforest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/amazon-rainforest>, when Luiz Alberto 
Araújo, the secretary for the environment on the city council, arrived home 
with his family.

 Luiz Alberto Araijo, secretary for the environment on the city council of 
Altamira. Photograph: Handout 
Before he could get out of his car, two men on a motorcycle pulled up and the 
passenger shot seven bullets into the 54-year-old, who was still sitting in the 
driver’s seat.

The killer got off the bike, opened the car door and shot him twice more. 
Araújo slumped on to his wife, who was seated beside him. Neither she, nor his 
two stepchildren, were injured. No attempt was made to steal anything.

The killing, on Thursday 13 October, had all the hallmarks of the sort of 
assassination that is common in the lawless Pará state, in the eastern Amazon, 
where illegal logging, clandestine mining and modern slavery are rife.

More than 150 environmental activists have been killed in Brazil since 2012 
<https://www.globalwitness.org/en/press-releases/olympics/>, with studies 
showing the country accounts for half the global toll of such murders.


Many of those killed, including the high-profile cases of Chico Mendes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/20/brazil-salutes-chico-mendes-25-years-after-murder>
,Dorothy Stang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/20/brazlilan-rancher-jailed-dorothy-strang-murder>
 andZé Claudio Ribeiro da Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/05/amazon-activist-murder-trial>
, were campaigners. But Araújo was a government official, and advocates say his 
murder is a rare and worrying development.
brazil map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/altamira-brazil-map/> 
 “The killing of Luiz Alberto Araújo marks a new low in the war waged against 
environmentalists in the Brazilian Amazon,” said Billy Kyte, campaign leader at 
the NGO Global Witness. “It sends a message that no one is untouchable.

“The government must urgently protect activists under threat and hold to 
account those responsible for this killing spree. Until prosecutions are made 
and protection is guaranteed, this deadly spiral of violence will continue 
unabated.”

Araújo’s home, Altamira, is a municipality in Pará, one of the poorest states 
inBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, with a land area larger 
than Greece but a population of just 110,000.

His work was a cross-section of the region’s environmental woes, from the 
battle against deforestation – which has risen by 24% in Brazil, recent figures 
show – to the consequences of the Belo Monte hydroelectric dam, which has been 
built nearby.

Araújo, who colleagues described as studious, serious and highly competent, 
had become used to receiving death threats. He had moved from a similar role in 
São Félix do Xingu, a neighbouring municipality, for that reason, they said.

“Without doubt he was afraid,” said Marcelo Salazar, of the 
Socio-Environmental Institute in Altamira, who worked with him. “He never said 
anything but anyone who works with the environment in Amazon towns will have a 
little bit of fear.

“It was a professional killing, there was no fight,” he added. “You have to be 
very careful with this work [combating deforestation] – and who you denounce.”

Belo Monte, Brazil: The tribes living in the shadow of a megadam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/16/belo-monte-brazil-tribes-living-in-shadow-megadam>
Araújo’s department this year granted a licence to a vast gold mine, called 
Esperança IV, in Altamira. Last monthfederal inspectors shut it down and fined 
its operators 
<http://www.ibama.gov.br/publicadas/ibama-embarga-garimpo-em-altamira-pa-e-aplica-multa-de-r-50-milhoes>
 50m reais ($16m) for breaching restrictions which barred the mine from any 
deforestation. Mercury and other pollutants were also leaking into the river 
Curuá, poisoning the food chain of the Kayapó indigenous tribe, inspectors said.

Araújo also reported the operators of Belo Monte, the fourth largest 
hydroelectric dam in the world, to federal prosecutors after his team found 
masses of dead fish.

Norte Energia, the operator, was eventually fined 35m reais ($11m) for the 
death of 16.2 tons of fish during the filling process of its reservoir. “He was 
assiduous in passing us this information,” said Ubiratan Cazetta, a federal 
prosecutor in Pará.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrazil-amazon-environmentalist-murder-luiz-alberto-araujo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79dc3a8bebc2cc2ca673c01190a5832c85c761ba%2F0_141_4243_2545%2F4243.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murder%20of%20Brazil%20official%20marks%20new%20low%20in%20war%20on%20Amazon%20environmentalists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrazil-amazon-environmentalist-murder-luiz-alberto-araujo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murder%20of%20Brazil%20official%20marks%20new%20low%20in%20war%20on%20Amazon%20environmentalists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrazil-amazon-environmentalist-murder-luiz-alberto-araujo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79dc3a8bebc2cc2ca673c01190a5832c85c761ba%2F0_141_4243_2545%2F4243.jpg>
 The area around Altamira suffers deforestation associated with logging and the 
Belo Monte hydroelectric dam. Photograph: Phil Clarke Hill/Corbis via Getty 
Images 
Earlier this year, federal inspectors in Altamira also busted a deforestation 
operation that had used modern slaves to clear 112 sq miles of forest, although 
officials played down Araújo’s involvement in the investigation.

The civil police in Xingu are investigating his murder. The detective leading 
the inquiry, Vinicius Sousa, said closed-circuit television footage was being 
analysed and his family and friends interviewed. Araújo’s environmental work 
and the inspections carried out by his secretariat were being considered as a 
possible motivation for his killing, he added.


 