
You could view the internet a little like the Earth’s surface. The bits of the 
web everyone knows about and uses are the land masses, but surrounding them are 
the vast expanses of ocean that represent the much publicised “deep web” – the 
uncharted depths that are the areas not indexed by standard commercial search 
engines, because they’re meaningless to the average internet user. However, 
within this abyss of uncharted waters, there is a place that undertakes 
groundbreaking technological advancements just to keep itself both separate and 
efficient. This relatively small area has been labelled the “darknet”, and it 
can only be browsed using services likeTor <https://www.torproject.org/> (The 
Onion Router) orFreenet <https://freenetproject.org/>, which are based on 
multilayered concepts of anonymity designed to make both the visitors and the 
web pages (styled as .onion) incredibly difficult to trace.

The darknet has been around since the 70s, but the rise and fall of the Silk 
Road <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silk_Road_%28marketplace%29> darknet 
marketplace empire (now Silk Road 2.0) in 2013, and the advent of
cryptocurrencies <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/cryptocurrencies>, 
notably Bitcoin, saw it truly break into the mainstream press. Ever since it 
has enjoyed sporadicnews mentions 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-28242662>, usually relating to drug and 
gun markets, political activism, child pornography, fraud, fetishism, murder, 
terrorism andTesco clubcard vouchers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/09/silk-road-website-roraring-trade-tesco-vouchers>
. To many, unsurprisingly, the darknet is an incomprehensible sin city.

With all that in mind, Aphex Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/19/aphex-twin-richard-james-bjork-ian-rankin>
’s decision to release details ofSyro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/21/aphex-twin-syro-review-richard-d-james>
, his first album in 13 years, via anelusive .onion web page 
<https://twitter.com/AphexTwin/status/501383043643621376> left a wider 
community of music lovers trying to decipher why electronic music’s prodigal 
son had chosen such a platform. Hackers immediately booted up their Tor 
browsers and pounced on the page to search for any hidden surprises, but 
reported back via Reddit that there was no hidden content and no secret 
messages.“If anything, the site is a little sloppy,”  
<http://www.reddit.com/r/Music/comments/2dw4qq/aphex_twin_announces_new_album_syro/>
said one commenter.

As I tried to explore the thought processes of Aphex Twin’s Richard D James (a 
daunting task in itself), I became sidetracked by a much wider issue, which 
involves a growing scatter of artists who are exploring the outer limits of the 
internet for inspiration, adventure, anonymity and rebellion, in search of a 
truer and uncensored reflection of the society we live in.

It began with Lee Bannon <http://ninjatune.net/artist/lee-bannon#.VCE_m0j6rW4>
, a Sacramento based experimental hip-hop producer. Bannon has spent the last 
year working on an album subtly inspired by the darknet. In contrast to his 
production work for rappers like Joey Bada$$ and Souls of Mischief, Bannon’s 
solo work is a distinct brand of atmospheric jungle which nods as much to 
digital culture as it does to the early years sounds of Goldie’s Metalheadz 
label. His first experience with the internet’s peripheries came when he 
started to find his music being discussed on different types of internet forum. 
“My original hip-hop fan base was somehow evolving into a more intellectual 
hacker crowd,” he says. “They lived a certain lifestyle, and I wanted to dive 
into that vibe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmusicians-embrace-darknet-uncensored-internet-web-surveillance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411467755324%2F34beffa5-3f18-48b4-a914-3bdd06e7dc0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Musician%20rebels%20embrace%20darknet%20to%20explore%20uncensored%20internet%20frontiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmusicians-embrace-darknet-uncensored-internet-web-surveillance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Musician%20rebels%20embrace%20darknet%20to%20explore%20uncensored%20internet%20frontiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fsep%2F23%2Fmusicians-embrace-darknet-uncensored-internet-web-surveillance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F23%2F1411467755324%2F34beffa5-3f18-48b4-a914-3bdd06e7dc0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Musician Lee Bannon: ‘For me, the fascination is about social justice and this 
new frontier of possibilities.’ Photograph: Josh Wehle 
A combination of watching the Anonymous network join in the Ferguson protests 
<http://mashable.com/2014/08/19/anonymous-ferguson-day-of-rage/> and witnessing 
a friend smoothly buy drugs off the darknet made Bannon obsessed with both the 
potential and the awe-inspiring absurdity of it all. “For me, the fascination 
is about social justice and this new frontier of possibilities. I think it’s 
like a sword. A good guy could pick it up to protect people, and a bad guy 
could pick it up to cut someone’s head off.”

It turns out Bannon wasn’t the only one in California’s state capital who had 
embraced internet subculture. Two years ago, thenow defunct group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/03/death-grips-split-announce-on-napkin>
 Death Grips launched an ARG (alternate reality game) on the darknet to promote 
their albumsThe Money Store 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/26/death-grips-money-store-review> 
and No Love Deep Web, by seeding various clues on the bulletin board site4Chan 
<http://www.4chan.org/>. “Silicon Valley is only an hour away, so a lot of that 
hacker culture winds up in Sacramento, because it’s cheaper to live there, and 
you can commute back and forth,” Bannon says of the attraction of the darknet 
for the city’s musicians.

Explorations into strange parts of the web aren’t restricted to Sacramento, 
naturally. “One of the few sublime experiences I have today,” explains the 
Canadian artist and essayistJon Rafman <http://jonrafman.com/>, “is discovering 
a new community online that I didn’t even know existed. It reveals a whole 
world within a world. It’s like thinking you know what reality is and then 
discovering an entire universe within an atom.” Rafman’s warped video collage
Mainsqueeze <http://vimeo.com/100324610> was collated entirely from footage 
found on the deep web, and this latest discovery has him even more fascinated. “
Wizardchan <http://wizardchan.org/>,” he says, “is an online community of male 
virgins over the age of 30. It comes from a Japanese saying that if you reach 
the age of 30 and you are still a virgin, you become a wizard. It is a 
community of supportive self-deprecation and self-loathing with a very internet 
sense of humour. They are often trying to one up each other in levels of 
patheticness and a lot of the time discourage any attempts at becoming 
‘normies’. I see this image of the basement-dwelling wizard who rejects 
societal conventions to such an extreme degree as one of the tragic heroes of 
our times.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F100324610&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F100324610> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F100324610&media=>
The above video features some footage that readers may find disturbing

Mainsqueeze, by Canadian artist Jon Rafman is a compilation of footage posted 
on the deep web 
Part of what Rafman admits to loving about the darker corner of the internet 
is how it allows people to take on new roles and identities. Yet, one of the 
key features of the darknet – the anonymity – is largely highlighted as its 
most dangerous component, with the “what have you got to hide?” card being 
thrown into most debates about encryption systems such as Tor, despite the 
dangers posed by the absolute lack of anonymity forced on internet users by 
sites that harvest their data.

The fear of the sites which see their users as a resource from which to make 
money drivesAlec Empire <http://www.alec-empire.com/>, the founder of 
Berlin-based digital hardcore bandAtari Teenage Riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/08/atari-teenage-riot-grrrl>. “You 
fear that a corporation is taking your stuff and monetising it,” he says. 
“Facebook, Twitter, all these things that helped independent artists in the 
beginning are now working against them. Putting a Pringles ad next to them. 
Even putting a video up on YouTube screws up the whole experience of watching 
it. The viewer is bombarded with bullshit. Using the deep web is a way to do 
things differently. I feel a new enthusiasm, [like] I witnessed when the 
original internet became big in the 90s.”

This idea, that the darknet harks back to a “golden era” of the internet – 
before legislation, surveillance and monopolisation took control – is a 
recurring theme. “The early internet was this alternate, separate place that 
was meant to transcend all the problems and censorship of real world society,” 
says the journalistJamie Bartlett 
<http://blogs.telegraph.co.uk/technology/author/jamiebartlett/>, a specialist 
on internet culture and author of the bookThe Dark Net 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780434023172>
. “As a result, it would be dangerous, liberal, uncensored, and it would be a 
great place for freedom fighters, democratic dissidents and whistleblowers to 
go, as well as criminals, child pornographers and terrorists. And that’s 
exactly what the darknet is. It’s seen as somewhere new, free and open, for 
those increasingly worried by the idea that the internet is becoming colonised 
by commercial purposes.”

Of all the artistic interactions with the darknet, Aphex Twin’s link may 
actually have been the least sophisticated. But what he has done is place the 
notion of the darknet, and the Tor project, in a new perspective both to the 
mainstream press and to an enormous fanbase, given his status as one of the 
most influential artists in electronic music.

Perhaps, the darknet – which Bannon describes as being like “Paris in the 20s” 
and Empire as “discovering America again” – has the potential to be a bastion 
of free speech and creativity, where art can escape surveillance and 
commercialism, to blend with new technology and hard truths in a way that is no 
longer possible on the surface internet. As Jamie Bartlett concluded in his 
book: “Outsiders, radicals and pariahs are often the first to find and use 
technology in shrewd ways, and the rest of us have much to learn from them.”
 