
Driving from London up to the north-west Highlands of Scotland the other week, 
I made my own version of a songline. A songline, according to Aboriginal 
cultures, is a musical route across the land. OK, my songline didn't have much 
to do with ancient creation myths: you might more conventionally call it a pile 
of CDs. But the way the music seemed to imprint itself on the landscape made 
for some spine-tingling moments.

I found the nostalgia engendered by the high-NRG pop of the 1980s and 90s 
perfect for long motorway stretches, in a relentless 70mph kind of way, but 
when I reached the Lake District and the beautiful Borders country further 
north, I needed something with a longer line, to echo the lengthy contours of 
the mountains and valleys.

So I popped on some Wagner. I chose Parsifal, the Good Friday Music from the 
third act <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DwdYZWFrBBM>, in which Gurnemanz 
tells Parsifal, the returning hero, how nature is a transcendent vision of 
God's benevolence. The music, the Lakes and the Borders seemed to shimmer with 
a shared radiance. The combination induced in me a possibly dangerous reverie, 
although there were times when the music's climaxes were out of sync with the 
scenery: old Gurnemanz's most visionary utterances and Wagner's most voluptuous 
music occasionally coincided with a passing petrol station.

I didn't manage what David Hockney used to do in California: he came up with 
an hour-and-a-half-long drive through the Santa Monica hills that perfectly 
fitted the music of Parsifal."It matches everything the eye sees and the ear 
hears," he said 
<http://articles.orlandosentinel.com/1990-09-16/entertainment/9009140389_1_david-hockney-monica-mountains-painting>
.

Reaching Assynt – past Inverness, past Ullapool, and into some of the most 
awesome mountainscapes on Earth – my songlines took a lyrical, literary turn. 
In the village of Inverkirkaig, there'sa monument to Norman MacCaig 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/hectormacq/4760747575/>, the poet, walker, 
fisherman and teacher who spent as much time as he could in this magical place, 
inspired by its peaks, lochs, people – and music. MacCaig's poetry contains 
some of the finest writing about music I've read. He turned this landscape 
before me into sound, weaving together the names of hills and composers: "And 
God was Mozart when he wroteCul Mor 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/douglas_griffin/3041011701/>."

MacCaig's poem Moment Musical in Assynt culminates with a paean to his 
favourite hill,Suilven 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?q=suilven&hl=en&client=safari&sa=X&rls=en&biw=1026&bih=622&tbm=isch&prmd=ivnsm&tbnid=WxFwHOGe8fQ6ZM:&imgrefurl=http://www.redlightray.com/tag/suilven/&docid=kUBBM4b08zikvM&w=507&h=337&ei=ZoE6TuvDCJKq8AP6sdT5Ag&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=712&vpy=118&dur=624&hovh=183&hovw=275&tx=151&ty=94&page=1&tbnh=114&tbnw=172&start=0&ndsp=12&ved=1t:429,r:7,s:0>
, which dominates this terrain with its seemingly impregnable cliffs and 
crests. "I listen with my eyes and see through that/ Mellifluous din of shapes 
my masterpiece/ Of masterpieces:/ One sandstone chord that holds up time in 
space:/ Sforzando Suilven reared on his ground bass." That image of holding up 
"time in space" has a Wagnerian resonance. When Gurnemanz leads Parsifal to the 
Grail ceremony for the first time in the opera, he sings: "You see, my son, 
here time becomes space."

MacCaig's writing presents a problem, though. It makes any actual music seem 
an impertinence, an unnatural and unneeded accompaniment to the geological 
masterpiece that is Assynt. Yet I found something that fitted the bill – 
something that had, on the face of it anyway, little to do with Scotland or the 
Highlands, with fiddling or bagpipe music, or with work by a Scottish composer. 
Fishing around for a CD, I grabbed Dvořák'sEighth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9lL7D7Au-U>. Listening to its joyous, earthy 
energy, I nosed the car round a bend on the single-track road and, just as 
Dvořák's finale exploded, I found myself gazing out at a glistening sea, bound 
by a rugged coast and bejewelled with the Hebridean islands.

Of course, this was nothing more than a coincidence of Czech music, Highland 
landscape, and the tempo of my driving, but the combination was like 3D poetry 
– my very own Hockney moment in the heart of the Highlands.

My cultural life

On my bedside table: War and Peace, a rollicking Russian read. Nice one, 
Tolstoy!

On my iPod: Arnold Bax's second symphony. It's at the Proms next week.

On my TV: The Code, with Marcus du Sautoy, my favourite bald mathematician.

In my diary: I'm off to the Lucerne festival – to see Claudio Abbado. Can't 
wait.
 