
When he heard on Monday morning that the man suspected of being responsible 
for a bombing in Chelsea was a Muslim from Elizabeth,New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, Nawaz Sheikh knew the local 
community needed to act.

Sheikh, the president of the Muslim Community Center of Union County, picked 
up the phone and called Hassen Abdellah, the president of Elizabeth’s Dar 
ul-Islam mosque, to discuss how to respond.

“Elizabeth is in shock,” Abdellah told the Guardian. “We were all concerned 
about what was going on.”

After texting and calling other community leaders, they met at the mosque, the 
city’s largest and possibly the third largest in the state by Abdellah’s 
estimation. In the palatial building, formerly the governor’s mansion, they 
prepared statements for a press conference planned for Tuesday and also made 
plans to secure the local mosques from potential attacks.

Backlash “is a concern of any community”, said Ayaz Aslam, outreach program 
director at the Muslim Community Center of Union County, who also attended the 
meeting. “This happened in our backyard so we’re just concerned.”

Monday’s arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/new-york-bombing-suspect-ahmad-khan-rahami>
 of Ahmad Khan Rahami, a naturalised US citizen who was born in Afghanistan, 
has left manyMuslims fearing the prospect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/new-york-bomb-muslim-americans-backlash>
 of a backlash against the community. Many fear an increase in the already 
soaring number of hate crimes against Muslims, as well as more anti-Muslim 
sentiment from the Republican presidential candidate, Donald Trump.

According to Abdellah, Elizabeth has been largely immune to the hate crimes 
experienced by Muslims across the country. They did not experience an uptick 
following the World Trade Center attacks of 1993 or 2001, he said.

Sheikh and Abdellah attribute this to the diversity in Elizabeth, where black 
and Hispanic peoplemake up 80% of the population 
<http://www.census.gov/quickfacts/table/PST045215/3421000/accessible>. Abdellah 
said there is a large Muslim community among them. But neither cite a sizable 
Afghan community in Elizabeth . Up to 1,000 people may pray at Dar ul-Islam 
during Ramadan, he said, while 200-300 people attend Friday prayers regularly. 
Sheikh cited similar numbers for the Muslim Community Center.

However, the fried chicken restaurant owned by Rahami’s family in Elizabeth 
was not immune to a flurry of hateful messages on Yelp after its address was 
publicized on various news outlets. “All I know is you camel jockeys need to go 
back home,” wrote one Yelp user. “If this family is supporting the terrorist 
with money, lodging, help, love or any other kind of support … then there’s 
nothing wrong with blowing this place up after it’s closed,” said another.

On the political stage, Trump sought to use the bombing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/sep/19/us-authorities-investigating-new-jersey-explosive-devices-live-updates?page=with:block-57e02c3ce4b0ef60eaef0f0b#block-57e02c3ce4b0ef60eaef0f0b>
 to justify “extreme vetting” on new immigrants that considers “ideology”, a 
spin on his previous pledge to ban all Muslims from immigrating to the United 
States. Donald Trump Jr went as far as comparing Syrian refugees to poisoned 
Skittles, sparking outrage online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/donald-trump-jnr-compares-refugees-poisoned-skittles-twitter-reacted>
.
Donald Trump Jr. (@DonaldJTrumpJr) 
This image says it all. Let's end the politically correct agenda that doesn't 
put America first.#trump2016 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/trump2016?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/9fHwog7ssN <https://t.co/9fHwog7ssN>
 <https://twitter.com/DonaldJTrumpJr/status/778016283342307328> September 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/DonaldJTrumpJr/status/778016283342307328> 
In a speech in Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/trump-ahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-bombing-immigration>
, Trump Sr also called for Rahami to be treated as an enemy combatant, meaning 
he would forfeit many rights afforded to citizens, but stopped short of saying 
torture tactics should be reinstated as he has done in the past.

The hysteria following the arrest of Muslims in relation to terrorist 
activities places Islamic organizations in a difficult position.

Organizations like the Council of American-Islamic Relations issue swift 
messages <https://www.facebook.com/CAIRNational/posts/10154081444492695> of 
condemnation that vehemently affirm that actors such as Rahami are not 
representative of the broader Muslim community.

“In general when we hear of attacks like this, our hearts go out to all the 
people that are affected by it and, to be very frank, it doesn’t matter to us 
what is the background of the person [who carried out the attack],” said Omar 
Awad, CEO and president of the Islamic Center of Passaic County. “Nevertheless, 
when that individual turns out to be from a Muslim background, we definitely 
believe that these are not Islamic actions or anything that actually aligns 
with the Islamic teachings. It adds more complexity to our situation.”

Awad said it can be exhausting to have to condemn actions that in no way 
represent the community, but he stressed it’s better to have Muslim voices then 
to cede that space to people such as Trump.

“You see people being quoted on news outlets as experts in Islamic affairs, 
and these people were never elected from the Muslim community to speak on their 
behalf,” he said. “It is very exhausting to be constantly in that position to 
try to say that, ‘Yes we condemn these factions,’ but I think as institutions 
we have to, until we have a better apparatus to speak about it.”

On Monday, Awad had a discussion with the director of homeland security for 
the state of New Jersey and the US attorney general to discuss ways to 
safeguard the community against the potential consequences of the weekend’s 
events.

A study 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3110202-SPECIAL-STATUS-REPORT-v5-9-16-16.html>
 by California State University San Bernardino found hate crimes against 
Muslims in 2015 were the highest they have been since 9/11, increasing by 78%.

Based on available data for 2016, the study found that hate crimes against 
Muslims in New York City have doubled since last year. The city has seenan 
uptick in attacks against Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/new-york-muslim-woman-set-on-fire-eid-al-adha>
 in recent weeks, which was most starkly felt in August, whenan imam and his 
friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/new-york-queens-imam-hate-crime-muslim-activists>
 were both shot in the back of the head in Queens, while walking home from 
midday prayers.

Researchers at California State University found that negative statements 
about Muslims by politicians following terrorist attacks was one of the driving 
factors for increased hate crimes. They compared former president George W 
Bush’svisit to a mosque <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=liudIJFg8UQ> following 
9/11 to proclaim “Islam is peace”, with Trump’s speech to ban all Muslims from 
entering the US following attacks in San Bernardino. The former was followed by 
a range of 46% to 66% decline in hate crimes against Muslims, while the latter 
was followed by an increase of 87.5%.

Muslims in New Jersey came into the spotlight when Trump claimed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/23/donald-trump-accused-of-hate-campaign-after-claiming-thousands-cheered-on-911>
 last year that Muslims in Jersey City celebrated when the Twin Towers fell on 
9/11. His claims werewidely discredited 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/nov/22/donald-trump/fact-checking-trumps-claim-thousands-new-jersey-ch/>
, including byJersey City’s mayor 
<http://www.njtvonline.org/news/video/jersey-city-responds-to-trumps-claims-of-muslim-cheering-on-911/>
.

“These comments are extremely divisive to our nation,” Awad said. “Events like 
these add to the complexity.”

“When he said it, I thought he was crazy,” said Muryd Williams, 24, who 
performs the call to prayer at Dar ul-Islam mosque. “Have you been on Manhattan 
island by the ferries and looked over at Jersey City? How can you see anybody 
from over there?

“It doesn’t matter what anybody says. If Trump says that we’re the best people 
he ever met or we’re the worst people he ever met,” he continued. “People are 
gonna hate us regardless.”
 