
I love nature. My legs and arse ache from the saddle, but I am elated. This is 
the first time I've ridden a horse, yet cantering across the canyon in Malibu 
felt like I'd ridden them for thousands of years. Pelicans fly low over the 
Pacific Ocean. Three dolphins leap through the waves, twisting in the air like 
kids playing on a trampoline. The outcrop where I stand is covered in wild 
mussels, wet-black like patent leather bubbles on the salt-carved rock. A wave 
thuds suddenly to an end and foam swirls around my knees. The wooden sign tells 
me that it is an offence to eat these mussels or sell them to anyone else who 
may want to eat them. They are probably poisonous, loaded with sewage juice or 
heavy metals, but they look so gorgeous clinging to the rocks, wet and slightly 
parted, as if inviting me to gently nibble the button of flesh peeping out. 
Haze - it's all a beautiful haze; I'm a delirious kid from Glasgow who can't 
believe where he is.

We get into the car and drive back a couple of miles to the Paradise Cove 
Beach Cafe. Fading photos tell stories of handsome lifeguards racing into 
pre-war surf and beautiful girls in heavy woollen bathers lined along the sand 
like a Busby Berkeley chorus line. We sit outside at a plastic table. The bus 
boy brings us a portion of mussels and fries that is obscene in size - a bucket 
of each. A flock of 40 gulls land on the furniture around us. Their amber eyes 
consider us. They consider the fries. They consider us to be no danger and a 
big guy flaps on to the table, vicious and ungainly. The beak is like a yellow 
hooked fisherman's knife with a broken hole behind a blood red splat. Eight 
fries in one snap. This is one big bird who does not give a damn. This guy is 
scared of nothing: certainly not me. I clap my hands and he cocks his head as 
if to say "Oh, Purleeease", before snapping another beakful. I throw a 
cardboard carton of milk towards him. He catches it in his beak and swallows 
it. His pals watch him, waiting for their turn. This is like Hitchcock's Bodega 
Bay, but a little more sinister. We grab our mussels, fries and fly inside to 
the safety of the man-made world. I hate nature.

Â· The writer is the lead singer with Franz Ferdinand
 