
I am wading fully clothed through a fast-flowing, waist-deep stream in the 
heart of the Peruvian Amazon. No white man has been across here in living 
memory and we're a week's walk from anything resembling a town. It's a thrill, 
but the pack on my back is heavy and the force of the water threatens to flip 
me over at any minute.

"Why isn't the local guide coming over?" I ask one of my Spanish-speaking 
companions.

"He won't cross, his friend drowned here three days ago." 
 Ed Stafford with the locals. Photograph: Mark Barrowcliffe 
Welcome to the world of Ed Stafford, explorer, adventurer and the man bidding 
to become the first in history to walk from the source of the Amazon in the 
high Andes to the mouth of the river in Brazil. This is no TV-friendly trip 
with fixers, boats and planes, soundmen, directors and translators - this is a 
4,000-mile slog through some of the most hostile territory on the planet, 
wonderful and terrifying in about equal measure.

You are welcome to this world too, if you've got what it takes. Ed, six months 
into his trip, is looking for a new walking partner after his original one went 
home. To cut a long story short, they didn't get on. Which means that now you 
can apply. It's the ideal trip for the daring and the fit. I spent a week with 
Ed on the Ucayali river, one of the Amazon's major tributaries, to see what 
you'll be in for, and to get a taste of Ed's real Boys' Own adventure as he 
attempts something no one has ever tried before.

It's a trip fraught with danger, not least the question of "will I get on with 
a complete stranger in such a stressful environment?" Luckily for me, Ed turned 
out to be an affable, purposeful bloke, nothing like the Rupert his Uppingham 
public school and Army captain background might suggest.

Ed had broken his walk to meet me in the town of Pucallpa, 400 miles from Lima 
- a ramshackle jungle river port of unfaced brick and corrugated iron roofs, 
38ÂºC heat and stultifying humidity. We had to take a boat back to where he left 
off. Getting marooned on a sandbank in the middle of the Ucayali on an unlit 
boat with night falling was a very Tintin way to start. We had to jump into the 
river to free the boat. As I looked to the distant banks I couldn't help 
thinking: "I'm in the bloody Amazon! What else is in here?"
 Mark outside his tent 
When we finally got back to the route we hit the ground running, almost 
literally. Ed has three main guides for this part of the trip, two from the 
indigenous Asheninka tribe - the tough Andreas and Alfonso - and one former 
logger, Cho. They really motor through the jungle. We saw Andreas and Alfonso 
for about 10 minutes of the way into the jungle. After that Cho just tracked 
them, though I don't know how. Perhaps he used the trail of beheaded pit vipers 
left in their wake. Poisonous snakes don't last long around these chaps.

The rainforest has an intense beauty that at times seems almost suffocating. 
The jungle is one twig short of impenetrable and the greenery seems to crowd in 
on you with a sensation that has been described as akin to snowblindness. The 
stuff I went through with Ed is secondary rainforest - many of the big trees 
have been logged - so sunlight pours in and the forest explodes with growth. We 
climbed over fallen trees or pressed ourselves into pools to get under them, 
fought off thorns, scrambled down banks, hauled ourselves up the other side, 
balanced and jumped, crawled and climbed along trails that are no more than 
areas of least resistance in the wall of vegetation. It was like a sprint 
through paradise. After 2km I was knackered. Ed had another 6,000 to go.

Brilliant birds flashed above us, around us giant buttress trees and carpets 
of butterflies. At night the moths were as big as sparrows and looked more 
likely to carry a candle off than fly into it.

It was when venomous snakes fell out of the trees - one directly onto a 
guide's back - that the experience began to border on the terrifying; the 
deadly fer-de-lance snake seemed as common as pigeons in a British park, 
although I found it funny (ish) when, going to the loo, a poison dart frog 
hopped out from under my bum.

Most of the challenges were scary but manageable. The perilous balancing acts, 
negotiating slippery logs over neck-breaking drops with a full pack on were fun 
if you didn't think about just how far away medical care was. You willed 
yourself through the physical challenge with cries of "come on!" At least I 
did. Ed later explained that he'd prefer me to suffer in silence. I suspect my 
attempts to gee myself along might have caused friction if I'd stayed with him 
for longer on the trip.

At one point we lost our guides, but even that was quite exciting. We had a 
satnav, so we knew where we were, if not which of 20 almost invisible trails we 
needed take to get to where we wanted to be. There was the nagging anxiety that 
something sinister had happened to the guides, particularly as our rendezvous 
point, a logging camp, felt like the Marie Celeste when we reached it. There 
were dinners left uneaten, half-full Inca Cola bottles with the tops left off. 
The guides eventually reappeared and we just had to conclude the loggers were 
just messy.

The persistent rain did make things gruelling. There's nothing like climbing 
back into soaking-wet clothes in the morning to make you feel like you're on a 
hard-core trail, and the logging roads - mile after mile of sucking mud - 
sapped my energy, especially when moving at Asheninka pace.

But the Amazon is full of rewards, too. The sun setting on the Ucayali, with 
the Andean foothills in the background, and the taste of freshly cut papaya in 
my mouth restoring a body utterly shattered made for one of those 'ones to tell 
the grandchildren' memories.

There was one fact that I hadn't properly considered until I met Ed: the 
biggest challenge is not the wildlife or plants, it's the people. After decades 
of mistreatment, the local communities are understandably wary of outsiders.

Ed explained that there is a myth among the Asheninka and Shipibo people who 
live in this area, of a beast known as the pelicara. It's a baby-eating monster 
that also steals the body fat of adults, sucks out their eyes and takes their 
organs. "What does this monster look like?" I asked Ed.

"You and me." 

Ed told me he has done everything he can to reduce the risk and allay fears. 
The real role of Andreas and Alfonso - whose village originally took Ed 
prisoner out of fear - was to liaise with the locals. They radio ahead to 
explain that Ed is coming through. They also get passes from local government 
and organisations representing indigenous people. It's a safety measure but 
also, explains Ed, basic politeness. If you're going to subject people to a new 
and potentially frightening experience, then it's incumbent on you to warn them 
first and give them the chance to refuse to have you on their land.

The danger was brought home by the indigenous organisations, who warned us not 
to camp out in the jungle or arrive in a settlement after dark, or we would 
certainly be killed. The locals may wear football shirts and jeans, but some 
have never seen white people. Even in Pucallpa, among the motorised rickshaw 
taxis and ice cream parlours, there are very few gringos.

I can't remember when I was most nervous in the next three days. It may have 
been arriving at those settlements after dark. Or it might have been camping in 
the jungle. Probably the latter, trying to sleep in my hammock outside the 
loggers' camp. What were those footsteps under the din of insects and birds? 
Animal? Human? I followed Ed's advice and took a sleeping pill. I loved this 
trip but, at certain points, I thought of my wife and child and began to feel 
quite irresponsible.

We weren't deliberately taking risks, far from it. Ed is meticulous in his 
planning, but this is the Amazon. It eats plans, and everything else. Something 
that looks like an easy 30km through plantations on the latest - but still 
40-year-old - maps can turn out to be an assault course through the jungle.

In late afternoon of the first day we reached a tiny local village - Esperanza 
- and, after the guides announced us, we were greeted warmly. However, one 
mother had doubts. "Are you pelicara?" she asked. We said we weren't.

"Are you sure?" she said. "We're sure." "OK then," she said, and I couldn't 
help thinking it was all a bit Monty Python.

Later she cooked for us at her wall-less reed hut - a lovely soup of coriander 
and fish, served with plantain.

The people of Esperanza don't have a radio, let alone a TV, and stared at us 
in wonder. We were put up in the local school, and the children filed in to ask 
us to sing for them. Marlene - a charity worker who had come with us for a day 
- was a good singer and piped up. One 13-year-old girl had the sort of 
expression worn by a child who has awoken on Christmas Day to find a pony with 
a bow on it in her garden.

It's here that I got to talk to Ed properly about his motivations for the 
mission. He mentioned the charities he's helping - Project Peru, Cancer 
Research, Action for Brazil's Children, the ME Association and Rainforest 
Concern - but at the end of the day, he said it's about being the first to do 
it. He wouldn't be interested if anyone had got there before him.

He was also honest enough to admit that, today, being an adventurer is a 
career like any other. When he is finished in the Amazon he plans one more big 
trip and then a life of easier expeditions, speaking engagements, endorsements. 
I hope he succeeds. I was three days in the jungle proper and the effort alone 
nearly killed me, never mind the wildlife.

On my final day, a 12-hour jog through the soaking jungle, I was at the point 
of total collapse. The insoles of my boots disintegrated as we reached Samaria, 
a large, well-kept village. Our attempts at radio contact had failed. We asked 
to stay and were led before a growing crowd to speak to a man who was clearly 
drunk. His opening position was that we were almost certainly pelicara and we'd 
be lucky if all he did was kick us out into the jungle in the pitch black. The 
villagers seemed terrified of us. It seemed amazing that this place, with its 
football pitch, TV and thumping cumbia music can hold such fears. But then what 
do the oil companies, the loggers or God knows who get up to out here?

Luckily a visiting Shipibo English teacher championed us and the village voted 
to let us stay. We went to the school and finally relaxed. Then I looked out 
from the veranda and saw the men with the shotguns, about eight of them. They 
fanned out across the grass, creating a perimeter between us and the village.

"I think we've been taken prisoner," I told Ed. 

"Well, there's not a lot we can do about it," he said. Just a week before, the 
possibility of being surrounded by armed men would have filled me with dread 
but I seemed to have developed Ed's "Oh, I'll worry about it in the morning" 
attitude.

The next day, the men had dispersed, and it was time for me to go home. I 
caught the collectivo river bus for a 12-hour trip back to Pucallpa, travelling 
first class on a fifth-class banana boat. I slung my hammock below deck and 
slept out the journey. I felt drained, mentally as much as physically. I'd done 
adventure tourism before - the Himalayas, the Australian outback, Iceland - but 
the feeling was nothing like this. Just the three days I did in the jungle was 
an incredible challenge. Ed has 18 months in front of him.

â¢ To view Ed's video blog and apply to be his walking companion visit 
walkingtheamazon.com <http://www.walkingtheamazon.com>. Journey Latin America 
(020-8747 8315,journeylatinamerica.co.uk <http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk>
) offers a six-day tailor-made holiday to Peru, staying three nights in a 
jungle lodge close to Puerto Maldonado, from Â£678pp, including domestic 
flights, transfers, most meals and guided excursions. Flights to Lima start 
from Â£635 return including tax, with Continental from Gatwick via Houston. 
Internal flights from Lima to Pulcallpa with LAN (lan.com <http://www.lan.com>).

Law of the jungle

I spent several months in the Peruvian Amazon, researching a book about 
wildness, talking to indigenous people, visiting shamans, listening to their 
stories of the land, their histories and philosophies. I wanted to know the 
connections between languages and the forests. I've never felt so vividly 
alive; rainforests are steamy, sensual places.

I went by invitation at each point because, simply, it is neither wise nor 
fair to journey otherwise in the Amazon. Centuries of experience - of rubber 
barons, loggers, miners and oil companies - have taught indigenous people to be 
terrified of intruders. Hence the myth that whites seek out the fat of native 
people, using their body-fat for fuel for machines: literally untrue but with a 
terrible metaphoric truth. But their justified fear is too often misrepresented 
as intimidation by white adventurers who portray themselves as courageous and 
native people as threatening, without quite asking whose courage is it anyway? 
And can it be right to make local people pay for their adventure in the coin of 
fear?

There are plenty of ways for whites to give as well as take once in the 
Amazon. I'd been asked to join Shipibo people, and help to try to throw illegal 
gold miners off their land. They wanted a white person as protection from the 
miners and the police, who might be slower to shoot them if there was an 
outside witness. It was a wild, glorious and sad time. The Shipibo, wearing war 
paint and with bows and arrows ("It really puts the wind up 'em," said one) 
wept when they saw the damage the mine had done. "This forest is home to us, 
and we are the land."

Uninvited intruders in their lands are walking straight into bedrooms, 
kitchens, churches and minds. No wonder Amazonians want to protect themselves.

Jay Griffiths

â¢ Jay is the author of Wild: An Elemental Journey, published by Hamish 
Hamilton Â£8.99.
 