
When modern life seems too much, I dream of living in the woods. I’ll be a 
mad, feral woman eating hazelnuts and tending a fire obsessively. It’s this 
specific wood where I would go, with its deciduous mix of ash, oak and 
chestnut, itssandy badger sett 
<https://badgerwatcher.com/2010/02/21/how-to-recognise-a-badger-sett/>, wild 
garlic, bluebells in spring, and the clear, fast-flowing water of the 
gravel-bottomed stream. Known as Fox’s Grove, it’s just a few miles from the 
centre of Norwich.


Today, I am not a hermit. I have a troop of children for company, who are 
enthusiastically den-building and stick swinging. They’ve collected plenty of 
dead wood and a wigwam shape is emerging from their collective imagination. I 
am happily redundant, sitting under a largebeech tree 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/native-trees/common-beech/>
, on a comfortably curved root. My fingers are drawn to the mulchy earth, into 
leaves and soil, as I inhale that musty, fungus scent.

A solitary and mysterious garden visitor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/31/country-diary-tree-creeper-highlands>
Out of childhood habit, I turn the log next to me to find it thick with 
woodlice <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/woodlouse> and can’t resist 
peeling off a large chunk of bark, sending them scurrying. A fallen branch is 
decaying over a gnarly, raised root beside me. Nestled in the gap below, I can 
just see the greyish legs and tail ofthe common newt (Triturus lissotriton 
vulgaris) 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/makeahomeforwildlife/wildlifegarden/atoz/c/commonnewt.aspx?&>
. Smooth and still, it is beginning its hibernation. I quickly replace the log, 
leaving it be.

Then, on a nearby oak, there is a brisk mouse-like movement. It’s a 
treecreeper, 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/t/treecreeper/>
Certhia familiaris 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/discoverandenjoynature/discoverandlearn/birdguide/name/t/treecreeper/>
,scuttling upwards with tail held low. Those heavy eyebrows and down-turned 
beak give the tiny bird a bad-tempered look, as if it is searching for 
something inconveniently lost.

The treecreeper reaches the cleft of two thick branches, where an incongruous 
bracken plant has found a place to grow, and then it rapidly flies down to the 
base of another oak. From here, it begins another climb upwards, long claws 
gripping. The only way is up for treecreepers;unlike agile nuthatches 
<http://www.wildaboutgardens.org.uk/wildlife/birds/nuthatch.aspx> they can’t go 
down the trunk head first.

Dusk comes early in the woods, and the den must be abandoned, half-finished 
but structurally sound. We crouch in it first, feeling safe and satisfied, 
before leaving for electricity and carpets.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>









 