 Photograph: Claire Preece 
Claire Preece has just graduated in a BSc equestrian psychology at Glyndwr 
University

After doing a two year foundation degree in equine science at Harper Adams 
University College, I decided to top it up to equestrian psychology. Animal 
welfare and equine behaviour have always been areas of interest for me.

The assignments on the course are quite broad and it's not just about 
psychology â€“ I looked at bute (anti-inflammatory painkiller for horses) and 
went into the physiological aspects of that. For my dissertation I looked at 
gastric ulcers and the difference between when a horse eats from a hay net and 
the floor. You do look at behaviour, but there's a lot of scientific principles 
of it. I looked at the central nervous system as well.

Most of the time when I tell people what I'm studying, they ask "What's that?" 
But when I explain it to them they're quite intrigued. It's not a conventional 
degree so it probably makes your CV stand out. Results depending, I'm going on 
to do a master's in veterinary pharmacy. I've also applied for jobs in that 
area. The course has been hard work but I've really enjoyed it.

Annabelle Yardley has just finished a BSc in marketing at Aston University
 Photograph: Annabelle Yardley 
I decided to do a marketing degree after speaking with a careers adviser in 
sixth form who suggested it when I told her what courses I was doing and my 
interests. I'd heard really positive reviews from people who'd been to Aston.

What really stands out about the course is the placement year, during which I 
did market research at the university. It was probably one of the most valuable 
years of my life: it taught me so much about organisation and how to behave in 
a working environment. It was really character building, and brilliant to have 
on my CV as well, because employers really look for that experience.

The first year is quite broad, so you learn about all areas of business. You 
can then decide what pathway you want to take. I think it's good to study a 
more specific degree as it shows you've got specialist knowledge in that area.

I've been accepted onto the BACS marketing graduate scheme. I was going to 
start in September but it's actually going to be earlier now as they're sending 
me on a unique trip to Cape Town to help with advertising. I'm really excited 
about it.

Harry Darkins has just graduated from BA oriental studies (Arabic with 
subsidiary modern Hebrew) from Oxford University
 Photograph: Harry Darkins 
Languages had always been my best subject at school but I felt like I wanted a 
new challenge, and was particularly drawn to Arabic. I began a degree in Arabic 
and French, but after my year abroad in Egypt I dropped French and decided to 
pick up modern Hebrew from scratch. Hebrew's relation to Arabic not only made 
it more appealing to me, but also fitted in with my interest in the 
Arab-Israeli conflict.

The highlight of my course would have to be the second year, which was spent 
studying Arabic in Cairo. This just happened to coincide with the Egyptian 
revolution, which my peers and I saw first-hand!

I'm about to pursue an MA in broadcast journalism at City University, with a 
view to gaining a job in radio or television news. In my career I definitely 
hope to use the language skills I have acquired throughout my course, as well 
as the set of transferable skills it has given me. The workload at Oxford was 
pretty demanding and there always seemed to be limited time to do it in, but I 
think this has taught me how to cope better under pressure.

Daniela Hackett is studying a BA in viking studies at Nottingham University
 Photograph: Daniela Hackett 
I stumbled upon viking studies when my mum and I were leafing through the 
Nottingham prospectus. We both had a good laugh for five minutes, but then 
agreed it sounded like exactly what I'm interested in: anything old, and the 
subjects English, history and archaeology. I remember my form tutor giving me a 
funny look when I first mentioned viking studies, but when I explained what it 
was she agreed that it really suited me.

I'm really enjoying the course and never get bored! One day I might be 
translating an Anglo-Saxon poem for the Old English, the next I might be 
writing an essay about the development of towns in medieval Britain or 
analysing animal remains from archaeological sites. But the highlight so far is 
last semester, which I spent studying abroad in Oslo. I had a brilliant time in 
a different culture, learning a new language and meeting people from all over 
the world.

People's faces when they hear what I study are amazing - I wish that I could 
record them all. On campus, viking studies students are like a rumour. Lots of 
people hear of the course, but not many meet us because there are so few of us.

Max Pears is just about to enter his final year of a BA in computer games 
design
 Photograph: Max Pears 
As a child I was fascinated by how much you could do with a game and how it 
felt to be a key part of a story, not just feeling as if you are reading or 
watching one. I decided to study at Teesside University because it has an 
outstanding reputation for computer games and animation courses, as well as 
excellent links with industry.

It has been a great experience. My team was recently the first in the history 
of the university to make it through to the Dare to be Digital (a video games 
development competition for students) final. While on placement, I worked on 
"Truck License 2" which reached number 66 in Android's "Top New Free App" 
chart. My overall greatest experience is the fact that I now know I have the 
skills and knowledge to make great games.

I see a lot of job prospects coming from it right now with the way that the 
industry is changing. Teesside University has a lot of strong connections in 
the industry and I know this can only benefit me when I graduate.

People are generally either amazed or confused when I tell them about my 
course. I tell my grandparents' friends and they have no idea what it is I do. 
Other people my age love it and when I start telling them what I have worked 
on, their faces light up as people find it so cool.
 