
At a time when 10,000 of the world's leading physicists are holed up in a 
Swiss bunker engaged on a project that may one day enable them to pretend they 
understand the nature of the universe,Alphaville 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/75764/alphaville> has never seemed more 
timely.

Jean-Luc Godard <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/jeanlucgodard>'s film – "a 
science fiction film without special effects" in the words of the critic Andrew 
Sarris; "a fable on a realistic ground" in Godard's own description – is a cry 
of protest aimed at the worshippers of science and logic. Unlike Stanley 
Kubrick's2001: A Space Odyssey <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36269/2001>
, which now resembles a picturesque relic of long-abandoned aspirations, 
Alphavillestill seems to be watching the world come to meet it 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mE_sjuYvd0o>. And the world is very much closer 
to the director's creation than it was back in 1965.

To have seen it in its time – in my case at the Moulin Rouge cinema in 
Nottingham, which alternated the latest from Godard, Truffaut, Antonioni and 
Fellini with the creampuff-porn nudist flicks of the pre-Confessions era – was 
to have been astonished and delighted. The passage of almost half a century has 
done nothing to dim its stylishness, blunt its humour or extinguish its 
piercing message.
 Alphaville 
Eddie Constantine, the expatriate American actor, had already played the 
weatherbeaten FBI agent Lemmy Caution in several French films based on a series 
of novels by the British writerPeter Cheyney <http://www.petercheyney.co.uk/> 
(sample titles: Dames Get Along and This Man Is Dangerous). Godard invited 
Constantine to reprise the role and sent Caution into the future, keeping the 
B-movie conventions intact along with his personal accoutrements – American 
car, Zippo lighter, raincoat, trilby, button-down shirt. Caution arrives in 
Alphaville on a mission to find a lost agent and assassinate Professor von 
Braun, the architect of a state whose people are ruled by logic and science and 
have been purged of emotion.

All the elements combine beautifully. Raoul Coutard's black-and-white 
photography turns everyday objects and settings – a hotel lobby, a swimming 
pool, a room full of mainframe computers, a jukebox, a Kodak Instamatic, the 
Paris suburbs at night – into the props of a convincingly dystopian futureworld 
whose philosophy is outlined in voiceover by the grating, inhuman tones of 
Alpha 60, the computer that regulates life inAlphaville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alphaville>. (Godard had the lines intoned by 
an actor who had lost his larynx and spoke through an artificial voice-box.) 
Paul Misraki's excellent score enhances moments of tension with warning stabs 
of low brass.
 Alphaville 
Anna Karina, meanwhile, is at her most darkly luminous as Natacha von Braun, 
the great leader's daughter. Her programmed responses slowly break down as the 
hardboiled detective gives his "pretty sphinx" a copy of poet Paul Eluard's 
Capital of Pain and introduces her to the concepts of "conscience" and "love" – 
words with which she is unfamiliar, since they have been progressively redacted 
from the dictionary that is the Bible of her father's totalitarian state. 
"Nearly every day, words disappear because they are forbidden," she tells him. 
"They are replaced by new words expressing new ideas." Orwell hovers around 
this film, along with Borges and Céline.

This was Godard's ninth feature film in six years, a rate of production 
resembling that of Beatles albums. There are signs of haste and improvisation, 
so Alphaville is much the better for its ability to make us think and trigger 
our feelings. At times it is a cartoon (the shootings, the use of negative 
images to convey disorientation) but at others it is more chillingly prescient 
than ever.

Yet Godard ends the piece on a note of romantic optimism, with Lemmy and 
Natasha escaping their pursuers and a dying world, fleeing to safety through
intersidereal <http://www.thefreedictionary.com/Intersidereal> space (otherwise 
known as theBoulevard Périphérique 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boulevard_P%C3%A9riph%C3%A9rique>) as the girl 
learns a new phrase: "Je vous aime ..."
 