
I was drawn to Albert Camus <https://www.theguardian.com/books/albertcamus> 
because he looked so cool in his trenchcoat, becausethe Cure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-cure> wrote a song inspired by one of 
his books (The Outsider), because he and his pug-ugly friend Sartre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeanpaulsartre> were existentialists (which 
seemed related, somehow, to the trenchcoat). Their falling-out could hardly 
have been more acrimonious but, as can happen, the rupture contained a measure 
of agreement: both accepted that Camus had never really been an existentialist. 
For him this was a matter less of intellect than of temperament, of the 
defining facts of his early life: being born (100 years ago this week) into a 
world of sunlight and poverty in Algiers. It was the discovery of the essays 
celebrating his childhood and youth that altered my perception of him, from a 
thinker to a writer whose intellectual lucidity was a product of the wealth – 
the sensual immediacy and clarity – that had been heaped on his senses. The 
trenchcoat, in other words, came later. As did his participation in the 
resistance during the second world war (a subject that finds allegorical 
expression inThe Plague) and the heretical willingness to take a stand against 
Stalinism and the Communist party (while Sartre enthusiastically toed the 
line). The Algerian war trapped him in an impossibly vexed position. Unable to 
support a liberation movement whose tactics could "strike blindly" against his 
mother, he was reduced, inTony Judt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tony-judt>'s words to "impotent silence". 
The journey Camus made was enormous – a telegram explaining that he had won the 
Nobel prize had to be read to his illiterate mum by a neighbour – but it 
brought him back, in The First Man, the novel he was working on at the time of 
his death in 1960, aged 46, to the land and history that had formed him. The 
narrator ofThe Plague concludes, simply, that "there is more in men to admire 
than to despise". Camus was equally convinced of a more private truth, that he 
carried within him "an unconquerable summer". It still warms us today.
 