
Infatuation creeps up slowly in The Go-Between 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/sep/14/trailer-watch-the-go-between-on-bbc1>
,LP Hartley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/17/lp-hartley-go-between-ali-smith>
’s classic novel of 1953. It’s the summer of 1900 and 12-year-old Leo has been 
invited by a posher friend to the family estate in Norfolk. All the adults are 
entirely charming, but anxious, watchful, in a way he senses but cannot 
understand. “For the first day or two, I never properly took in the fact that 
one of ‘them’ was my host’s son and another his daughter. Blond (as they mostly 
were), dressed in white, swinging their tennis rackets, they looked so much 
alike!”

In films, though, such visual vagueness will not do. Which is why, in the 1971 
Harold Pinter <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pinter>-Joseph Losey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/21/joseph-losey-the-servant-bfi> 
adaptation, the beautiful Marian, as played byJulie Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/juliechristie>, is first espied in her 
famous hammock, and why, in the BBC’s new version, Joanna Vanderham is spotted 
from afar, in long gloves on a stone balcony, in a shot that looks weirdly as 
if it comes fromGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzVQhJ9Eyy4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzVQhJ9Eyy4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtzVQhJ9Eyy4&media=>
When it gets going, though, the BBC film is pretty good. In the 1971 version, 
it’s hard to get over the fact that Christie can’t help but always be Christie. 
But Vanderham is soft and childlike and indefinite, which works well. Ben Batt 
as Ted Burgess, theAlan Bates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/dec/29/guardianobituaries.filmnews> 
part, is perhaps a little wooden. But that seems fine for a physical presence 
described by Leo as “maturity in its most undeniable form”.

Rereading: The Go-Between by LP Hartley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/17/lp-hartley-go-between-ali-smith> 
By dropping the artiness of the Losey movie, the BBC lets the deeper tensions 
of the novel emerge: land, money, war, revolution (Marian’s intended, Viscount 
Trimingham, has been disfigured in the Boer war. Back home, he organises a 
landowners v villagers cricket match, “to keep them quiet”, as someone says).

How much does Trimingham know about what Marian’s up to? The question is 
asked, exquisitely and repeatedly, in the painful smiles of Stephen Campbell 
Moore. He’s being watched, too, by Lesley Manville as Marian’s scheming mother 
– “the beam of her dark eye” sliding sideways, as if hidden behind a painting 
in a cheesy horror film.

• The Go-Between is on BBC1 on 20 September at 9pm.
 