
There aren't many ways you can be sure to make yourself feel happy, but 
there's one that always seem to work for me. I listen to a piece of music, only 
a minute and a half long, that was originally written for a music box and then 
orchestrated. Its unwinding tune is immediately memorable. It is so 
shimmeringly coloured, so precisely made, so assured in the delivery of its 
climax that it always leaves my mood effervescent. It is calledTwo Organa: 1 (a 
misleadingly academic title), and Oliver Knussen, who wrote it, is one of 
Britain's greatest living artists. If you have not heard of him, that is 
probably due to the fact that he works in the occluded, occasionally airlocked 
world of contemporary classical music. This is a great shame. His music is 
instantly likeable, elegant, melancholy and exhilarating.

Knussen conducted his own first symphony at the Proms at the age of 15. As the 
son of the principal bassist of the LSO, he grew up listening to the inordinate 
variety of noises an orchestra can make. This education gave him an expertise 
in combining instruments to produce exactly the right colour and temperature of 
sound. He writes his jewel-like scores carefully, with great technical rigour, 
but there remains at the heart of his music an unanxious playfulness. His works 
are often set in the childhood worlds of toys and storybooks and in that 
familiar, phantasmal place between waking and sleeping. He is aÂ conductor famed 
for his perfectionism and generosity, a rare combination, and he is a 
significant teacher of other composers. His operaWhere the Wild Things Are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/mar/20/books.guardianreview4>, written 
in collaboration with Maurice Sendak, is an adaptation of the book and far 
superior to the recent film.

He is a very recognisable figure, tall and fat with a Victorian thicket of 
beard. I've never tried to tell him how much I love his music when I see him at 
concerts. I admire him too much. He has added beauty to the world.
 