
On Friday a 24-year-old navy medic faces a decision that could lead him to 
military prison after becoming one of the few conscientious objectors in the 
Royal Navy since the second world war. That man is my husband, Michael Lyons. 
He joined the navy in 2005 at 18, as a medical assistant submariner. He chose 
the medic path because he wanted to help people. In 2008 Michael was promoted 
to the role of leading medical assistant, and has been very proud of his 
service to his country for the past five years.

Throughout his navy career he has spent a considerable amount of time hundreds 
of feet below sea level, thousands of miles away from his home land. Both of us 
come from military families: my grandfather was a regimental sergeant major in 
the army and Michael's was a pilot in the RAF. Sadly both died while serving 
their country.

Last June Michael received an order to deploy for a patrol base in Afghanistan 
on the 1 March. We were recently engaged and had been planning our wedding for 
2011. Michael felt he wanted me to have the legal protection of being his wife, 
should something happen to him in Afghanistan. So we sacrificed the dream 
wedding in a beautiful country house that we had booked and married quickly at 
a register office. We downsized and began to visit family as much as possible 
before his deployment. All this was done with a sense of duty, knowing that 
Michael had to go toAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> 
to serve his country. He was proud.

However, in July this year Michael learned 76,000 military documents had been 
leaked on the internet and published in analysed form in various newspapers. 
These documents detailed the military's under-reporting of civilian casualties 
caused by Nato troops, both in the air and on the ground. Examples included the 
convoy of US marines apparently driving down a six-mile stretch of highway
firing at everyone they saw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2010/jul/26/afghanistan-war-logs-wikileaks>
: 19 unarmed civilians were killed and a further 50 wounded. Closer to home 
there were the allegations that Royal Marines hadshot innocent drivers and 
motorcyclists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/aug/01/campaigners-mod-court-afghanistan> 
on eight separate occasions over a six-month period, and that Ghurkhas had
called in an air strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/aug/02/wikileaks-british-lies-afghanistan-ireland>
 on a family compound, leaving seven innocents dead. These were just some of 
the reports.

I remember the day I asked Michael how he felt going to Afghanistan, 
considering the publication of these reports. Upset by what he had read, he 
said he didn't believe we were over there for the greater good. He went on to 
tell me he wouldn't be able to live with himself knowing he had been a part of 
that. He said: "I can't have that on my conscience."

And so it began, the navy mocking the idea he might object to war, the feeling 
of being ignored, or not being taken seriously. We quickly found the navy's 
chain of command didn't know how to deal with Michael's fears. He was offered 
very limited support and advice. And that is not the half of the hell I feel 
the navy have put my husband through over the last few months.

The navy denied his claim that he was objecting to the war on grounds of 
conscience, and gave no reason why. He was ordered to see a chaplain, even 
though Michael is an atheist, and the chaplin's statement implied Michael had a 
slight political reservation, not a moral objection. If Michael had been 
dishonest and said he was a committed Christian, and because of his faith he 
could not be part of war on moral grounds, perhaps this would have been over in 
an instant. So is the navy saying you cannot have a conscience if you are 
secular?

The next step was appealing against the navy's decision â€“ within days, Michael 
had sent off his statement to the Advisory Committee on Conscientious 
Objectors. In November we received the letter we had been waiting for: his 
appeal date. And this Friday I can only hope that he will finally be heard.
 