
Up on the fourth floor you feel exposed to two very different influences: 
nature and the city. I can smell the sea air and the far-reaching views mean I 
can see all the old Dutch architecture that lines every street. I put in a 
circular window to see the roof of the Vredespaleis - or Peace Palace - the 
building that houses the International Court of Justice.

Although I was born near Rotterdam I feel quite close to The Hague because it 
became my home after I had been turned down for every art collage in Holland. 
However, a school here accepted me on to their one-day-a-week photography 
course. Unfortunately it was awful and I dropped out, but I stayed in the city 
for another three years before going to England when I was 24. I wanted to be 
closer to the music I loved - specifically Joy Division. I came back three 
decades later.

I use this studio to think, draw, tinker and plan. I've owned the house for 
four years, but only recently moved in. It took two years to plan the 
renovations and then two years to see them through while I was making my first 
film, Control, about Ian Curtis.

The building used to be a school over six floors. I changed it completely and 
only left the original staircase. I restored the original 1900s ceilings and 
put in an elevator. Dutch houses seem to have the toilet in the same place on 
every floor. So if you take the toilets out you have a vertical space and 
that's where I put the lift. In the second world war it was a bank, as were a 
lot of the houses on this street.

I'm far more chilled here than I was in England. London has this pace that 
doesn't exist in The Hague. I still own a house in Shepherd's Bush, where my 
office is based, but I'm more at home here because I can take more time over 
things. What I really missed was cycling. Going by bike to the doctor, the bank 
or to the dunes. It's a nicer way of moving around than public transport.
 