
Wearing brown is GOOD

Woody Allen's oeuvre is so intrinsically linked to 1970s Manhattan that it's 
hard to know which of them actually pioneered a wardrobe of earth tones and 
sold it to us as boho dressing for the preppy intelligensia. We can, if we 
wish, trace a slurry-coloured line directly from the beige slacks and rusty 
roll necks ofPlay It Again, Sam <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0069097/> through 
to the copper corduroy and fawn-flecked tweeds ofAnnie Hall 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0075686/>; nestle gently in some dun-coloured 
two-pieces inManhattan Murder Mystery <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0107507/>, 
and pop-up in a neatly-pressed chino pocket in his latest offering,Midnight in 
Paris <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/oct/06/midnight-in-paris-film-review>
.

Here, Allen continues his obsession with mud colours, getting Owen Wilson, 
Rachel McAdams and evenCarla Bruni 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2011/mar/29/carla-bruni-fleeting-appearance-film>
 to slope around the Left Bank in a tonal palette of chocolate, biscuit and 
taupe, accented with denim and a little bit of snobbiness. It's surely a mark 
of the cast's skill that they are able to pretend it's normal for Americans 
abroad to act as though no other colours exist beyond camel, khaki and oatmeal. 
I have run out of words for brown but I think you get my point.
 Diane and Woody talk brown slacks in Manhattan Murder Mystery, 1993 SNAP / 
Rex Features 
Mannish tailoring never goes out of style

I doubt that Woody had much to do with Diane Keaton's much-lauded 
misappropriated-menswear. I imagine it was more a case of Diane saying 
forcefully one day on set, "Goddammit, Allen, I'm rocking my own update ofLe 
Smoking <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Le_Smoking> meets Bonnie and Clyde 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0061418/> because tailoring DAMN well flatters my 
boyish, rangy frame and COSTUME can go SCREW themselves!". To this, he would 
respond: "Uh huh, um, uh huh, OK, I'm running off with a teenager."

Though Keaton's look is very 'Dietrich 
<http://2.bp.blogspot.com/_vQAIJOWmqRU/SPjNeD-r4VI/AAAAAAAAAiI/YWH45VSDiys/s400/Marlene-Dietrich.jpg>
' in Manhattan, it is her Annie Hall wardrobe that is the ultimate embodiment 
of androgyny - a look which fashion land is currently head over heels in love 
with (ie it's ON TREND). Annie Hall is the ocean from which so many tomboy 
trends – and numerous catwalk collections *cough*Paul Smith this season *cough 
cough* have been plucked.
 'Say Woody, can I borrow your shirt?' Annie Hall, 1977 Photograph: United 
Artists/Getty Images 
Glasses, glasses, glasses: never take off the glasses

Establishing a trademark is a thing actors do when they don't want to 'act'. 
In this way, Allen's omnipresent black-rimmed specs are a Brechtian prop which 
remind us that, when on screen, we are only ever watching Woody Allen 
pretending to be someone just likeWoody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen>. (Stay with me - this is about 
fashion, I promise.)

Allen's perseverance with the goggle-wearing has paid off: as many a 
street-style blog testifies, he was an early adopter of the modern-day trend 
for geeky NHS eyewear. In fact, he is now a bifocal icon of such gargantuan 
proportions that if he were ever to switch to contacts, a black hole would open 
up in the universe and all the graphic designers and Dutch-speakers in the 
world would be sucked into it. The moral is: wear glasses and wear them with 
pride, four-eyes!

PS. It's the bright side of chronic myopia that nerd-bins 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=bins> make you look much more 
intelligent than you really are – excluding, note please children, the ones 
with clear Perspex lenses that cost £5.99 down To'Sho', yagetme?
 'Wow, I've really nailed this whole neurotic nerd look' Photo: Play It Again, 
Sam, 1972 
Big saucepot hair rules

When I first saw Hannah and Her Sisters <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0091167/>
, it was well past the late 80s and the big hair thing was dying down into 
something much more gelled. Nevertheless, who could fail to be entranced by 
such a hypnotising display ofperms 
<http://s3.amazonaws.com/data.tumblr.com/tumblr_lpkyi1aJPq1qabm7io1_1280.jpg?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAJ6IHWSU3BX3X7X3Q&Expires=1318525768&Signature=kbPvMZkx8Wpx%2FlfzXV9EW7etq68%3D>
 and layers and waviness andtexture 
<http://media.tumblr.com/tumblr_l85f53bQm71qarwhv.jpg> and bigness 
<http://content6.flixster.com/photo/13/52/17/13521768_gal.jpg> (there are also 
a lot of knee-high boots and midi-lengths and discussion of psychotherapy, but 
I digress).

Fast forward to 2008, and Vicky Cristina Barcelona 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0497465/> was an unending festival of smoking-hot 
Spaniards <http://www.gossipsauce.com/files/gs_cruz_bardem_091004_m.jpg>, big 
old tumbling bed-heads and general inference that the bigger and better your 
barnet, the more interesting your love life, which is brill because big wigs 
are BACK this season (helloJames Long at Fashion East/Gaultier 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/spring-summer-2012/ready-to-wear/fashion-east-james-long>
).
 'No, Meester Allen, I don't think my hair can get any bigger'' Photograph: 
The Kobal Collection for the Guardian 
Tennis is tops

I don't know why Woody is obsessed with tennis styling but he is. Most 
recently, in 2005'sMatch Point <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2006/jan/06/1>
, it was all about Jonathan Rhys Meyers glowing gently in a cropped short, 
while Sca-Jo was all,"I'm sexy, let's have an affair" 
<http://www.moviemantz.com/review_shots/match_point.jpg> in a white 
flirty-skirty dress. Annie Hall also contains someball-thwacking 
<http://dailyfashionmusings.files.wordpress.com/2009/03/annie-hall-tennis.jpg>, 
during which Keaton and Allen work the classic 1977 pairing of crisp 
short-shorts and pulled-up socks, while swinging rackets and exchanging 
neurotic banter over a large net.

What are we meant to take from this? I think it's that we should all wear more 
short-shorts and more white, and play sport and then bone afterwards. It's so
Tommy Hilfiger 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-_zm0KHoAOJY/TfR2QecZHgI/AAAAAAAAC5Q/YPVa_2uHeF8/s1600/White+Trend+Spring+Summer+2012+Tommy+Hilfiger+8.jpg>
 meetsChanel 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/spring-summer-2012/ready-to-wear/chanel> 
Spring/Summer 2012.
 'It tends to wash some people out, but white really is your colour' Photo: A 
still from Match Point, 2005 
Midnight in Paris is in cinemas now
 