
Aung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi>, 
Myanmar’s Nobel laureate and state counsellor, thanked Theresa May for 
“Britain’s friendship and support” during her country’s political transition 
after years of military dictatorship, Downing Street has revealed.

A spokesperson said the pair “briefly discussed Brexit” during a meeting in 
London as part of the politician’s first visit outside Asia since her National 
League for Democracy party’s historic election victory late last year.

As she arrived at Downing Street, the de facto leader of Myanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> remarked that the prime minister 
must be “extremely busy” with plans to leave the European Union.

 May admitted there was “certainly a lot to do” as she greeted Aung San Suu 
Kyi and congratulated her on Myanmar’s transition from military rule after the 
election victory created the first civilian government in five decades.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a2cded06f7bd8878a502bfc87734705411639b6%2F0_144_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Myanmar's%20Aung%20San%20Suu%20Kyi%20thanks%20Theresa%20May%20for%20UK%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Myanmar%27s%20Aung%20San%20Suu%20Kyi%20thanks%20Theresa%20May%20for%20UK%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a2cded06f7bd8878a502bfc87734705411639b6%2F0_144_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Theresa May greets Aung San Suu Kyi outside 10 Downing Street. Photograph: 
Toby Melville/Reuters 
“Aung San Suu Kyi thanked the prime minister for Britain’s friendship and 
support. The prime minister said we stood ready to provide further assistance 
as Burma continues to develop, including through £118m in support this year,” 
the spokesperson said.

“They agreed that to create a society that truly works for all, it would be 
important to see Burma make further progress in the creation of jobs, in 
improving access to quality healthcare, and on reforming the education system.”

May raised concerns about human rights abuses in the Burmese military, before 
the pair turned to Britain’s exit of the EU, agreeing about the “importance of 
the UK remaining an outward-facing, engaged country on the world stage”.

Aung San Suu Kyi, who spent years under house arrest, was given the specially 
created role of state counsellor because her two sons’ British citizenship 
prevented her from becoming president under the military-era constitution.

Her leadership has been chequered, with international concerns being raised 
about the plight of Rohingya Muslims and the leader herself being criticised 
for failing to tackle hate crime and institutional discrimination against the 
minority community.

Amnesty International had called for the prime minister to raise the issue 
with Aung San Suu Kyi. The rights group’s foreign affairs adviser Polly 
Truscott said the Myanmar government’s “failure to address their suffering is a 
stain on its international reputation”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff991d4bce58db17e1aec1f8675aaebf7876b184d%2F246_730_3850_2308%2F3850.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Myanmar's%20Aung%20San%20Suu%20Kyi%20thanks%20Theresa%20May%20for%20UK%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Myanmar%27s%20Aung%20San%20Suu%20Kyi%20thanks%20Theresa%20May%20for%20UK%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff991d4bce58db17e1aec1f8675aaebf7876b184d%2F246_730_3850_2308%2F3850.jpg>
 The two leaders speak inside No 10. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA 
'No Muslims allowed': how nationalism is rising in Aung San Suu Kyi's Myanmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
On Monday, Aung San Suu Kyi met the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, who 
raised the issue of human rights and supported the establishment of the Rakhine 
commission, led by the former UN chief Kofi Annan, to examine discrimination 
against the Rohingya community.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35333f31f17345c46fdd8a4dbf7e755ae5ec3328%2F142_0_3496_2519%2F3496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Myanmar's%20Aung%20San%20Suu%20Kyi%20thanks%20Theresa%20May%20for%20UK%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Myanmar%27s%20Aung%20San%20Suu%20Kyi%20thanks%20Theresa%20May%20for%20UK%20support&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-meets-myanmars-aung-san-suu-kyi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35333f31f17345c46fdd8a4dbf7e755ae5ec3328%2F142_0_3496_2519%2F3496.jpg>
 Speaking on the doorstep of No 10. Photograph: Leon Neal/Getty Images 
“It’s a great pleasure to meet Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and congratulate her in 
person on her victory in the November 2015 elections and forming Burma’s first 
civilian government for over 50 years,” Johnson said in a statement after the 
talks. “The Burmese transition to democracy is an historic achievement.

“The courage and sacrifice of the Burmese people, not least of Daw Aung San 
Suu Kyi herself, has led to a major shift from military dictatorship to a more 
civilian, democratic and accountable government.

“The UK is pleased to have played an important role in bringing about Burma’s 
emergence from decades of repression and isolation. We remain committed to 
supporting Burma’s extraordinary reforms and we welcome a democratic, stable 
and prosperous Burma that can contribute to stability and security in 
south-east Asia and beyond.”
 