
A court in Myanmar has sentenced a young poet to six months in jail for 
defaming former president Thein Sein, making him one of the first political 
activists sentenced since Nobel peace prize laureateAung San Suu Kyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> took power in April.

Maung Saung Kha, 23, used his Facebook account to publish a poem about having 
a tattoo of a president on his penis 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/the-bizarre-trial-of-a-poet-in-myanmar>
. He was charged for defaming Thein Sein under telecommunications laws, used to 
curb free speech in several other recent cases.

Because Maung Saung Kha has spent more than six months in jail since being 
arrested, he will be freed on Tuesday.

Myanmar’s new era is thwarted by the old regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/17/can-myanmars-lady-realise-countrys-dreams>
But the case highlights the limits of control that Aung San Suu Kyi’s 
government, elected in November on pledges of democratisation, has over the 
government where the military plays an outsized political role.

It also draws attention to a continued use of the telecommunications law to 
stifle dissent.

Enacted as part of an opening up of the telecoms sector in 2013, the 
legislation bans use of the telecoms network to “extort, threaten, obstruct, 
defame, disturb, inappropriately influence or intimidate”.

“I’m glad I can go home freely, but I’m disappointed about the verdict,” said 
Maung Saung Kha after leaving the court.

“Even though we have a democratically elected government, the verdict was like 
from the old days.”

The judiciary in Myanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> has for 
decades been an instrument of oppression by the junta against democratic 
opposition activists, many from Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, jailing them for long 
terms on show trials.

'No Muslims allowed': how nationalism is rising in Aung San Suu Kyi's Myanmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
Despite Suu Kyi’s victory in November, the military-drafted constitution 
guarantees it control over the home ministry, which oversees the courts. It 
also controls two other security ministries and controls 25% of seats in the 
parliament.

Last year, NGO worker Patrick Kum Jaa Lee was sentenced to six months in jail 
for commenting on a picture showing a foot standing on a photo of army chief 
Min Aung Hlaing. Several more people were charged under the same law this year.

Aung San Suu Kyi’s government released scores of political prisoners shortly 
after taking power, but 64 people remain behind bars and 138 are awaiting trial 
for political actions, according to the Assistance Association for Political 
Prisoners, a watchdog.

It is unclear whether the NLD plans to reform the telecommunications law or 
how far it intends to change other opperesive laws from the military era.

Human rights advocates raised alarm that its draft of a revised law regulating 
public demonstrations keeps many military-era curbs on free speech.

 * This article was amended on 24 May 2016 as it incorrectly credited the 
article to the Associated Press.  